 Story_ID: 30712 Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers archives. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Legand, L-E-G-A-N-D, middle initial "L" only, Burge, B-U-R-G-E, Jr. Speaker 1: And do you have a nickname? Speaker 2: I go by Lee. That's probably a nickname, although there's probably others that the family would refer to. I don't know if you need that (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay, it depends on whether you wanna tell us or not. Speaker 2: Well, it depends on who you think is gonna be dealing with this (laughter). Speaker 1: Well, it's for the family too. Speaker 2: Well, close family members when I was young referred to me as Butch, Butch, Jr. because my dad [Legand L. Burge, Sr.] was referred to as Butch. And my close, my brothers and sisters and some of the closer family members refer to me as Gand. That's G-A-N-D. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In other words, Lee and Gand. So that's a history there that they couldn't pronounce the Legand and just, it's like where the Lee came from. So Gand is my brother and my two sisters, and then Lee came from another guy who couldn't pronounce the Legand, and he said, I'm just gonna refer to you as Lee. I can get into that later. Speaker 1: Now, is there a story behind the first name, Legand? Speaker 2: Well, my dad and his mother [Mary Burge] and her grand--her mother actually wanted to have a French person in the family. And they referred to name as Legand. And if you go back to the French, it's Legond (ph.) which means the "great" without the "r". And so the translation kind of comes from there. So it's got some history referred to my great grandparents, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, so it's related to Legrand? Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: August 3, 1949, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your occupation? Speaker 2: Well, you refer to what I do as an educator, but the title is Dean of the College of Engineering and Physical Sciences, Tuskegee University. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today is April 11, 2011. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: You're sitting in an historic place here. It's referred to as Kellogg Conference Center and Hotel. We're in a teleconference room exactly, and this is a video teleconference facility that you have here. But Tuskegee University sits in Tuskegee, Alabama, in the historic site, you know. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 30713 Speaker 1: And, okay, before we get into depth, there are five light-weight, "People Magazine-ish" type questions that we always ask. And they just require a short answer. The first one is, do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Do I have a favorite food (laughter)? Speaker 1: Yes, and what is it? Speaker 2: Yeah, that is very light? Oh, I guess fried chicken. I think my wife would say that's probably my favorite. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And all (unclear) chewing, potatoes and green beans and that sort of thing. I'm preferably a "green" person, greens, green beans, collard greens (unclear) stuff like that, you know, cornbread, etc., etc. So (laughter). Speaker 1: Now, do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Oh, (laughter), this is real light-weight. I would suspect blue is probably my favorite color. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Well, actually, I enjoy the entire year, personally, but obviously, birthdays. That's in August, and I think I've enjoyed Christmas. I like to do things at Christmas time, you know, the seasonal time of November, December, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Ooh, well, that's, that is interesting. Well, I've been a few places, obviously, with my military background, but I like to go to the beaches. I prefer to spend a day at the beach from sunrise to sunset. And so I'll do that, so any beach, Gulf shores or the beach in California or even Nice [France]. I mean I've been all over, so (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, and the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: I guess my kids say I have a lot of them (laughter), but I guess, that--I suppose that there's probably a few, and I'm trying to just capture something that would be appropriate for this. But you've got to have a program. That's probably my--one of the comments, you know. May sure you move through the knee of the curve and don't get caught up in the minute, but you've gotta have a long-term program (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 30714 Speaker 1: All right, now, I'm gonna ask you about your family history. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask you about your mother's side of the family and your father's side, but I'm gonna ask you about your mother's side first. Now, can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Bobbie, B-O-B-B-I-E, Jean, J-E-A-N, Bates, B-A-T-E-S. And obviously, her name is now Burge, B-U-R-G-E, married name. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: She was born in Oklahoma City, January 24, 1928. Speaker 1: Okay. She passed away in 2005? Speaker 2: Two thousand five, [2005], correct. Speaker 1: All right. Now, what do you know about your mother's side of the family? How far back can you trace that side? Speaker 2: I knew her oldest sister, Lucille, L-U-C-I-L-L-E, Clayona Bates, who was, I think her name was Cooper, Clayona Cooper, who was another sister. That's C-L-A-Y-O-N-A. Frances, I knew her sister. She was a young sister, F-R-A-N-C-E-S. And she had several other brothers who I never, I didn't meet and several other sisters who I think were deceased before I, you know, I came along. Speaker 1: Did you know your grandparents? Speaker 2: I knew her mother Lena, and I did not get to meet her father who was Clell, C-L-E-L-L. The interesting, the reason why I know this is, interesting enough, Clell was born on my birthday, August third and his dad who I think is a guy named Willis, I can't remember all that, but at any rate, he was also born on August 3. And the January third date which is my brother's birthday is the birthday for Lena Bates, who we referred to as Mother, Mother Dear. So that kind of ties all of that, I think I got 'em all, the four sisters, the mother and the grandmother and the grandfather. I don't know who the mother was, although my brother, now, would know all this because he's kind of my historian for the family (laughter). Story_ID: 30715 Speaker 1: Okay, now, we have a note here that your great, great grandparents, Solomon, Abrams. Speaker 2: Abram. That's who I was trying to think of, yeah, right. Speaker 1: And Addie Jackson Abrams were listed on the Chickasaw rolls. Speaker 2: Correct, right. Speaker 1: And do you know what, can you tell us something about that? The Chickasaw Freedmen of Oklahoma. Speaker 2: The bit I do know about this, again, I'm--I would refer to my brother. You ought to do a historical thing on him. He is, you know, Kim and Kim Larmar Burge, and he did a lot of digging into the background of Abrams and the Willis's and the song 'Swing Low, Sweet Chariot', and it was my folks in their history that actually wrote this, these songs, and it came in part of moving out of the place where you were so you would get into another ride. You know, they--we refered to it as spiritual, what they call spiritual songs, but they really-- Speaker 1: Negro spirituals, right. Speaker 2: -- had a message, and that was the whole idea behind that. And the Freedmen's bureau was created because the colored at that time and the Indians, you know, were really melding together as far as their interactions and what have you. And so that bureau kind of tracked those people, and they were part of that group. And so these people are actually on the rolls. And as I understand it, there is a monument to these folk in lower Oklahoma, there around the Red River, Toca, what have you. So you might wanna just follow up, but like I said, you really ought to talk to my brother (laughter) who is Kim, and he would, he has all of this documented even to the form of the paper, clippings and all the things that related to the entire family prior to the eighteen, late 1800s, you know, (unclear). Speaker 1: Now, one of your great uncles or great, great uncles, Wallace Willis-- Speaker 2: Willis, yeah, that's who I was thinking about, yeah. Speaker 1: --was, is now known to be the author of 'Swing Low Sweet Chariot' and 'Steal Away to Jesus'. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And these are songs that were always thought to be traditional Negro spirituals with anonymous writer. They're often listed that way-- Speaker 2: Correct, right. Speaker 1: --popularized by the Fisk Jubilee Singers and other singers. Speaker 2: Correct, correct. Speaker 1: So, I just wanted to make sure that we point that out, that you're-- Speaker 2: Right, I guess I'm remiss and just thinking about that because yeah, you are trying to go into the cobwebs (laughter) of my history here, but, indeed, they were messages that were sent through the slaves. And these folk were actually attributed as the authors of that. And-- Speaker 1: And 'Roll Jordan, Roll'. Speaker 2: --I think, I'm trying to remember here. 'USA Today', if I recall, actually captured some background on this, and so you might wanna follow up with that, you know. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. All right, but-- Speaker 2: As a matter of fact, and let me just interrupt a second, the Tuskegee University [Tuskegee, Alabama] choir by Richard Dawson, you know, William Dawson actually put these all into a very nice anthemis type version for the choirs here back in the 1920s and have really popularized all of these numbers. As a matter of fact, one of the things you might wanna do is to come to Tuskegee, to Tuskegee University, and you'll see what they refer to as the singing windows, which really captures all the songs and their titles. And one of the things we do here every year is capture the whole William Dawson Institute, quite a historic thing that goes on annually. Story_ID: 30716 Speaker 1: Okay, now, let me go back to your--what did your mother's [Bobbie Jean Bates] parents do for a living? Speaker 2: Ooh-- Speaker 1: What did your grandparents [Lena and Clell Bates] do for living? Speaker 2: Domestic and basically, you know, ditch diggers, nothing that you would have called of the intellectual capacity, but laborers, yeah. Speaker 1: And did they retain any of the Indian culture or traits at all? Speaker 2: None other than food. I really wouldn't say that they had a whole lot of things that they pushed on us. There was, obviously, you can look at me. I have some redness to my background and all that, but there's no generic things that we, you know, captured traditionally. Speaker 1: And I think there was like legal issues around who could be officially an Indian-- Speaker 2: That was part of the [Chickasaw] Freedmen thing. As a matter of fact, even currently, I understand that there is a litigation going on to try to remove the blacks from the Freedmen rolls, particularly because many of the Chickasaw, you know, the Cherokee, Choctaw, all these folks have now become very wealthy, particularly, in Oklahoma (laughter). All right, and they're trying to, you know, capture the resources and make sure that they're not extended. So that is an issue right now, right? Speaker 1: Yeah, that's always been an issue with Indian benefits in Oklahoma-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --which started off as Indian territory, you know. Speaker 2: Correct, that's right. As a matter of fact, Oklahoma means, you know, Home of the red man, you know, so (laughter). There is some connection here now to Alabama, the Trail of Tears [1831] actually started in the north part, and they ended up forcing these people to move from this part of the country, west. And they moved all of the "quote, unquote", the five civilized tribes into the area called Oklahoma Territory. Speaker 1: Absolutely. Speaker 2: Yeah, so we wanna just capture that as far as, and tell that. A lot of folks don't know that, okay, where during those years, it was really hard. And even in this area here, there's reservations that have Indian territory, and they actually are a sanctuary, you know, for the Indians. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, that's right. Story_ID: 30717 Speaker 1: So, did your mother--now she grew up, did she grow up in Oklahoma City? Speaker 2: Yes, graduated from Douglas High School. I ended up going to Douglas High School. Speaker 1: What were some of her stories of growing up? Speaker 2: Oh, (laughter) she escaped from Clell Bates' [Burge's maternal grandfather]--I have to say it like that because this is the way she referred it to us. He was quite a dominant figure in the household. And his children were to do their chores and she carried that on to us, and to basically move out, you know. He didn't think girls were that important and I think even the older sister, the one, Lucille, that I mentioned, was probably married at the age of twelve or thirteen. And I think the others followed suit, and so when she finished high school, about eighteen-- seventeen eighteen, she left too. And my father [Legand L. Burge, Sr.] married her, and she was a beautiful young lady, you know, if you look at the pictures and all that. And I think as a result of a lot of that strong-willed, dominance that he was putting on her, and she tells the story about, you know, they had to carry ice with these, the handles and for--to keep the refrigerators cold. And if you dropped the ice, the repercussions of that were just unbelievable. And she said she had to carry two of these five-pound cubes of ice. You know, they were like a square, cubic. And she talked about this where you had to truck, you know, truck it for several yards, you know, around. And you could not drop it, and the ice couldn't melt, even in the heat of Oklahoma. So that's how fast you had to move (laughter). So this, (laughter) this discipline was quite etched in her mind. And she was referred to as "Red", and he called her Red, and her siblings and all of the family referred to her as "Red Tootsie". We ended up dropping that later on and just called her Tootsie. And so he said, "Red", you know, I want you to go get me some ice, go get me some water or whatever. And so she had to carry these buckets and that was the thing that they had to do to move, you know, to make sure that the household was taken care of. And she tells this story about the meticulous attention to detail that she wanted us to do, that you need to think as opposed to doing labor. (Laughter) And so that's one of the reasons why we now all have gone to college and all have got master's and Ph.D.s and all that. So (laughter), so it's one of those things that really made a big difference. Speaker 1: Did your mother talk about what she ideally wanted to do after high school? Speaker 2: She obviously was a very meticulous writer, and, of course, she never did that. But she ended up being a cook, domestic things that were, I'd say, household related because that was where the money was in the, you know, '50s [1950s] and in the '60s [1960s]. And so she basically put us through, you know, along with all the, you know, other support from, you know, my father and all. And it was a good time. So I don't, I can't say that she had other aspirations. And that's hard to connect the dots on that one, all right. But she was a very good writer. She had beautiful penmanship, and she was one that could have probably made a very good secretary just because of her attention to detail. Story_ID: 30718 Speaker 1: Okay, well, I'm gonna get back to her in the context of the family, but can we go to your father now, to the family background on your father's side. Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: My father's full name, Legand, L-E-G-A-N-D, middle initial "L" only, okay, Burge, B-U-R-G-E. They referred to him as senior because I was the junior, and the interesting thing is that he was born on my birthday or I was born on his birthday, however you wanna say it. So August 3, 1911, and a very nice gift that he received and my mother [Bobbie Jean Bates] gave to him. So-- Speaker 1: So, I guess there's no doubt that you'd be a junior. Speaker 2: No, doubt (laughter), right. He had a younger brother, Thomas, an older brother, August, an older sister, Los Angeles. And there were other children that died as they left Georgia coming to Oklahoma. Speaker 1: By the way, what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Okay, his date of birth is August 3, 1911 and he was born in Rome, Georgia, R-O-M-E, Georgia. And I think I probably need to just--cause you asked me about that, and the sister, Los Angeles, who was the oldest and the next was August, him and Thomas. Those are the ones that I knew, okay. If you go to Oklahoma in the Indian area there in Luther, Arcadia, Oklahoma, you will find the gravesite for every one, in addition to others who were part of the family who had died before. His mother was named Mary, Mary Burge, and his father was named Dery, D-E-R-Y. Their father was also named Dery, yeah, Dery. And I'm trying to remember her name, but I can't remember it right now. But at any rate, they were all part of Rome, Georgia, the area there, the Fulton County area, and they actually owned a business and what have you. And the reason why they split, left the area, split up was because the people at the time, the white people at the time, wanted this black family to leave. They, their prominence and all that. They had a lumber mill and a lot of other businesses in the area. And so in Rome [Georgia], they'd burn 'em down, burn 'em out. There were five other brothers that Dery had-- Speaker 1: So their property was actually burnt out? Speaker 2: Right, just like the Rosewood issue [Rosewood Massacre, 1923] the issue in Tulsa [Tulsa Riots, 1921], those things actually happened, that actually happened in Rome, Georgia. Speaker 1: Well, this is important because people, you always hear young people say, well, we have never done anything and we, that sort of thing. Speaker 2: Oh, no, they were very prominent. As a matter of fact, they talk about Shepard and Dery and Charles and all these folk who went North and became a part of the early pieces of General Motors, the early parts of the Historical Society in New York and Baltimore where they went into the steel mills and all that. So they were very prominent thinking and very business, you know, like folks. I suppose some of them probably have done very well over the hundred and ten years-- Speaker 1: So the family kind of scattered-- Speaker 2: Yeah, they ended up scattering-- Speaker 1: --after the incident in Rome? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: When was the property burnt in Rome and where were they-- Speaker 2: I would have say early 1900s. Now, the date would probably, I could probably logically figure it out here in a minute because my dad was born in 1911. And his, the sister, Los Angeles, who was older than he was, was born right around the same time, but she was born in Oklahoma City, all right, cause they were traveling to-- west to go to Los Angeles, California. That's the reason why she got the name, Los Angeles. And-- Speaker 1: So her name is Los Angeles? Speaker 2: Right, and as a result of the trip, she was born in Oklahoma City. Now, as I understand it, my grandfather and the brothers went to Oklahoma City during the run, the land run, which was 1889, and, you know, obviously you could go and stake out home, do homestead and all that. That occurred around that 1889 timeframe, and then they got back later. And then on the way back, a lot of people died. The older sisters and all those older brothers, and I'd have to go back and check the, how many people died, but I believe it was about four, four kids died on the way, all right. So I think I got that logic correctly. So this incident had to have occurred at the turn of the century, and I'm saying the early 1900s, okay. Speaker 1: So the incident in Rome? Speaker 2: Right, the incident in Rome, right. Speaker 1: So, this happened before your father was born? Speaker 2: Right, it had to have happened before he was born. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: But I know that the Tulsa thing happened in the, around the 1920s. Speaker 1: Yeah, 1921, it was the Tulsa riots. Speaker 2: And the Rosewood thing was around that same turn-of-the century too, which was kind of a rash of backlash as a result of, obviously, the turn of the century, the things that were going on in places like Tuskegee [Alabama], you know, where they were training blacks to become, you know, actually industrial types, business types, things that were going on in places after the war (War World War I), you know which kind of catapulted blacks to become more connected with society (unclear)-- Story_ID: 30719 Speaker 1: --(unclear) Did your father [Legand L. Burge, Sr.] serve in World War I? Speaker 2: He was in World War II. Speaker 1: Well, no, he couldn't have served in World War I, but did any of his relatives serve in World War I? Speaker 2: Not to my knowledge, no. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Not to my knowledge, all right. He did serve in World War II though. His age, trained him to do quite a few things and obviously, he was good at math and what have you, and I guess that's kind of the reason why a lot of the, a lot of us have kind of done well in that area. Speaker 1: So did he get a chance to go to college? Speaker 2: Well, that's what I'm getting ready to share with you. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The sister [Los Angeles Burge Joseph] was the one that was chosen to do well. Now, all of them went to Langston University [Langston, Oklahoma]. Because of money and things that were required, they decided that she would then go to Langston. Her husband actually went to Tuskegee Institute [later called Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] at the time and majored in construction. At the time, it was called Building Industries, okay. And he graduated around 1937. His name was Henry Joseph. So she ended up at Langston, graduating in the area of English and reading and actually then getting, got her degree through a school that we know as Oklahoma University, a little later on as a master's degree. She became the prominent teacher in Oklahoma during the '50s [1950s] and '60s [1960s], taught-- Speaker 1: Is this Los Angeles? Speaker 2: This is Los Angeles, right, Burge. And they never had children, but they certainly did very well about us, as an example of intellectual prowess and about the other kids who are my cousins. And so she basically took a lot of us under her wings and shared with us how it was to go to college and what have you. One of the things I did in both Henry Joseph and Los Angeles Joseph was to put a brick of legacy here at Tuskegee because he graduated in 1937. And so I'd have to go and check the exact record, but that was what I did for them. Speaker 1: What was her husband's name? Speaker 2: Henry Joseph. He was actually a minister too, in addition to a builder, okay. Yeah, he built houses. If you go to Arcadia, Luther or Oklahoma, you will find a lot of what they refer to as the Tuskegee red brick. And they were rocks, and so he made all of these houses and built enormous, nice homes in that area right now. So, but both of them are deceased, obviously. Speaker 1: So her name would have been Los Angeles Joseph. Speaker 2: Los Angeles Burge Joseph. Speaker 1: Burge Joseph, all right, all right. That's quite a history. Speaker 2: Yeah. The, Thomas Burge was mechanic. He majored in the mechanical industries and what have you and so he worked on cars and, as a matter of fact, he had his own business in Oklahoma City. August was handicapped. He was challenged by his eyes, and as a result, he ended up being disabled most of his life. But he did have lots of children. I mean I think there's seven cousins from Thomas. There's seven cousins from August and Los Angeles, though, did not have any. And I was the only--well, technically, they say I'm the only son, but really that's not true. And I need to probably get into some more of that if you want me to. My brothers and sisters were the product of supposedly my mother's [Bobbie Jean Bates] post-divorce activities with several men. But they all have Burge as the name and my father actually took care of them (laughter). So these things happen. They were divorced in 1957, but my brother was born in 1957. My sister was born in 1958, and my other sister was born in 1961, so very, very interesting (laughter), thing that happened over the years. Speaker 1: Well, that's kind of, it's unusual in the sense that people, there are a lot of situations that are unique that we don't even know about. But that's interesting. Speaker 2: Right (laughter), yeah. Speaker 1: Now, is there a--well, let me go back to your father for a minute before I put them both together, but, so your father grew up in Oklahoma City? Speaker 2: Correct, right. He actually grew up in Luther, Oklahoma. Speaker 1: Luther, Oklahoma. Speaker 2: I need to make that clear too. They-- Speaker 1: Is Luther a suburb or? Speaker 2: We would refer to it as a suburb now. Arcadia, Luther, Jones, there's quite a small amount of, out of the northern part of Oklahoma City, Edmond. I mean there's a lot of different cities now that have become all part of the Oklahoma City metropolitan area because of its enormous reach (laughter). Speaker 1: Now, I've heard, yeah, I've heard that people brag in Oklahoma City that it's the largest city in America-- Speaker 2: It is the largest-- Speaker 1: --in terms of area. Speaker 2: --it is the largest city of area in the United States. Yes, I think the only competitor would be Tallahassee, Florida. But, yeah, Oklahoma City is quite a county. And the county and the city is pretty much, you know, together. So my folks lived in what was referred to as the country, the rural area of Oklahoma City in the early piece. And I guess in the last, let's say forty years, it has now, you know-- Speaker 1: Been incorporated? Speaker 2: --been incorporated all the way out, right. Story_ID: 30720 Speaker 1: Okay, are there any stories that your father [Legand L. Burge, Sr.] shared about growing up and things that happened to him, you know, (unclear)? Speaker 2: Certainly, he, being a radar technician on a Navy ship, he talked a lot about the military experience. Speaker 1: Well, what was his path to that? I just, I mean, it's not everybody who gets a chance to do that. So-- Speaker 2: Well, as I-- Speaker 1: He graduated from high school, I take it. Speaker 2: He graduated from Luther, there, I wanna say it was Star Spencer which is a black school at the time. And I'm trying to just remember. His intent was to go to Langston University [Langston Oklahoma] or at the time I guess it was Langston Institute, the school, during the '30s [1930s]. And I guess as time would have it, you know, before he went he did some time there and they decided that Los Angeles [Burge Joseph] was the one to get the support. And he helped send her to school. But he was quite smart in the form of technical pieces. So he worked, you know, at Tinker, it was--at the time it was called Tinker Field, but it's Tinker Air Force Base [Oklahoma City, Oklahoma] now, getting a job there working in the radar area, the technical area of electronics. Speaker 1: This was during the War or-- Speaker 2: No, before. Speaker 1: Before the War, okay. Speaker 2: I hadn't got to the whole thing there, okay. So, he did all that stuff, and I gather that he may have been more of a pseudo laborer and what have you. But obviously, they didn't let blacks do a whole lot of stuff in the '30s [1930s] and when the alarm was sounded for the Pearl Harbor [Hawaii], he tells me that he had to go and sign up because everybody was gonna go somewhere, either in the Army or what have you. Well, he qualified to go to the Navy, and that's how--he passed the test. So he went and he did, got trained as a radar technician in the Navy. After the signing of the Roosevelt [sic, Truman], the desegregation of the military [1949], he ended up transferring to the Air Force. Speaker 1: Now-- Speaker 2: He literally became master sergeant in the Air Force, and, but he didn't retire, but they didn't let him retire. That's what he tells me. Speaker 1: Okay, now, it's interesting that he was at Pearl Harbor [Hawaii]? Speaker 2: Correct, and I was gonna get to that. He was at Pearl Harbor during the time of the, his, you know, his enlistment there. He was actually at Iwo Jima [Japan], you know, during the time of the big transferring of the flag and all that. So he had a lot going on with the World War II, being a part of the Navy and all that sort of thing, yeah. Story_ID: 30721 Speaker 1: You asked for some more stories, and I'm just trying to remember. He [father: Legand L. Burge, Sr.] was quite a country boy. And as a result of that, he loved the land and one of the things that happened, this homestead, it was about a hundred and--let me just, about 160 acres. It's quite a bit of property. They lived on it, all of that from like the early 1900s, I guess about 1911 on forward. And Dery Burge [paternal grandfather] died in the, I wanna say '40s [1940s], 1940. And the, Mary Burge [paternal grandmother], because of her religion decided to give about sixty acres to the Oklahoma Baptist Convention. They were part of the Baptist church. She liked the song 'Near the Cross', and that was her favorite thing, and as a musician, you know, I used to play it for them when I was even little. She died around 1954, I wanna say that. I just remember because I was about six years old. It may have been '55 [1955], '56 [1956] though. But at any rate, he talks about the growing of the corn and working the fields and that this was good work for your mind and it was good for you to do. And I got a taste of it when I was in my, you know, about my teens because he thought it was something that I needed to do and experience. So I have done a little bit of that (laughter). Speaker 2: Did you like it? Speaker 1: No, I didn't appreciate that very much (laughter). It's hot work, it's hard work, and I remember one time he had, he and I put together a fence around this whole acreage because after everybody died, he decided to move to the country and work the land. Obviously, a hundred acres is a lot of stuff. So we took the barbed wire fence, one, two, three, I think three-tier wire, all around this fence. And you talk about hot work. That was hot work and hard work, post in the ground, fence pulling the wire. And we had a tractor pulling this, you know, wire tight and all that. So it was good experience. But it did teach me a lot. We still have the farm itself, and what happened, since everybody has died literally, and Los Angeles and August and Thomas [father's siblings] and my father [Legand L. Burge, Sr.] have died, they gave it to us. And what we ended up doing was basically giving it to my brother. And the other cousin didn't wanna live on the land, cause we're talking rural now. And now Oklahoma City is moving north and the property is actually significantly depreciated in value. But he's got a house out there and the whole works and he's actually got cows and horses and all kind of things on this property that they literally grew up on. Speaker 2: This is your brother? Speaker 1: My brother, yean. Speaker 2: What is his name? Speaker 1: My brother's name is Kim, Kim Lamar, okay (laughter) right. And he was one that kind of identified with my dad because even though, you know, there was a little difference in the age, we went together and he enjoyed the country. And I, I liked it, but I didn't enjoy it, okay. He literally loves to be out in the quiet, away from people and listening to the things that happen, which is nothing (laughter). So he loves that (laughter). Other things though, he, my father liked to grow the corn. He liked to grow the soybeans and he did all those things, you know, out there after everybody had sort of left and what have you. He was probably the reason why I talk about this program thing. And as, "you gotta to have a program", well, he always talked about setting up a program for the family. And all of this land that was out there, I think the vision of my grandmother [Mary Burge] was that it would become an amusement facility or a golf course, you know, something that was quite prominent for the family. And we haven't really realized it, other than the church which now is called Burge Kim, in her honor, such--and there's dormitories, there's a chapel. They can do summer camps and all that. And that's ongoing right now, by the way. Speaker 2: The Oklahoma Baptist Convention, right? Speaker 1: The Oklahoma Baptist Convention, right. And they do that annually. They do all kind of youth camps and what have you. So it's all part of her linkage, you know, to what she did for the Baptist church at the time. So quite a significant contribution, you know, as a result of her life. And her vision, I guess, for the church. And as I understand it, all denominations come out there. And I mean you can put thousands of people--we had a big family reunion a few years back where everybody went and enjoyed this, the facilities. You can actually stay out there and live in the, you know, in the wide open and what have you. Speaker 2: Now, did your father talk about hard times growing up? I know he would have, prior to World War II, I think Oklahoma was going through the Dust Bowl [1930s], right? Speaker 1: Correct, (laughter) I would say, yes, he did. I'm sort of remiss in trying to remember all of the stories, but he was mostly focused on trying to make sure that we had our sights on getting an education, that if you don't get the education, if you don't pass tests, if you did not prepare yourself, you couldn't insert yourself into anything. You would become a laborer. And he was trying to avoid that. So-- Story_ID: 30722 Speaker 1: I would imagine he would have had some stories about the Dust Bowl days cause it's been, you know, the 'Grapes of Wrath' is a story about the family trying to get to Los Angeles [California], like-- Speaker 2: Right, and that's what they taught, is that if you did not do what you needed to do, you would end up as, in the, basically, the dust of the earth. And that was one of the things that he was really trying to capture. He attempted to preserve the history piece though. And if you go to the area now, there are some things that he put a marker of where the church and the family's heir property sets. And there's a marker there. And so he really wanted to preserve that. But as far as trying to remember the whole Dust Bowl story, again, you need to probably talk to my brother about that. I mean I just cannot recollect (laughter). Speaker 1: Without the details, just it's significant that your family maintained property. You've got a black family maintaining property through the Dust Bowl when a lot of families lost theirs-- Speaker 2: Well, let me share this with you though. I do know that Los Angeles [Joseph Burge] was the keeper of the taxes. So she made sure that the taxes were paid and that all this property as kept up. And one of the ways they did it was they rented it out to farmers for the cattle. So they let the cattle graze and what have you and they'd pay so much, and it would actually pay the taxes. And when they, when she paid the taxes, she took the difference and distributed amongst the brothers. And I remember she would give me a check for, oh, twenty four dollars and "x" number of cents after my father died and because she said, this is your piece of the, after the taxes, and you all have to keep the property going, and all that. And so she kind of instilled that in everybody to do that. Now, as a result of a lot of events, I don't know if I can capture all of it, but I attempted to probate and divide the properties up amongst the family. Now, obviously, in 1880--I'm sorry, in 1981 when he died, there were several cousins. And his brother had died prior to him, and so they were kind of had a leader there too. So to start trying to divide this heir property up was a challenge. And I attempted to do this with an attorney. And we got everybody together, but obviously, with, let's say fifteen, twenty people, nobody could exactly agree on what it was they needed to do (chuckle). And as a result, we never probated it. Now, roll forward, my brother [Kim Lamar] who wants to live out here on the property and one of the things I didn't say and I failed to say was that my grandmother [Mary Burge] divided up shares of the property amongst the kids, all right. So my father had a piece, Thomas had a piece, Los Angeles had a piece, you know, and August had a piece. The front end, the better end, was given to my dad. I mean from, I wanna say Indian Meridian to Coffee Creek. It's about a mile of strip, is given to my dad. The next piece was given to Los Angeles. The next piece was given to August, and he got a better piece than everybody else because he had so many children. And then the latter piece which was a, it was not quite parody, but it was close to parody for him. And so this little piece in the front, the better piece is now on the road today, and it's a nice piece of land and what have you. Well, my brother and I agreed that he would just stay out there. I mean I--in 1980, in the '80s [1980s] (laughter), we, I said, I'm in the military. You know, I'm not gonna ever go back and do whatever. I said, you just do it. So he ended up building a house out there, ended up really taking care of the land very much and ended up being the caretaker for this Oklahoma Baptist area, even though he was a police officer. He still just took care of the whole hundred acres (laughter), okay, and so it made it really nice for them because they never paid him really for ever taking care of it, all these years. They just think that it's gonna happen (laughter). It's really a interesting thing there. So he never has really, let's say, cashed in, other than just being there. And they know that he has the keys. He knows where everything is, knows where everything is, knows where all the snakes are, etc., etc., so he just takes care of the property. And none of the other cousins actually come out there. And so what has happened over the years is we have negotiated to actually buy the land and transfer it to, everything to him. Los Angeles actually deeded it to him when she died. And that was about the '97 [1997] timeframe, 1997 timeframe. And if I recall, August and his folks decided that they didn't wanna live out there, and I mean it's good property, really. I mean you're talking, it's got a lake, pond and all that, good hunting. I think they all go out there and they hunt deer and, you know, (laughter) and turkeys and all that kind of thing. But he just enjoys the land and that's the way it's been over the years. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 30723 Speaker 1: Well, let me--now, your father [Legand L. Burge, Sr.], you said he reached a rank of Master Sergeant in the Air Force. Speaker 2: In the Air Force, yeah. Speaker 1: He went from Navy to Air Force. Speaker 2: Right, and I wanna say that happened around the time of the desegregation of military, right. Speaker 1: About '48 [1948] or-- Speaker 2: Right, somewhere in there, right. Speaker 1: Okay, so he remained in the military. Now,-- Speaker 2: Probably through the '50s [1950s]. He didn't retire though. Speaker 1: Now, was he stationed at Tinker Field [Oklahoma City, Oklahoma]? Speaker 2: He was stationed at Tinker, and that was the way he got into doing the signals and stuff with the Tinker folks with the radar and all that, yeah. Speaker 1: All right, so that, but that's quite a transition. He goes from basically being an electrician to getting involved in the-- Speaker 2: Well, now, it's all sort of the same generic, I would think, just from my understanding of electronics. Radar technician, you do signals, you do--you're taking care of tubes and all of the things that relate to capacitors and what have you. And so he was really good with oscilloscopes and multimeters and all that. So it wasn't anything to be the big transition. The interesting thing is though that he told me that he had to leave because they basically were not gonna promote him anymore. You gotta understand that a master sergeant in the '50s [1950s], black guy, almost unheard of, all right. Obviously, the Tuskegee Airmen had done their thing and what have you, but even then there was a lot of backlash-- Speaker 1: Oh, sure. Speaker 2: --you know, as a result of that. So they were attempting to take his stripes for some chaotic reason and he decided to just leave, take his time and grade and roll over to becoming a civilian and that's how he ended up at Tinker, okay, Air Force Base. And obviously, from about 1948, '47 [1947], '48 [1948], that's when he met my mother [Bobbie Jean Bates]. And I showed up in '49 [1949], so-- Story_ID: 30724 Speaker 1: (Simultaneously talking) Now, is there a story about how they met that they tell? Speaker 2: Well, here's what-- Speaker 1: He's [father: Legand L. Burge, Sr.] considerably older than your mother [Bobbie Jean Bates]. Speaker 2: Considerably, yeah. Speaker 1: She was born in '28 [1928] and he was born in '11 [1911]. Speaker 2: He in eleven [1911], yeah, considerably. Well, my mother was a cook at a diner and it was called the, Beverly's Chicken in the Ruff. Beverly's Chicken-n-the Ruff. In other words, Chicken n, as in dash "n", the ruff, all right, R-U-F-F. That was the name of it. It still exists in Oklahoma City [Oklahoma]. There is a picture taken of her that we archived when she was the cook, and she's smiling and flipping burgers or something another. And she used to bring us home this chicken-n-the ruff, quite tasty recipe that they had in the '50s [1950s]. Well, in a diner, you have a counter, and so what would happen is the waiter, the waitress would take the orders and the grill was right behind the diner. So she'd take it, you know, hamburgers, whatever, chicken and what have you. And she was doing the cooking, and so she was quite a fair young lady. So she garnered a lot of attention. This was frequented by many folks, obviously, the blacks and--or the negros at the time and the whites would come in and traverse this. And so she made a lot of friends. And as a result of that, I think that's where she met my dad [Legand L. Burge, Sr.]. And, obviously, you know, you date, you, what have you and she's looking for a way out of Clell Bates' [Burge's maternal grandfather] house anyway. And she asked her [sic, him] to marry him [sic, her], and that's how she got out. They moved to a place that was in Oklahoma City on Tenth Street, 1700 Tenth Street. I remember it because I remember the house. And they actually bought this house because he had GI benefits, okay. You gotta understand that, see he was in the military and he was a veteran. So he bought her this house, and he stayed in the military all this time. And he would go back and forth and what have you and come and visit and all that kind of thing, but they never had any more children according to her, by him, okay (laughter), although he maintained the name of Burge and stayed with us all this time. Now, she [mother: Bobbie Jean Bates] maintained this connection with the diner, and I believe that these other guys who quote unquote "were supposed to be the father of my brother, Kim, and the father of my sister, Arleta, showed up. And perhaps there was some dating going on and all that kind of thing. Well, she stayed at the diner all this time. And so they maintained this whole time-- Speaker 1: Now, she worked at a diner the whole time she was married? Speaker 2: No, no, she didn't. She ended up leaving there and doing a lot of other domestic things and whatever. She worked out of the house. She was quite an entrepreneur. She took care of us by doing cleaning and pressing clothes. You gotta understand that, see, if you did shirts well and pants and washed and what have you, you could make, you know, a dollar a shirt and do pretty good. And I would, I remember seeing folks' shirts all in the house, hung up on these racks. And then people would come in and get their stuff cause you gotta understand that there were not many black businesses in the '50s [1950s] and '60s [1960s], you know, who were really operating without having some kind of issue with the government or what have you, all right. So she did this all out of the home. Another thing, she was a very good cook. I'm talking extremely scratch cook. Here's what I mean by scratch cooking. She could take pancakes from, let's say out of flour and sugar and what have you and make 'em taste like the best thing, very, very light. The stuff that we eat now at Cracker Barrel and all that, well, she was really par excellence with this; great fried chicken because she worked at this diner. And she was actually the one that did all the recipes, good stuff, I mean just great stuff. I never, to this day, have enjoyed anybody's cake or pie that was made with something that's--let's say cake mix and boxed and all that--I always had scratch stuff, and even my wife today, she says you don't eat this stuff from--I said, if it's not scratch, it's not worth eating (laughter). So she was quite an excellent cook. So when you get all this together, you can kind of see that we enjoyed cakes and cookies and these big cinnamon rolls that would swell up in the wintertime, you know, and get--they call them yeast rolls, you know, just unbelievably cooks, just very impressive. So all of this was part of the household. And we enjoyed all of this stuff, and I guess I have to say that although she was divorced from this guy, she still maintained a certain level of economic, you know, comfort. Speaker 1: Now, when you think about your parents' personalities, their talents and their dispositions and even their looks, who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: Probably my dad, look wise, even my mannerisms, I probably have my mother's disposition and discipline. She's quite the disciplinarian. My kids say the same thing. They say that I'm really, a real hard person (laughter), cold. Story_ID: 30725 Speaker 1: This leads to home training. Let's talk about home training now. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Oh, home training, yeah (laughter) Speaker 1: This is, your mother [Bobbie Jean Bates] is legendary for home training. Speaker 2: That's correct. Speaker 1: And explain her approach to home training and what that's about? Speaker 2: Well, just in summary, you've got to connect back to Clell Bates [Burge's maternal grandfather] now because see, Clell raised a no-nonsense house. I mean literally when the ice cannot drip from twenty yards out to coming back to the house, this is really hard nosed training. She would make sure that we were up at daybreak. We had chores to do and everybody, were organized and what have you. We had a spotless house even though it was just a regular place. Everybody had their beds made. They had, we did turns with dishes and things with cleaning up, outdoors, indoors, just the whole works. So she had us all kind of on an army-type schedule. And when you went to school, you were checked on what you did that day. Homework, you had to homework first and then you could play. She allowed us to play though. That was one of the things that we don't really do much now. She allowed us to go out and enjoy the evening until, you know, the lights came on. And, you know, I don't know if some people talk about this, but you're supposed to be in the house when the lights come on. So that was a big deal cause if you were out, you know, walking around in the house, I mean in the yard or down on the corner of the street, she was wondering what you're up to. So we need to know where you are so when the lights come on, you're supposed to be in the house. She did allow us to do a little TV [television]. When TV came along, I guess in the later part of the '50s [1950s], and I enjoyed that. It was black and white, a small TV and what have you, you could only watch just so much. And it was her thing is that you didn't need to waste your time watching TV because there was no productivity there, okay. So she was always interested in productivity, you know, showing where the linkage was in what you were doing. So if you weren't doing anything, you really (laughter) weren't making any headway. We were probably the, one of few households who had an encyclopedia, 'World Book' encyclopedia set. And she would tell us, okay, Saturday, you're gonna read Volume A (laughter). So I have to kind of chuckle about that, but I, but she had a dictionary, and she wanted to be sure that you knew how to pronounce the words, all right. All of this business of bad grammar and all that stuff (laughter) just was unheard of (laughter). So I was telling you about the business of her writing and all that. She made sure your penmanship was very good, and I--everybody comments on my penmanship even today. They say (laughter), you know, but it was (unclear) really drilled in what we had to do. So the disciplinary thing was quite significant. And you didn't waste a whole lot of time in what we referred to in Bobbie Burge's house. Every minute was important, and that's one of the things that we have to transcend to today is that, we were talking about this in another session. That's the reason why that thing was printed, said-- Speaker 1: That home training rules. Speaker 2: The home training, Bobbie Burge 101 is what we were talking about, and we were commenting on it in a recent--the four of us got together and were just chatting about it (laughter), and we just laughed about it. But literally, I'm gonna tell you what it did. Every one of us went to college, and as I said before, we all have advanced degrees. Every one of our children are either in college now, and that's my younger sister--not my younger sister, but the other sister, she has a son who's getting ready to be Ph.D.. Her daughter is at Howard [University, Washington D.C.]. The other son is getting ready to go to freshman year. I have a Ph.D., computer science. I have a master's degree in computer science. I have a bio-engineer and environmental engineer who was at Johns Hopkins [University, Baltimore, Maryland] and I have a son in poli sci [political science], okay (laughter). So we've done well. I mean, so, I'm just saying that all of us have now contributed as a result of this home training that we had from Bobbie Burge. So it's been quite, quite significant. Speaker 1: Now, this is, you've even published the rules of home training on the internet, right, so anybody can-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, one--let me just share with how that happened. I didn't really tell you how it all happened. The Microsoft Imagine Cup that has been going on for the last couple of years has never really had an HBCU [Historically Black Colleges and Universities] to be in a leadership with it. And we had fifteen teams this year to participate. And we got Howard involved and also Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia] and Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] is involved now too. So we all had teams to go. When they came to the campus this year, they asked if we could do a day of things with the, I guess the high schools. So we got about three hundred kids together with all the teachers and their math and what have you, science and physics folk. And so we told them about our projects that our kids were doing. So our kids actually presented. And so the students in the engineering areas presented their particular solutions to the [Microsoft] Imagine Cup. Well, after this thing and Mrs. Woodall who was the general manager just said, I think I wanna have you interviewed. And so, about a few weeks later, somebody calls me from Microsoft and asked me about my background and where I came from, etc., etc. and all this. And then they got to asking me about my family, just like you're doing right now. And I said, well, you know, my mother [Bobbie Jean Bates] was kind of special. You know, she's just a little bit different and as a result of that, we've done this. As a matter of fact, during the last few years, we have published what we call 'Home Training, Bobbie Burge Style 101' (laughter). And so we sent it to her, and they actually ended up putting it on a blog (laughter). And so that's how it ended up happening as a result of this Imagine Cup thing. Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: So that's the way that happened, yeah. Story_ID: 30726 Speaker 1: All right, well, growing up. Now, what, so you grew up in Oklahoma City [Oklahoma], and did you grow up in that, the same place, 1700 Tenth Street or did-- Speaker 2: No, no. About 1951 or so, it may have been '52 [1952], my father [Legand L. Burge, Sr.] found another house, 1825 Northeast 11th. It was a, an old white lady who was trying to downsize. They had this thing called gerrymandering, you know, how they would sell houses to black people at a certain cost because the blacks were moving in and all that. Well, they were doing this about a mile over, which is a little bit down the street, but yet over, yet in the same school district where we were gonna eventually go to high school. Speaker 1: Were the schools segregated then when you were a little kid? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I mean I, I would say Douglas High School was the high school were the negros went to school in the '30s [1930s], '40s [1940s], '50s [1950s], '60s [1960s] and-- Speaker 1: Were there any blacks going to the white high schools at all or maybe a few? Speaker 2: There were a few who were privileged in what you would call private schools maybe, and they went a little bit with that, but not very many, not many. There were some, I guess they refer to them as magnet-type schools now. But there were just not a whole lot of inter- sort of racial things going on. As a matter of fact, the, [Frederick] Douglass [High School], for instance, was the only black school that had a statewide connection so that you, you know, Tulsa and Laughton and Ardmore [Oklahoma] which were all black schools, they all came to Douglas and they played football and what have you, although we were part of this state, citywide athletic conference. Speaker 1: Yeah, it's sort of like a de facto segregation in the sense that it wasn't law, hard law, but it was practice that you would, that the blacks would play each other in athletics. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's pretty much what they practiced, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But, now, when you, and I guess I have to kind of see how to get this in to you. Because of the impact of all of the wisdom of the black administrators, and the way that things were done with the elementary, the junior high and the senior high, we had a real powerhouse as far as intellectual, you know, things going on. So we all ended up going to school together, particularly, in the '50s [1950s] and '60s [1960s], all right. The Finger Plan [1972-1973], which was kind of the busing thing, which busted all this up in Oklahoma City, started about 1970, '71 [1971]. And what they did was they took all the better teachers and moved them to the better white schools so to speak, and then they brought some kids over here, some kids over there, and they kinda bused them around and what have you. But the better school was still over there on the white side of town in Oklahoma City, all right. And that was just the way it was, and I think even today it's still like that. But getting back to what was happening in the '50s [1950s] and the '60s [1960s], because of the teachers who lived in the community, principals who lived in the community, we all knew each other. We all kind of knew where the smart kids were and we kind of moved through what we call a, basically, a magnet school inside of a big, nice big high school (laughter)-- Story_ID: 30727 Speaker 1: A kind of tracking system. Speaker 2: And it tracked, it tracked us from the time we left elementary. The better students were kind of tracked in their special courses. We got the better math, the better science, the better physics and all that through the junior high school. And we were forced into this higher end math. I actually had calculus before I left high school, all right. So we were tracked into the whole thing. As a matter of fact, my high school class, 1967, has today, of any Douglas High School group, of the whole time, more lawyers, doctors, colonels, high-end administrators. We got three or four politicians, just significant achievement from that class. We had about 420 to graduate. And I understand about 80 percent of the folk actually went to college, okay. We're talking 1967 now. I went to Oklahoma State [University, Stillwater, Oklahoma] and twenty of us went to Oklahoma State in engineering, all right. Seven of us graduated. So just unusually high preparation for, you know, achieving in the science and the engineering and the math. So that's really quite (unclear). And that happened out of [Frederick] Douglass [High School]. We had people winning science fairs, nationwide, out of Douglas, statewide. We had folks going to music, state music, and winning competition. As a matter of fact, the choir, the band, it was not unusual for us to win the statewide competition in choir and band because we were just that good, and I'm talking classical, you know, producing the kind of development with the entire repertoire, you know, doing concerts. That was just unusual, all right. So we were exposed to this business in the '50s [1950s] and '60s [1960s]. And you gotta understand that a lot of those professors were coming from, you know, Florida A and M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida], and they ended up going to, you know, coming to Oklahoma City. We had people coming out of Tuskegee [University, Tuskegee, Alabama], coming here, you know, Howard [University, Washington D.C.], Hampton [University, Hampton, Virginia]. They would come and they'd work there and what have you. As a matter of fact, the guy who taught music actually studied at Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee], a guy named Leroy Hicks. He was there for like twenty or thirty, forty years. I had French from a black lady who had studied over in Paris [France], and she taught French. Matter of fact, Madam James, as her name was called, taught us one first, second, third year of French as you--and when you, believe it or not, I never had anymore French, and I could still go to France and be very comfortable with interacting with the people over the years since I've been around. One of the things as far as the fine arts goes, we did at Douglas was every year they performed 'The Messiah', all right. I'm talking about the Christmas version of it, all right. And then they did something in the spring too that was related. So the choir and the band and the orchestra at the time would put this on with the community and we would be exposed to this whole business every year. So you had those kind of fine arts things that were going on with the sciences and the math, you know, and the kind of things that would really give you wide exposure to, you know, what this is all about. Story_ID: 30728 Speaker 1: Now, you're a scientist-- Speaker 2: I'm an engineer, and I guess you could-- Speaker 1: Yeah, that's-- Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: But you took piano lessons and you were a-- Speaker 2: I studied-- Speaker 1: --a musician as a young man. Speaker 2: Right (laughter). I still play. I probably have been playing for fifty-nine, sixty years (laughter). Speaker 1: Now, was there a music tradition on your mother's [Bobbie Jean Bates] side of the family as a result of the-- Speaker 2: No, it was actually on my father's [Legand L. Burge, Sr.] side. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My father liked music and my, he encouraged--and he was a piano player, you know, for what it's worth. But I think that my brother and I and my sisters and everyone, we used to sing and play while we were young. As a matter of fact, we would actually sing at church and all this. And I would play for 'em, and he would play the horn and the drums and they would all--so we were all kind of a group basically. And that was something we did through the years, and I mean now if you asked us to do that now, it probably be, (laughter) they'd laugh at you. But we played, and that was what we did. We were literally the choir and the band for the church. Speaker 1: Well, what was the name of your church? Speaker 2: We went to Providence Nazarene Church. And that's another thing. You don't find many black folk with at Nazarene churches (laughter). And the way that happened, there was a guy named Joe Edwards who came to town out of Birmingham, Alabama back in the, I guess it was the '50s [1950s]. And I gathered that he met my cousin, whose name was Edward Green. Edward Green was called to preach, and he said, come and preach with him in the '50s [1950s]. So they started Providence [Nazarene Church] back in the, I guess it was the early '50s [1950s], and as a result of that, Petey, who he was referred to, is my cousin, he was a musician himself, played at [Frederick] Douglass [High School] and what have you, had a little bit of background. He understood music, and so he was the choir director, and they asked me to play. I was like three years old at the time, and I was playing for the Sunday school and all that kind of thing. I was actually doing it. Speaker 1: You're kidding, three years old? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah, I was playing, yeah. I could play in little stuff. And so I carried it on over the years, and I played from--I played for Providence [Nazarene Church] up until I got out of college, and that was probably 1971 or two [1972] or three [1973], somewhere around there. Speaker 1: Now, that's amazing. Now, when does your memory start, I guess where you actually--if you're playing the piano at three, where do you-- Speaker 2: I remember sitting on the piano at about age three, yeah. I remember, you know, enjoying playing 'Mary Had a Little Lamb' and all that (laughter), yeah. That's probably about it (laughter). Speaker 1: Interesting. So the Church of the Nazarene-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --now that-- Speaker 2: And just kind of to interrupt, Joe Edwards came to town and he befriended, like I said, our family. And Pete Green, who was a preacher and brought--because they had barbershops at the time. And he would come to the barbershop. And-- Speaker 1: Now, Joe Edwards is a white guy, right? You said, it was a White man? Speaker 2: No, Joe Edwards was a black guy. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: I'm not talking about any white folk here. Yeah, I apologize. There are some more white people that have entered my life over the years, but right now I'm talking about black folk. Speaker 1: But that denomination is primarily a-- Speaker 2: It's primarily a white denomination. That's what I'm saying. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, I got it. Speaker 2: This is the first, I would say this is probably the first Nazarene congregation that's black west of the Mississippi [River]. Another one was created in Oakland about the same time, Oakland, California, all right. But I do remember Joe Edwards, and he ended up having, you know, he was Doctor of Divinity and all that out of Nazarene church there in Oklahoma City. There's a School of Nazarene there. Story_ID: 30729 Speaker 1: What particular idea separates the Church of the Nazarene from other churches? Speaker 2: That Jesus has a more direct birth as being a, you know, growing up in Nazareth, all right, and he has a more focused time of being, you know, there in the Nazarene-centric, you know. In other words, I would say more of the indigenous part of the world, okay. But as far as, you know, I guess, the doctrine, I would have to say there's not a whole lot of difference between Protestant. It's Protestant. You know, I, you know, it's probably not the method that you see in the Methodist, but it's very close to the Methodist, all right. It's probably not the orthodox that you see in the Lutheran, but it's probably right in the middle there between the two. Speaker 1: Now, was there any conflict between that and the Baptist ideas of your, I guess, your grandmother [Mary Burge]? Speaker 2: It was a lot more structured. It's quite, quite, quite structured, a lot more disciplined. It was quite Bible versed, you know, quite biblical from the standpoint of teaching methods as far as teaching the Bible and what have you? Speaker 1: But did your mother [Bobbie Jean Bates] and father [Legand L. Burge, Sr.] attend that church? Speaker 2: No, just my mother. Speaker 1: Just your mother. Speaker 2: Just my mother, yeah. No, my father was more of a Baptist person and what have you. However, I will say this, though, because of my connection with the church and what I used to do and my age and being with them, I ended up, and you gotta understand that musicians now are well received throughout many congregations. I was, I got pretty good. And because I got to be a pretty good pianist, and an organist by the way, I ended up getting offers to play a lot of different places. And as a result of that, I have played for Baptists and Lutherans and Catholics and AME [African Methodist Episcopal], AME Zion, CMM [Central Methodist Mission]. I've done the whole gambit now. Speaker 1: That must have been quite a novelty. You've got kids playing well enough to entertain congregations. Speaker 2: Yeah, right. Speaker 1: So, you're playing the piano and your-- Speaker 2: Well, no, my brother [Kim Lamar] actually does horns. You name it, from coronets to trumpets to saxophones and quite, I mean he does everything. I mean he's quite--they're quite a deal. And see, my children, they actually are very talented too. I mean I got singers and piano players and all this. As a matter of fact, my daughter [LeAnn Burge] now actually has her own choir and church in Oklahoma City, so quite, quite significant there. So, yeah, we're kind of a musician centric group. And even today I still play although I don't do churches too much now because I don't have the time (laughter) really. Story_ID: 30730 Speaker 1: So when you were a little kid that age, did you imagine yourself becoming a professional musician? Speaker 2: You know, I'm glad you brought that up (chuckle) because I actually had it in my mind--because you gotta understand I played with the Billy Grahams of the world, James Cleveland. I mean I played with Hawkins. I played with Donald Vale, okay, and I thought one day I would become a musician. So I was thinking one day I would actually go and get a musician's, a music degree. And that's kind of what I thought about when I left high school. And the reality came when I heard about how they were doing musicians like The Temptations and the Supremes and all that, that they would have them perform, but they never would pay 'em. You know, all of these things are going on in the '60s [1960s]. And I said, you know, I'm gonna try this music. As a matter of fact, I actually music studied in college too. I went through Oklahoma City University [sic Oklahoma State University] and studied quite a bit under a guy named Dr. Burke. I had a teacher to tell me in high school that, you know, you really ought get something that's solid. This musician thing is great (laughter), but you might not be able to eat much on it (laughter), all right. And so he was saying, you need to go to something that's really more solid. And he suggested--this guy's name was Fred Burkes, if I remember right. He said, you know, you need to go and be an electrical engineer. I didn't know what an electrical engineer was. And I was in electronics because I was, I liked to do for my dad [Legand L. Burge, Sr.]. He kind of was into that. And I said, I was like the Number One person in the class. And he says, you need to go into electrical engineering because this would really make a big thing, you know. And at the time, remember now, there's not many of us in engineering, period, let alone electrical engineering. I mentioned earlier about twenty of us going to Oklahoma State [University, Stillwater, Oklahoma]. Well, a guy came from Oklahoma State, and his name was William Hughes, and he was looking for, and he was looking for some, what he called smart, black kids, smart negro kids that he could put in his program. Now, you gotta understand that OU [Oklahoma University] had just a few years before had a big desegregation suit. OSU [Oklahoma State University] didn't have a whole lot of yawl there, and as a result of that, he was trying to be the first (laughter) to do a diversity program, if you could call it that. That's what it's referred to today. So he reached out to [Frederick] Douglass [High School], because Douglass, remember what I was telling you what we had. We had the best in the state, literally. So all of these smart kids were going to different schools and all this around--and we had people going to MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. We had folks going out to [Washington] D.C., you know, UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles], all this, and what have you. So, as a matter of fact, when I got ready to (chuckle) to go to college, I probably received invitations from a hundred schools. I mean, you know, University of Rolla Missouri. Who ever heard of black folk going there, you know, BYU [Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah] , I mean crazy stuff (laughter). So you see all this and you say, you wonder what it is. And I was just thinking about going around the corner and doing whatever. I even got a note from Tuskegee [University, Tuskegee, Alabama], but (laughter), I wasn't event thinking about going to Alabama. That was just unheard of. Well, this guy came in, and he says, I will help you go to school, and I want you to major in electrical engineering. And he got all of that, that electronics class, he got several of us from that class to come and major in electrical engineering. And the rest is history. I ended up getting a Ph.D. in the stuff. I had never even thought about this, all right, (laughter). So-- Speaker 1: All at the same school too, right? Speaker 2: (Laughter) All at the same school, right. Story_ID: 30731 Speaker 1: Let me go back now to-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --now, what's the name of the grade school you attended? Speaker 2: Truman Elementary. Speaker 1: Truman, okay. Speaker 2: Truman was in Oklahoma City and again, all of those teachers--see, they had the same kind of thinking. It was a nurturing environment. You had to do this, you had to do that. And you gotta understand that a lot of these teachers all lived in the neighborhood, you know, close by and what have you. So it was a good, good group of folks, all right. My high school was F. D. Moon, Frederick Douglass Moon. Speaker 1: Oh, so, it's really Moon High School. It's Frederick Douglass Moon High School? Speaker 2: Yeah, F. D. Moon, yeah. Speaker 1: And the Moon is? Speaker 2: M-O-O-N. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He was, I wanna say he was a local prominent leader in the community. That's why they named the school after him. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: And Douglas High School, Frederick Douglass High School was the main school where everybody who was black, Negro at the time, went to school, very big. I mean my class, was like I said, four hundred plus folk. Speaker 1: Now, let me make sure that, I'm a little confused. But the high school is Frederick Douglass High School? Speaker 2: Frederick Douglass High, Douglas High School. Speaker 1: And the middle school is Frederick Douglass Moon? Speaker 2: High, junior high school, right. It was seventh to eighth grade, is F. D. Moon, yeah, Frederick Douglass Moon, yeah, right. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: Right, and these folk, as I said before, they were preparing you for something big, but you didn't know what it was at the time. And as I said before, a lot of this, when you reflect back on it, it was, we're kind of missing the boat in the country if we don't bring back a couple of things because one of the things that happened in junior high school, they separated the girls and the boys. You know, you did industrial arts, you did carpentry. You did a lot of things that were kind of focused on that. The girls did a lot of things that were more focused on developing the home, okay, you know, homemaking, cooking, stuff like that, sewing and all that. So you did all that for probably six weeks at a time, if I remember right. You had a little project, did it, exposure to a lot of stuff. But one of the things that they did though is the science and the physics, the chemistry, the biology, all of this business was begun at that time. That was what we were beginning to see possible. The math that I took in the seventh grade, and I can remember it just as plain as day, taught by a lady named Steward, Seward, S-E-W-A-R-D, was called SMG Math, Systems Math Study Group. It was a whole different way of thinking about mathematics, and it's whole purpose was after you did the seventh and the eighth grade math, you could move into that algebra I, then move into trig (trigonometry), the move into geometry, then move into that pre-calculus and that calculus that last year. So, see, all of this was preparation for that whole system. And that was the whole trajectory, all right. And now, and this is fifty years later (laughter), they've kind of messed it up in a sense (laughter). Rather than force the students into this thing, everybody says, well, you don't need that much math. Now, I kind, I'd wanna argue with that. So, but anyway, long story--to make this really, really quick though. We were on a path towards doing something really special. And I just now realize what it was all about now that I'm kind of, gotten a couple of days since then, because they developed the entire person. I mean music and fine arts. They took you to plays and planetariums. They made you do this stuff, all right. (Unclear) And then you had football and basketball. I mean we were the number one basketball team in the state. Story_ID: 30732 Speaker 1: Well, I know there's an educational philosophy now and there're a lot of technical schools popping up and there's a move in public schools and in colleges to drop the liberal arts training in favor of more hard, technical training, saying this is more useful than a liberal arts, and well, what do you think? Speaker 2: I disagree with that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, definitely. You gotta understand, see, I got a real strong fine arts background. I can enjoy opera and a concert or a play just as well as I can do scientific calculations, analytical calculus, all this business, all right. I think you need to develop the left and the right brain because without understanding the finesse, you can't understand the specifics, all right. You need to really understand color, you asked me about colors and all that, there is a business to understanding what colors are. Now, the way you put the colors inside of the drawing is a specific, all right. The way that you develop, let's just say the art of something, the design piece of it, you know, the whole idea of creativity and innovation, that's over there on the right brain, all right. But the way I build this thing and construct it and put it together and use technology, that's all over there on the structure side. And you need to have the two together, not--I believe that the nation needs to probably think about that, a lot more play time and a lot more rigor time. There one thing I could say--I'm getting back to my mother [Bobbie Jean Bates] again. She would let us do play time. But then she says, it's time to work. Play time's over with. So, a little different there. But it's-- Speaker 1: While, we're talking about this, and I probably should ask this later on in this, but since we're on the topic now, and we're at Tuskegee University [Tuskegee, Alabama] which was, and the fact that Booker T. Washington was engaged in a debate with W. B. Dubois on the nature of what black education ought to be, even though I don't know if there was, they took as hard a position as people say they took today. But-- Speaker 2: (Unclear) (laughter). Speaker 1: So Tuskegee was seen as the practical solution and the classical education model-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --but Dubois was supposed to be frivolous, you know, in a sense. And then you have like, a person like George Washington Carver, who was an artist. I mean he studied art in Iowa, and then he comes here, and he's like a world-renowned scientist, but he mixes the Art and the science. Speaker 2: Correct. Speaker 1: So what are your thoughts on that? Speaker 2: Well, you, I think you're partially correct about the splintering and the ways things were segmented. They, there's--you do need the intellectual piece. I think without understanding the philosophy, you know, the Plato and all that, and I, now, believe me. I've done all that business with the humanities. I didn't really see a whole lot of need (laughter) when I was doing engineering and they say, you gotta do this liberal arts curriculum. And I said, why do I need to study humanities? I mean 'The Iliad' and all this business here, it has a very good place of understanding why we think and how we think and what that's all about. Booker T. Washington was a practical person. You gotta understand the times. You're out of slavery. You're gonna start a school, and these folk are basically ignorant. As I said, we're at Tuskegee, and the monument that was presented here takes the head, the hand and the heart and puts it together because you've got to connect with your thinking (laughter). You gotta connect, you know, with your soul. You gotta do your mind, all right. You gotta do the whole business of what this is all about or you as a whole person. And you gotta be able to deliver. Now, you have to understand that at the time, the recognition that blacks could do anything was a real--it just was not on the page. So he had to say, where could my people deliver? Well, you can deliver in industries. We can deliver where we're working in the fields, okay. We can deliver where we can help in businesses, all right. That was kind of the philosophy--(laughter), you gotta understand that for him in the eighteen--I think it's '92 [1892] presentation to the Atlanta Exposition, for a black man to be talking to white people about what they ought to do and be and providing an opinion was absurd (laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah, it's the 1895 Cotton Exposition. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Okay, yeah, right (laughter). And so, I mean this is, so he had to take where he was and say where can I make the biggest impact? And I believe he found the niche. What happened though is that this hand, head and heart thing actually became quite significant for companies. Companies don't want people who can think. We want people who can build things and make things work because I gotta sell product (laughter), right? I'm building cars. I gotta sell product. I gotta know, I gotta have people who can think technically and understand how to put things together, okay. That's what the whole idea--if you go back and look at the history here, Ford [Ford Motor Company], companies like Procter and Gamble [Cincinnati, Ohio], General Motors, John Deere, all right, Cal-, I mean you look at all of this transition, those people are still here as partners in the university because they got so many products, the executives, they're producing things for the product, okay. Speaker 1: Self interest motivated. Speaker 2: And obviously, it is self interest (laughter). I'll try to make this as politically correct as I can. [Henry] Ford and [George Washington] Carver had a very good relationship. And he, I think he exploited it in that Carver was very much of a genius, producing new ways of painting, new ways of developing materials, all right, and putting things together. Well, what does it do? When you do cars, you want nice shiny cars. You want these things that last, rust inhibitors (laughter), okay. You go over there and look at the museum. He's done all of that stuff, and he could put colors together. He knew how to do all of that business there. So that relationship that was going on was very good. So it was very beneficial, obviously, but to the detriment in a sense because Carver didn't really push the patent thing. If we had more patents, Tuskegee would be a place to literally, you would just have to, you know, not ever worry about it, okay, going to-- Speaker 1: Okay, we've gotta take a little break. Speaker 2: Alright. Story_ID: 30733 Speaker 1: Okay, we were talking about the philosophy of technical education versus liberal arts education. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: But let me take you back to high school and ask you what, who were your mentors in high school, in terms of-- Speaker 2: Ooh, that's a good one. I actually used my high school math teacher as probably the best one, Greer, Lola B. Greer. Lola B. Greer was, again, no nonsense, had you going to the board, and I enjoyed the math class very much. I thought that, you know, it was very good to do because I didn't mind doing it. But some of the other students really did not fare very well because they didn't enjoy proving, you know, going to the--she made you go the board and do your problem, demonstrating that you could solve. Another was, again, Fred Baker, as I said earlier about the electronics guy. And he was a good prof--good teacher, from the standpoint of really getting you to understand, you know, the whole idea of electrical. Jenny V. Peters who was another math teacher who actually taught the calculus, linear algebra and all that business. I thought that they were good. Now, on the other hand my band leader who was Willie Perry and who was, who handled the band, the marching band, the orchestra, the stage band and all that, I really enjoyed band. Band was, obviously music was a key piece of the whole way of doing business. And then there was another guy named Leroy Hicks who was the choir director who dealt with the music. And you gotta understand, as I said before, [Frederick] Douglass [High School] had a state renowned band, state-wide, renowned band, state-wide renowned choir. I mean during the time I was there, the choir actually produced albums and all kinds of just significant things. So, you know, just unbelievable. So, an album, by the way is, for those who don't know this, is a 33-1/3 rpm, plastic kind of thing. Today, you know, you refer to it as a CD [compact disc] or whatever (laughter) so, it's a little different. So Speaker 1: Actually plastic records, it seems funny to have to explain that to somebody (laughter). Speaker 2: Right (laughter), and so-- Speaker 1: You're right. Generations will not know what we're talking about. Speaker 2: That's obviously correct. I knew several of the principals, but they were not as prominent as the teachers were. And those folk come to my mind as being quite good mentors and developers. Story_ID: 30734 Speaker 1: Now, I didn't talk about, I didn't ask you about, now, you were I guess about seven [years old] when your parents [Legand L. Burge, Sr. and Bobbie Jean Bates] split up. Speaker 2: That's probably true, yeah. Speaker 1: About seven, in '57 [1957]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And so how did that affect you growing up? Did it affect your relationship with your father [Legand L. Burge, Sr.] at all, adversely or--? Speaker 2: No. There was a new way of doing business. I understand I did these visitation things and all that, but honestly, it didn't get in the way because he still visited me often. And even I think my Saturdays were a regular thing. In Oklahoma City to Luther [Oklahoma], where the farm was and where my auntee lived and all of these folk, we had a, kind of a ritual with summertime and the weekends. And because of the lack of economics with the other cousins, they would always migrate on a Saturday or a Sunday out to her house. And I wanna say it's a good twenty minute ride from the Oklahoma City area out to this Luther area, all right. They lived on a, it was basically their farm, and as a result, they were to us, very prominent. It appeared that they had all kinds of money. They bought a car every year. I mean it was like significant, but when you went out there, you had to work. And obviously, I mean Bobbie Burge [Burge's mother] kind of had me and all of us, kind of connected. So when we went out there, it wasn't a big deal. The other cousins were kind of, to us, appeared to be lazy because of their slack in what they would do. I mean I literally spent a summer with them. I can remember going down and doing fields and watering and helping and all that. A matter of fact, I have a story--you're talking about stories here. I remember one year, I must have been about seven, eight, nine [years old], somewhere in there, I was eating these raw peaches. They tasted sweet, but they were really still raw. They weren't ready yet cause, you know, they don't really come ready until the August timeframe. And we were out there eating these peaches. And she says, if you eat those green peaches, you're gonna get sick. (Laughter) And so we were eating cause they were kind of, enough sweet for you to just enjoy 'em. Oh, I tell you, by the end of the day I had a stomachache that was unbelievable (laughter). So it was quite, quite interesting. But we spent these weekends though with the family. And so we grew up together. As a matter of fact, Clarence and Ecresha (ph.) who died and she was one of the few that caught leukemia, you know, while she was in college with us, and she died. And some of the others, who was a musician, like Delmar, for instance. He was a musician, played with Sam and Dave, you know, he was their drummer. And so we had all this stuff going on all the time, and, you know, I was like a piano player and all that, and he was like a drummer, and we would be beating and creating and singing and all this kind of stuff. So that was really a common thing. And we grew up with all this over the years. So I don't see the divorce really making a big deal. It wasn't a big deal to us, and even with my brother and sister, with their quote, unquote, so-called dads, I guess, he kind of overshadowed all that because he just took us all, you know. I'm still today, and I was telling a joke with my sister and my brother about, I said, I really think y'all part of these kids, you know (laughter). We all kind of look the same and what have you, but at (laughter), but at any rate, that's another story. Story_ID: 30735 Speaker 1: So did your father [Legand L. Burge, Sr.] ever remarry or anything? Speaker 2: Actually, he did. It was told, there was a lady named Clara Luper. Clara Luper was a Civil Rights leader in Oklahoma City. A matter of fact, she was one of the ones that did a sit-in. He and Clara grew up together in Luther, both of them from Luther, Oklahoma. And the word is that they always dated but they never really got together. And so my mother [Bobbie Jean Bates] said that she always wanted him as her husband, and so when they split up, it had to do with the fact that Clara Luper had gotten engaged with him again and somehow, and they married. She had some prior children too because she, her husband, I think, died. And Calvin, Marion and I can't think of the other sister's name, but they all grew up with us and we're all about the same age. So, you know, they married and they stayed married for a year or two, not very long. Speaker 1: It wasn't that long. Speaker 2: Not very long. It was right at the edge of junior high to high school for me, and I think there was some (laughter), misunderstanding on where they were gonna go with the children and college and all of this business and so they decided to amicably split. They still stayed very good friends and even, I saw her recently. She's still living in Oklahoma City and has become a very prominent teacher. She, as I said before, she was a, quite a political civil rights activist. And as a result of that, you know, she was quite the voice, and she had her own radio show and a lot of other things. As a matter of fact, my children when we were stationed in Oklahoma actually ended up having a history class with her as a teacher, you know. So she was a very, very good--and they said that she was just a real good teacher. I don't remember anybody else that he married. There was another, my mother now, did marry the young sister's father, Homesley (ph.), but they didn't stay married. I think it was merely to solidify the fact that he had a child and that sister now enjoys the fruits of her father's I think oil remains or something or another. I understand that she lives on a little bit better than the rest of us (laughter). So, but it's great. Her name is actually June Evelyn Homesley-- Speaker 1: Homesley, okay. Speaker 2: --rather than June Evelyn Burge. And so she, her name is Homesley, and she was, she's been married too before, but she reverted back to her name after she was divorced. Story_ID: 30736 Speaker 1: Now, just a little bit more about high school before I move you to college, but was, were you involved in--were you popular in high school? Were you involved in sports or high school activities? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, well, I wouldn't say I was a real popular person, but I do know that I was the smartest kid on the block. And when I went back to the (laughter) the fortieth year reunion, it wasn't a surprise to any of my classmates who were still around at the time that I had done what I had done over the last forty-some years. I was on the swimming team. I was a member of that. As being part of the band, I was actually elected band president my senior year. And, you know, I was part of clubs. You know, we had math clubs, science clubs, UF-beta (unclear), you know, math clubs and what have you. I was a student council officer. I remember being either vice president or secretary one year and all that, so. We had a, I think there was probably some popularity there. One of the things that I need to tell you though, see I--and see, you're bringing out a lot of things and I need to just make this real clear. I met my first wife in high school, all right. And during the--we were two years apart. She came in as a ninth grader. I was an eleventh grader. And we ended up going, you know, ended up going to college together and what have you. And then right after I went into the military, we--we were married that year right then, okay. But, you know, popularity, I wouldn't say I was the, no, (laughter), because I was really a geeky kind of thing. As a matter of fact-- Speaker 1: Well, you were the smartest guy (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --I told, I think at the reunion, one of the young ladies who was a friend says, you were just so smart, nobody knew how to just approach you. They liked you, but they just didn't (laughter). So, but anyway, that's the way it was. Story_ID: 30737 Speaker 1: How did, I didn't ask you a question about popular culture and all, but were you, did your family like entertain popular culture, the radio, you know, songs on the radio and the popular things that were out, the movie and all that? Speaker 2: Well, you gotta understand that AM radio was a big deal in the '50s [1950s] still. The transition to FM came around in the latter '60s [1960s] or what have you, but we got KOMA, K-O-M-A and WKY radio and, you know, TVs were still three channels and all that kind of thing. So we got all of that. And, yeah, I remember listening to a lot of the black music through the years, particularly, the '50s [1950s] and '60s [1960s]. Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite group or musician? Speaker 2: Ooh, that's, that's (unclear). I talk about this a lot cause we do a lot of what I would call historical development as to why gospel happened and jazz and all of that and what have you. I suppose the more favorite of the groups is probably the Supremes and the Temptations and the Four Tops. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know, when you really put the three together. But, now, if you go back and listen to all of the stuff that was coming out of Motown, I mean you gotta really just know all, like it all. I mean you just gotta just know that this is your number and, I mean I've gone to Aretha Franklin's concerts. I mean I've done Spinners. I mean there's just a lot of groups that were just great to recognize that they were singing your song. I used to listen to other music though, you know, country and some of the more popular things like Led Zeppelin and Jimmi Hendrix and Chicago (laughter), you know. So I had a eight track--so I'm taking you back now, see (laughter), I had an eight-track player and a VW [Volkswagen] bug that when I went to college, I would put that thing in with Chicago and listen to it all the way to school. I mean it was just great to hear 'Time is a Beginning and all of the things that Chicago put out that was pretty, pretty neat. But obviously, yeah, the black culture was a real key thing, you know, black, gospel was coming along at the time. It had been around since the '20s [1920s], but it was coming along more prominent. As I said before, you know, I played with a lot of these folk. I went to things with, you know, Hendrix, and these guys who just became very prominent in the '60s [1960s] with, you know, [Edwin] Hawkins and all those guys. I mean they were always looking for, seeking and hunting in the sense for musicians. And, you know, Cleveland [James Cleveland] was a great guy. And they started this thing called the Gospel Workshop of America. And you could go and learn about how to teach your choir to sing and all that kind of stuff, which was very, very good (unclear). Speaker 1: James Cleveland, yeah, he had, he was a big-- Speaker 2: James Cleveland was very, very big. He came out of the Roberta Martin Singers. Now, one of the things I didn't tell you, I didn't say, and only because I just overlooked it. The minister, Joe Edwards, that I was connected with with Providence [Nazarene Church], he used to sing with the Wings Over Jordan choir and he had a very disciplined thing about music because remember the Wings Over Jordan was an a'cappella group, black group, group of men, all right. And the sung all over the world. And he talked about the guy that gave the pitch for the choir, that you had to stay in your pitch. That's the reason why Fisk Jubilee singers today, the golden voices are so impressive to me, they bring back that old European singing. They still sing the same way even today with their anthems and the spirituals and the way Dawson taught 'em and what have you. Well, the Wings Over Jordan choir did that whole thing too. And that was the, one of the things he did, he actually mentored me into how you get a choir to do stuff. And over the years, I mean I've done, as I said in the military, I mean I played for choirs from California all the way to Washington, D.C. I mean we've done the whole bunch, we've been minister of music and all that kind of thing. So it's been quite a, quite an interesting spin there, all right. Story_ID: 30738 Speaker 1: Okay, well, okay, now Oklahoma State [University, Stillwater, Oklahoma]. Now, you're recruited by Mr. Hughes-- Speaker 2: Bill Hughes, yeah. Speaker 1: Bill Hughes, okay. And so how did you like Oklahoma State? Were there--you said there were twenty of you from [Frederick] Douglass [High School]? Speaker 2: About 20 went the first year, and we were all there. You gotta understand that Oklahoma State now is a big place, agriculture, mechanical which now is predominantly engineering and agriculture and engineering. Speaker 1: This was 1967. Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty seven [1967]. It's quite a shake up going on in the United States. We went to school, understanding what was happening, you know, with the civil rights and all that kind of thing, and with the whole idea of, you know, hey, we're gonna do this and get out. We were probably, if there were five hundred blacks on campus out of thirty forty thousand (laughter), if there were, we just couldn't and so therefore, we knew where everybody was. We kind of knew where they stayed, and the things that really bonded you together in this group really kind of really made a difference. But, now, I ended up with a guy named--and believe it or not I got him because he was such a terrible roommate (laughter). But this guy was out of Tulsa, Oklahoma. It'll come to me in a minute (laughter). I wanna say Fred, but anyway, he went to college totally for the wrong reasons. He went to party. And that was his whole thing. His, indeed, he had a very good semester partying. And he did not come back the second semester. He ended up with a perfect GPA [grade point average], zero. He made all failing grades and just was not--it'll come to me after I tell you about the other roommates. Speaker 1: Was there a lot of support for the--they recruited you all, you know, based on the fact that you all were some of the best students, at least the [Frederick] Douglass [High School] people, and you said, out of the twenty, seven graduated. Speaker 2: Some of them actually made three (unclear), yeah, I think only because we were prepared and we had the tenacity to just stick through it, stay with it. Speaker 1: So there wasn't much-- Speaker 2: No, there was no-- Speaker 1: No retention programs. Speaker 2: --development program, retention programs, no nurturing. That did not exist. And women were unheard of and obviously blacks in classes were just rare. I mean I was the only one in classes for four or five years. So it was just like that. I was, I mean I was able to develop and move through and link, and I went to tutoring sessions, sat in the back, and you know, all of that. You were never really called upon. I don't know how graphic you wanna get in this, but I went to an English class (laughter), and the first semester, this professor, I guess you don't wanna call names and all that, but told me, and everybody else in this group of about forty or fifty students--this is English composition the first year, he says, well, no nigger is gonna pass my class. You know, you can sit in here if you want to, but and what have you. Well, about one, two, three, four days of this, I called my dad [Legand L. Burge, Sr.] and told him, I said, I think we got a little problem here. And we ended up going to the Associate Dean and talking about this lady. And so, within another day I was moved to another class, a little bit more favorable teacher that at least weighed the options of your work and gave you a fair shake and what have you. I did well in English, you know. I was doing okay, 'cause it wasn't that we were not prepared. It was the issue of given the opportunity to succeed. And that was part of the whole issue there, and so this lady making that comment (laughter), I said, I don't think we can get it here so we've gotta move on. The engineering people were very supportive. I think my professor had joined in '62 [1962] from Michigan State [University, East Lansing, Michigan]. And he became a very good friend, and I graduated from him in 1979 with my Ph.D.. So he was a very, very good guy, and he was an Indian guy, Yarlaggadda, Rao Yarlaggadda, R-A-O, Y-A-R-L-A-G-G-A-D-D-A, okay. So I wanted to be sure that we get his name cause he really deserves, you know, he was a guy that really nurtured you and he--and that was one of the reasons why I liked his classes too. He was a very math-oriented, analytical guy, but he was into signals and he knew how to do matrices and all that. And I kind of linked up with him over the years of undergraduate. I had two or three classes I think with him in just the undergraduate years. But I mean, as I shared with you earlier about the liberal arts, the thing that Oklahoma State did, they made all the engineers do this whole big arts and science curriculum. I mean it was literally, English, humanities, you do the civics, government, I mean you had to have all of this stuff. And I said, and I was coming home to school one day, talking back to the professors, the teachers (laughter), and I said, I'm not taking any engineering stuff. I'm just taking this, these English things and all that. And I said, and they think it's gonna make you develop. So actually, in hindsight, it's probably the best thing that happened. I (laughter), because I found out when I went to the Air Force that it wasn't all about technical. You need to be able to write, put your name on stuff so that when it went out, you were the author and that made a big, it makes a big difference. Story_ID: 30739 Speaker 1: Now, did you have any trouble at all with the technical aspects of it when you were in college? Speaker 2: Oh, I worked my butt off. I didn't have to-- I didn't fail a class, very challenging though cause you had to--after a while, you're pulling math and science together, and you're making this, you know, linking how the chemistry works in solid state, for instance. You're looking at signals and you're trying to look at the analytical piece of how things pull together. Yeah, you had to see the waves (laughter), okay. You had to see that, and that's a challenge, all right. And you had to be able to develop that. And this was all a big stretch, thermodynamics which is the way waves move through, you know, media and how things are transformed, heat exchange, all of those formulas that you have to deal with. You had to learn how to use the reference manuals and at that time, you know, these computers now are just really unbelievable, but you had to learn how to use a slide rule. And you became an expert at this stuff. As a matter of fact, I think slide rules are great. I was telling that to the students here recently, and they talk about how you use a slide rule and all that, well, 'cause they know calculators, the best thing that happened back in the '60s [1960s]. I remember when the first HP [Hewlett-Packard] came out and the TI little calculator came out-- Speaker 1: Texas Instruments. Speaker 2: Right (laughter), I remember when they first came out and everybody was, oh, man, that's too much trouble. I'll just use the slide rule (laughter) 'cause you had to learn how to do reserve polish operations and all that kind of thing. And so it was a pretty big deal. But, obviously, that's history. Speaker 1: Yeah, it's interesting in those days, I remember discussions where people were saying you were cheating if you're using a calculator instead of using a slide rule-- Speaker 2: Correct. Speaker 1: --and that sort of thing. Now, nobody uses a slide rule anymore. Speaker 2: Yeah, I had a student come in. He has a TI-93. I think it's the best thing that's out. It's got memory. It connects to the Internet. It has a little bitty screen on it and it actually can graph whatever it is. And it also has a connection to the Library of Congress and what have you. And he says, no, Dean, I'm gonna have to learn how to use this thing because all the classes are on here. I mean literally, his math, his English, his science, all of the physics and everything is all on this calculator. It's about this size here, just unbelievably. I said, you've got to be kidding me. He says, yeah, I really don't have to go to class. I just, it's all right here (laughter). So, yeah, we've really gone way beyond slide rules now (laughter). So it's a whole nother world. But I learned how to do all that when I went to college, and it really made you a better person. The best thing, the best decision I ever made going to Oklahoma State. Speaker 1: Now, it's interesting, your relationship with Dr. Yarlaggadda, yeah, there were other--there was a Dr. Ramakumar? Speaker 2: Ramakumar. Now, he was a power systems guy. He was a guy that taught, again, Indian, but he taught power systems 'cause I used a lot of his stuff when I went to work with Oklahoma Gas and Electric Company. I was a technical--they call it internship now, but I went to them as a result of his recommendation 'cause he taught power systems. I mean at that time, they had a blackout in the Northeast, and I thought that was really fascinating, and he did a big study on that. He had these great big machines that ran the power systems and all that kind of thing. So we really made a big, big to do. So I was very impressed with all that, and I went to work as I said, OG and E, and it made a big difference, you know. Story_ID: 30740 Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty eight [1968], I just wanna go back to that for a second. What happened, there's usually a story about Dr. [Martin Luther] King's assassination when we talk to people who were alive during the time period. And this is, here you're, I guess a sophomore in college, I guess at that time? Speaker 2: Sophomore in college. Glen Mosley, who I hadn't mentioned before, he became my, he became my second roommate. Glen and I were actually at [Frederick] Douglass [High School] together. After a year or so you could figure out who's on campus and who really was gonna be there. And so Glen was actually an electrical engineering major too. He was one of the ones that went with me, he and I, pretty high in class, very smart kid, did well. And we decided to become roommates and we moved to Kerr-Drummond [Hall] together. And he was over in Bennett [Hall] at, on April the fourth, and he said, "Burge," and, you know, we're trying to study and all this April. And he says, "Dr. Martin Luther King just got shot." I said, "you gotta be kidding me," you know. This is just unheard of. "Yeah," he said, "they blew him out." He says, "man, they're gonna be marching tonight." I said, "yeah, but I, we gotta step back here." I got the, I think I had a test the next day (laughter). And he said, "I'm going." And he, I said, "okay." I didn't go, and I did eventually follow up after, you know, the next day in talking to people and all that about ways forward, next thing, next steps and all that. We had Julian Bond to come to campus right around the same time if I recall; don't remember exactly when. But he was, you know, he was quite the eloquent spokesman about things that we have to do now and all that. And they talked about this whole idea of intellectual freedom, you know, developing, preparing yourself, etc., etc. So the Martin Luther King assassination to me galvanized the fact that I need to really get my stuff together. That was the way I took it, that, you know, they're shooting this guy, and I--you know, we looked up to him. I got to really get my stuff together so that I can make a, do whatever my contribution is, all right. So I took a whole different approach rather than going out and marching and all that. And here's another thing that happened. Because I didn't get into the political fray, later on I got offered a job as a teaching assistant in the department. I didn't have all this political baggage, all right. I, I--they knew that I was a smart guy. They knew that I could really deliver. So, as a junior and a senior, I got to be a tutor and a teacher of the engineering science curriculum. Later on I ended up becoming a graduate teaching assistant as we referred to 'em here and getting an assistantship, and then going into the military as an Air Force officer, all right. So I didn't get involved with this political stuff. I just didn't think it was necessary to do that. Now, granted, you do need some folk that are gonna be on the front line, that are gonna do and maybe catch the bullets, if I can just use that phrase, all right. I don't know if everybody needs to be on the frontline. We need some people behind the scenes making stuff work, and that's where the engineers come in. You gotta have folks that are gonna do the technical piece to really make this stuff develop and be applied and proven. The political people are just that. They need to be the ones who compromise an understanding, all right. But I do think that there needs to be some people behind, and I guess I kind of fall into that secondary category. Story_ID: 30741 Speaker 1: Okay, did your family kind of follow the Civil Rights Movement growing up, I mean fairly closely or did, was it more--? Speaker 2: My father [Legand L. Burge, Sr.] was probably a lot more an advocate because of his, obviously the military background and his strength behind the fact that he was technical and he needed to work and prove to the white people that black people could do this technical stuff. You know, like I said before, he got all of stripes, all right. And you just don't get stripes, in a black guy (laughter). They don't give them to you, all right. You gotta be number one. You gotta pass the test. You gotta prove yourself. You gotta get good efficiency ratings. I mean just a number of things that have to happen before you get all them stripes, particularly, in the '50s [1950s] now, right. So this is, this what--my mother [Bobbie Jean Bates] was not so political, although she had her opinions about stuff. If you go back and look at the Bobbie Burge [Burge's mother] list, you know, she deals with this thing. If you don't have your stuff together, the system is going to take you over and you're gonna be spit out, all right. She was pretty clear about that (laughter), okay. So we didn't wanna get spit out (laughter) as she said, you know, put it together. But my cousins, yeah, there's a few of them that were really into politics, like I said, Clara Luper was close to us. She always wanted us to rally us to do a sit-in and all that kind of thing. But, no, I never got arrested, you know. I never got hoses and all that kind of thing, no. Story_ID: 30742 Speaker 1: Now, was there a black student organization on the campus of OSU [Oklahoma State University, Stillwater, Oklahoma] at that time? Speaker 2: Yes, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: As a matter of fact, was it '68 [1968] or was it '69 [1969]? One of the years, and I think it was right after Martin Luther King, they decided to have a boycott. And they were not gonna go to class. They were gonna meet and have these meetings and discussions, etc., etc. Well, now, remember now, I'm working for the university, and I basically told them that I couldn't participate in that, all right, because I'm--number one, I'm working for the university. I've got these other responsibilities, not only to myself but I had it to the other students that I was teaching, see. So you gotta really come apart from this to the higher calling, and that's something that's really key here. And I had to do those kind of decisions at that time when all of this was going on, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Do you remember the name of the organization, what they called it? Speaker 2: Oh, God. Speaker 1: Were you a member of it at all? Speaker 2: I don't think I was a dues paying member, no, I wasn't. I did join Kappa Alpha Psi about that same time, but, no, I don't remember being a--I'm trying to think. I really don't remember. Speaker 1: But they had a Kappa chapter, on campus? Speaker 2: No, they did not. Okay, that's a whole nother story here, but right quick. Glen [Mosley] joined Kappa in '67 [1967], '68 [1968]. He suggested that I start. So I started joining Kappa, and you understand, it's the fraternity of achievement, a lot of leaders were Kappa's, you know, just Tavis Smiley, for instance, you know, great guy. You know, he's just super. So he's a little younger than I am. But, so Kappa was quite significant, did not have a chapter on the campus. But the way we wanted to do this was to start our own chapter, undergraduate chapter and C. Felton Gayles, a guy who was out of Oklahoma City, connected with Langston [University, Oklahoma City]. And I'm trying to think of the other brother's name here, can't think of his name now, but he was an Oklahoma State grad. And I just don't remember his name right now. But he helped nurture, mentor the brothers to take 'em to Wichita State [University, Kansas] and granted, here's what happened. Langston University which was fifteen minutes away was considered a challenge for anybody to pledge through. You gotta understand, we were pledging at that time. They don't do pledging anymore. We do intake now and it's a whole nother way of working at it. But to pledge through, and so it was decided by Brother Gales and I think his name was Drummond, but I can't remember his name right now, but that, we would pledge through Wichita State. We took the all of the brothers up to there and then after about six months, they were, you know, became members of the fraternity. Then we had a klan, so to speak, at Oklahoma State but we didn't have a chapter. And so the next year, we ended up being pledged through Kansas State [University] which is in Manhattan [Kansas], and that's where I went over. Okay, Kansas State was sort of an umbrella mentor. And it wasn't, it's not that far really, maybe an hour or two on the other side of the border cause Stillwater's pretty far north of Oklahoma. And Langston, although it was there, there was a (laughter), a sense of recognizing that if you pledged through Langston, you nearly lost your life. Speaker 1: Now, hazing was really-- Speaker 2: Now, hazing was really bad. And (laughter) so they decided that the only way they would pledge us is to pledge us through these other schools. So, long story short though, since then the whole thing has turned around 180 degrees and it's really just totally different. But Kappa has become a significant part of, and I have been a member now for forty-two years, yeah. And so I've been a life member, etc., etc. And I'm even active right now on things. You know, they have me speaking and stuff like and a lot of mentoring going on now. That's what we do now, is mentoring, a lot of community service, scholarships, what's called--referred to as Guide Right, the whole development of the community, the whole idea of supporting, you know, different entities, you know, politically and economically and from the standpoint of scholarships. So it's quite significant now. So all that was going on and Glen and I were basically Kappa brothers all the way through. We probably had twenty or thirty, you know, brothers on the campus at any one time. We were financial. We created a house. We were the membership--I was actually the first pole mark, president, of the Zeta Theta chapter at Oklahoma State, all right. So I went down in the history books for that (laughter), and so it's quite, quite significant and became the graduate advisor when I was a graduate student back in the early '70s [1970s]. So we really made a big impact there. And, you know, it's probably not picked up too much anywhere else, but it was a good, it was a good time. And even to this day, and I look at the other nine panalenic you know, organizations, you know, the Alpha Phi Alpha, Omega Psi Phi and even the women, you know, and what have you, these organizations have been a significant thing in the black community from the standpoint of creating leaders and in developing leaders, being mentors to the students and being representatives, simply representatives of what it is you can be. Now, W. E. Dubois, I'm getting back to the other thing you asked me earlier, and Booker T. Washington had this issue that the talented tenth had to pull everybody up. That was his thinking. Well, perhaps these organizations are part of that, but if you don't have the skill set, which is what Booker T. Washington was talking about, if you can't deliver, if you can't be a doctor on the street when they need doctors, then you're of no consequence. So the intellect is just great, but you need to be able to deliver. So there's a great, you know, merging of the two, if I could just put it like that, all right. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 30743 Speaker 1: Now, '68 [1968] was also the advent of a movie that may have, you may have seen, '2001 Space Odyssey'. Speaker 2: Yeah, Space Odyssey, yeah. Speaker 1: Now, was this--it featured a computer called Howell 9000 that, a speaking computer-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Now, how did that effect your work as you--I don't know if you had even--when you saw it, were you thinking about a speech and-- Speaker 2: Well, not really, but there's probably even more that goes back. One of the reasons why I even got into engineering, I found out it was probably worth thinking about, was what happened at Sputnik and all of the hoopla that was going on with NASA [North American Space Administration], okay. When we went to the moon, I mean I had pictures literally in my room when I went to college of the moon, astronauts doing their thing and all of the business that was related to NASA. So when I saw the movie, when I heard about computers talking and the whole idea of using your innate ability to think and create artificial intelligence, I thought it was a novel area to get into as far as speech processing goes. So my thinking was that I would try to at least make some contribution to that particular area when I was going to do my dissertation work. And, indeed, we had some interesting discussions over the years. Some of the work actually has, as you can see it now, if you pick up an email or voicemail or if you hear a lot of the, what I call the automated systems, they're really talking computers because that's who it is. It's created synthesized speech, all right. When you now talk to a, let's just say an airline, they'll ask you for, where do you wanna go? Going to Manhattan, Kansas, and they'll--it recognizes speech very well now. So we're, we've come a long way. It makes errors, but after a while, it trains. You know once it talks to you, you could, it trains on you. And then it learns your phonetic and all of your vowels and what have you. So it's very, very, a good product. Now, do I get any credit for that? No, but it was, I'm great to have been a part of that development, all right (laughter). Speaker 1: Speech recognition technology. Speaker 2: Speech recognition and the whole idea of creation of speech and all that. So there's two sides to it, the whole idea of synthesized speech and the whole idea of recognition. So it's very good. Speaker 1: Okay, you know the fear that people always have when they hear a machine talk, like, the movie, the horror in the movie is created by the talking computer and his-- Speaker 2: Well, that does--machines would then control you and that there would be no need for the human element. Now, we're teaching a class here right now in engineering ethics. And one of the areas is, how much does technology intrude into your life, RFIDs, Radio Frequency Identification Devices, all right. We now are experiencing someone talking about implanting a device into your skin that will determine your vital signs, send signals to, you know, if you're gonna have, predicted of a high risk, like a heart attack or diabetes or what have you, now are we getting too far ahead? Well, and from the standpoint of prevention, the whole idea of what I would call life impact and maybe helping people develop maybe better lifestyles, this can be very good from the standpoint of privacy, insurance companies, exploitation, that's the whole issue of ethics, okay, and what have you. How much do we want them to have? But there should be no reason why there isn't a balance there where the medical world, those healthcare professionals out there are not being able to leverage, you know, their use of technology to help people, you know, live better quality of lives, improve, you know, the life expectancy and the other things that are going with that. So there's some balance, and we need to work out the (laughter), the policy issues still. But it's coming and just like the internet, I mean there's some balance with it, all right. And it came along and some people exploit it for good but yet there's so much great stuff that comes out, and we just need to really be able to put that together, all right. Story_ID: 30744 Speaker 1: Okay, now, you earned your bachelor of Science in '71 [1971] from Oklahoma State University. And you were involved in ROTC [Reserve Officer Training Corps], so did-- Speaker 2: Right, that's a whole nother story too, now that you're telling stories (laughter)-- Speaker 1: Did you go right into it? Speaker 2: The Vietnam War [1955-1975] had been going on for a while. My dad [Legand L. Burge, Sr.] said that based on his experience, obviously, you know, you're gonna have to do something because they're gonna get you. And he was very afraid that I was gonna be called up via the lottery and put on the front line of Vietnam and then come back as a body bag. So what he said was, you need to get into ROTC. Come to find out, they actually gave scholarships. They gave you all this training, and they developed, and you went and did things through the summer and all that. So it's a pretty good experience, and let alone all the science. And they paid you while you're in college. So I took this as a pretty good deal, and I ended up beginning to be a, what you would call a leader in your own right because I became a member of the Honor Air Society which is the non-profit fraternity that they have. I ended up being, going to meetings where you could actually learn how other people were thinking in other parts of the world, cause you gotta understand that. See, I'm coming from Oklahoma City. I'm on the other side of the tracks here and I had never seen all these folk, let alone deal with all these white folks, okay. And now I'm actually telling them what to do, all right; just took me to a whole nother level, all right, and what potential I could be. So I'm now engaged in this business of ROTC. I ended up graduating, I think it's called distinguished graduate and get what they call blue chip where they actually send you to graduate school and you're kind of committed to the Air Force and all that kind of thing. So that was good. So it provided a whole nother experience for me. And now, granted, when I was commissioned, it was my agenda to do an assignment and then get out. You know, three years or whatever the time was at the time, or whatever, I was gonna do the minimum and then go back home and, because I actually had a job at Oklahoma Gas and Electric. You gotta understand, see, I was an intern for them. And they said, when you get through with the military, you just come on back, and then we got--you'll get your job as an engineer cause you're graduating as an electrical engineer. Well, they sent me to California. They took care of my family. We bought a house within the first year on that VA [Veterans Affairs] thing that you can get, you know. And I saw the water. I saw the beach for the first time in my life. While I was there, within six months, the first year, I ended up going back to the Pentagon on a TDY as they referred to it. That's temporary duty, all right. And I got to meet a bunch of people and saw all this great exploitation of what we were doing in the world and I was flying satellites. That's what we did in the business, doing these non-national, technical things. Story_ID: 30745 Speaker 1: So you were, well, it may be good, yeah, just kind of go into the science of that. Like what were you doing in the-- Speaker 2: Well, my first assignment I was assigned as a satellite officer out at Sunnyvale Air Force Station [Santa Clara County, California] as part of the Space and Missile Systems Division which is part of the Secretary of the Air Force. I was special projects. Special Projects folks were the ones that flew the satellites. We did the development, the creation of hardware, the design of hardware, the whole writing of the software, handling all of the various targets, making decisions on databases for the hardware, making sure that the hardware is well taken care of, the health and payload. And then shipping the collection items to the Pentagon. This was a very big, this is a very big system. It involves rockets. It involves, you know, at that time it was McDonald-Douglas, you know, which is now turning to other things. It involves working with the contractors, you know, Hughes, the TRW [Inc.], the Aerospace Corporation folks, all that. It involves the global weather central, people out in Omaha [Nebraska], which handles all of the weather all over the world. It involves the camera systems, the Kodak was the vendor. It involves all of those people in the Pentagon who do the political side. In other words, underneath the President, there's a group of people now that refers to themselves as the Intelligence Community, involves all of them people. Well, I get to meet, I got to meet all them folk (laughter) within the first year. I had a master's degree at the time, and my other two colleagues who were black, a guy named Henry Jacobs, who was a Tuskegee [University, Tuskegee, Alabama] grad and I'll think of his name, Sonny Marshall, who--I think he came out of Howard [University, Washington D.C.]. Story_ID: 30746 Speaker 1: Now you've got a master's degree now. Speaker 2: Yeah, but the reason I'm getting this to you is that I'm getting out of Oklahoma State [University, Stillwater, Oklahoma], and I've now got my first assignment out of this. And I get to meet all of these significant people. I mean I'm talking movers and shakers. And I'm seeing generals. I literally had, in my first assignment, I saw George Bush the first. He was the CIA [Central Intelligence Agency] Director. He came to a place. I got to meet this guy, and I got to talk to him and what have you. And, you know, this is quite significant. Speaker 1: Now, that was in the late '70s [1970s] or? Speaker 2: In the '70s [1970s], yeah. Speaker 1: Seventies [1970s], okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, '70s [1970s]. Speaker 1: So this is right after-- Speaker 2: Probably '73 [1973], '74 [1974], somewhere in there, you know, I don't know. So I get my B.S. degree and the Air Force then approves for me to get a master's Degree and stay there. So I get to leave that graduate teaching assistant job, move onto active duty and don't have to move. I literally am working to go to school. Quite significant. Remember I said I got married and all this kind of thing, so this is just super. My kids come and I mean I had, you know, I got, my first kids are twins. And we, we're there and all this, and we're living in a nice apartment there in Stillwater [Oklahoma], and I mean life was good. And we decided that this is gonna be our life. And I said, you know, we're gonna only do this for a few years because this is a couple, three years and I figured that the assignment would be over with and that was it. Well, this first, this first six months, they sent me to the Pentagon. And a group of us, they took all of us second lieutenants, and we were there, and looking around and meeting all these people and talking about what we were doing. And it was really interesting work. I got to see the whole thing, all right. It's kind of like, you're in the dark and you see a light dimly, and then everything opens up and you get to see the whole thing. What did they do that for? I said, wow, this is quite significant work. So I'm going back, and I'm still doing the thing with the satellites. We're working, and we worked shift at that time, four on, four off. Four days on, four days off. I did that through probably the captain time, and then I got moved to do some other stuff. But at any rate, I'm trying to get back, going back though to make sure that I'm not, I make the picture complete. When I got commissioned, all right, I did not realize, even though I had graduated, distinguished graduate, electrical engineer, B.S. degree, you know, that I didn't know what was in for the whole take. And this is what really kind of makes the thing just shocking to me. I thought I would graduate, go back to Oklahoma City, after I get the B.S. degree and just do what people do, live in a nice house and do whatever. I have not went back since (laugher), okay (laughter). That was my whole idea of, and, you know, and my dad [Legand L. Burge, Sr.] was very proud of me, you know, once--because everybody came to the commissioning. It was quite, quite significant. So and it was just, you know, indeed, I had far exceeded the expectations, all right, at that time. And that was in 1972, '73 [1973], all right. Story_ID: 30747 Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, you earned your master's in '73 [1973] so, okay-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --you went right out there with a master's then. Okay, so you're in D.C. then in the '70s [1970s'] and you're working-- Speaker 2: I'm actually at Sunnydale Air Force Station in the early '70s [1970s]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And if I can remember this, ooh, between Sunnyvale, which was California, Northern California, and Los Angeles, which is Southern California and then from there going back to Oklahoma State [University, Stillwater, Oklahoma] to get my Ph.D. for three years--I think that's right. Speaker 1: Right, yeah. Speaker 2: And then, see that, this Ph.D. thing was really an unknown to me. It was really an unknown. I thought that I was gonna really do some significant work and what Dr. Yarlaggadda was saying that, you need to really do your research piece, take the minimum number of classes because it's not what you go to school for. It's what you contribute in the research world. Well--and now that I see that as the dean, I see that I really want people to do scholarly work. I want 'em to take their work and do something with it, you know, apply it to something or do whatever. So it really made it a big difference. And then from there, I--we moved through a lot of things. Now, I don't know how much you want me to get into this personal slash professional life because it's, I got a real convoluted thing going on now, okay, cause--while, the trials and the vicissitudes of what happens in your life really gets impacted by the professional and the whole stress of economics and everybody trying to be a professional. My two kids are coming along and my wife is doing her thing. She was a teacher and had done very well and what have you. But we ended up just diverting and parting ways and what have you, somewhat amicable, but departing ways. Speaker 1: Now, this is in, this is about the time-- Speaker 2: Seventy-- Speaker 1: --you're working on your Ph.D.? Speaker 2: Yeah, right around the time, yeah, about '77 [1977], somewhere along in there. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I think that's right, yeah. And so we split, and basically, because I'm in the Air Force, everybody stays a dependent, and, you know, she's an ex-wife, but yet she still gets to be a dependent. So, it's kind of, a little bit different thing. It's sort of like, she becomes an ex-wife, that's all. But she still has privileges because of the children and what have you. So in--moves on, move on to the Air Force Academy. Oh, but what happens though, during this time of my Ph.D., I go back to an old friend and during the seventies, I mean during my high school days, I, you know, I'm very popular as you said before. A lot of people know me (unclear). Well, Claudette Jones, I said, ooh, I had to even think about her name, God (laughter), is the organist and pianist at the church. And she and I had been organist and pianist before over the years. She actually went to Langston [University, Oklahoma City]. Oh, by the way, this is another thing. I'll just kind of make this clear. My, Gwenetta, who's the first wife, went to Langston, Delta Sigma Theta pledge. So we go--Oklahoma State and Langston are very, very close together, ten, fifteen minutes, like I said before, very close. So I was basically going to Oklahoma State. You were talking about the livelihood of schools, we were going to Oklahoma State and then we'd also go down to Langston on the weekends because that's where all of the-- Speaker 1: That was the recreational-- Speaker 2: The parties were, the Kappa's were there, the Deltas were there. I mean, and it was a real big deal for me. So Glen [Mosley] and I, okay, used to do this often. It was just as close as whatever cause it was just part of the way you did it. Oklahoma State's got thirty thousand white folk. You gotta understand this, okay, only got a few black folk (laughter) there, alright. Story_ID: 30748 Speaker 1: So, the proximity made it such that we [Burge and his wife] could go to Langston [University, Oklahoma City] and often, even sometimes during the week we'd go down there, and we'd just--depending on what was happening, cause a lot of times when the fraternities and all of the other things were going on, they were doing things that were be either social or things that you need to be a part of. You gotta to understand that during the '60s [1960s] then there was a lot of civil rights stuff happening, speaking, we were speaking and, you know, you'd--I mean we saw some of the greats. You name it, the young lady who is at Virginia Tech [Virginia Polytechnic and State University, Blacksburg, Virginia] now. We saw her, the poet. Speaker 2: Nikki Giovanni? Speaker 1: Nikki G--yeah, saw Nikki, and like I said, Julian Bond was (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Probably Dick Gregory. Speaker 1: Rob, Dick Gregory, I mean all these people were coming and going, and so you wanted to go and hear these folk and get a perspective on what was happening. So it was very, very good to do. So, the wife was there, and it was easy to kind of, you know, transition and go back and forth. And so I saw her quite often, you know, during the week and even during the, on the weekends. So it was a good deal. We married, kids came, went to California, and things kind of went to pot in a hell basket. And so we split, and then from there I started to work. Now, this Ph.D. thing is quite intense. And if you have never done Ph.D. work before, you really don't know what the doctorate's all about. You become literally married to this thing, and it becomes something that you have to live and breathe by, daily, nightly and you never stop. Some times, and particularly, when I was doing this development of this detection algorithm that we came up with, two, three days would go--we were intense with the rest of the students doing programming, cause you gotta understand, we were programming, okay. I'm writing four tran programs, big programs. It wasn't this business where you come with a little bitty laptop computer. I'm talking a big machine as big as this room (laughter), okay. Speaker 2: With cards. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Cards and all of this. Speaker 2: It was the punch card era. Speaker 1: And it requires meticulous attention to detail, all right. And you really could not afford to get away from it. You had to stay with it, and I recognized the intensity of the contribution. And not only just doing the application of the work, but also the research piece in finding out what was previously done. Well, my advisor, [Rao] Yarlaggadda, he created something that they called a conference of signal processors, never had been done before. In 1977, I sat in the audience and heard a guy named Cooley and Tukey talk about something they called an elegant algorithm for processing the Discrete Fourier Transform. Well, what does that mean (laughter)? That means that I could take time domain signals and then move them to the frequency domain and back elegantly, mathematically and what have you, which means that I can now create a computer program that will do this stuff automatically and do it very, very fast, all right. That was the whole breakthrough to the whole signal processing thing. I was sitting in the audience in the time when they did--we did this thing in Tulsa, Oklahoma first time, you know. That's been like thirty-something years ago, okay. And at the time I didn't realize it was so significant but then we--we wanted to create our processor at Oklahoma State [University, Stillwater, Oklahoma] that would do the same kind of thing, all right. So that was the intensity, and the speech piece, while we hear you hear, the frequency of what's coming out, it's actually occurring with your ears being interpreted with a time domain, all right, versions, so you can determine when things are going and all that kind of thing. So, long story short, is it was quite intense work and she thought that I was cheating on her and what have you. And then it turned, it just didn't work out and so, long story short, I meet a new young lady--well, I didn't really meet her. I already knew her from high school and all of the elementary schools and all that. We get married. She goes to Colorado with me to the Air Force Academy [Colorado Springs], all right. Story_ID: 30749 Speaker 1: And I think my, now that I think about it, my dissertation title was 'The Efficient Coding of the Prediction Residual.' Now, the reason why I say that is before we left, I came up--I had to come up with something that was unique, some breakthrough, something that really made a difference. So the prediction residual is that piece that makes your inflections occur as you talk. You know, it's the (laughter), it's the excitations piece. It makes you recognize that a new word is coming, that a new phonetic is coming, all right, that a new sound is coming, all right, so if you can kind of deal with that. So I kind of did this preliminary work in that area. And so-- Speaker 2: What does determine, I mean how a machine, I mean a device determines when a new word is coming? Maybe I'm asking too big a question. I don't know. Speaker 1: What, so you wanna know when a new word has been--okay, remember now, what you hear, hear, H-E-A-R, there is a phonetic and a vowel that's occurring there, all right. So the machine has to determine when the phonetic starts and when the phonetic stops. So there's actually a little breakthrough there, although we don't really determine, we can't really determine that. There's some space there that gives the new phonetic everything from fricatives to explosives to vowels, all have start and stop points. And so that's what our computering system was all about, was to determine where those start and stop points were and how we could, you know, interpret what they are, all right. So we had to synthesize that in some way, all right. We had to make the computer create that particular excitation signal for each one of those, although it's continuous, we had to determine where the discreet place was, all right. Speaker 2: Okay, so did you have to sort of measure the tones or--? Speaker 1: Well, we had examples of prior demographic speech, and we then digitized that and put it into sonograms and put it into what we called replications so you could then overlay. So what happens when you do a voice recognition, I have various loci of different vowels, A, E, I, O, U, and I have you saying "A", me saying "A", the guy over there saying "A", and I have a whole now community that's saying "A", all right. And now I have a whole loci of 'em. I have a whole spectrum of 'em, all right. And now I can say, well, when I hit this particular quadrant, then I know that that's "A" because it has the frequency domain, all right. And it has the various formats that you can determine from all of that, all right. So that's what is really happening. It's a lot of processing power that your brain does for you, all right. Story_ID: 30750 Speaker 1: We had a discussion yesterday about recognizing speech patterns from different parts of the country-- Speaker 2: Yeah, they're different, yeah. Speaker 1: --and how you could just be baffled by somebody from, you know, way down South if you're from way up North or, you won't know what they're talking about or they, you. They don't-- Speaker 2: Correct. Just notice the difference between the British English and American English. Those that have dialects, all right, and those that have other things from around the world, you have to listen a little bit. It's not that you can't understand them. You just to have to listen a little bit, and this is basically what all the computers are doing, all right (laughter). Speaker 1: Well, how does a computer solve a question like, a word like oil, you know. I say oil (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Oil? Speaker 1: --and down here they might aul (oil). So does the-- Speaker 2: Hum, that's a challenge. Speaker 1: Check that aul [oil], you know (laughter). Speaker 2: That would be a challenge, and I think we did determine--when we were at the Air Force Academy [Colorado Springs], we did some more work on, because the Academy cadets come from all the United States. We ended up doing a study on the vowels and putting that into a whole database. And that work, a guy named B.J. Stanton and I did some work together on that. And so we did that for the Wright Laboratories. So it does require a lot more processing to make the determination that you're saying oil or aul, earl, or whatever, okay (laughter). You need to be able to make that determination. Again, it's processing power and the process of elimination and doing good prediction analyses, all right. The, the, well, we used Lee Square, but now there's a lot more sophisticated algorithms that are around to help this whole business there. Speaker 1: So you have to basically create an artificial way of determining what, say if somebody said, "check that aul" to me, I would, I might not know what he's talking about at first, and I'd think "check that", what comes next, you know-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: and then I'd come up with, he must mean oil. Speaker 2: Correct, correct. There are prediction pieces we refer to as digital filters at the time, but now a lot of that is done in different ways, but the digital filter business was the whole idea of predicting, and then we take that, the returning signal of encoding that business and going back, all right. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Story_ID: 30751 Speaker 1: So quite significant work has been going, a lot of breakthroughs in the area. The phones are not perfect and the operators that you're talking to have to ask you to repeat if there's some conflict. And so the machines help you to determine that, all right. Speaker 2: It seems to be that business today is determined to use these voice, they use synthesized voices on the-- Speaker 1: Well, it's a force multiplier, all right. You know, using technology to, you know, do things and make decisions for you, so I don't have to have manpower to do that. I can create a machine that helps that particular thing and then you, as a person, can do something else, right. See, the logic only requires a machine. Humans are needed when we have to make judgment, all right (laughter), which is getting back to your R2-D2 when you're in the movie, when the machine starts making judgment, then you get into a problem (laughter). All right, yeah, so that's the bigger challenge we have. Speaker 2: And (unclear), do you think there'll ever be a time when--I know we just had the super computer play Jeopardy, what's his name "Watson". Speaker 1: Well, again, that's a logic game. If you can give me all the possible solutions, certainly you can come up with that. A computer could do all that for you. A computer can do chess. I mean they've got computing running and doing--and going through all of the meetings. As a matter of fact, it'll make the decisions more thoroughly or completely than the human will, all right, because it's gonna run through all of the possible and combinations that can be decided. And then it will choose the optimal one, all right (laughter). Yeah, so it really makes a big difference (laughter). Speaker 2: Okay, and I know there's still some things that really fall in the cracks. I've got like AT&T internet service, but I don't have phone service from AT&T. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: And every time they call me about the bill, they ask me, what's your phone number? And I say, I don't have a phone number. Then that throws the whole thing off, you know. Nobody is, though they sell the internet by itself, they haven't the bill payment computer to recognize it. Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: So they just, wait a minute, let me repeat. What is your phone number (laughter). I don't have a number. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Well, now cable companies and AT&T, of course, as a part of that, phones, you know, cable and the whole idea of the TV and everything is coming through, movies and all that. And I think all this stuff is gonna converge shortly-- Speaker 2: Yeah, they've converge, yeah, they have kind of converged it. Speaker 1: It will probably become a utility in its own right and maybe even include a lot of other services as in business, particularly when the businesses can become a part of that whole stream, just like you have the internet. Now, with advertisements, well, once they intrude that into your life, then you won't ever had to leave your house or everything will be on your cell phone now, your Smartphone and you can now take it away. So it'll all get, become nothing. And I figure that as we move through and just taking this a little further, the whole world becomes seamless and very wireless. You will just have to worry about the social piece and where it fits into your life and you go from there. But getting back to that though, what we did though after the Air Force Academy work, we did some papers on that. And we've now seen a lot more folks in this whole idea of synthesis and recognition. I have not been able to, let's just say, develop, do more work because, what happens in the Air Force is, once you do the captain thing and make sure that you know the technical piece, you get promoted. And then you start managing people and then money. And as a result of that, I got selected to go to the Command and Staff. And the Command and Staff, Air Command and Staff is the first cut towards making the determination whether you're gonna make field grade and become a leader in the Air Force, or in the military. As a matter of fact, a lot of my contemporary folk who were with me went on to become a one, two, three and four-star general, so, I mean I was sitting around the table with a lot of these guys who are now, you know, leadership and just recently retired. Story_ID: 30752 Speaker 1: Now, you were selected for the Command and Staff college in '84 [1984]? Speaker 2: Right, from the Air Force Academy, right. Speaker 1: Okay, and then at some point, you actually are working at the Pentagon under General Colin Powell? Speaker 2: Right. Well, my first assignment from Command and Staff in '85 [1985], one of the things that they do at Command and Staff is they tell you, you're either gonna become a commander somewhere or you're gonna go to the Pentagon. Anybody worth their salt in going to Command and Staff is gonna end up being put in a leadership job. So a lot of us who were in the class ended up rolling to Washington, D.C. and going and doing things, depending on--well, I ended up in International Programs, working for the Secretary of the Air Force. International Program Systems connected me with NATO [North American Treaty Organization], it connected me with the things going on in Asia, you know, Japan, Korea, China, all of that Asia peninsula and all of that business there. So you get a lot of connected footprints. As a matter of fact, I'm probably in the books, NATO's Research and Development Organization, it was coordinated by me after '85 [1985] for about three years or so. That's what I did. And then I left there and then became, after War College, ended up coming back and working for, you know, General [Colin] Powell and those folks as part of the Secretary of Defense and what have you. So it was quite significant there. I ended up moving into a job that you would think you would not have an engineer in. I was a cost analyst (laughter), yeah, and so it's working--as part of that whole transition there, I ended up, you know, doing all those kind of things for these folks. And it ended up being quite a significant job because I did the weapons systems cost number for, you know, such things as JSTARS [Joint Surveillance Target Attack Radar System] and Milstar [Military Strategic and Tactical Relay ]and I can't even think of some of those different technical programs, all right. But I had a whole thirty, probably billion dollar list of programs that I was dealing with. It was quite, quite a bit there. Story_ID: 30753 Speaker 1: So you were qualified to be the cost analyst because you actually knew what-- Speaker 2: The engineering piece was, yeah-- Speaker 1: --it took to put together a piece-- Speaker 2: Yeah, part of my job was to get (laughter) to the truth (laughter). The reason why it's said, is that many of the contractors are building weapon's systems, particularly, the major weapon's systems, and that was what I was dealing with, major weapon's systems. Those major weapon's systems were gonna become a purchase, if you got it procured, through the process, and as a result of your expertise and not only just technical but also understanding the whole idea of the defense acquisition world--and by the way, see, I went to a course that was called Defense Acquisitions Management which I eventually became the dean of back in the late '90s [1990s]. And so as part of that deal, you know how all of this stuff fit. You knew how much it cost to build a unit, to build a system which in turn goes into the avionics of an aircraft, you know, etc., etc., etc. So it becomes quite, quite significant there. So they couldn't really buffalo you. Here's a time for a story now. I didn't mention this. I was up at Boston [Massachusetts] attending one of these reviews, and a lot of these so-called--again, how many black Ph.D.s in electrical engineering do you know? Not many. Okay. So this guy thinks that I'm some kind of blow off and just says, well, you know, whatever and I commenced to asking him a question about the whole idea of the signal processing piece because it appeared that he was charging a lot, too much for this, we got into a tit-a-tat and all that. And I got up and I explained to the group all of the business and the background that has to do with signal processing, why you had to have certain things and why it didn't make sense that this would cost so much. Well, in deed, it shocked this kid because he thought that I was some kind of shoe off, that I didn't know what I was talking about. And the reason why you have to do--I had to do that was, number one, for technical credibility and for the government to make sure that we were really getting the right price. And that's the whole, that was my whole role. But even as late as the last ten, twenty years, you get people who don't believe, and you can just consider, even the President in his things that he's dealing with right now, don't believe that, you know, black folks are technically competent to do all this stuff, all right. So I had to kind of jam him up, as my mother [Bobbie Jean Bates] would say (laughter). (Unclear) we go for that, all right. Speaker 1: Yeah, you hear the--CBS, '60 Minutes' one year ran a report on Pentagon spending with crazy things like hammers being classified as some kind of percussive unit or something and costing-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --exorbitant prices on-- Speaker 2: Rubbing in the (unclear) (simultaneous), right. Speaker 1: --coffee machines and other things. And I don't know. Speaker 2: It has to do with the interface, infrastructure, and the interface of where this particular function is, all right. And gotta understand is that, if you're putting a restroom, a toilet in the back of a C17, it's gonna cost you more than if you're putting it in your house that's located on Podunk Street, a little different thing. It's got to function. It's gotta be, it has all the appropriate technical pieces. You don't want it to leak. You gotta be sure that it's gonna be functioning for the people. You gotta be sure that it's gonna fit the pressure and all the other technical pieces that's going on there. So really you just can't take the same toilet and put it there. So, a little different device, same functionality, but you're putting it in a different place. Okay, that's, that's the difference there (laughter), all right. Speaker 1: Okay, a toilet that will work in your home wouldn't work in--okay. Okay, so, now what was General Colin Powell like to work for? Speaker 2: I think he is a guy, a man of integrity, and one of the things I would say too is that, I understood him because I understood my mother. You gotta understand that this home training thing transcended the whole business there. He says, my meetings start at, let's just say 8:00 o'clock, you had to stand up. Five after 8:00, he walks in the room. He deliberately never came in on, let's just say, on time. But he walks in the room, and no one walks in after that. That was the way he did business. I understood that, and even today, I talk to people about showing up on time. If you're not ten minutes early, you're really late. So I get that whole business of integrity and promptness, and, but I would say tenacity, follow through, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Now, recognize that as a colonel and a four-star general, there's a whole lot of difference there, all right (laughter). Okay, I'm just a staff person (laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah, but you did appreciate his approach. Speaker 2: Yeah, you appreciate all of that, and you appreciate leadership from, particularly folks who are consistent and focused and have a vision. See, that's what you get from most of the leaders. Story_ID: 30754 Speaker 1: Okay, so when you were at the Pentagon, what would you consider your most significant project or achievement? Speaker 2: Showing up and coming back to work on time every day (laughter). I have to share this with you. My wife, Janice (ph.) now, we have been married about twenty years now, was there when I got promoted to colonel. And one of the things that I was gonna have her do was to walk in with me because we had to both show up. And from North Parking to the Pentagon is a trek. It's a long, long way. And I said, you might wanna wear some tennis shoes 'cause, you know, she'd never done this trek before. And if you walk around, if you go around the Pentagon now, you find a lot of ladies wearing tennis shoes when they walk and going from the parking lot and all that, long way. Well, she says, oh, no, I don't wanna do that because of this and that and the other. I'd have to change shoes. I said, I think you wanna wear tennis shoes. Well, she didn't heed my advice. So she's in these heels and we're walking from North Parking. I'm talking about the last row. It's probably, if it's not a half a mile, it's three quarters of a mile, long way; nice sidewalk, but she's walking and says, how far is it? I said, we're going over there. She says you've got to be kidding. No, I said (laughter). So we walk over there and, indeed, she says the next time, I'm either gonna take the Metro in here (laughter), and that's the way you get in now, or you're gonna drop me off in the front (laughter). And since 9/11 [September 11, 2001], you know, you can't even get close to the Pentagon. You have to (unclear). But I do think that the international programs piece was a significant place to be. It gave me another dimension of what the whole world was all about. I'd been to all the NATO [North American Treaty Organization] countries, the Middle East, been to Korea. You know, I, I mean I've been like all over. You go to a lot of places, you know, and as a result of that you get to meet people and the cultures. You get to understand issues. You understand that everything that the United States is putting out is not necessarily what everybody else needs (laughter), okay. And you need to understand that, okay. And that's one of the reasons why I think, where we are right now in this very global environment, we need to appreciate that, what's going on. So-- Speaker 1: Can you give us an example of what you mean by that? Speaker 2: Well, one of the first meetings I went to was a NATO meeting that was held in Brussels [Belgium]. And we had to get the--at that time, it was sixteen countries, you had to get everybody to agree on a decision that was gonna be made for something. My job was to get the staffers together and to share appropriate reasons why, how much it was gonna cost, you know, etc., etc. and just lay out what we called a consensus so that when the member was speaking, he would--or she would make the appropriate positive remarks towards where the United States' position was. That takes a lot of effort, all right. It's a win, win. You have to get rational discussions. You have to understand where everybody's coming from. You really have to appreciate their perspective too and that your perspective is not necessarily the only perspective, all right (laughter). So that's what I got out of a lot of this thing. And so at the end of the day, we got this particular item, you know, approved, and our guys went back happy. And everyone else was supportive of it, and they felt like it was theirs as opposed to the United States saying "do it", a little different there, all right. See, the other people have to feel like its theirs. If you look at all of the various consensus that are going on with the Desert Storm [1990-1991], the Iraq Wars [2003-] and all that, the coalition has to agree that it's their interests, all right (laughter). You're not doing that because the United States is forcing you to do this. This is very, very key in the international environment, all right. We just can't go in and push around and say, hey, this is not, this is my idea. It's gotta be everybody's idea. Story_ID: 30755 Speaker 1: Okay, now, National Security Agency, you become, in '87 [1987] you become at age thirty-eight, you become the lead research at the National Security Agency [Fort Meade, Maryland], I guess, in engineering education? Speaker 2: Well, I guess the way, I don't know about the data or how they interpreted it. I was, again, a division chief at the National Security Agency, and I worked, at the time it was communications security, computer security, which became information security as we know it today. We were responsible for I'd say near, mid-term, and mid to long-term technology development. For instance, one of the things that came up on the time while we were there was the low-cost terminal as you know it today as a private telephone that can operate in a security environment with just the push of a button which requires a random, you know, key that's done which is generated every time you call. And that was quite a breakthrough effort. The whole idea of putting a cell phone in the President's car was, you know, a significant effort. You know, those kind of things were the kind of, were the stuff that we did. So it was a great breakthrough in the area of biometrics, okay. Speaker 1: Now, this is the age, I just want to point this out, when the cell phone was like a brick or something, about the size of a brick. Speaker 2: Yeah, I had one that was probably about 12 x 12 by maybe four inches. And you'd pick it up and you had to carry the case with you (laughter), okay. And it was quite different than what we have today which is, something that's really, really small which is a computer (laughter) in itself. So it really makes a big, big, big, big difference there. So we were doing a lot of breakthrough things in the area of speech, speech signal processing. Again, voice recognition and speech generation synthesis; biometrics became a big deal. In other words, that was looking at fingerprints, things, research related to your eyes, facial recognition, the whole idea of pattern recognition and the whole business there. So we were, there were a lot of breakthrough things that were really moving for which since I left the agency, I mean I have seen some of this actually come about. But you gotta understand the agency's, you know, its mission is signals, you know. So it's quite, quite significant there. So we have to recognize that. But, yeah, it was probably the best assignment, job you could have for an electrical engineer. And I'm talking from lasers to chips to solid state to signals or whatever, I mean it was really, I mean you just went to work with energy and you couldn't tell anybody about it (laughter). So it was, it was a great job (laughter), yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, so you didn't waste a lot of time talking about what you did at work? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Right, right, but it was a great job though. It was a great job because we had every kind of computing power that you could dream of, and you had technical people who were just on top of their game, just unbelievable, you know, just a lot of connections with Nobel Prize folks, people who just did this because they wanted to do it and, cause, you know, you get a lot of smart folk in the agency. And these people were creating all kind of algorithms related to coding theory and what have you, which is the kind of stuff that I was working as my, when my Ph.D.. And I met some of these guys who were in the books that I studied in the '70s [1970s]. So it was quite significant, all right. Speaker 1: Now, what--you hear today and you heard back then too, people are conspiracy theorists on the left and right who-- Speaker 2: Um-hum, yeah. Speaker 1: --were very much, who talked, who wrote a lot and spoke a lot about the capacity of the government to spy on the average person or on people from other countries or whatever-- Speaker 2: Hum, yeah. Speaker 1: --with all kinds of devices. And you see 'em in spy movies and this kind of thing-- Speaker 2: Yeah, it's real, yeah. Speaker 1: --I've often thought that some time, you know, it was exaggerated on the capacity of the government to look into your house from outer space or-- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: --I mean all those kind of things were a little bit exaggerated. Speaker 2: It's real (laughter). Story_ID: 30756 Speaker 1: So how real is it? That's my question to you, as somebody with the NSA? Speaker 2: Well, it's real, so-- Speaker 1: What could the government actually do to you in 1987 in terms of, if they wanted to find out what I was doing in particular, for whatever reason, if I'm--as an American citizen or as a foreign national-- Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: --what could they actually do to track me in those days? Speaker 2: I would say the tracking is better now, but they could always track you. Remember that HF [high-frequency] and all these high-frequency radio waves and all that, so always been around. Anytime you're on a telephone and a cell phone, I mean it's out there in the--it's out there. So tracking is not a big deal. Now, you gotta understand that those towers that have your cell phone, they know where you are so it's not a big deal on trying to track you. They could always listen. The whole idea of listening around the world is not a big deal. We got antennas everywhere that listen. We got satellites that listen and we have all kind of devices that can be put on walls that can hear into the reverberations of the sound because it's just a signal. That's all it is, another signal (laughter). So I can hear and determine, and if I have the appropriate encoder from the speech side, I can interpret what the language is, and I can get somebody to tell me what they're talking about. That's not a big deal which is one of the reasons why the agency wants all kind of romantic, new languages that are moving, you know, particularly, in Africa and the Middle East, and you know, and then Russia and what have you so they wanna be sure that at least they know what's going on. Will they exploit it? I doubt it because I don't believe that's what kind of country we are. I believe we have the interests of humans and for the betterment of the world, particularly for democracy, to move forward. In the wrong hands, yeah, there could be some people who could exploit this stuff. And that's why you don't want dictators who have their own interests who are basically exploiting their people, you know, and taking advantage of the resources and all that, manipulating the money and what have you. I think that's where the real problem comes. Those folks need to be--we need to know where they are. And I think we do that pretty good, all right. Speaker 1: Is there a, does the corporate world like enter into this discussion at some point in terms of tracking each other and spying on each other and that sort of thing? Speaker 2: Business ethics is a big issue. I think that corporations need to play fair and here's what I mean there. The better companies, I'm talking particularly the top one hundred, maybe the Fortune 500, will certain play the game fair. And when I say that, if they were to receive data that would be an advantage to them and their competitor, I believe that they would tell the competitor that this is something that fell into our hands, and we have not tried to dissect what's going on here. I think that that is the way the better corporations are doing it, and I think they have a responsibility, particularly from the ethical standpoint, of not trying to find out by exploiting, you know, certain kinds of data that would be a difference. They, they need to make a better product, and they need to treat their people appropriately, all right, cause there's a big thing out there about the workers and what they're getting compensated and their care, etc., etc. So there needs to be some balance on corporate responsibility to the products that they create and the people that are working in the corporations, all right. Story_ID: 30757 Speaker 1: I don't know what you say about this kind of thing now, but I guess you were there when the Soviet Union collapsed in '89 [1989]? Speaker 2: I was in International Programs at the time. As a matter of fact, one of the things that we did, we had a guy going over to Germany, and his job was to get a piece of the Wall [Berlin Wall]. And he was there in at the European Defense Agency for some other thing, but we said, we want you to bring us back some of the Wall. So what we did was took that and took some of the rock and put it into an acrylic for each one of us to have as a going-away when we transferred. It was quite a significant gift. I have it at home right now. And it has the place and where it was from and the time, yeah. But, yeah, that was a significant event because we had to now change the way NATO [North American Treaty Organization] was doing business. We had to decide--and the big discussion was, who was going to now become NATO because many of those countries now wanted to join us, particularly, on the research and development piece. So we had to deal with this whole technology transfer issue. And we had a big staff meeting on all of that and how to develop it. But certainly we had to embrace the whole idea of transfer and assisting people to come up because they had been, you know, held down quite a bit. Speaker 1: Yeah I can imagine that would be quite a discussion, you know, all of a sudden and now they wanna be members. And you say well, can we give them the same-- - Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --technology that we-- Speaker 2: Well, NATO is, as part of NATO, a member, everybody is a member. And that's the way it was decided. And I've even lost the number count now and how many countries are part of NATO, but it is quite significant now, yeah. Story_ID: 30758 Speaker 1: Okay, so all right. What do you think, and I'm just, this is just as a layman sitting here asking somebody who's involved in this, what was the most, I guess, remarkable device created or system created, you know, in terms of National Security that you witnessed when you were with the NSA? Speaker 2: Integrated circuits. You know what those are? Speaker 1: Wait, explain (laughter), Oh. Speaker 2: Well, the whole idea of being able to move from vacuum tubes, now, you gotta understand, remember I talked about vacuum tubes which I studied in the '60s [1960s] to a device that would be smaller than the nano particles of your hair, that would now become a decision maker. And it would be like a flip flop. We referred to 'em as flip flops, the computing memory. That was what the tubes were. To see those devices now created and be a part of that creation of those systems now was quite the breakthrough. And even now you have the capability of having the kind of computer that I did my work on could literally be put in my pocket, all right, now, where I was in a whole room of devices that were hot and heated and running and all that, now, I've got a chip, as we refer to it, which has a, the ability to make decisions which comes from the computing processing power. And now I can transfer that information and collect information and make new decisions on that. That's really, I would think, the biggest breakthrough that we've seen over the last, since I started in the '70s [1970s], yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, but in terms of application of that technology, is there any real significant device or thing that you-- Speaker 2: Well, that's, that was the whole idea behind, today we see the cell phone which the security devices that I referred to as Information Security earlier, well, now I can protect my information or I can let whatever I want out at the appropriate time, okay, cause I now have control over the information that is on the chip, all right. So I now have a computer, if I would, all right, that has any and unlimited access to the data worldwide and even in space too on that chip. Okay, I can have that as part of that, and I can have real-time access to that, all right. See, that's why I think it would be, it's the most significant piece there, all right. That was done at NSA [National Security Agency], all right. The NSA creation of, as I say, the layered idea of taking substrate and solid state and stacking this thousands of times over is really where the big breakthrough is because now I can create systems of systems. And I can put 'em literally on the size of your thumb. You know, the nano systems that we have now are going to be, as you said before, artificial intelligence systems, all right. And we're gonna be able to make better decisions for, you know the better quality, improving the quality of life, all right. Speaker 1: Okay, well, what role do you think NSA played in making these, advancing this kind of technology? I mean would you think it would have advanced without NSA involved? Speaker 2: No, you had to have the government. And there's so much research investment, the government has to be the leader on it because a company won't do it because the benefit took a while. We were talking about the concept in the '70s [1970s]. We had talked about solid state items and materials back in the '60s [1960s] when I was in school. It came to fruition in the '70s [1970s] though, all right. But without government pushing and then companies pulling, all right, the whole technology, I don't think it ever would have happened because the government has to do the investment. And I think that's the whole role of government policy, you know, in public policy, is to find those areas that are gonna have maximum transformational impact, all right. You gotta understand what the role of the government is, not so much to be a part of us and to control our lives, but by what the impact is going to be, and we had a lot of smart folk that were, you know, and I was just part of the team, you know, and all that. But they were making transformational impact on all kinds of things, all right. Story_ID: 30759 Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now, when did you leave the NSA[National Security Agency] and-- Speaker 2: I left about '90 [1990] because if I recall, I ended up going to the Pentagon for the International Programs Office, if I remember right. Speaker 1: Yeah, I know we have you go to the Air War College-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, that's right. I left after the International Program and went to the War College, right. The War College is a place at Maxwell Air Force Base in Alabama. Okay, and again, it's, you get selected to do the War College on your potential to become leadership in the Air Force. That's the, you know, the generals and obviously, the colonels, you know, that are gonna be the next generation because you're gonna spend ten, fifteen years in the executive role in the military. It's a select group. I would venture to say there were a hundred fifty [150] military and maybe another hundred or less foreign officers who were part of that class. Speaker 1: Okay, it says here-- Speaker 2: But there is a significant thing though that probably needs to be pointed out. And it's not for every class. It just happened to our class. There were Afro-Americans in this class, quite a significant (unclear) people. And I think out of that ten, one guy made flag rank. All of us made colonel, and they were very significant players in the White House, the medical world, their healthcare world. As a matter of fact, when Hillary [Rodham] Clinton was doing her thing with the healthcare with Bill Clinton and all of that, when [President] Bill Clinton was pushing that healthcare thing, one of our guys was the key guy working for her. And we, I mean myself, I went to work, like I said, the Secretary of Defense, and in, I mean they just went all over and did a lot of different roles and defense information systems, the whole idea of the--they became fighter pilots or leaders, commanders and all that. So we, it was a very good class. And you, we had a couple of four stars that actually came out of the class, so it's quite, quite significant. Story_ID: 30760 Speaker 1: Okay, now, did you go back to the Pentagon? Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter), right, I went back to the Pentagon, right. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And this is when you worked as a cost estimator? Speaker 2: Right, went, I did the cost estimation thing and-- Speaker 1: For the defense secretary? Speaker 2: Right, for the Secretary of Defense, yeah, worked for David Chew at the time. Speaker 1: David Chew? Speaker 2: Yeah, he was the guy that was working under Colin Powell and the Secretary of Defense and all. I can't remember, [Les] Aspin, yeah, that's the guy's name. His name is Aspin. Speaker 1: Okay, so you were there, this is mid '90s [1990s], I guess right-- Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: Nineteen ninety--now, this is after Colin Powell becomes kind of world famous now-- Speaker 2: That's right. Yeah, he-- Speaker 1: --after the Gulf War [1990-1991]. Speaker 2: --he's big time there cause '90 [1990], '91 [1991], the Gulf War, if I recall, we had some guys who were all part of that business, you know. So it was quite significant. Speaker 1: Okay, did you have much to do with the Gulf War when you--well, I guess you were in the Pentagon, so you-- Speaker 2: I was at the Pentagon, but I was primarily doing logistics and things related to running around. I wasn't what you would call a key player, you know. That was mostly run out of the command, the battle field commanders. Speaker 1: Okay, now, what year-- Speaker 2: Although you get credit for being there though, okay (laughter), so it's good. It's good to be there, at the Pentagon. I got credit for that, yeah. Speaker 1: And did you ever have any trep--now, I know the talk in the barbershops and other, was, oh, the U.S. is gonna go over there, oh, what is his name? Saddam Hussein claimed it was gonna be the mother of battles, and it's gonna be all that. But just from reading 'Time Magazine', I thought it should be pretty easy to do, you know, as long-- Speaker 2: You know, it was done, in a hundred hours it was over with. Speaker 1: Yeah, as long as we didn't land. That's what my-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: That's the issue that we have with a lot of other wars, you have to have a great exit strategy, and that was one of the things that Colin Powell did and all of the other chiefs, was to, here's where, here's our exit strategy, here's our target. This is where we're going and then we're leaving-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --which is what the strategy was. Speaker 2: Do you think it was a mistake to go back and--I'm asking you. It's out of your, it's out of science and teaching,-- Speaker 1: (Laughter) Yeah, I don't-- Speaker 2: --but in retrospect, you know, when you look back at George [W.] Bush going in there in 2003, and what was the, you know, it seemed like it was just the opposite thinking than his father [George H.W. Bush] did? Speaker 1: Yeah, I--see, they didn't, the issue is the exit strategy. I mean how do you get out once you stick your foot in, all right. And that is the issue that we have, all right. And I think we probably need to just leave it alone at that because without a way to exit, the military becomes a political thing, you know with Vietnam's and the whole idea of the Iraq thing and all, so that's part of the issue you're getting into. It's like the Afghanistan thing. You know, you're in there, you're dealing with this. Now, you've got to figure how to get out, all right. So we never really, we got to a truce in Korea, but we really, it would be hard to leave now. Speaker 2: And we're still there. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Yeah. Story_ID: 30761 Speaker 1: At any rate, now, tell us about your transition from the Pentagon to being a commander of ROTC [Reserve Officer Training Corps] programs at Tuskegee, and is that really after retirement or what? Speaker 2: No, no, I was, well, I got a call from a General Pomalow (ph.), Susan Pomalow. And she says, Colonel Burge, I want you to become the commander of an ROTC unit, and you had to make application to do this. And, you know, like a colonel, the general calls you up. She's the commander of the ROTC folk. She wants to make a change in the way the old guard is functioning, and the way business is done. And so she was calling potential candidates directly. So I go ahead and put my name in the hat, and you had to pick some schools and all that. And I looked at the list, and I didn't really wanna go back to Oklahoma State [University, Stillwater, Oklahoma] . That was probably not my forte. But there was this place called Tuskegee [University, Tuskegee, Alabama] that I had been before. See, I had been here before, you know, over the years. You come down and everybody kind of knows about it. I said, well, I'll look at some colonel slot and go to--and plus, my wife [Janice (ph.)] wants to come to Alabama, okay. And so we, so I put this in as my number one choice, and got a call from the president here and the provost and showed up for an interview. I wasn't selected yet. I came, showed up for an interview. Dr. Payton, who was the president at the time, told me what he expected and what have you and I didn't have any problem with it, you know, I just--and talked with Dr. [William] Lester, who at that time was the provost. So, we had a nice, I mean I had a Ph.D. in electrical engineering and all that. So it kind of looked well for the faculty, so they couldn't really argue with that, good school and I had some good credentials. So I looked at this as a nice assignment. I didn't look at it as the last assignment though. And that's probably why I did pretty good here, I think, all right. See, a lot of times folk will take the ROTC job and say, ah, well, this is gonna be my last assignment etc. etc., but I'm twenty-some years in. I could stay another ten years, you know, or whatever. So I looked at it as a serious assignment and I came with the intent of really doing as good as we could and trying to make a difference with the new Tuskegee Airmen, as we referred to that, and that was those new kids that were coming up and sort of telling them what I had learned over the last twenty years. Speaker 1: Now, what year is this when you come to Tuskegee? Speaker 2: About '94 [1994], I think that's right, yeah, '94 [1994], yeah, I think that's about right and maybe '95 [1995]. But I had a great cadre though. They had a young lady who now is a, she retired as colonel, Johnson, Val--boy, I tell you I'm getting old. There was another young lady who retired as a colonel too, and then we had a gentleman named Stanford, who was a major, retired a lieutenant colonel. And I had two of the best NCO's [Non-commissioned officer], a guy named Bendoff, who was an old transportation guy, logistics guy, and all that. He just knew the ropes and knew how to get things done. And then I had a great admin guy who really took care of all of the money and stuff that we had to do. We spent two years or so together, annealed very well. We were the first black group that ever went to a field training place and set it up. And they gave us the hardest assignment the next year. And they sent us down to Tindal Air Force Base [Florida] (laughter), and they told us to set up the camp for the whole summer. Now, it starts in May and it goes through the end of August. So they had these summer camps, and I was the commander, and then I brought troops and other cadre from all over the United States. So we probably ended up with about, I don't know, 2,400 cadets, I guess, from all over the United States. And they were to get trained for field training. And they spent the summer when it's real hot, Tindal [Air Force Base, Florida], you know. So we had a lot of rules that we were dealing with. And as a result of that, we had a great summer. We went off without a hitch, learned a lot about myself and the rest of the, getting the groups together immediately, cause this was like, you had to have a team together like literally in three days. And we had groups that were very cooperative. They didn't have a problem with me being the commander. We had a lot of females. We didn't have any issues with gender. We had a lot of--at that time, there was a big transition that General Pomalow (ph.) was doing, see, that really shifted the way the Air Force was doing business, particularly related to mutual respect, mutual respect, sorry, and technical development, recruiting, you know, the best kids, etc., etc. So I had a great time at, there at the Air Force. A matter of fact, it made such a big impact, it's the reason why I'm in this job right now. I left a couple of years later, and I ended up going to Defense Systems Management College [Virginia], and there I served as the dean up in Fort Belvoir [Virginia]. Again, I was part of the Pentagon, but the assignment put me underneath the Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, all right, and we were the training arm. So that kind of helped out, and we were dealing with everybody who was getting trained in acquisition. You name it, from the R and D [research and development] guys to the testers to the systems guys to the contracts folk, we did all that business there, okay. And all of the background I already had before kind of developed, you know, well for that. So I was key for that, so I did a lot of good stuff there too. Speaker 1: Okay, now, you retired from the Service in '99 [1999], right? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Story_ID: 30762 Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay, you retired in '99 [1999], and did you have an intent of coming right over here to Tuskegee [University, Tuskegee, Alabama] and becoming a dean? Speaker 2: Wasn't even on the list. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (Laughter) I went to this transition class in about '97 [1997] or '98 [1998] and they told us to do it about the twenty-four-year point or somewhere in there because you needed to be prepared just in case you decide to leave the Air Force. The transition class, it was a spring time, and the lady who was the facilitator told us to come in civilian clothes just like I'm dressed now. And the first four hours, she says, I want you to write your obituary, and you can only have basically a hundred words or something. It was really a tough thing to kind of do, really, when you do this. But you had to go from the time you were at your present rank to where it was when you die. And so we spent about four hours doing this, a lot of self, introspection and what it is you're gonna do and all that kind of thing. After the class, I got about seven offers, you know, folks like [The] Boeing [Company], for instance, and all these Beltway Bandits [private companies located in or near Washington D.C.], (laughter), you know, it was a lot of them around. You know, a lot of great offers too, you know, (unclear) Brown, you know, just a lot of great offers, you know. And I wasn't really committed to leaving in '99 [1999], but my wife [Janice (ph.)] said, I wanna get out of Washington [D.C.], you know. I wanna go and go back and do something else. So we got a, we had this thing at Tuskegee [University, Tuskegee, Alabama]. I said, well, maybe I could just become a faculty member, you know, and I could just teach a few classes here and all that. I said, I think I little (unclear). So I knew--Dr. [William] Lester was still living at the time, who was the provost. I called him up. And I said, do you need any faculty member in the electrical engineering department. He says, well, sure. So the guy who was sitting in as the interim dean at the time, they had an interim dean now, and they were actually looking for a dean. I didn't even know that they were looking for a dean. They had been looking for a dean for about two years. He got my name. He says, oh, I can put you in as the department head in electrical engineering because they had an interim department head in electrical engineering too. Yeah, I'm coming down and I do this interview thing. Well, the provost and the president got together, and they said, we want you to consider this job here. Would you be willing to put your name in the hat--and I think there was about five people who were--well, long story short. I went, I had an interview with what I had done in the background, what I thought a dean did. Now, here's the reason why it's really significant. I had been a dean cause I was the dean of the Defense Systems Management College [Belvoir, Virginia]. And I had all this vast, world-wide experience, you know, about deaning. You know, deans do this and they do that and they go up and talk about money, and they do the--of course, you know, government, it's a little bit different about money, but the idea is that you're dealing with a lot of people, and I'm talking like, four hundred thousand people I'm dealing with. So Tuskegee is like three thousand campus, so it's a little bit different here. But it sold these folk, and the next thing I know, they offered me a job, and I recall, I started, I wanna say, June, if I'm correct. The first day I got here I was at a luncheon meeting, and the speaker didn't show up. And they said, we'll hear from our dean of the College of Engineering, Architects and Physical Sciences (laughter). I'm saying, well, obviously, being a colonel, you know, you're kind of always prepared to do a speech and all that kind of thing. And it wasn't a big deal, so I just kind of welcomed and what have you and talked about, a little bit about the vision and all that. And fortunately, what I had done at the transition class was, they talked about the centers of sphere of influence and how that you had to deal with teamwork and all that kind of thing. Well, it's actually been the way we've been doing business since I've been here. And it's been real good, technically competence, making sure the students have a management idea of business side, you know, dealing with teamwork, oral and written communications, the whole idea of getting students out into the world, taking the whole Booker T. Washington mantra of head, hand and heart, you know, moving it to the industry people. So making sure that everybody is ready, performance ready-students, big, big deal. And we just kind of kept that all the time and so today I've been here almost thirteen years. It's been very labor intensive. It's been a labor of love (laughter), you know, it's a lot of hard work. It's, it's been a challenge. Story_ID: 30763 Speaker 1: [As a] matter of fact, I'll share this story, since you're talking about it. I actually was going to quit at the end of the first year because I said this is just too much work for me to do. I just don't think I can do this. The secretary at the time was a lady named Elita Silverson (ph.). She has died, and she died about, it's been about six years ago now, maybe seven. But she says, stay until graduation. And let's, and then let's talk. Graduation is always on Mother's Day here, all right. What they do here, the week prior to graduation is a lot of standard, traditional events. They do the career. Industry people come in, and they recognize all of these folks who have done internships over the last year or so. The companies will come in. The teachers will do their ceremony. The nurses will do their ceremony. They have the ROTC commissioning, I mean just a number of things. And then they do a rehearsal, graduation rehearsal for every student. Every student's name is called, no matter, I mean it's five, six hundred kids. Every student's name is called. All right, well, as they're walking across the stage, I didn't know the dean shook everyone's hand, but everybody that's in my college, I get to shake their hand. And as that whole thing was happening, during rehearsal, one kid came up. He says, "I am really glad that you're here. You have made such a difference in the way I look at things." One kid did that. We'll graduate, I'll graduate hundred, hundred fifty students, okay. Well, that shook me, and I thought about it over the next day or so. And I'm still here. I figured that there's always one every year that you can touch. You never know, you just never know. So, it's been quite, quite a good time, and so that's why I'm here now still. Believe me I could be gone (laughter). There's a lot of jobs around. I mean I, just in the last year I've gotten serious offers from companies and other--they want you to get promoted to provost. They want you to be a president over here and all that. This is a good fit. I mean it's gonna have to be really, really (laughter), really, really serious for me to leave right now. Story_ID: 30764 Speaker 1: Let me ask you about L. L. Burge and Associates. You and your children formed this? Speaker 2: Well, here's, when I got ready to retire, my son and I, okay, and the son, you have LeAnn. She's the oldest daughter who is a twin and Legand together, okay. And Lamuelle who is the next daughter and then there's Louis. Well, when he got his Ph.D.. degree, he and his wife married. I guess they've been married now seven, eight years. LeAnn and they got together, and I said, you know--and I didn't deliberately do this. Everybody in the family is a L. L. Burge, all right (laughter). So, we created this idea, concept, consulting firm, and actually, it's still existing, but he actually took it a little further and I think they're actually doing business with it, making money. But we call it L. L. Burge and Associates with the whole idea of doing consulting and information technology work and all that kind of thing and distribution and what have you. It, to me, it was a concept that they probably will use maybe later. I, maybe one day somebody will drop a million dollar contract in our life and change everything. But right now it's a company that exists and it's been around for a minute. And the kids kind of deal with it. We actually have a business plan with everybody from his wife, my wife, the other kids, all having a role with their own specialty, you know, with the computer science, the business, the whole environmental. And so we all were in a package together so we could be sold to anybody (laughter), you know, that wanted to do that 'cause we have the capability of making those kind of things work. And that was the whole idea. Speaker 1: It must be rewarding being in a company with your children (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah, right. Speaker 1: At least having (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I don't know if I said much about them, but they all in their own right have kind of come along. Again, I think if I look at my mother's [Bobbie Jean Bates] vision, again, they're all college grads. They all have done very well. They're paying taxes, being a great citizen and all that. I got one grandson, Ray-Ray, Johnny Ray Chris, okay, the third, okay. Okay, his dad is Johnny Ray, the second. He's a junior, and he is nine now. They're in Oklahoma City. She is a program manager. She handles engines for the Air Force and the logistic center. Legand is a, the chair of the computer science department at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], and I guess it's systems eng--systems computer science in the College of Engineering in computer science at Howard. And he's been there now since about '98 [1998], tenured professor, done very well there. His wife, (Landra?) she works with the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigations]. She's a computer scientists too (laughter), right, so it's quite interesting. And so they're all, and they live in Washington, D.C. The Lamuelle is not married, but she's at John Hopkins [University, Baltimore, Maryland], you know, finishing up her environmental engineering degree. And Louis is graduating from Tuskegee [University, Tuskegee, Alabama] in political science. So we're moving along quite a bit and hopefully, we'll see something that happens in the next twenty-five, thirty years with these, this crowd. Story_ID: 30765 Speaker 1: Okay, now when you look back on everything you've done to this point, what, is there any major thing that you could do differently? Speaker 2: I probably, personally, would probably have saved a lot more money (laughter). I think I should have taken the Ph.D. to another level and written a book about--there's a couple of things that I've learned, totally independent of this. One is how to be a good church musician; very novel thinking. I have a list of one hundred rules, I call them "Lee Burge's Rules for Church Musicians". I think that that needs to be put out. I believe I need to capture the whole idea of being a dean because I'm finding out that this is a on-the-job training thing, and leadership and deaning is just a piece of the pie. You need to deal with the companies, the government, the faculty, the students, the parents and all the other stakeholders. I mean it's just a real- I think I figured out a nice model for that now. And I don't believe there's any written work on this done to date. So capturing those two things would probably be good. I try to balance a lot of stuff. I swim as often as I can. I'm a golfer, not, well, that golf, I play golf, okay, (laughter), it's a little different there. I would like to have done that a little bit more, you know, as I move forward from here. And I think what I'm gonna do is to try to do more golf (laughter). So I'm in pretty good health right now, but that doesn't mean that things can happen in the next fifteen minutes. But certainly, I'd like to travel a lot more, see a lot more and be a little bit better voice. As I said before, I took a lot of backseats, worked in the background and not stepped up forward. I don't know if it would have made a lot of difference, but I probably could have been a lot more forward and putting my finger in a lot of people's face than I sort of done, you know, in the past. Speaker 1: What today would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: A person that came along and was able to capture science and technology, demonstrate leadership in the kind of things that I had control over. I don't know if I've ever really invented anything, although I, like I said, I do have these Lee Burge's Rules which might be useful, just because of what I know about church, church music, churches, what they do, the need for inspirational development and the whole idea of helping people to understand themselves. That's kind of what this book is about. So, it's probably a lot more that could be done there. Story_ID: 30766 Speaker 1: Okay, what do you see as the future of Tuskegee [University, Tuskegee, Alabama] based on its past and-- Speaker 2: Ooh, (laughter) well, I don't know if you're aware, but we just got a new president [Dr. Gilbert L. Rochon] a few days ago, so to speak, first of November. And he has a great trajectory. I think he's going to leverage where we've been over the last 130 years. And I believe he's going to move into the sciences a lot more. He's gonna enhance the engineering piece a lot more. And it appears that he's going to make some things converge. In other words, engineering and science and health disciplines are probably gonna come together, and I see that as being a need. Tuskegee's always been one that puts people out that are ready to go to work. They, they got a lot of entrepreneurs that have come out of here. I mean Lonnie Johnson, for instance. I mean he's really the, quote, unquote, "the guy" that you want a reference to. Super Soaker, ring a bell? Yeah, that's the guy (laughter), okay. Lonnie has done well. Speaker 1: That's the big squirt gun. Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter), the big gun. So they have done well over the years. We need to continue to bring a lot more folks worldwide here. If I have my way, I would double or maybe even triple the enrollment, but I gather, we're gonna double it over the next few years. And so we need to get a lot more folks exposed to what we're doing here because we're really doing some good stuff here. Nobody ever talks about it much, you know, and I would want that we, you know, big marketing campaign to make sure that that happens, you know. Speaker 1: It's certainly a place with a rich history. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: Right. Story_ID: 30767 Speaker 1: So our last question is similar to legacy, but a little bit different. Sir, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: (Laughter) I have to kind of, I have to kind of think about that. That's a real challenge. Number one is that as a technical, mathematical, analytical person, I think that's easy to see. As a musician, somebody who appreciated music. That's kind of easy to see. But I do wanna put out that I like to do things for people, and I'm always willing to help regardless of how small or even big it is. I don't mind selflessly, you know, giving a lot. And I think that that would be a great thing to kind of put in the book that he gave a lot, during this 1949 to whatever (laughter). It'd be good to do that. So I think that that would be a great one to put in the books. Speaker 1: Okay, well, thank you very much for sharing your life. Speaker 2: Appreciate it (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, all right...