 Story_ID: 320877 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns and observing is Brian-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE) Curry [Brian Curry]. Speaker 1: --Curry. Brian Curry is observing. Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: It's Walter Doyce Broadnax [HistoryMaker Walter Broadnax]. Speaker 1: Okay now how do you spell that middle name? Speaker 2: D-O-Y-C-E. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so it's Walter, W-A-L-T-E-R, D-O-Y-C-E, B-R-O-A-D-N-A-X. Speaker 1: Okay now is there a story behind Doyce? Speaker 2: There is. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: As you can see I was born in 1944 and my, my mother [Mary Cotton Broadnax] gave birth to me in Star City, Arkansas, but in 1944 the war [World War II, WWII] was starting to show signs of it may be coming to an end, maybe not real soon, but soon, and she was having this baby and she thought she would name me after someone famous and so she was gonna name me Dorie after Dorie Miller [Doris Miller], the famous black World War II hero that shot down all the Japanese planes, you know, in Pearl Harbor [Naval Station Pearl Harbor, Hawaii], during the Pearl Harbor attack. The problem was is that, you know, she told the doctor when he arrived, which was seven days later, the midwife delivered me, and the doctor who was sort of a circuit riding doctor and older gentleman was filling out the birth certificate, which is the way they did it, right, and so he got his papers out of his bag and he asked her so what you gonna name this baby, now this is awhile, the baby is a good size, my mother said I don't know how old I was, but I had been here for a while when the doctor got there, and she told him I'm naming him Walter Dorie Broadnax, and the doctor wrote down Walter Doyce Broadnax. So the birth certificate I had had the name Doyce, and my mother was trying to name me Dorie, and so the convention my parents went with was since its Doyce on the birth certificate we'll go with Doyce. And I've met no one in my life named Doyce; and so that's where the name came from and that's the origin that sort of made up--the doctor, that's what he wrote, and that's what we went with. So, instead of D-O-R-E-Y, we got D-O-Y-C-E. And throughout high school and grade school that was the name I went by because my father's name was Walter [Walter Broadnax], and I wasn't a junior and we couldn't have two--my dad believed, we couldn't have two Walters in the house that would be too confusing, so they used my middle name. So, if you talk to anyone who knew me as a child growing up, they would remember me as D-O-Y-C-E, not Walter. Speaker 1: Okay, that's interesting. That, that is quite a story. I'm glad I asked that. Now, what is your birth day? Speaker 2: October 21, 1944. Speaker 1: Okay, and you said you were born in Star City, Arkansas. Speaker 2: Star City, Arkansas. Speaker 1: Is that with one, one R? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and sir, what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I am--I always say I'm an educator. I'm president of Clark Atlanta University [Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today is August the 24th, 2005. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We are in Atlanta, Georgia, in a house owned by the United States Park Service [National Park Service] near The King Center [Martin Luther King, Jr. Center for Nonviolent Social Change, Atlanta, Georgia]. Story_ID: 320878 Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth, there are five, lightweight People magazine-ish type questions we always are compelled to ask by management, and they only require a short answer. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: The first one is, do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Actually I'm sitting here thinking about what my wife [Angel Wheelock Broadnax] would say. I think it's rice. Speaker 1: Okay, now do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Blue. Speaker 1: All right, favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Spring. Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Home. Speaker 1: And the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: I'm often saying, "Now let's see if we can understand this; let's see if we can understand this," so I guess that, that, that's--pops up a lot in my life and conversation. Yeah, let's see if we can understand this. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 320879 Speaker 1: Now I'm gonna ask you about your family history. I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Walter Broadnax] side. We'll start with your mother's side. But we're not gonna skip your father, so don't tell us about him yet (laughter). Okay, can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Yeah, my mother's--you want her maiden name? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Okay, it was Mary Lee Cotton, C-O-T-T-O-N. Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: It's 1906 in Magum, M-A-G-U-M, Arkansas. Speaker 1: Magum, Arkansas, is there a story behind that name? Speaker 2: These are little country towns in and around the delta. I've never been to Magum. I've been to some of the other towns around there. It's--I mean these are, I mean when I say little towns I don't--I mean really little towns. Speaker 1: Now is Star City [Arkansas] close to Magum? Speaker 2: Yeah, and it's a little town. It was--my mother said when I was born it was probably about probably four or five hundred, and today is probably right at eight, eight hundred, nine hundred people, so you know that it's and that's growth over fifty, sixty years it's grown from four hundred or five hundred to eight hundred, nine hundred, so these are little bitty places, yeah. And you know, I mean if you know the Arkansas Delta or if you've been in the Mississippi maybe it sets up for you in imagery of what I'm talking about, heavily agricultural and the fact that my father was a railroader was sort of a little bit of an anomaly, but they had chosen to live there and I presume because of family nearby and you know the quality of life that they could sort of create for themselves in that kind of venue as opposed to Pine Bluff [Arkansas], which would have been the nearest good sized city, which is I'm guessing now seventy miles or so from Star City, but it's city and so all the requirements you know that--the economic requirements and so they could have a house and a garden and all these other sort of things by living in, you know, in Star City as opposed to trying to make a life for themselves in Pine Bluff. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now tell us, what, what do you know about your mother's ancestors or the ancestors, your ancestors on your mother's side of the family? How far back can you trace them and are there any stories about them? Speaker 2: My maternal grandmother was a woman, she's passed away, named Rosie Bunns [Rosie Peyton Bunns], and her name was Rosie Bunns. When, when she became sophisticated, she started calling herself Rosa, but on her tombstone it's R-O-S-I-E, Rosie, B-U-N-N-S, and that was my mother's mother. And her mother's name was--my great-grandmother's name was Creola Peyton, P-E-Y-T-O-N and-- Speaker 1: Creola is it C-R-E (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) C-R-E-O-L-A, Creola. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Peyton. Story_ID: 320880 Speaker 1: We just interviewed [HistoryMaker] Clayola Brown and she's the head of the A. Philip Randolph Institute [Washington, D.C.], interestingly enough. Speaker 2: Is that right? Speaker 1: Yeah, a black woman who was a, yeah, union executive, yeah. Speaker 2: Oh, wow. Speaker 1: Yeah (unclear) you may meet her one day. Speaker 2: I'd love to. We owe--boy I tell you A. Philip Randolph is a guy that didn't get enough credit. I mean, that he made folks like us almost middle class. I mean just, I mean his work overnight transformed families from--and my daddy [Walter Broadnax] told me when he started working on the railroad that, I mean, it was, it was awful work when he started. And men were abused, you didn't get your pay, and I mean all kind of stuff happened. And after Randolph, man I'll tell you, I mean, you had protection, you had the union, you had a voice, you got your pay on time, you got your benefits, you got-- and so it made you really stable. I mean, it was, it was you know not bad contextually and, I mean if it was no job versus a bad job, then a bad job was better than nothing, right? But, Randolph made it a respectable place to work, I mean, and actually gave you a little status and you had--as Mrs. Harris was talking, Pat Harris [Patricia Roberts Harris] during her confirmation meeting, and of course her dad [Bert Roberts] was a sleeping car porter, which you know, that, that really was up, up the ladder because you know you wore the, your white uniform and white gloves and you know rubbed shoulders with the rich and famous, you know getting their beds ready and you know you were probably more well-spoken than the average bear out there, I mean so that was yeah it was, it was an impressive thing, so. Speaker 1: Yes sir. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 320881 Speaker 1: Now, so your great, [maternal] great-grandmother was Creola Peyton-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and are there any stories that come down from the family about life in Arkansas? Now, now they, they must, your great-grandmother she must go back at least to the 1870s, I guess or-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah, my mother's mother [Rosie Peyton Bunns] was born 1890 and my great-grandmother was born, I believe it says and don't hold me to this, but I believe--'cause her tombstone is also faint, but I think it's like 1877 something like that on her tombstone. But it's real--if you went there, it wasn't a very expensive tombstone, weather and so forth. Speaker 1: Okay, what about the grandfathers on that side? Speaker 2: My grand, my grandmother's husband was Willis Bunns, B-U-N-N-S, first name Willis, W-I-L-L-I-S and I did not--and Great-grandma Peyton, I, I never knew him and anything about him and he was mentioned--he was killed very-- when my mother [Mary Cotton Broadnax] was very young, and so she really didn't know much about him either so-- Speaker 1: He was killed? Speaker 2: Yes, killed. Speaker 1: Is there a story about how he was killed? Speaker 2: Yeah it was a, a, an accident that they don't think was an accident. You know he as my parents used to say--and I don't want to offend your colleague here, but he worked with white people and I guess there had been some dispute on the job and one evening I guess somebody came and told my grandmother that your husband is dead and that he'd been killed on the job. And the family all talked about it as he was killed. Not being very explicit, but the, the impression was is that maybe it wasn't as much of an accident or it was an accident where there may have been an opportunity to recovery from it or whatever, but I grew up sort of with this impression as you listen to the discussion of sort of the environment and so forth, that he may have been-- Story_ID: 320882 Speaker 1: And it's interesting because my father's father was lost very obviously in the same sort of thing, but he was shot to death in a dispute with some white men about a piece of land and they just simply rode up on their horses and shot him to pieces. I mean, my, my dad [Walter Broadnax] tells the story that, as it was told to him because his mother [Caroline Broadnax] was pregnant with him at the time that his dad was killed, so when he was born he was born into the world with his father having been killed over this land dispute. I understand it was about a fence that--and, and you know you listen to these stories and you think gosh, I mean, it sounds like just a few feet and the argument was is his fence was too far in one direction and they wanted him to move his fence. And he went through all the trouble of doing the surveying and measuring and you know and coming up with his factual case that his fence was where it ought to be and tempers ran high and again you know a black man questioning what, what white men were saying was the real issue is what it became. And he was out there working his land and these guys rode up on horses as the story is told, and just starting firing their rifles into him and killed him. So, you know there's this tragedy on both sides of the family that we lost two, one on my mother's [Mary Cotton Broadnax] side and my father's father. Speaker 2: Perhaps needless to say, but because it's history we have to say it: they, the people who shot him were obviously well known, but not prosecuted, right? Speaker 1: That's in either case. There was no, no trial, no arrest, no nothing in either case, no there was nothing and they knew who did it, sure they did. I mean, my grandmother knew who the--obviously Mrs. Peyton [Rosie Peyton Bunns] knew the men that he worked with and in my father's mother's case, I mean you know she knew the men he'd been arguing with. I mean, they were, they were neighbors, I mean people lived right over there, so she knew who they were, yeah. Speaker 2: That's gotta be tough on a family to have to live under that kind of--. Speaker 1: Oh, it's--I--even though segregation was, was rampant when I was a child, it still sticks out in your mind. I mean, that kind of gross--and all the lynchings were still a part of the American fabric. You still considered it to, to be somewhat unusual. You didn't expect to be lynched every day, so this kind of thing, the sort of wanton killing was extraordinary even in those times. And those weren't good times, they weren't good times at all, so please understand me it's not that I saw my world as this wonderful world by comparison, but it was a better world than that. People were riding around just killing folks. And so it's clear that you could--you know I've thought about it many times it's clear that you could just do that. I mean, it was just--but that's a chilling notion, you can just do that. You can go to a black man's farm and take your friends and take your guns out 'cause you had a dispute, and you shoot him down and left him there. I mean, there was no attempt to sort of cover it up or anything. You know, the family was able to go get the body and they buried him; there it was. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But, it left a real scar on my father and I think to some extent on me. I mean you get those stories, get passed along and it does leave a mark on your psyche, I mean, and it, it tempered my, my interaction I guess is the right word, I mean, there was always this as a part of my interaction particularly with white males growing up. My parents were very worried about us as children being in unsupervised situations with, with white men. I mean, wanted to make sure that you understood the precariousness of that, those interactions, that that could lead to your demise. And so there was a lot of talk when I was a young boy about, you know, being careful with white men. Be respectful, do what you had to do with them, and be on your way. Don't, don't be hanging around and even if you're invited or--and you're not to be taking kindnesses from 'em, you just be on your way. So, if you had to do something, do it, and be on your way. So, and that was a carryover I know from--and my mother was constantly talking about I don't want to lose my, either one of my boys. I don't want you to, you know, to be--what did she used to say, "I don't want you to be thrown away," which is the way she said, "I don't want you to end up being thrown away." And I guess what that really meant was that your life being thrown away, that, that you know for nothing you're no longer here, for just nothing, no good reason that you're gone. Story_ID: 320883 Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: It's Walter Broadnax. Just Walter Broadnax. As you notice, most of the men that, the few that I can remember they, that, they just had one name, you know, Walter Broadnax, Willis Bunns, you know, that was it. Speaker 1: The idea of having these middle names--but then there's a phenomenon of, of the brothers that have only initials. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. I had a good friend, his name was L.C., and I'll never forget asking him, his, his family had migrated from Louisiana to Hoisington, Kansas, where I grew up, and I said, "Okay man what's your, what's your name and what's L.C. mean?" And he looked at me and he said, "It means L.C." I said no, but I mean, you know, and we used to tease him and said, "Man your name is really Lawrence Charles," and he'd say, "If you say so, but my name is L.C.," so, yeah, I mean--. I knew another guy named A.C. And there was another gentleman in the community named L--A.D., A.D., and so yeah there were a good number of those. So, my dad, and it's a good point you make, my dad is proud of the fact that he had a full first name. That was a status thing. They didn't just have the initials, that he had a full first name. His name was Walter Broadnax. Didn't have a middle name or a middle initial, but he was proud of having his full name. And of course for his children, he was just off the scale proud that we had middle names and we had full middle names, you know, not just initials, but a full name. Even though mine was made up, it was still a middle name, right. And that was a status thing that you weren't just--it was a part of that you're not in the second class that you are, you're in the first berth or you are clearly somebody of value, you, and one--your calling card is your name, right? Speaker 1: So instead of having a name like Bill you had William. I mean, William would-- Speaker 2: That's correct, yeah. Speaker 1: --be the full, I mean--I think in southern life, particularly amongst black folks and, and white, white poor people that, you know, they often have a name that's an abbreviation of a longer name. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Yeah, maybe two of them linked together. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Billy Bob or something, you know. Speaker 2: Right and everybody called my brother, William [William Broadnax] growing up, and then after he got to be a man and went in the [U.S. military] service and all that you know people started calling him Bill, I mean, as he got away from home. But, my mother [Mary Cotton Broadnax] called him William to the day she died. I mean, she did not call him Bill, and I now call him Bill and he answers to that, but that's not--you know, he's William. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's, that's another tendency in the black community too, to pronounce someone's entire name, not-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --to give them a nickname. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Often the first time you encounter an abbreviated name is when you work with white people and they'll call you the abbreviation-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --if you're Robert, you're Bob all of a sudden, you know, yeah. Speaker 2: And me Walt [HistoryMaker Walter Broadnax]. And I used to tell folks I said, I said you know one is, you know Walt's a big guy, Walt's at least six feet tall and got big biceps. I mean, I just don't look like a Walt, and but folks call (laughter), you know, they call me Walt and so you know you just go with it, you just, you know whatever, but hey Walt. I'm like Walt is a big man. I mean that whole thing, the sound of Walt. Now Walter you can come in a lot of different forms, but Walt, and I'd look at myself and say I don't look like Walt (laughter), but anyway, yeah. No, it's true and I'm sure it's probably mine own way through indirection of, of dealing with the same issue. Part of who I am I'm sure I was communicating is why don't you call me what I said my name is. I mean, why do you care so, just take it as I give it to you. My parents told me my name was Walter, I'm telling you it's Walter, why don't you just take Walter and run with it. But, you know it's the cultural thing too and I came to understand that in the, the larger society this is also a, it's sort of a friendship thing, I mean, that-- Speaker 1: Kind of an endearing thing to call you-- Speaker 2: Yeah-- Speaker 1: --the nickname though, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, you Walt, you know. You and I, you know we (laughter), so. Speaker 1: It's a culture clash, culture clash. Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly, exactly. Story_ID: 320884 Speaker 1: 'Cause my wife has always called me Walter [HistoryMaker Walter Broadnax]. My mother [Mary Cotton Broadnax] never was comfortable calling me Walter 'til the day she died because you know like I said I couldn't really use that name until I got to be a grown man and sort of had my own life established. I was at the university, but, then I took on using the name Walter. My mother called me Doyce and then she'd correct herself. So, she'd say Doyce and she, "Doyce" and that her, "Doyce, come here Doyce," you know, and then she said and the older I got and my hair started turning gray she'd say, "Walter, well you know that name you use." She'd go through all kinds of changes and what she wanted to say was, "Your father was named Walter [Walter Broadnax] and I was comfortable calling him Walter, but son I'm not comfortable calling you Walter. That's not who you are. You are Doyce, or Doyce." And you know what happens, I mean the mother wins right. So for the ten days that you're visiting or whatever you become Doyce and I told my wife I said you know how the parent can infantilize the offspring. I don't care what your achievements are you return, you become this child. I thought here I am at the time, forty years old, forty-five, fifty, and I arrive here at this house and I become this juvenile, then child, and I just regress back. My mother ordering me around, telling me what my name is, telling me it's too early to have a drink. I said, "Well, Mom, I think I'll make myself a drink." Now I'm, I'm away from work, I'm at your house, it's 5:30 and I've been downtown to the liquor store, bought myself something to drink and I'm gonna make myself a cocktail and you look at the clock and say it's too early for you to have a drink. So, I wait 'til six o'clock, 'cause you say that's when respectable people--if you gonna, if you gonna do that you don't do it before six o'clock. So, I told my wife, "I'm totally out of control here. Here we are and we're being treated like little children." Story_ID: 321973 Speaker 1: Well let's go back to your mother [Mary Cotton Broadnax] again for a second. Did, did your mother talk about growing up? Did--how did she grow up? Did she have access to school? Did she grow up in--she came--they, they were mostly farmers in, in a-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --in--. Speaker 2: That, that her, her father Mr. Bunns [Willis Bunns] was a railroader too, but my mother grew up on a farm. They had a farm, and so she grew up working on that farm and that's the way she talked about her life. She didn't--it's only later in her life that she started sort of referencing herself as being a part of this railroad culture. But, her earlier life she describes herself as this farm girl and doing all the stuff that people did on farms, and they had a small cash crop, which was cotton, and so she remembered chopping cotton and picking cotton and so as she talked about her life it was all of, all of that. And the one-room school house for both my parents, although my father [Walter Broadnax] didn't go to school very much. He just went three years. He used to laugh and say he wasn't sure he went to the third grade or not. All he knows is he went to school three years. And my mother really taught my father as he called it his letters and so my dad's ability to really read and write at a level where he could use that was because my mother taught him like she taught us. So, she had really taught her husband how to, how to read and write, so my dad could write some and he could, he could read, so and she taught him. So, that, that was--my mother was the literate person in my immediate family. I mean she read books and taught us how to read by, by kerosene lantern. We had kerosene light in my house when I was a small child. And the rural electrification program that President Roosevelt [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt] put in place meant the world to my part of the world in south central Kansas 'cause a lot of people didn't have electricity. And I remember when we got electricity, but before that it was the kerosene light and I remember my mother sitting with us as little bitty kids and reading to us by kerosene lamp. So, she was a farm girl and a housewife. That word housewife, you know, I always worry about saying my mother was a housewife, cause it, it to me it conjures up this sort of 1950s Donna Reed image and that is not what it was. I mean my mother was a stay-at-home mom and my dad was very proud of that, that she was there to raise her children and help care for him and that he could afford to do that, but it wasn't that this, she wasn't in her low heel shoes and a frilly apron and all of that. I mean my mother was working. I mean, you know, ironing and washing and raising a garden and taking care of the animals that we had on our place. I mean it was--I think about the work. She'd start every morning around five o'clock and she worked all day long, and she cooked three meals every day. She fixed my father breakfast if he was home, and then she would take him his lunch and then she would fix him dinner. I, I mean, you know, it was--and then washing, ironing, cleaning, feeding the chickens, feeding the hogs, I mean gosh. So, when I say housewife it's, you know, I worry a little bit that sort of--know that people understand I don't mean that in the sort of traditional way. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 321974 Speaker 1: Now your father [Walter Broadnax], now what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Eighteen ninety-five [1895] and I put Helena [Arkansas] 'cause that's probably as close, 'cause he, that's as good as he could get. He really wasn't born in Helena, but somewhere sort of outside of Helena. Speaker 1: Okay, Helena, Arkansas yeah that's, that's the home of John Stroger [HistoryMaker John H. Stroger, Jr.] who is the Cook County [Illinois] commissioner in Chicago [Illinois] and a lot of the staff I hear are from Helena too, yeah so. Speaker 2: The Arkansas society in Chicago is big, big. I was just there on an alumni trip and I used to come out and speak for oh your congressman, oh God--. Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Bobby Rush. Speaker 2: Bobby Rush and he--they, they'd had this big breakfast of Arkansans and he would invite me because I was born in Arkansas, and of course being part of the Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] administration that became big right to do Arkansas stuff. So, I kind of got involved with a lot of people that I wouldn't have otherwise known or met during that time that were Arkansans. Speaker 1: You probably met John Stroger, I guess, the-- Speaker 2: I bet I did. Speaker 1: --Cook County commissioner. He's the highest, you know-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --official in Cook County. But then you know quite a few aldermen there. There's a lot of, lot of the politicians in Chicago on the South Side, West Side are from Arkansas, Danny Davis [HistoryMaker Danny K. Davis] is Arkansas too. Speaker 2: Yes, I know Danny, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, I just thought about that. When you think of Chicago as a Mississippi city and I think the majority of black people are from Mississippi. The politicians are from Arkansas. Speaker 2: Isn't that interesting. Particularly given the way I've lived a good part of my life, it's interesting; I wonder what's going, what's in the water in Arkansas, right (laughter) yeah, yeah. But, yeah we had a great alumni event out there and I bet you there were a dozen people Clark Atlanta University [Atlanta, Georgia] people alums who are Arkansans who migrated to Chicago. I mean Chicago is clearly the promise land--that was--I mean, you know. Story_ID: 321975 Speaker 1: Even for us in Kansas, I mean my dad [Walter Broadnax] being a railroader, but he shied away from big places like that. He thought that the chances--I guess he had a chance a couple of times to transfer to like Chicago [Illinois] or St. Louis [Missouri], and he shied away from it because he said it's hard to control your kids in an environment like that, that's too much competition and that he thought this miserable little town out in south central Kansas my mother [Mary Cotton Broadnax] just wanted to be in the city so bad, you know, but daddy resisted and he said we can control these boys here that we got a better chance of raising them and fending off problems. Speaker 2: So, it was after, after you all were born. I mean, how many brothers and sisters do you have? Speaker 1: I--my brother [William Broadnax]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I have one younger brother. I have some half brothers and sisters, but I didn't put them down because I had seen them and they're much older and I'd seen them and, but it's not a close familial relationship. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Daddy always said he wanted me to know them, but they were adults, you know, and so. And you can see he was about fifty years old when I was born, so. Speaker 2: Okay, so, so your father moved the family to Kansas. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: About how old were you when your father moved to Kansas? Speaker 1: Oh two months old, something like that. Speaker 2: And where did you all live in Kansas? Speaker 1: A town called Hoisington [Kansas], H-O-I-S-I-N-G-T-O-N. Speaker 2: And where, where is Hoisington? Speaker 1: Its fifty miles south of Hays [Kansas]. You know, if you know where Hays is. Speaker 2: Yeah, now Hays is I know it from 'Gunsmoke'-- Speaker 1: Yeah right. Speaker 2: --I've never been there, but Marshal Dillon, Matt Dillon was always leaving Dodge [Dodge City, Kansas] to go to-- Speaker 1: Go to Hays. Speaker 2: --the court, you know, at Hay--Hay City [Hays City, Kansas], he called Hay City. Speaker 1: Well now Hays City-- Speaker 2: That's different from Hays? Speaker 1: --is different than Hays. Speaker 2: Oh, okay. Speaker 1: Hays City is near Wichita [Kansas] and Hoisington is seventy miles from Dodge City, so Dodge City is seventy miles further west than Hoisington. So, if you look at Dodge City and come east seventy miles, that's about where I grew up, on your way to Hays City, which you had to go on to Wichita, which is another hundred and fifty miles to Wichita. Speaker 2: So, when he got on that buckskin horse to go there that was a long--. Speaker 1: He was going a long way. He wasn't just going around the corner. He was going on a big trip on that horse, 'cause we used to laugh and say, "Well you know you won't get there probably today (laughter)." No, seriously you probably would stop on a horse overnight. You wouldn't make a hundred and fifty miles I wouldn't think in a day. Speaker 2: No, I'd guess fifty miles would be about what you could do on a horse in a day. Speaker 1: So, yeah, but he was going, he was headed that way--but yeah Hays City is not far outside of Wichita. And the other, the Hays I'm talking about is going up north. Interstate 70 now runs right through there on your way to Colorado and it has the state college there, Fort Hays State College [Fort Hays State University, Hays, Kansas], town of about 10,000, but that was big out in that part of the world. That was a good sized city. Dodge City was about 12,000 when I grew up which was considered a good size. Great Bend [Kansas] which is south of Hoisington was about 10,000 in those days. In my little town of Hoisington when I was a kid there it was about 5,000, around 5,000. It's now probably 2,500. It shrunk like a lot of those towns out there. You know industries like the railroad was the industry in it and it dried up and so the towns dried up along with it. Story_ID: 321976 Speaker 1: Can you tell us about your parents' [Mary Cotton Broadnax and Walter Broadnax] personalities and tell us who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: For a long time, I used to say I'm like my dad and I guess I was probably forty years old before I finally came to the realization how much I'm like my mother. And my mother and I struggled so much early in my life and later in my life. I mean we struggled, and like I said I had to grow up before I could realize a lot of the struggle was because we were so much alike and so my persona--I'm a very critical person. My mother was very critical and was searching for perfection. I mean, you--and she would always say if it's worth doing, it's worth doing right. And I used to just hate that. I mean I used to just want to just jump through the wall and this little woman followed me around and just pounding this into you, you know, and my brother [William Broadnax] and I could remember at night in our room we would lay there and say, "If it's worth doing, it's worth doing it right." 'Cause you know you just sick of this. You know this woman thought--every time you turn around she's arguing about something you didn't do right. Well, boy I guess it, she got through and created you know something that looks a lot like her. And my wife [Angel Wheelock Broadnax] today says, "You know the one thing about you that is most difficult for me, Walter [HistoryMaker Walter Broadnax] is this, this criticalness, this, this, you know." And I'm not saying if it's worth doing, but it, but all of that is there. That I'm saying why won't people do it the right--they know what the right way is, why won't they do that. Why do they do something--? And she says why are you worried about it? Why don't you just let it go? I said but yeah they're wasting--no just, and so I'm like this little woman, this little Mary Broadnax that--I'm critical, she was critical. She wanted you to do it right. She was very ambitious, a very ambitious woman. Always wanted more, was always looking up. And my father was always there trying to moderate her ambition. And I--as a kid growing up I didn't fully grasp what was going on and I used to think why don't you just give it to her. I mean, you know, so 'cause we're tired of hearing the snipping and snapping and you know her saying you know and you saying you know why don't you, you know you're too, too, your too--you wouldn't say your too ambitious, but you know what do you want, I mean you know we're doing, we're doing good for colored people. You do, you know that and she would say no, I mean I want us to have this. And so that was the struggle. And it wasn't that he was without ambition, but I think he thought hers was unbridled. And at some level I think it was unbridled. Story_ID: 321977 Speaker 1: Because my mother [Mary Cotton Broadnax] never told me until the day she died that I had made it and she never said, "Well done, son, boy, by God I am so proud of you, you did it." Now people who knew her told me that she was constantly bragging about her oldest son, but she never did that with me. And I asked her when I became president of Clark Atlanta [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] and one of the last really good talks that we had before she started to, started to really slow down, I said, "Mom are you, are you proud of me, don't--I mean I am president of a university." And I said, "You've never said--here I am I'm fifty, I guess fifty-seven years old and you never told me I got a hear mama, I mean what do you think?" And we're sitting on the porch at her, at her little place and she looked at me and she said, "Son I don't guess you would not have taken that job if you couldn't handle it." That was it. That was the feedback. There was no more feedback. There was no more like sonny boy let me hug you and kiss you and tell you boy you really--that, no. "Son," she said, "I guess you know you would have never taken that job if you didn't think you'd handle it." I thought she does understand the complexity. She gets it, but she's not going there. She's not going there. She's saying you must have thought you could do it or you wouldn't have done it and I'm expecting you to do what you said you were going to do, which is do it. That's it. I'm like whoa. Speaker 2: So, she sort of always thought you could do more, right? Speaker 1: Yeah, 'til the end, 'til the end. You weren't coming there and get patted on the head and said that a C is just great son I'm glad you got a C. If you--don't go there then. If you need that from--don't go to her 'cause she gonna start talking about well the B. How far from the B were you son, I mean, how close were you to a B. And if it was a B, how close were you to an A. I mean, it was just--and what kept you from getting there. I mean, what, what was it that you didn't understand. And it couldn't be effort. Now don't tell me, don't let us discover that the problem was the amount of effort that you put in 'cause you're in trouble now. And she was always looking for that. You learn quickly that what she was digging around for was to figure out that you didn't study hard enough or you didn't work at it hard enough and you didn't have a friend in court with either one of them. My dad [Walter Broadnax] was just as, as terrible as she was on effort. I mean, once he discovered that you were laying down on the job you did not have a friend. So, you better show that you were kicking up a cloud of dust trying, trying to get it. So, yeah I mean and those were--they had that in common that that you were going to give it some effort, a lot of effort and if you didn't do that, then you didn't have any friends with them. Story_ID: 321978 Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: I can remember going to kindergarten [at Roosevelt Elementary School, Hoisington, Kansas] and, and I question that from time to time as old as I am, saying do I really remember that 'cause you know 1949 is a long time ago. And in fact as I remember that's when you were born, so I started kindergarten the year you were born, and I was the only black child, and I'm sure you probably thought of this, that I lived in this little black community [South Hoisington, Hoisington, Kansas], but my education was in this white school system 'cause there weren't enough African Americans to have a school system. Speaker 1: So, it wasn't even enough of you all to segregate? Speaker 2: No. We were segregated in terms of our housing, but we did our shopping, movies, school, with the larger white community. You were segregated in the movie house, but you--it was the funniest thing, there were a set number of seats that were reserved and the movie manager always called it reserved for the coloreds and so but you were surrounded by white people. In fact, the last seat in the reserved was here and then the white seats started, so the last seat in the reserved colored section, the next seat was a white seat. So, it was the weirdest thing. And we--it was one part of a row, like I don't know twenty seats or something, and on the other side the white people started and they were in front of you and they were behind you. So technically you, you were segregated and that you all sat on the same row, but one could argue when you looked at this you were among the white people. But, anyway that--. Yeah, so we, we, we bought our, did our shopping in the white grocery stores, but behavior by the merchants, by the movie theater manager, and sometimes even in the school system, was clearly communicating that you were second class. Story_ID: 321979 Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up and what did your neighborhood [South Hoisington, Hoisington, Kansas] look like? Speaker 2: Okay, think of a flat terrain, a lot of wheat at different places around, people growing wheat, which was the big agricultural endeavor. In some places, oil barracks, oil wells pumping oil, scattered around. A sort of a scattering of houses, all framed houses, two and three bedrooms mostly, a church sort of in this mix that was prominent. So, if you were standing back looking at this community, the church stood out, the steeple--. Speaker 1: What was the name of the church? Speaker 2: Hoisington First Baptist Church [First Baptist Church, Hoisington, Kansas]. Probably seated at full capacity, maybe you could get seventy-five people in that room; I don't know, small, really small church. The railroad was about a mile and a half from my house, so our house was more on the front of this area where the black people lived. So, I had a shorter walk to what we called the town, but the railroad was the train was a part of life--that the trains passing through. So, in 1949, when my mother [Mary Cotton Broadnax] was gonna take my father [Walter Broadnax] his lunch she, she would take it to the railroad yard at that time and they still had the steam engines, were still, they still had some steam engines. Speaker 1: So, he worked on--was he a brakeman or what, what did he do? Speaker 2: At the end of his, end of his life he was a brakeman, but that came as a result of some opportunity being created in the structure. He had started off originally as a trackman and then got into progressively some better jobs and he ended up being a brakeman, yeah. Speaker 1: As a trackman, they make sure that the tracks are straight and that sort of thing? Speaker 2: Yes, yes, the really hard stuff, that's rough stuff and you do that in all kind of weather, yeah, that's where he started. Story_ID: 320093 Speaker 1: Was there a name for the black community in--? Speaker 2: Called it South Hoisington [Hoisington, Kansas]. The town was Hoisington [Kansas], and our part was called South Hoisington, and the railroad tracks were the division point between South Hoisington and Hoisington. And the white people, the town across the tracks going north, was the white town called Hoisington. And south of the tracks was where we lived called South Hoisington, and there were some whites that lived in South Hoisington, but they weren't considered to be a part of South Hoisington. South Hoisington was the name of our community, but it also represented meaning the black community. So whites who lived south of the tracks were not really considered to be a part of South Hoisington. Speaker 1: But, I bet they were considered those who lived across the tracks. You know it's all these towns, you know if somebody lives across the tracks-- Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) that means that, you know, that--I've grown to learn I think that the railroad tracks actually separate the better, what they call the more improved par, part of the community from the other side. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: Were your--was there a difference in the city services in terms of the way the--. Speaker 2: There were no city services on my side of the tracks. Everything that you had you had sort of arranged for it, so you know water you had to figure out how to get it and what we did you would have several families who'd go together to get themselves connected to the main water line, which was about oh a half a mile or more from where our community was. And I remember my dad [Walter Broadnax]--before that you had to haul your water. You had to transport it and so having a vehicle was very important, 'cause if you didn't you had to get someone else to haul your water so that you had drinking water, bathing, and so forth. So, we had no city, no city services, zero. No water, no sewer. The fire trucks would come, but it was sort of at their leisure if you had a fire. No garbage. The garbage truck went past my house in fact on its way to the city dump, but it wouldn't take your, your garbage. You had to dispose of your, find a way to dispose of your garbage, so we had no city services at all. Speaker 1: Were the streets paved by the north side of Hoisington? Speaker 2: Yes, all streets were paved on the north side. None of the streets were paved in South Hoisington. Gravel was the biggest thing we had and the graveled roads were roads that were also important to--like the one that went from my house went all the way to the city dump and the city sewage treatment plant. So, gravel was important so that you could travel that road in, in, in muddy or rainy or snowy time. The roads that were off of that main road that the city workers or somebody didn't have to use, they were just dirt. And so when it rained or snowed they were awful, I mean, just a quagmire of mud and so forth. So, you know life was difficult. I mean, people couldn't drive their car. I remember people getting stuck. That was a big thing and having to get somebody to push you or pull you out of the mud that sort of thing. So, it was a gross difference. I mean we--a lot of outdoor toilets. We didn't get indoor plumbing until 1956 because then we had enough people hooked up to water and we were now able to put in some sewage and so forth, but 'til 1956 none of us had indoor plumbing. Story_ID: 320094 Speaker 1: Sir, how would you describe yourself as a little boy? I mean, what kind of a little kid were you and what did you like to do and what worried you? Speaker 2: Well, I think I was an average kid. I liked playing outside and as I was telling you I, I remember starting school and the, the difference between the races was made plain to me my first day of kindergarten and I remember the teacher had me stand up on a little footstool that she had in the kindergarten class and all the little kids were in a circle around me and-- we'd all been in a circle; I was called out of the circle and she had this little footstool and she had me step up on it and she said, "This is, this is our little colored friend, and his name is Doyce Broadnax [HistoryMaker Walter Broadnax] and you should you know so forth and so on, you should know him and so forth, and he's, he's colored and so forth and so on." And I remember this experience of being put up on here on this stool and all the kids in a circle and I remember telling my, my mother [Mary Cotton Broadnax]. You asked me if I could remember back; I remember that. It seems almost vividly because it was so jolting to me, and I told my mother about it and it was important enough that she actually went to the school with my father [Walter Broadnax] to talk to the teacher, the white teacher about it. I don't know what they discussed. I wasn't involved in this, but I remember that they went to talk about it. It concerned them enough. But it was--the point was to make sure that I understood and, and I am sure that was here defense. She wanted me to understand that I was colored and that was very different and very important. Oh, and she also had taught me a new word that I grew to hate and I still don't like the word a lot, although I use it when I have to and that word is tolerance. And she told the kids we have to learn to tolerate Doyce and tolerance is important and so we're gonna, we're gonna show tolerance and I remember--and so and as I came to understand the word and even today I don't like it 'cause tolerance is a very difficult posture to take on. I know what the word tries to communicate, but I think it is difficult particularly when you're talking about relationships to talk about tolerance. I'm gonna tolerate you. I'm gonna have tolerance for you being the way you are. You're not a good thing, you're not me, you're not like me, but I'm going to tolerate you and so that was the beginning of my education, with this introduction to this thing called tolerance. Speaker 1: Now, now what was the name of this school? Speaker 2: It was called Roosevelt Elementary School in Hoisington, Kansas. Speaker 1: It was named after Teddy [President Theodore Roosevelt, Jr.] or--? Speaker 2: You know I don't know. Just all I remember is Roosevelt or FDR [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt] I don't know. It was just Roosevelt Elementary School--. Speaker 1: In those days--. Speaker 2: I would think it would probably be Teddy, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah and that's a Republican state, so I doubt it was FDR, that's right, yeah. Speaker 1: And he was current at the time pretty much-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --he had just passed away. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, you had Truman [President Harry S. Truman] in office. He hadn't been dead that long. Speaker 1: Yeah, I'm thinking. Story_ID: 320095 Speaker 1: Tell us some other--like what did you, you know, so what kind of things did you like to do when you were coming up in (unclear)? Speaker 2: Oh, I played outside, I mean, I think I was just an average kid. I played outside and I played alone a lot. Some of that was 'cause there weren't a lot of kids to, to play with [in Hoisington, Kansas]. I mean, you know, you're talking about maybe fifty black folks, that's counting children, adults, and so you didn't have--at one point the number may have gone up between fifty and a hundred at the peak, but I always think about the place having you know fifty or more people. I don't know how many families that constituted. There were a couple of families that were fairly large, but I played outside. You know I had, I had a couple of dogs. We had farm animals. I didn't have a lot of chores, but early in my life I had, I had to help out. So, if I wasn't in school, you know I helped my mother [Mary Cotton Broadnax] doing what a little boy could do. I mean, there wasn't a lot I could do, but I would help her feed the chickens and I'd help her feed the hogs. You know so you're learning too, you know you do things and I'd follow my father [Walter Broadnax] around when he was doing stuff on the place and but I, you know, when I wasn't in school and wasn't doing that I was playing. But, a lot of time playing to myself and I did a lot of day dreaming as a kid and I'm sure a lot of kids do, but I'd create these cities. I built cities in places. On our place, I would find a place and I would build a whole city and I remember that was part of what--I'd build a whole town, I mean the churches, the, in my little play world. Speaker 1: Now what would you build the cities out of? Speaker 2: Sticks, and I used popsicle sticks and other pieces of wood, you know, and, and created. Sunflowers are very good construction material, so and we had lots of sunflowers you know where we lived. So, you cut down those sunflowers and dry them and that's great construction material. So, I would cut down sunflowers and dry the material and you could build things. Speaker 1: The stems? Speaker 2: Out of, out of the stalk to the sunflower, yeah. Speaker 1: They're pretty strong, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah and so I built my little towns and I'd make tunnels and create a police station and then on roads and make bridges. And I had friends in my head that were a part of this, but it was just me. And I was very protective of this little town. My dad never bothered these. It's interesting he let them stand. I mean, that, it was interesting. He was going along with it. This was my play area and it was preserved. Nobody messed with it. Speaker 1: That's interesting so now here is a future public policy expert and (laughter), city planner. Speaker 2: Yeah with the town and, and had it organized the, the folks were there and I had housing and, and I would go back to it. I mean, this was ongoing obviously. This wasn't just a one-day affair. This was my play area and, and my playmates in my head were there, and I'd have conversations about construction of the bridge. You know at one point I tried to put in some telephone lines, you know, in my town and to upgrade it, you know, and I spent hours there. Story_ID: 320096 Speaker 1: What inspired you? Was it like just observation of, of what was going on in your hometown [Hoisington, Kansas] or--? Speaker 2: That, I'm sure it was. When I chose my profession--as an undergraduate when I chose my major it was starting to get clear to me what was going on and that public policy, that public policy questions were clearly burning inside my little head very early and I wanted to create a different world than a world that I saw. And when I was a student at Washburn University [Topeka, Kansas] in 1964 I chose my major. I knew it was gonna be at that time, government, political science. But the reason I did that was that I wanted to change this world and it was politics. I had figured out that the, the context for all human endeavor in the world, it all takes place in a political context and the people that control the political context control the game. You decide what's legal, what's illegal, what's punishable, what's not punishable. Who gets the good stuff, who gets nothing, how much you get, I mean it's deciding all these questions. And so some of my friends at Washburn were saying hey man you know I want, I wanna get in there and get some money, you know, and I said, "Well yeah that's important, but if I'm gonna join the political game I need to determine how you use your money. In fact, I can neutralize the value of your money. You can amass a billion dollars and I can pass a law structured such that your money is meaningless or I can determine how you're gonna spend it, when you gonna spend it, and what you gonna spend it on. So, you got a billion dollars. But I tell you can't own more than an acre of land, so now you got the billion dollars, but you can only own an acre of land, you can only own one automobile and it gotta be this many years old." And they all said, "Oh man you stupid, you really--you know you just take that money and you buy it, somebody will sell it to you--money talks." I said, "No." And to me it was so clear and I still believe that, and I tell my young students today that; I believe it and so I think it was me seeing that--you know I had library hours. The white kids didn't have library hours. Speaker 1: Now you had a--was this in--? Speaker 2: In North Hoisington [Hoisington, Kansas]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --where the--everything was in-- Story_ID: 320097 Speaker 1: So did you go to school in North Hoisington [Hoisington, Kansas] too? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, so you had to cross the tracks and go over to the north side. Speaker 2: Right, so you had to cross the tracks and go north to go to school. Speaker 1: So this was a daily visit for you. You were always on the north side at least once a day going to school. Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly. I had to go to white town. They didn't say the white side of town, 'cause it was the north-south, but it was the white town and that's what my mother [Mary Cotton Broadnax] would sometimes call it, going to white town. And that was a big trip for you, I mean that people were, they thought about that your kids had gone to white town and, and until you got back from white town your parents spent some energy thinking about that you had done that. You--remember I said earlier I mean that one of the things that was carryover from my father [Walter Broadnax] certainly was what had happened and my mother too, that to their respective male relatives, and so you--they thought about you even as a little boy that you could come and go safely. And if you weren't back at a certain time and people were sort of expecting you at a certain time, then people started to look for you. And I remember that happening once in my case. I decided to, to go off with another kid and we didn't get home on time and was embarrassed and also in some real trouble that people, my dad and other men came looking for me, so yeah. Story_ID: 320098 Speaker 1: Did you have any heroes beyond--I mean did you--with your father [Walter Broadnax] working for the railroad, I know he wasn't traveling and stuff that, that much maybe, but did you get like the latest newspapers from the like the Courier [Pittsburgh Courier; New Pittsburgh Courier] or the Chicago Defender? Speaker 2: No black newspapers. I only saw black newspapers when we did travel, which was typically in the summer and we would visit people and family in Arkansas and we had family in St. Louis [Missouri] and we had friends of the family in Kansas City [Missouri] and so we would take my dad's railroad pass and go to those places. And those places were so radically different than where I grew up, I mean, what black people were doing, the number of black people, blacks having their own movie theaters. My dad's mother [Caroline Broadnax] was living in, in Detroit [Michigan] with one of his sisters, and I was just taken by Detroit. It blew me away completely, I mean, to see that many black people--houses made of bricks, having new cars, which you know where I grew up [Hoisington, Kansas] you didn't see black folks really with new cars. That was--we bought used cars. So, the, the, the image of who you were and, and how you fitted into the world was so dominated by the white world where I grew up and we were in such a terrible minority relationship, small numbers, economically dependent in a sense that we all worked for, you know, some kind of concern, almost everybody, the railroad. You were, even the little recreational opportunities, it was defined by the larger white community how you could participate, so was the movie theater. The swimming pool when they built one we couldn't go at all. The city decided that they didn't want blacks swimming in the water with whites, so we couldn't go. So, I didn't learn how to swim 'cause my parents wouldn't let me swim in the creek 'cause it was dangerous, snakes and other stuff. So, I would go to the swimming pool I remember as a youngster and stand at the fence and look at the white kids I knew and went to school with. I could go to the pool, but I couldn't get in, and I would stand there and talk to kids I went to school with through the fence as they swam and had fun and so and I couldn't do it. So, it, it, back again, I mean this, this, this public policy power, the power of defining the game and how it's going to be played is so important. When I was in South Africa some years ago and it was before the change-over between from the white government to having in essence a black government, some of the South Africans were a little uncertain about what would this mean, I mean, that white people had all the economic power and I never forget saying--we were at the University of Cape Town [Cape Town, South Africa], and I remember saying to them but don't you understand the rules that govern your life today have been all written by this government. You get to rewrite the rules. That's--don't you think that's important that these rules have governed your life for hundreds of years, you're gonna rewrite these rules, you can rewrite them and your behavior will be legal and the laws will be enforced by people who standing up for the prin- principles that you've articulated, you know, that that's a, so you're not, no longer an outsider, you're no longer an interloper, you're no longer an outlaw and they would sort of say yeah well you don't need it. Yes you do. And so yeah it's back again to that, the law, who's gonna determine the rules, who's gonna determine the formula for distributing the good things in society. I mean, it's all about that and that's what political power can do for you. Story_ID: 320099 Speaker 1: Was church a big part of growing up? Speaker 2: Oh yeah every Sunday and a lot of Wednesday night prayer meetings. I joined church when I was twelve. You had to wait 'til you were twelve. Speaker 1: But, you attended though before? Speaker 2: Oh, every Sunday. Speaker 1: What was the name of your church? Speaker 2: First Baptist Church of Hoisington, Kansas, First Baptist Church. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I liked church, so it wasn't it wasn't as much of a burden as I sometimes pretend to people. You know, you, all of us roll our eyes you know I had to go to church every Sunday, but that was when you really got to be with other people and I liked that, and there was singing and we had a little choir. At one point, we even had a little youth choir and they had maybe six to ten kids in it, and we would sing sometimes in church and that was good stuff. I liked that. I liked that and I liked listening to the ministers and watching the ministers and not so much their, their sermon, but their leadership skills in the way they operated the church, in the way they moved the congregation in one direction and another, and that impressed me that people would give themselves into this person to do one thing or another and, and clearly the minister is one of those influential people in my world. So, I paid him a lot of attention. He was the only man in my world that had more than one suit that I could sort of discern, that he had several suits. My dad [Walter Broadnax] had one, didn't particularly I don't think like wearing that one, but you know he wore it for funerals and weddings and whatever events and to church, you know, to wear his suit. But, the minister had several suits and he had the closest thing to a new car. I noticed that too that he had a car that was only a couple of years old, and his wife dressed better than the other women in the church. I mean it was always obvious to me. And the women said that was the standard that they wanted to dress as close to the minister's wife if they could and I don't know if the men tried to model themselves after the preacher, but the women certainly wanted to emulate the preachers' wife. Speaker 1: Now, now did you, did you have like responsibilities in church, a lot of things? Speaker 2: I became superintendent of Sunday school when I was sixteen, so I was the superintendent of Sunday school for, for the church. That's all Sunday school, I mean adults and so forth and of course I had a typewriter and that made me a powerful guy, right. My parents had bought me a typewriter, a little Royal [Royal Typewriter Company] portable typewriter, and I could type and so man I had, I could actually type letters and I could type programs and so you know partly, probably I got to be part of the reason I got to be superintendent was I had my own typewriter. I could type the church program. You know I could type other things, but also I was very much into the reading and writing thing and, and teaching Sunday school, which I did a little bit of as the superintendent, also appealed to me. So I was interested in doing a little bit of that. So yeah, church was--it was really important. It was important (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Story_ID: 320100 Speaker 1: Were there any teachers that were like especially helpful for you in, in grade school? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, there was a--my third grade teacher, Mrs. Hamilton, Sarah Hamilton [ph.], or Ms. Hamilton. It turns out she wasn't married initially and I found out when I graduated from high school she was nineteen years old when she was my third grade teacher. You could teach in those days--with two years of college you could teach elementary school and I guess she was working towards in the summer finishing her degree or whatever, but she took a special interest in me. Young, very attractive white lady who married while I was her student. Her fiance came back from Korea, and I remember him coming to the school ground and me being really terrified that he was gonna take her away and she was very important to me and I was very threatened by this guy and I remember very clearly that he came and she hugged him and they walked away and I in my little child's mind he's taking away, that this is the person who has treated me so well and this guy is taking her away, what's gonna happen to me? I am going to go backward here. But, she, she treated me so well. She came to my high school graduation. They had moved away. She had had her family. She came back to my high school graduation. There had been no communication between us. She came back and I asked her, "Why did you come to my graduation," and she was talking to my parents [Mary Cotton Broadnax and Walter Broadnax] and they remembered her. It was interesting. And she said, "I knew that Doyce [HistoryMaker Walter Broadnax] should be graduating and I found out and I told my husband we have to go," and they came. And of course I was the--this is, it sounds really strange now I've given you the context, I was the outstanding senior boy in my graduating class. So, this is the number one student at our school. We called him outstanding senior boy. Speaker 1: What was the name of your high school? Speaker 2: Hoisington High School [Hoisington, Kansas]. It was a school of about--it was one of these consolidated school districts, so kids were bused from all over a large catchment area. Story_ID: 321980 Speaker 1: Now you're at Hoisington High School [Hoisington, Kansas] and I take it there aren't many black students at Hoisington High School since there is not that big a population in the town [Hoisington, Kansas]? Speaker 2: That's right, that's right. There were--ninth grade we considered to be--it was in the high school, so we start at nine through twelve, but you--it was also, its athletics were separated. It was the ninth grade, so it really wasn't part of the high school. And the reason I'm making this distinction is that you didn't count the ninth grade as a part of high school, and it depends on how you wanna think about it, then I was the only black student in the high school, but I was clearly the only black student in the twelfth grade. There is just no issue about that, so--. Speaker 1: What happened to the rest? Speaker 2: They didn't--some of the same things that we are wrestling with today is that eighth grade was about it for a black student and you could leave school after the eighth grade. The law permitted you to not go to school anymore. You weren't truant or--and no one came looking for you, you just go off and go to work. And so a lot of kids once they did--the goal was to get through the eighth grade and they get through the eighth grade and that was it, they'd quit. And so my brother [William Broadnax] and I were unusual in that the expectation was that you were going to finish high school, which is, I mean, in those days that was a huge thing to do that you were gonna get a high school diploma and say that out loud. A lot of people said that's ridiculous. You can get yourself a job. My high school diploma. So, my brother who was in the ninth grade, and this is--I was a senior and he was in the ninth grade, my baby brother, and so he was in that same building and there were three other black boys that were in the building that I went to school in. So, if you counted them as a part of the high school, then there were about five of us in that building at any given time. Story_ID: 321981 Speaker 1: Now, what was really odd, I was one of the outstanding athletes on the varsity--in the, on the varsity teams and these four black boys in the ninth grade totally dominated athletics in the ninth grade [at Hoisington High School, Hoisington, Kansas]. So like they would, they would--and when, by the time they were seniors they were winning the state in everything. And so you had four black boys that did every--they, they, they were, they were the stars of the football team and like won the state championship football. They were outstanding, and a couple of them playing basketball too, and, and in track and field they had a couple of kids who were the fastest kids in the country. One of the boys turned out to be the fastest high schooler in the country. Speaker 2: Give us some names--. Speaker 1: A kid named Billy, Billy Kimble [ph.] is the one that was just off the charts and I guess in 1964 or 1965 were his great years. He ended up going to Texas Southern [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas] after high school to run track. It didn't turn out real well. He ended up getting drafted and going to Vietnam and got shot. Didn't die, but came back lost a lung, all sorts of, but he was in incre- he ran against Richmond Flowers [Richmond Flowers, Jr.]. Speaker 2: Richard Flowers, he's the son of the politician from Alabama right? Speaker 1: Exactly-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --he was attorney general and I think he was governor. Speaker 2: Yeah his, his father [Richmond Flowers, Sr.] was a liberal-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --politician in Alabama-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --one of the few. I remember reading about him in Time magazine. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: Richmond Flowers-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --was fast, yeah. Speaker 1: Well he ran against, I mean track running, and young Flowers was very fast too--. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and they had a dead heat in the hundred yard dash in, in Modesto, California. They had these big relays and these two kids came here running. They said they couldn't figure out which one of 'em won that race. It was a dead heat and they were both timed and I'm trying to think back now. It was some incredible time, but it was blistering fast. I'm, I'm hesitating to say, but it was in the neighborhood of like 9.3 for a hundred yard dash which was just--. Speaker 2: That's very fast. During the time we had a kid in Ohio who was ahead of me, Craig Wallace, who ran a 9.4, and that was you know a big deal--. Speaker 1: Big deal. Speaker 2: --he, he won everything in Ohio. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: So these kids are running under, under him. I remember reading about Richmond Flowers, that's probably one of the last time that a white kid was that fast-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --in the United States that actually could compete for that. Speaker 1: You know what the word was in our community we all said that Richmond Flowers is probably our cousin (laughter), that he probably was a member of the tribe and so that was--everybody joked about it. Speaker 2: That might explain the liberality of his father. Speaker 1: Exactly, and he said, and Billy Kimble told me how nice the young Flowers was. They hit it off he said right away at these relays. They became tight; even though they were fierce competitors they became very tight. So--but yeah great athletes. I was good, but I wasn't like these kids. I mean my brother's group, I mean they were, they were outstanding. I mean I was good and in the context I was playing in it was okay and I looked good, but these guys, they were really good. They were, they were up here somewhere and I was down here somewhere. Speaker 2: What's your brother's name? Speaker 1: William [William Broadnax]-- Speaker 2: William, okay. Speaker 1: --like I said I call him Bill now, I'm in the groove with modern and--he's much larger than I am, but these kids were all much larger than I am and faster, all of them. And so they were in those days like Billy Kimble was 6 feet, 6'1" and like 170 pounds. So, these kids--that's, that's a big boy and when he was playing football he probably weighed a little bit more and so somebody with that speed and that size, I mean, you, you begin to get the idea. My brother is about 5'10" and probably and he was the center on the football team and he probably was 180, 185 and, and big upper body. And they didn't lift weights, but not much. It wasn't like they do now all that weight training. You did calisthenics and some push-ups and all that, but they were big boys and they were fast and were quick and they were focused. They played the game at a level of intensity that, that even in Kansas football, which was pretty good football, you didn't see that. Speaker 2: Yeah University of Kansas [Lawrence, Kansas] I know had a big re- reputation-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --in those days of football. Speaker 1: These kids blocked in high school, they knocked you down. There was none of this brush blocking. I mean, I saw them play a couple of times I thought man oh man, people don't know what to do with this. They knocked--they came around the corners like pro football. If they could get a beat on you, it would knock you down. Story_ID: 321982 Speaker 1: Now when you were growing up I don't know if you ever ran across 'em, but Wilt Chamberlain was playing in Kansas. Speaker 2: Oh sure, sure. Speaker 1: Though he's from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. Speaker 2: Right, right. I remember his, his story, I mean when he came to the University of Kansas [Lawrence, Kansas] we were all excited. Had this giant and even out where I was I mean we knew that he was there and it was a big deal. And I don't know if you remember this but Wilt could not stay in the dormitory at the University of Kansas. He stayed in the Eldridge Hotel, downtown Lawrence [Kansas] because he was black. Speaker 1: Was it, was it because he was, was it because he was too tall? Speaker 2: No, that too. They--that was the way that the spin they put on it that they had to make a special bed for Wilt and how lucky he was to have this wonderful suite of rooms at the Eldridge Hotel, but the real deal was that the university did not--Phog Allen did not know how to bring this black giant onto the University of Kansas campus and put him those dormitories with these white kids, and so they put him in the Eldridge Hotel. And I, I never heard from Chamberlain on this subject. I know the university brought him back before he died and had a big to do about him and I understand he did leave the university some money. So, they must have worked through some of them with Wilt, 'cause Chamberlain was a very smart guy and I'm sure--but anyway my feeling is I always believed that one of the reasons Wilt left and didn't finish his degree, he was just tired of this. I mean, you know, you're this big giant that they use for so many months and then they park you back down at this hotel and you're isolated and segregated from sort of the student life. That, that wouldn't be a, a very pleasant life and there not, there were not that many blacks at the University of Kansas, very few, and in '57 [1957] when he was there, when he got there, there must have been almost none. I mean I wasn't old enough to be there at that point obviously but--. Speaker 1: Now is, is Lawrence close to your hometown [Hoisington, Kansas]? Speaker 2: It's on the eastern part of the state, so it's closer to Kansas City [Kansas]. So it's all the way across the state and so Lawrence is the eastern, right on the Missouri border. So, it's a long way from where I grew up. It's, in those days over a six hour, six, seven hour drive. Today it's certainly five hours even with the interstate from my place. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's quite a way away. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's quite a ride. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And that's at eighty miles an hour. Story_ID: 321983 Speaker 1: --Tell us about--now how did you rise in high school [Hoisington High School, Hoisington, Kansas] being the only one there. I mean you rose from a position in kindergarten as being our little colored friend to, to being like the president of your high school graduating class. How did this happen? Speaker 2: Well, as I said I was the outstanding senior boy, which meant academic, athletic, political. I had been president of my freshman class, and I'd been I guess I was vice president as I recall of my junior class. And I believe I was vice president of my senior class so, so there was political stuff too. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: But, it was a series of teachers, but it was also the times, I believe explained my opportunity to rise. You think back, that I entered high school, the ninth grade in 19--, 1958, yeah it had to have been 1958, and you had Brown vs. the Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka] in '54 [1954], so that had already set in people's minds and there, that there were gonna be a change and there were, there were signs around, meaning there was discussion about what we called Jim Crow, that it was being questioned heavily and people were no longer sort of taking this to be the natural order of things. It may have still been the order of things, but it was no longer seen by a lot of people as the natural order. Speaker 1: Now, now did you--being right there in Kansas during those days, what it, Brown vs. the Board being a Kansas case in Topeka [Kansas], I guess, how far is Topeka from where you grew up [Hoisington, Kansas]? Speaker 2: Topeka is only about twenty minutes from Lawrence [Kansas], so it's where the university [University of Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas] is, so it's about the same distance as I was describing about a four to five hour drive, a long way away. Speaker 1: Okay, so about the same, okay so it wasn't real close. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah so and we knew about the case and we knew what it was trying to deal with, but it didn't radically change your life where I lived. I mean, it happened, but it wasn't like tomorrow morning you wake up and all of a sudden you can go to the movies and you know you can engage in interracial dating, no, no. Speaker 1: You were ten when that went down I believe right, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. So I was prob- that means I was about in the fifth grade, something like that. And it, you know, but it was having an impact on the people who were teaching me and that was sort of unbeknownst to me. But as the teachers were coming on and we got a lot of young teachers in the system; it was probably harder to hold them in this small town. You're getting people with little different attitudes and I think I benefitted from these younger white teachers who were coming either from the state university or Fort Hays State College [Fort Hays State University, Hays, Kansas], teachers college, a lot of them were from there, which was in Hays [Kansas], that their view of the negro was different and so they took it as a badge of honor that they would be helpful in terms of me developing to my fullest and so I found not everybody, but there were several in my environment from the ninth grade forward that were pulling against the system. Part of the system said that you're gonna go out and be some kind of tradesman, that you're clearly kind of smart, so you'll, you could--you were talking about barber, they said you can be a barber or, or a carpenter or maybe even a brick layer or you know and they named the things that I might be able to do. Speaker 1: When you're smart and black you can be those things. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, that you could be a tradesman, you know, that hey that would be good and you could make a contribution to your community and you know that sort of thing and people are open about that. But, there were these youngsters who were saying, "Hey that's BS, you should go to college." Story_ID: 321984 Speaker 1: So, you had good counseling in-- Speaker 2: No, I had lousy counseling [at Hoisington High School, Hoisington, Kansas]. My counselor told me I should go to barber college (laughter), and he gave me the material from the barber college in Tyler, Texas, I'll never forget it. And that was after I was voted outstanding senior boy and was graduating in the top of my class, and he gave me the materials. I remember he was sitting in his office and he said you know I think I can help you get into this barber college in Tyler, Texas. And I was sitting there like what do you say right, you don't want to be disrespectful. So, I took the materials and then I said again you know well how about some of these colleges, and he wouldn't really get his act together, so I sat down and I began to write letters on my own. It was almost sort of random because you know there are all of these colleges out there, right, so I'm trying to write to be--and in my search I even found Lovanium University [University of Lovanium, Kinshasa, Democratic Republic of the Congo] in the Belgium Congo and wrote a letter to Lovanium University and got accepted and my acceptance letter came in French and I had to take it to the superintendent of schools' wife who was the only person in Hoisington, Kansas, that could read and write French, and she translated my letter for me, which they said if I could get my passage to Lovanium University in the Belgium Congo I could go to school. Speaker 1: That's amazing. Speaker 2: So, that, you know, so I got accepted to Lovanium University. Speaker 1: How do you spell that? Speaker 2: L-A-V-O-N-I-U-M, Lavonium [sic. Lovanium]. And this was during Lumumba's, Patrice Lumumba's time. I think Lumumba was killed shortly-- Speaker 1: In '61 [1961], I think February '61 [sic. January 1961]. Speaker 2: Okay before, okay before 'cause I was applying in '61 [1961], so he was, but I remember Patrice Lumumba and I, I had seen this on TV and read a little bit about it and these were black people. I wanted--. Speaker 1: So, you did not have any trepidation about going to school in Africa if you had, if you had to? Speaker 2: I just, it was this, you know as I think back now God I didn't know that much about Africa and I didn't know what I was--what a huge trip this would have been and even financing it, I mean, that would have been a big deal to finance that trip. But, what it says to me is I intended to go to college and it meant having to go all the way to Lovanium University I'd do that. But, I had wanted to go to Philander Smith College [Little Rock, Arkansas] in Arkansas, and I wanted to go 'cause it was a black school. Speaker 1: Did you know anybody else that or anyone who had? Speaker 2: A couple of my relatives had gone to Philander. Another one had to Arkansas A&M [Arkansas Agricultural, Mechanical and Normal College; University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff, Pine Bluff, Arkansas]. Speaker 1: At Pine Bluff [Arkansas]. Speaker 2: Pine Bluff, so, teachers, they were all teachers. And so I had talked to people who had had this experience and the thing I liked about Arkansas was is that blacks had social life and I had been educated without the benefit of a social life. Speaker 1: Now, 'cause you described it like it was a lot of other black males in high school with you, I mean, the other classmen. Were there any black females in school? Speaker 2: No, no all the black females that had been along the route had dropped out, got married, really didn't have that many get pregnant and have to leave, but they soon got married or got hooked up with somebody or their parents left, but no there were no girls. So, when I got to the end of this thing, there were girls and you were totally prohibited from, from dating white girls and I was told that. Just in case I didn't know, the principal called me in at the beginning of my high school and sat me down and said look there are several rules here you gotta follow and you'll be successful if you follow those rules. There's one, don't let us catch you with fooling with any of these girls, that's off limits; and a couple of other things and you'll be fine. And so I just knew, I mean I didn't have to sit down and guess what it was. And my parents [Mary Cotton Broadnax and Walter Broadnax] reinforced it. They supported the rule that thou shall not date white women; you don't do that, or white girls. So, I had no social life. Story_ID: 321985 Speaker 1: There were no black women. There were lots of women, but there were no black ones. So, I had gone to high school [Hoisington High School, Hoisington, Kansas] during that very formative period going to school dances without dates and sometimes I would dance with a girl or two in the gym or wherever we were having our little parties or get-togethers, but I never went to dances outside the school. I was not invited to those. I was not invited to parties, and I certainly wasn't dating anyone. Speaker 2: Now this is serious business because we're talking about here you are this is puberty we're talking about (laughter) and, and no girls, right, you know. Speaker 1: No girls. Speaker 2: So, and you, and yet you still achieved this high status. You must have poured all your energy, I guess in achievement. Speaker 1: I put my energy into school and that's what my parents [Mary Cotton Broadnax and Walter Broadnax] said to do. My dad said, "You're not going there to date," and again there was no sympathy. They didn't say to me oh gosh you're being discriminated against, it's segregated, this is awful and we feel sorry for you. They said no, you gotta get everything you can out of this and there's a lot there to be had and you're gonna reach a point in your life where there will be women for you and my dad said I know you want 'em badly now and I know what it's like being a teenage boy, but just hold on, they'll be there for the rest of your life; and if you get an education you'll get a chance to choose from amongst some outstanding women to be your woman and that's what the name of the game is son, it's finding your woman. And so I know you think right now that this is the end of the world; it's not. It's so, you know--now I overtly subscribed to that, but deep in my heart I still wanted desperately a girlfriend--some, you know I wanted to go to parties and the dances like my friends in high school 'cause the guys I played football with and basketball with and ran track with they were dating and going out and they was talking about this stuff in the showers, in the locker room, and you know I was totally outside that, right, so I wanted to do what they--and they were telling stories you know like boys tell stories about what they were doing and whether they were lies or not, I had no stories. Story_ID: 321986 Speaker 1: That just fueled the fire, but let me--you, you were saying off camera that, that this and I know you don't like to, we don't wanna get into a thing where you'll give us a litany of discrimination and problems and stuff, but that's not what all this, all, all of this is about, but it was rough wasn't it, being there [Hoisington High School, Hoisington, Kansas]? Speaker 2: It was rough. It was very rough and I, you know, one of the things that happened to me even though my parents [Mary Cotton Broadnax and Walter Broadnax] had said I couldn't date and the school said I couldn't date you probably figure out that you know there were a range of responses among the females. You got a kid who is being treated in one respect as though he's an outstanding kid in the school and they watch him play football, they watch him play basketball, they see he performs well in class, he's involved in, you know, dramatical arts and stuff and so they, quote, kind of like you. So, this one girl asked me one night to walk her home after play practice and I was the student director for the, for the play, and so I walked her home. And I'll never forget her father--I walked her up on the porch and I hadn't kissed her, I hadn't touched her at all, I just walked her home and being a good young man I wasn't gonna leave her on the porch until she got inside the house. So, she was going in the house and I don't know how her parents--either they were waiting for her to come home or what, 'cause I was still on the porch, her dad burst through the door and sort of flung me into the bushes in front of their house. I guessed he pushed me off the porch. Didn't pursue and yelled at me and said I don't want you around here and blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, and that was the only real sort of altercation that didn't--and I didn't want to tell my father about it and never did because I was breaking the rule, that I shouldn't have been there and so I had no one that I could tell because my, my dad's rage would have been substantial 'cause he said I was putting myself at risk for no good reason and they'd already told me that I shouldn't do it; so, yeah no girls. I actually went to a drive-in movie one night with one of my male friends and his girlfriend. Now you talking about punishment and I was stupid. I mean, once I got there I realized what a dumb thing it was. While they hugged and kissed and I'm sitting there in the back seat of the car watching the movie while they're hugging and kissing and moaning and groaning and carrying on, I'm sitting in the back seat of the car and I thought the movie was just far too long. I couldn't get up. I'd get out of the car and come back and it was still going on, then I tried to sit outside and then they would say to me why are you, why are you sitting outside to me, you know get back in the car, you should be sitting--insane right, so I never did that again, but it was a tough time. So going to college again took on even greater meaning. And college not only meant going to an education, it meant getting away from this setting, that this was a setting that wasn't very welcoming in some respect. Story_ID: 321987 Speaker 1: So, how did you wind up choosing Washburn [Washburn University, Topeka, Kansas]? Speaker 2: I chose Washburn because I could work and go to school. That a friend of ours, my friend, who lived in Hoisington [Kansas], had attended Washburn for a year, the wife of--her name was Josephine Gulliver [ph.], and she was probably one of the brightest people I knew, not only at Hoisington, but anywhere. I mean, she was well read and really an anomaly in our little town. She read books all the time and knew about current events and, and read magazines and, and she was unusual. She told me about Washburn, and she said she had gone there for a year and she always regretted that she hadn't finished. Now, you know Washburn was the school of Art Fletcher [HistoryMaker Arthur Fletcher], Sam Jackson [Samuel C. Jackson], Bill Harris [William L. Harris, Jr.], outstanding leaders in the Civil Rights Movement. You know Art Fletcher just recently died. Now, I didn't know all this when I went to Washburn. I didn't know that all these black men, mostly, who became distinguished black men during the Civil Rights Movement and of course Fletcher and Jackson were Republicans and both worked for Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] and Ford [President Gerald Rudolph Ford, Jr.] and so forth and Fletcher set up the labor department office overseeing the affirmative action, part of the initial affirmative action program. Speaker 1: He's called the father of affirmative action. Speaker 2: Absolutely. He went to Washburn University in Topeka, Kansas. But, the thing was a black person could go to school there and because it was a city, you could get a job and pay your tuition and go to school. So, I worked nights. I worked from eleven at night to seven in the morning at the state hospital and went to school from 7:30, 8:00 in the morning to around two. Then, I'd go home and sleep and get up and I'd have a couple of hours where I could study and get something to eat and I go to work and then at my job because I worked the night shift at the hospital by about one or two o'clock you could now if things were quiet on your ward and this was a state mental hospital, Topeka State Hospital [Topeka, Kansas]. If things were quiet, meaning no patient was upset or nothing was going on, you could study. And so at least three nights a week you could guaran, almost count on getting four or five hours of studying uninterrupted and then I'd have to get the ward ready for the morning shift and then I'd go back to school. And that, that was a boon to me, my friend. I'm gonna tell you I could pay all my tuition, my books, everything. I mean, I was in good shape. I just, it made the difference. All of a sudden, all of the worries about how to do this were gone. Story_ID: 320764 Speaker 1: You got a girlfriend, you finally got a girlfriend in Wa- Washburn [Washburn University, Topeka, Kansas]. Speaker 2: Got a girlfriend in Washburn, ended up marrying that girl, and so when I finished college I was married and had a child [Andrea Broadnax Green]. At my senior year, we had a baby and my wife was going to school and then she stopped her junior year and I finished on up 'cause she was pregnant and we had a baby and then I finished and then I got a job and she started going again to school. But, I met her and we got married and-- Speaker 1: Now let me ask you, now what was major in Washburn? Speaker 2: Political science. Speaker 1: Did you--was it hard to decide that you were gonna be a political science major or had you always kind of figured you--? Speaker 2: I had never thought about political science. I had though like a lot of black kids you know it's the things that you know about and of course I think if you're black and you're a good student at all first thing people start to tell you is you're gonna go into medicine right, so it's you ought to be a medical doctor, you ought to be a dentist, you should be a--and my grandmother said a preacher. She wanted me to be a minister, and none of those things really appealed to me, so I entered college without a clear notion. I had told people what I was gonna do was, I was gonna get a degree in biology and teach biology and coach track and tennis, which were two of my favorite sports and so that's what I was gonna coach, but I had sort of made that up--I mean, (unclear) cloth--I mean to, to give an answer what are you gonna do? I had some relatives as I said that were teachers, so I liked biology, so I would major in biology, teach biology, and one of my favorite teachers in high school [Hoisington High School, Hoisington, Kansas] would have been my biology teacher, so that made sense and I'd coach track and tennis like he did in high school, right, so it was all sort of taken from Gary Jones' career in life. Speaker 1: What happened to steer you towards political science? Speaker 2: I think more than anything, the beginning of the Civil Rights Movement. That you were beginning to see the political debate starting to really shape itself around race and the participation of African Americans in politics. Speaker 1: Now was there a strong NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] youth movement when you were growing up in your home--well I guess it probably wasn't there 'cause it's too small. Speaker 2: Not in Hoisington [Kansas]-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --but there was in Topeka [Kansas] and Washburn. Speaker 1: In Topeka and Wichita [Kansas]-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --as, as, as Ron Walters [HistoryMaker Ronald Walters] describes during that time. Speaker 2: And Sam Johnson [sic. Samuel C. Jackson] was the president, the leader of the NAACP in Topeka and I knew him and I got very involved as a student and we marched and, you know, all the things that were going on at that time. So, NAACP was a big vibrant and important organization for African Americans in Topeka. Speaker 1: Okay, now you graduated from high school in 1962. Speaker 2: Sixty-two [1962] Speaker 1: Okay and so you came out of Washburn I guess in '66 [1966]. Speaker 2: Sixty-seven [1967]. Speaker 1: Sixty-seven [1967]. Speaker 2: I graduated January '67 [1967]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, and the world just had changed so much between the time that I had entered high school and the time I graduated from college. So, from 1958 to 1966 it was like night and day. You had Lyndon Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson]--well you had John Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] first of all--it started right there, saying that black people could do things and we had a role and place in American society. I mean, I think people have forgotten how powerful that was. I mean I hadn't heard any president ever stand up and so boldly say black people had a place at the table. Speaker 1: I think I believe he said that those who oppose that are on the wrong side of history. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: I think he said that. Speaker 2: And I mean that, can you imagine, I had never heard such a thing. I mean, and, and to hear that and then to have Lyndon Johnson, I mean sign the Civil Rights Act [Civil Rights Act of 1964] and to see that on television and then to sign the Voting Rights Act [Voting Rights Act of 1965] and then say I'm gonna enforce it. I am gonna send federal marshals to ensure that black people can go to the polls and vote. That was unheard of. I can remember people saying all you niggers get away from here, get, away from here you ain't gonna vote, just go somewhere. Go to the bar, go, go, this isn't for you. So, you say why political science, I mean, that was everything. It was about politics. It was about participation. It was about how politics could change your life as a black person, and the people who were changing my life were in politics. Story_ID: 320765 Speaker 1: Did you have good instructors at Washburn [Washburn University, Topeka, Kansas]? Speaker 2: I did and one of my instructors, again a young white guy teaching political science who told me, who grew up in Alabama took a liking to me and he said I reminded him of his, a young black playmate he had in Alabama and that he never forgave himself for not standing up for his playmate on several occasions and that he had gone off to Korea and had been in the [U.S.] Army and a young black man had basically saved his life in war, and he said I have such a debt that I owe black people. He said I'm gonna repay some of that debt 'cause I'm gonna do everything I can to make sure that you try to be all you can be. And so I had this, and this fellow and the chairman of the department became my advocates in the, at the university. And so I'd taken a couple of political science courses and I'd done pretty well. In his course, I did extremely well and that got me really interested and I was also interested in history and so those two disciplines became the center of my academic interest and I went on to really have a very strong undergraduate performance, but driven by my interest in political science and history. And I--it was sort of unheard of, I had in my history courses at the university-- and kids used to laugh about this--and I'm not bragging I'm just recounting this 'cause somebody told me so I don't if it is fact or not--but I took all the history courses necessary for a minor and really a major. I took twenty-five hours and I had two hours of B in all those courses and the rest were A and it was unheard of and I'd gotten A's in European history, which people just couldn't do, and I wrote the first one hundred midterm exam in European history, which you know, and the teacher Mrs., Dr. Fulter [ph.] told me I never had somebody get a hundred on one of my exams. But, but the point was I was turned on by this and people were either encouraging in the history and political science area or not discouraging. Not everyone was encouraging, but they weren't discouraging. Now, Washburn wasn't quite perfect. I mean, I had an English professor make me understand that I was Negro, and that Negroes didn't ask questions, they didn't question their teachers, and she made that clear to me, and it turns out she was from Arkansas, the funniest thing. But, you know, and I got through that, got out of her class. My--Dr. Bader [ph.], the chairman of the department got me out of her class. I told him about the incident, and he got me out of it. But, it was a pretty good experience, meaning I really did have advocates at that point. I was flourishing. My grades were extremely good. I had a good personal life. I had a wife now, our daughter [Andrea Broadnax Green] came, and that was a good thing, and there was a future. The president of the United States was saying I had a future, that I, [HistoryMaker] Walter Broadnax had a future, and all I had to do was reach for that future, that he was with me. He wanted me to vote. He wanted me to have a job. He wanted me to have an education. He, the president of the United State wanted me to do that. Man you, it couldn't be any better than that, and that was you on the right side of history now if you wanted that for me too. Hey, I mean, go, let's go get it, and so my wife and I were like hey let's go get this thing. Story_ID: 320766 Speaker 1: So, when I graduated [from Washburn University, Topeka, Kansas], Bob Docking [Robert Docking], a young Democrat, had just been elected governor in '66 [1966]. And when I graduated in January, a friend of mine that I'd worked in his political campaign, a young representative named Jim Buchele who later became United States attorney in Kansas under Bill Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] was state rep and I was walking the streets of Topeka [Kansas] with this new bachelor's degree looking for a job and couldn't find one. He took me to the governor's office, introduced me to the governor's executive assistant and within a week I was on the governor's staff, junior position, but on the governor's staff for State of Kansas, unheard of. And I worked in the old War on Poverty program, a Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] program, and that's where I met Ronnie Walters [HistoryMaker Ronald Walters] in Wichita [Kansas] and other African Americans around the state as I worked on the War on Poverty program. So, yeah the world was changing and I was fortunate enough to have been born in a time and in a place to where I really, and I believe this, I was able to get on this wave that, that people had created. I mean people like Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and other national leaders that created this wave that was now carrying a lot of black people forward at a very rapid rate, and we were doing things that we never thought we could do. And so if you had an education or if you get an education, or if you wanted an education, there was a lot of energy now facilitating that and I started this journey where there was no facilitation, I mean, to go. If you could find a way to do it, great. Speaker 2: Now, now what, what was your position with the State of K- what, what did they call you when you started your--? Speaker 1: What was my title? I think I was called program coordinator for the office of state technical assistance, which was really the OEO office, the Office of Economic Opportunity, but we call it the, the state office of technical assistance. So, I was the program coordinator. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Ma- making more money than I ever dreamed of, and my wife and I every night were, I think went to bed thinking someone was gonna come and tell us that it was a dream that you couldn't possibly be making $8000 a year, 'cause at that time a teacher was making about between four and five, here I was making eight and I was just like wow. Speaker 2: You're right, yeah that, yeah that was, that was-- Speaker 1: Tremendous salary. Speaker 2: Yeah more than double the salary that some teachers were making-- Speaker 1: Exactly, exactly, exactly. Speaker 2: --coming out of school in those days. That was yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 320767 Speaker 1: So here I was making eight thousand [dollars] in this job and my wife could return to school and then I said--one of the men I worked with in state government was the budget director [James W. Bibb], met him, and he was a white guy and he was from Alabama and he had a story about having a black friend when he was growing up and this kid was so smart and he always felt guilty that that kid never really went on and had the kind of life that he did and, and here I was I was smart too and if could be helpful to him, to me let him know. So, I came, saw him one day in his office, and I said I think I want to go to graduate school. He said if you wanna go to graduate school I wanna be one of the people who support you going. And so I said well I'm gonna apply. He said you do it. And what I didn't know was when I sent my application in he called the chairman of the graduate program 'cause it was the one he had attended at the University of Kansas [Lawrence, Kansas], the public administration program and sure enough I got in an assistantship and when I-- Speaker 2: Now this is 19--what? What is this? Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty-seven [1967] I entered-- Speaker 2: Sixty-seven [1967] okay. Speaker 1: --the master's [degree] in public administration. Speaker 2: So that wasn't long after you graduated [from Washburn University, Topeka, Kansas] then? Speaker 1: Right, I worked from January to September and then entered graduate school in September. So, now I'm leaving an $8,000 a year job. A lot of people are saying I'm crazy. A lot of my black friends said, "Broadnax [HistoryMaker Walter Broadnax] you are out of your mind. You're making $8,000 a year and you gonna leave it to go to graduate school." I said, "Yeah, but man I'm gonna get a master's degree and over time I'll be able to make more and have more security for my family and do more and--." They said, "Man you're nuts." We moved to Lawrence [Kansas] and my wife stayed home. She was a stay-at-home mom that that year, and I had a graduate assistantship for about $200 a month and that's what we lived on for an academic year in this little tight apartment. She took care of our daughter [Andrea Broadnax Green] and we lived off that. We had a little bit of savings, but not much. I'm talking about a few hundred dollars. I don't mean a few thousand dollars. I mean, we had a few hundred dollars in the bank when I went to graduate school and when we finished, we had still a little, like fifty, sixty dollars. We had enough money to get a U-Haul trailer and move ourselves. So, we were still operating independently not having to seek out any help from family. Speaker 2: Now, in, in graduate school, University of Kansas, what was your, what was your thesis in graduate school? Speaker 1: Well my thesis was on a comparative, is a comparative thesis on financial management practices in Costa Rica and in Kansas and so that the title of the thesis was 'Financial Management in Costa Rica and Kansas: A Comparative Statement,' [ph.] and so that was the master's thesis. And I've always been interested in sort of financial things. It turns out, I mean, and some of that comes from I think my upbringing. My father [Walter Broadnax] was very sort of money conscious, and I think some of that got in my head and that seemed like--oh and I spent three year, three months or more in Costa Rica on a fellowship after finishing my coursework and so I collected the data there and then came back to Kansas. I collected the data while I was on the fellowship and came back to Kansas to work for the state budget office and that was the guy, the director of that office was the guy that encouraged me to go to graduate school. Speaker 2: Okay so you come back to his office, okay. Speaker 1: Come back to his office. So not only had he facilitated me going to school, he, when I got ready to graduate, he said, "I want you to come to work for me when you finish." Speaker 2: So you finished in what year? What was that? Speaker 1: I finished in '68 [1968]. So I was at KU [University of Kansas] from '67 [1967] to '68 [1968] and came back to Topeka [Kansas] having finished my coursework and now I had to write my thesis and do my internship and I did it at the budget office, and so I got my degree in '69 [1969]. Story_ID: 320768 Speaker 1: What did you do next? Did you work for the state [Kanas State budget office] for a while or--? Speaker 2: Couple of years, and was promoted twice. And so I had been promoted to senior analyst within two years and you know I had, the boss was my advocate. Again, he was so supportive of me and I will just never forget it. He was a southerner. I mean, he was the antithesis of what he was supposed to be. Everything about this man if you just read his CV [curriculum vitae] you would never see him in the role that he was playing in my life. Speaker 1: Now this is the third Alabaman anomaly we've talked about in this interview-- Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly. Speaker 1: --Richmond Flowers [Richmond Flowers, Sr.] and his son [Richmond Flowers, Jr.], that's four. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah and so here these people are not behaving like they're supposed to be behaving and he loved jazz and during the work day and things were a little slow he would have me come in his office and he would bring his recordings, Bessie Smith, he loved Bessie Smith and he would have me come in and he said I want you to hear this. And he was a saxophone player and I'd been a saxophone player; that was another kinship. And his dream in life was to have been, if he could play saxophone like some of these people or sing like Bessie Smith, he though that's the deal, that's what you wanna do. But he was the state budget director. He's one of the most powerful men in the state, but dreamed dreams, I think, of being a jazz musician. Speaker 1: Now what was his name? Speaker 2: James W. Bibb. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: B-I-B-B is his last name. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so he seems like a very important figure. Speaker 2: Very important. Speaker 1: Yeah, right. Speaker 2: Pivotal, pivotal because he's now reinforcing in a way the first African American to work in a professional career service job in the state and in finance. Homer Floyd who was a black guy who was from Ohio who had been an All-American at the University of Kansas [Lawrence, Kansas] was the head of the civil rights, what they called civil rights division [Kansas Commission on Civil Rights] in the state, but his was an appointed job as you can imagine, and he was the highest ranking black in state government. But, he used to stop by my office every now and then just to see how I was doing and you know Homer here he was this big shot, you know, all American football player at the University of Kansas from Massillon, Ohio. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's where they give the baby little footballs when they're born. Speaker 2: Is that right? Speaker 1: Yes they do, yeah. Speaker 2: This guy was incredible, 'cause he wasn't that big and he was All-American at Kansas. I mean the man could really do it, but a good looking guy, and a very nice man. But, this was pivotal, I mean this--I could do finance. I could perform with the best and the brightest in state government, 'cause the best and the brightest were in finance and I had gotten two promotions in two years and now I was a senior analyst, and the confidence that that engendered, I mean, I, I, you know on reflection it's hard to sort of understand the confidence that that builds and the reinforcement you're now getting from people, black and white saying, wow, and people saying keep going. I had-- Speaker 1: You're still a very young man-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: --you're not, you're about twenty-five maybe, at this time? Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly. I was about twenty-five. Story_ID: 320769 Speaker 1: Then they, the, the university had an Upward Bound program and the dean of the school of education at Washburn [Washburn University, Topeka, Kansas], my old alma mater, asked me would I like to come and be director of Upward Bound. Mr. Bibb [James W. Bibb] had told me, "Don't do it. I mean, you're on your way to a great career in state finance, you could be assistant director of budget someday." He didn't say director, but "You could maybe be assistant director." And I think that was kind of his dream that this young black guy that he liked so much who he'd developed and when his old assistant director retired I would have the experience and so forth to take over and I thought of that in retrospect. I didn't think about it when he was telling me to stay. But, to run this Upward Bound program at the university was so attractive to me, 'cause it was to get minority kids who looked like me into college and that just turned me on. Speaker 2: So did you take it? Speaker 1: I took it. Speaker 2: Okay, now this is 19--. Speaker 1: Seventy [1970]. Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy [1970] okay. Speaker 1: I went back to Washburn to direct the Upward Bound program, and it was a great time. I learned all kinds, I mean, I learned more than I contributed. I learned about management. I hadn't managed anybody and all of a sudden I got this program and I've got a hundred kids in the summertime in sixty-five during the academic year that are in these high schools and you got these tutorial programs you gotta set up and I'm trying to keep kids out of jail and get 'em out of jail, get 'em through to the juvenile court and get 'em into universities and colleges around the country. And it was an exciting time, but it just wore, it wears you out too. It's a young man's job 'cause it's 24/7, and those kids run you ragged. And so beginning my second year I said, you know, I, I don't wanna make this my life and I'm not having any home life and I'm a young man and to be in a university, I need a Ph.D., that if like this kind of life, I gotta get a Ph.D. So, I started again seeing where could I go to graduate school. Story_ID: 320770 Speaker 1: Well boy, in 1970--'70 [1970], '71 [1971] all kind of places were saying if you're black and you wanna go to graduate school check us out. I mean Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] and Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York] and Syracuse [Syracuse University, Syracuse, New York] and of course Kansas [University of Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas] was there. It wasn't as, you know, welcoming as say Yale, just you know please fill out an application to Yale, please, you know and I'm like, "What?" And they're sending this stuff out, you know. So, I did apply to Yale. I applied to Yale and I applied to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. I applied to Syracuse, University of Southern California [Los Angeles, California], where else--about five or six schools. And I got accepted everywhere. It was sort of daunting. You know you sent your application off and sort of late in the winter these letters start coming in, you're accepted at Syracuse, University of Southern California, Yale, Harvard. Harvard wanted to change where I should come to study. I had applied to one program and they, typical of Harvard, they called me up and said no you don't wanna be in that program, you wanna be in another program and that sort of was off-putting. And I was still naive enough at that point, even though I was much more sophisticated and mature, I didn't fully understand what I was doing when I told Harvard well if I can't come to the program I applied to I just won't come, and that's what I did. And I went to Syracuse where the program that I wanted to be in was there, which was public administration and so I went and that turned out to be the number one school in the country, but I didn't really know that. I just knew that this was a really great school. People were saying it's a great school and they were welcoming. They were very welcoming. And I went to visit and confirmed the hospitableness of Syracuse University. So, my wife and I said we're going off to Syracuse University and everybody at Topeka [Kansas] said you guys have to be nuts. You could go to the University of Kansas right down the road here, why you gonna go off to New York, and we went and it was terrific and another pivotal experience. And it was just a scintillating academic experience in terms of what I learned, the contacts I made, the, the personal and professional development that took place-- Story_ID: 320771 Speaker 1: Who were some of the people that you met along the way that were important? Speaker 2: Oh man, Stephen K. Bailey was the dean, a Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] trained political scientist, national and internationally known man; Alan K. Campbell who was the dean while I was there. Bailey had been dean and Campbell was dean. Campbell was the president of the, or chairman of the [U.S.] Civil Service Commission under Jimmy Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] and was just a force in my professional life. He virtually adopted me. I mean I became his, his project and when I finished my work, I will say this, I mean I made nothing below an A in my Ph.D. work at Syracuse [Syracuse University, Syracuse, New York] and they kept my doctoral exams on file for twenty years as the model Ph.D. comprehensive exams for students to go in the files and look at those to prepare themselves for their doctoral comprehensives, that it was the model for twenty years, and I'm a little embarrassed to say, but it was, that's what they did. And you know in retrospect, you know if I were to read those, I'm sure I'd find them to be a little bit juvenile and so forth and so on, but you know and I never went back to read 'em again. I mean once I realized that was going on I did not put myself in a position to go to, now as a professional academic to see what I thought of my exams. I just let that alone; I didn't do that. But, it was a great experience. I had a lot of supporters and encouragers and for the first time in my life it was like all my professors wanted me to be successful. I'd never been in that situation. Everybody wanted you to be good and they expected you to be good, and there was no like oh no what are we gonna do now. It was like yes you can do this. But, it was that Civil Rights Movement again I'm telling you about. See by the time I arrived at Syracuse the, the expectation on all these campuses was to get us through. Story_ID: 321988 Speaker 1: All right. What was your dissertation [at Syracuse University, New York, New York]? Speaker 2: I did a--it was called, gosh role, role--let's see was it role, 'Role Differentiation Between Minorities and Non-minorities in Urban Administration' [ph.] and what all that means is I was trying to look at, and using statistical measures, the different between the experiences between whites versus minorities, blacks, Puerto Ricans at that time, not Hispanics. I looked at blacks, Puerto Ricans, Asians,--I believe I called them not Oriental. I remember my first iteration on my questionnaires I called them Orientals and we changed it to Asians and I think other, other minorities. And to look at them in comparison to the white experience over time, and I had a series of variables to look at and what the results showed was that they began their time in urban administration--there were city--series of cities in which I administered the questionnaire, that all of them began with sort of a similar perspective on what a career in urban management or urban administration was going to be, but over a seven year period of time there was tremendous divergence in the perspective, and you can imagine what it was, that the minorities really began to lose their idealism and belief in what they can do and the impacts that they can have and they began to fall out of the system that you can see and I didn't do a second study to focus on them, but my committee said probably what would have been the more interesting study if you'd had unlimited resources would have been to have done the first research cut to identify these that fall out and to have done the research on them to discover in more detail the fullness of what their perception was; of what was happening to them inside these organizations. And if you remember, the theory was at that time is that everybody wanted these minorities. We really want you there, and so people were going in and what the research showed is wanting you there was in many cases in name only, that once you were there, there were these whole series of challenges you were gonna have to meet in order to succeed in that environment. So, yeah we want you to come--. Speaker 1: But it was in compliance to-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --some federal-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --or, or local regulation. Speaker 2: That's right. So, when you read in the paper everybody looking for these minorities what my research showed, yeah they're looking for you, but it ain't gonna be any bed of roses, that you are going to--and so for the ones who succeeded--and that was another that my committee wasn't as interested. I was just as interested in them, because clearly--and what the data was suggesting was they moved in terms of their worldview in the direction of the dominant culture and you, you can see it today. There are folks who have done very well by articulating the dominant view in terms of some of the issues related to African Americans in American society. I mean, there is a, there are rewards for--let me put it that way, there are rewards for that. You know being a little clearer about it, I mean, you know, saying I don't know what all the anger is by these black folks, all you gotta do is do what you're supposed to do and America is a wonderful place. Some of that's true, but it ain't all true. Story_ID: 321989 Speaker 1: For those who choose to, to disentangle, you know, and look for what the real truth is in that, that caused a lot of consternation. It still does today. When you start to talk about discrimination in American society today, it still causes great discomfort. And if you're in a white board room, and I've been there and done it, and I don't care if you are one of the big foundations, it's still you can see the discomfort when you talk about unfairness, discrimination, prejudice. It makes people really uneasy in American society. So, you can just imagine in 1975 what you're getting as blacks are just now getting entree to a lot of these, these opportunities. A friend of mine came here to Atlanta [Georgia] and had worked for Sam Massell and he had gone to one of these accelerated programs to get blacks into urban government because you know blacks were exercising political power and taking over like in Atlanta, Maynard [Maynard Jackson] succeeds Sam Massell. So, those cities are trying to get ready, they can see what's happening, that the blacks are going to be the leaders and people like my friend are gonna have some new opportunities, but not everybody was gonna be in Atlanta working for a black mayor and a lot of those kids ended up working in situations that were still dominated by whites and had some tough road, roads to hoe. And for those who persisted in wanting to talk about the, the difficulties and to do that in a, in an assertive way what the research was showing that, that's gonna have a career impact for you. I mean, you're not gonna move as quickly as the other folks who started out with you upward. Now, for those African Americans who decide they're gonna greatly moderate the rhetoric and how they talk about what the realities are, they're gonna be doing better and those who just refuse to do at all are going to be doing not well at all and I think that was a large number of those who were dropping out, that they were saying this ain't for me, I gotta get into something else. This, I, I, I'm not going to adapt to this, and I'm not gonna adopt the kind of behaviors that are required for me to be successful. I think that's true today. It's true in corporate America. You see it with a lot of business school kids, black kids today. I see it with graduates of our business school at Clark Atlanta University [Atlanta, Georgia]. They gonna work for big corporations and you talk to 'em two, three, four years out and they're talking about their own business, that--getting your own business. And if you talk to 'em long enough, part of what's on their mind is the limitations they see in terms of getting to the top as a black man in these corporations and they see if you really want to be in charge that you gotta think really serious about having your own thing. If you wanna run it, then your chances are much better of doing that if you create your own business. So, a lot of our graduates and it's true, it's true at Wharton [Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. A lot of these guys coming out of the top business schools in the country and you talk to them, two or three years out and they're already struggling with whether they or where they can start their own thing. So, those issues are still there, and that's what the research showed. Now, if my dad [Walter Broadnax] had been alive and I had talked about this in not a big fancy way with all the statistics, he'd have looked at me and said, "You needed to do all that research to find that out? Boy, everybody knows that." I mean that's what he would have said. I laughed and thought about it, and my mother [Mary Cotton Broadnax] too. I never talked to her about the, the dissertation that much, but she would have said to me if we'd have ever had a long conversation about it, the same thing. She'd say, "Son, it took all that for you to know that?" Story_ID: 321990 Speaker 1: It is one of the strange facts of, of academic life that, that we find ourselves doing research on black folks and we know the answer before we even get to it. I mean know a lot of times, sometimes you might be surprised about something. Was there anything that surprised you actually in this study? Speaker 2: Not really, not really at all. There was no surprise, which was the surprise 'cause I fully expected to find something quite different. And my sort of operating assumption going in was that the rhetoric was true. And you know you work on something long enough, I mean, really you get it, you, your mind, you know. And so that hypothesis that it's true became strong in my mind and so I was, if there was any surprise or disappointment, it was it ain't true that they're telling, what they're telling you ain't true, and that's a little unsettling too because that has implications for you. You're just finishing up a Ph.D. and these universities are saying the same thing and this research says it ain't true, so now you getting ready to go on the job market and these guys--I'm already talking to universities now about job, oh really I want you here at the University of California. What can we do? We know we're gonna have to pay you more and we have to give you this and do that and we're willing to do that and if you were white I'd only pay you twelve thousand dollars a year, but because you black we're gonna pay you fourteen thousand and this. And I'm sitting here having done this dissertation saying you know, hmm and that's right and even when I was at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], my dean told me I was making so much more money because I was black, and I believed it. And we got a new person in the dean's office, a white woman, and I said to her when I took over the innovations program that was Ford [Ford Foundation, New York, New York] funded, that the dean wanted to give me a raise. And of course I was trying to be circumspect and, and level-headed about what I was going to ask for and so I went to, her name was Betsy Reveal, and I went to Betsy with my little note and I said well Betsy I think I should have--and I'll never forget the number--I said $58,000 and that would be a 20 percent increase for me and I don't think I said wow a 20 percent increase. I said, but I don't wanna overreach and I, I know you know the numbers and I don't know--I don't wanna know other people's salary just tell me if that's overreaching and her face turned kind of red and she leaned back in her chair, and she had worked for [HistoryMaker] Marion Barry in Washington, D.C., so she, she had her black credentials. She looked at me she said, (making sounds), she said, "My friend you don't have to worry about being odd asking for that. She said, "Let me just put it this way: you're not above the fifty percentile in the ranking in salaries at this school." And the dean is telling me that I'm one of the highest paid people there, and she's telling me I'm on the lowest, 'cause if you drew the line at 50 percent, the fifty percentile I'm below, not above, and I'm sure I'm not in the ninety-ninth percentile or something like that. I was crushed. Now, here I'm supposed to be this very sophisticated guy, I'm doing it again, the rhetoric has run out, I hear it and I believe it-and I operated according--. She told me you go back and change your request. She said I'm not gonna tell you what to ask for, but you go change it. And so I put in my request to the dean--now, this will, this will make you really chuckle. I really ratcheted this baby up, and I couldn't sleep that night knowing what I was gonna ask for. So, instead of the fifty-eight [thousand] I now come back at sixty-five [thousand]. She looked at me. She said well I'm gonna go ahead and take this, but you should know you could have asked for a lot more. And I stood there and I just couldn't deal with it and I said sixty-five, I said Betsy you gotta help me, you know, you gotta tell me. She said I can't tell you, I can't tell you what to ask for, but you could have asked for a lot more. And so I went into this at sixty-five. When I got my raise at the end of the first year, it was a tremendous raise and I'm sure it was her on the dean's case saying you know dammit you, you, you gotta do something. And so I got this big raise that took me north of seventy [thousand], which, you know, you're talking about the, the middle 1980s now and even in Cambridge, Massachusetts, I mean seventy thousand dollars for an academic job, even a non-academic job, was a very good salary. So, but, somebody helping me out and the rhetoric was the same and it still wasn't true. It wasn't true, but it was a good, it was a good time for me at Harvard and I-- Speaker 1: This is in 19--Harvard? Speaker 2: Yeah, this is 19, the 1980s. I went there in 1981. Story_ID: 321991 Speaker 1: And another critical experience that again took me in a direction because it put me in a place that was a crossroads of the world for the, the rich and famous. I mean, you walk through the streets of Cambridge [Massachusetts] and Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and I mean you ran into the Dalai Lama, Billy Graham, [HistoryMaker] Julian Bond. I didn't, you didn't have to go off somewhere to--they came to you. And so I could go into the Kennedy School [John F. Kennedy School of Government, Cambridge, Massachusetts] on seven o'clock on a Tuesday night and Julian Bond is lecturing and a thousand people sitting there listening, get to meet him, and have punch and go home, go to bed. I didn't have to go to Atlanta [Georgia] or somewhere to hear him; and Billy Graham came and stayed three days and Golda Meir came, prime minister of Is [Israel]--and it just went on and on and on. That changed my life again. I never could have imagined presidents, former presidents came. Ronald Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] in the presidency and wanting to be there, wanting to be invited and to that environment, I mean just--Walter Mondale coming when he's running, spending two days and I'm sitting in the room with him and he's asking for our, my advice. It put me in a different group of people. These were the people who were entitled, who felt entitled to run the country and, and were running it. They were the sons and daughters of the people who ran Wall Street, the major banking concerns that controlled the economic life of this country, the cultural life of the country and I was meeting them and spending time with them and getting a chance to see how the other half lived and never dreaming that I would ever see that. I don't know if you know where Louisburg Square is in Boston [Massachusetts], but it's the wealthiest enclave in Boston. The Kennedys had that, that, Senator Kennedy [Edward M. Kennedy] has his house in Louisburg Square and those houses was just off the scale in terms of their value and so forth and to be invited to, to, to parties in Louisburg Square was quite a thrill for my, my current wife [Angel Wheelock Broadnax] and I, but we were married at this point, my present wife, and I remember our sort of pinching each other. It was like my first wife and I when we would saying like you know gosh when we drove into Syracuse, New York, like I'd never thought we'd be in New York and my current wife and I going to this party in Louisburg Square saying two black folks invited to this party in Louisburg Square and it turns out we were the only two black folks at this party with all these very liberal people, but we were the only two blacks that were invited to the party. But, it really was an education for me. I never in my wildest dreams expected to be at Harvard, certainly as a teacher and directing a major national program [Innovations in State and Local Government program]. Story_ID: 321992 Speaker 1: --You were the founding director of the-- Speaker 2: Right. The innovations-- Speaker 1: --Innovations in State and Local Government program. Speaker 2: Right and I was a lecturer in public policy, so I taught and ran this program. So, to be in the well teaching at the Kennedy School [John F. Kennedy School of Government, Cambridge, Massachusetts] there were days when I would have these flashes of what you and I have been talking about that I was this kid from South Central Kansas who, you know, didn't even have a serious date in high school and now I'm teaching the, quote, best and brightest. And of course when the, you know, when black folks came through the programs, I mean, it was just--these were love ends, right. These are folks, black people who were coming to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] who probably would have never paid me any attention if they'd met me somewhere else. But, meeting me there, I mean, you just embraced each other. I mean I knew that every black student almost that saw me was gonna come to my office within the next week. So, if I met some kid in the hallway on Monday I knew by Friday they were gonna be in my office and so it just changed. So almost every black person that came there you really got to know them and there were a few. And every famous black--like Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson]. When Jesse Jackson came, I got a chance to meet Jesse, be with him in a room, talk to him, and he treated me like we were old friends. But, it was, it was the context. If I'd met him in Atlanta [Georgia], he'd been nice and cordial, but we would have been, I wouldn't have been treated like old friends, but in Cambridge [Massachusetts], "Brother Broadnax [HistoryMaker Walter Broadnax] I'm glad to see you here. How are things going? How they treating you here?" And of course this gives you cache, but also makes the point and does, you, you really bond with those folks that are coming. So, it was a great experience, but it put me on another track and positioned me to get invited to join the Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] administration. Story_ID: 321993 Speaker 1: So when did this happen and when did you join the Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] administration? Speaker 2: I had worked on the transition in '92 [1992] right after the election and headed up one of the transition teams working for Vernon Jordan [HistoryMaker Vernon E. Jordan, Jr.] and Alexa, [HistoryMaker] Alexis Herman who were running the Clinton transition when the--the folklore was, you know, he and Al Gore were running, I mean they were seriously running--well were, Vernon Jordan and Alexis Herman were running the transition. And Vernon and Alexis liked my work to be quite frank and bought me to the attention of the president-elect and it resulted in the president-elect offering me a series of jobs in the administration. The first interest area was they asked me would I be interested in being the head of the [U.S.] Office of Personnel Management, and I demurred, I didn't really want to do that and then they asked me about a couple of other things and then they said, deputy secretary of the [U.S.] Department of Health and Human Services and that was a mighty big job and a mighty big opportunity and I ended up saying yes and so I joined the administration. And it turned out there were a lot of black folks. I mean, we were just, we were amazed when we found out how many of us that Clinton had, was appointing or had appointed. In fact, we had a big party in Washington [D.C.]; I don't know maybe you were there. There were 250 or something like that of black appointees, and we had this big party and got to know each other, you know, 'cause you know we're all over and we didn't all know each other, but it was a tremendous experience and seeing African Americans like [HistoryMaker] Hazel O'Leary heading up big government departments, I mean, she was the secretary of energy. It was just an incredible time. And of course, this president was taking it to another level. I mean, one more time I'd live long enough to see a president talking about what I as a black man was also entitled to, that it was right and in fact you should have to explain my absence from the policy table if I were not there, that it was inappropriate for me not to be there. Well, that really changes the, the paradigm, 'cause I started on this journey where you were trying to make the case for being in the room. And the argument was well you know I don't know what y'all arguing about, you know, you don't have to be in the room, we'll take good care of you to where you got the president saying we have to explain ourselves if they're not in the room. You, General Electric, have to explain yourself if you don't have any black executives, and he's pushing that. So, it was a great, it was a heady time, but you know the country was clearly getting ready to go through another change and so it was ready to elect Bill Clinton, but quickly it gave him a congress that was a Republican congress that was now challenging all that and so where I got on the train now is coming back to visit. Story_ID: 321994 Speaker 1: What do you blacks think you're entitled to? You're not being discriminated against, your problems are of your own making. I mean you guys gotta learn to appreciate education and well if you went to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] you obviously don't know as much as the white kid who went, 'cause you're affirmative action and no matter how good you are you're still not as good. I mean, all of this sort of stuff now comes back and you know people my age remember it. I mean, it's where you got on the train that you're not as good, and so that argument popped up again and that's where we are today. I mean, we're having this debate all over again about whether we should be at the table, whether we should be in charge, whether we should be in college, whether we should have a nice home, whether we can, should have a nice car. That--it--I won't say we've gone full circle 'cause we're higher I think on the chart in terms--as a race. I think we have moved as a group to a higher level, but the old questions are back and, and what, and now we're calling it entitlement, you know, should blacks feel that they're entitled and it's an interesting concept. Should we feel we're entitled to the same thing that white people feel they're entitled to? I mean, that's what the question really is. So, it's been good. I don't fully, I don't fully understand it myself and to be quite frank when I try to look down the road from where we are now it's hard for me to see because if you ask me and press me hard the world I see thirty-five, forty years from now I have to say we'll still be suffering from a substantial amount of racial separateness or racial distinction. I mean you can use a lot of words, but I guess the dream that Dr. King [Revered Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] had about if he was talking about it, and I'm not sure he was talking about this, but if he was talking about a colorless world and there are a lot of people who try to say that's what he was talking about where color didn't matter. I don't think that's what he was talking about. I think he was talking about us raising the, the intercourse or discourse to a higher level. It wasn't that we were gonna lose our color. In fact, I think he would argue that it's probably not wise to do that and you don't have to do that and can still have this wonderful new world of interaction, well that's not the driving principle in terms of how we do business, but anyway it's, it's going to be important. I think I see it as being extremely important a generation or two from now, and, and maybe the country will never fully wrestle it to the ground. I think the interesting question is whether it is possible for African Americans to realize their full potential in this society without us wrestling the, the, the racial question fully to the ground. Can we still move ahead and realize our full potential without having done that, and I don't know the answer to that. Story_ID: 321995 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Sir, could you give us your full name? Speaker 2: Walter Doyce Broadnax [HistoryMaker Walter Broadnax]. Speaker 1: And what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today is August the 26th, 2005. Speaker 1: And we're in Atlanta, Georgia, correct? Speaker 2: That is correct. Speaker 1: And we're following up to finish an interview we started just a couple of days ago. Speaker 2: That is correct also. Story_ID: 321996 Speaker 1: All right, and before we pick up before we left off, we're gonna go back and pick up a couple of items we missed. If you could touch upon your experiences in New York City [New York, New York] working for Mayor Cuomo [Mario Cuomo] and talk about the South African project, the Harvard South African project [Harvard South Africa Program] that you worked in conjunction with Howard University [sic. Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] Speaker 2: Terrific. Well yeah I, I was on the faculty and director of the Innovations in State and Local Government program at Harvard and was asked by Mario Cuomo in 1987 to come to New York State and become president of the New York State Civil Service Commission. The New York State Civil Service Commission handles all the personnel matters for, for state government in New York and the civil service system is driven by examinations. So, it was a big merit-based system and so we gave thousands of examinations every year to determine who was going to get, who the people were going to be be selected for various public jobs. But I also had a major role in labor relations and labor negotiations and Cuomo asked me to come to reform the New York State Civil Service system and make it the most modern system in the United States and that was exciting to me, a guy who was academic and teaching this subject matter at Harvard to go to New York and have the resources to do it. Got there, I was there for a few months. The country went into recession. New York State government ran out of money, and I ended up being the largest layoff czar in the history of the State of New York. We ended up laying over, laying off something in excess of thirty thousand people because the state was in his massive recession. We didn't have the tax revenues and so I went there to do one thing and ended up doing another. And I'll tell you it was a really difficult time because New York State is a diverse state and the way you make it work is that you're able to take care of all these diverse interests, and the state found itself in a position where it couldn't take care of all these groups. And on top of that, that I was the governor's face on--now also taking people's jobs away from them. So, it wasn't a very pleasant experience. God, I learned a lot and I said when I was leaving after three years of that, Lord I hope I never have to do this again. So, that was the New York State. I mean, it almost was just a single focus experience that, that grew out of going there to do something very different. Story_ID: 321997 Speaker 1: We skipped over one thing, University of Rochester [Rochester, New York], department of public policy you were, you were the head of that department, right? Speaker 2: Well, I was the head of the Center for Governmental Research-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --in Rochester [New York], and I was a professor in the public policy program at the University of Rochester. And this was a think tank that I was president of in Rochester, and what it did was analytic work for public sector organizations and for private businesses and it was an exciting and, and fun experience, I mean providing policy advice to business groups and businessmen and to governmental leaders, and we did it for a fee, and it was a very successful enterprise. And during my time there we were able to expand the scope of influence of this organization from just being Rochester-focused to becoming an organization that had a lot of influence sort of in the east. We developed an office in New York City [New York, New York] and did a lot of work for David Dinkins [HistoryMaker David N. Dinkins] when he was mayor there, did a lot of work for the United, United Way of New York City. So, it was a really good and interesting experience, but much narrower than, than a lot of things that I had done before, but, but it was a high impact experience as well. Story_ID: 321998 Speaker 1: In 1992, you were involved in the Harvard South Africa Program and, which had something to do with Howard University [sic.] as well. Could you explain what that--? Speaker 2: Well, the real connection again was Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and while I was in Rochester [New York] they say once you've been connected with Harvard you never get away, and they've proven that in my life. They periodically pop up and have something on their mind and in this particular case they had gotten involved with Nelson Mandela who had every reason to believe and understand that he was going to become president of South Africa. So, one of his needs was to begin to put together a government and a way to bring the white exiting government, if you will, and the black entering government together. So, Harvard had stepped forward and said they would be interested in helping with this, so we went to South Africa for about a two week or so period of time and worked with the black and the white government at the University of Cape Town [Cape Town, South Africa] to put together methodologies for bringing the two parties together and a methodology for beginning to fill critical governmental positions with black South Africans that had been previously held by white South Africans. It was an extremely exciting experience for me. The Zulus and their participation in this was particularly edifying, and I think I can say this that the Zulus kept coming back to why don't we just start killing each other. I don't mean to be pejorative, but their, their frustration level with assertive political negotiation was palpable. I mean-- Speaker 1: Now just to set the stage for this, the Zulus were not involved in ANC [African National Congress]. They were basically cozy with the old South African government there towards the end and when ANC took control the Zulus were not--though powerful, were not on the inside of the-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --what was going on. They were kind of outside as they had really fought against the resurgence of ANC and the, so-- Speaker 2: Right, but a real frustration with this sort of put together this new cobbled together where ANC is going to be as you say, it's ANC that you're really talking about. I call it the black South African government, and the Zulus had not a high interest in sort of helping facilitate this thing. And that was interesting for me, I mean, to actually witness this because my orientation is an African American orientation, right so they were all black and you have to sort of jog your brain and say yeah they're all black, but they have different interests. Speaker 1: It was about power. Speaker 2: It was about power, that's right. Story_ID: 321999 Speaker 1: But, we did two weeks of this and I never sort of really knew where it was going to go and I must say at the time we were doing it, it was not crystal clear that Mandela [Nelson Mandela] was going to, he and the de Klerk [F.W. de Klerk] were going to be able to pull this thing off. I mean it, it is still one of the most I think outstanding achievements in, in modern day politics that you can reference that these two men virtually did the impossible, and I still often think of it when you think about difficult things to do, where you got, you know, white society or a white government dedicated to the continued oppression of blacks and you got blacks who have experienced nothing for several hundred years but oppression and death from whites and to be able to sort of put that in a place to where you can come together and begin to orchestrate, the, the, the transference of power in a bloodless way from white to black and that that be believable and credible on both sides. I mean, to get enough trust built up to do that is just phenom- Mandela was central to that, but I think de Klerk deserves a lot of credit. I mean, I think this guy controlled a real fringe element in, in the white world that wanted to take up arms. I mean, there's no doubt about it that they believed the solutions that was they would just go to war again with the black South Africans, and I think he was instrumental in keeping that from, from happening. But, it was a very interesting time. The other was I realized as I moved around in society that the white South African government, which was still in power so to speak, couldn't really distinguish me from the other South Africans and so even though I was an American, you know, walking around thinking I'm here as an observer and participant in this and helping, but I'm not really part of this, they couldn't tell the difference. So, as I walked down the street or went shopping or went to the dentist or whatever I just looked like another South African to them, and boy that was a real, I mean, all of a sudden you realize because you're starting to become a part of the culture you realize that your fate is the same fate as the people you're working with and boy that changes your perspective a lot and you're standing back in a sort of objective posture, gonna help from a distance and yourself is on the line. A policeman stopped me one morning when I was out for a jog and he had his machine gun and everything and I had my stocking hat on, which made me look like a South African who had ridden a bus to come into Cape Town [South Africa] to work for the day 'cause a lot of them wore stocking hats like I had on, and the guy stopped me and after he talked to me a couple of minutes I think he realized that I was an American. But, the point was that he had the machine gun pointed at me and until he sort of worked all this through, I was just another South African who he had asked to explain himself and why was I in the part of the city that I was in. And I had run into a fairly affluent part of Cape Town and it was not a place where I guess blacks usually went without an express destination in mind and the police officer knowing what that was. So, it was really quite an experience, but we were there for over a couple of weeks and then there was some residual activity after we came back and one of the things I always talk about, I'd love to get back there and, and see--to experience for a week or two what South Africa is like now after some years of the changeover in government. It's one of the great experiments I think in government and politics, public policy, certainly in the 20th century and maybe the last couple of centuries. Speaker 2: Did you have any experience with any of the South African leaders like Mandela or even, even de Klerk, or Bishop Tutu [Desmond Tutu] or any of those? Speaker 1: Met, met Bishop Tutu, met Mr. Mandela, but they were not up and close connected to this. I mean, it was of interest to them, but they were not close end players and there were people who were their surrogates that, that we dealt with on a daily basis and they weren't the big names that, that we see you know in the press and so forth. A good number of them were people who were academically trained who had recently come from Europe back to South Africa, so you had a lot of people from Great Britain who had come back and other European locations, some the U.S. Story_ID: 322000 Speaker 1: Last time we left off with you being called in and we talked about your, you being par, part of the Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] transition team which was pulled together by Vernon Jordan [HistoryMaker Vernon E. Jordan, Jr.] and [HistoryMaker] Alexis Herman and, and actually being, being offered a job-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --by the Clinton administration. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And so we'll try to pick up where we left off and you being offered, offered the job. Speaker 2: Okay. Yeah, I think as I said before-- Speaker 1: That's okay it's a stamp. Speaker 2: --that, that Vernon Jordan had been running the transition team. Alexis Herman was sort of his deputy, running the transition and they had developed some confidence in me and it resulted in me being offered a very interesting job as the deputy secretary at Health and Human Services [U.S. Department of Health and Human Services]. I ended up taking the job and it was, it was probably without a doubt, I mean, an overwhelmingly exciting time. I mean you had healthcare reform on the table, welfare reform on the table, I mean two massive problematic areas that the president had promised we're gonna reform. You know, they were gonna change healthcare in this country, how it was, how it was delivered, how we're gonna pay for it, save money, increase access to poor people, and on welfare reform we were gonna take it such that, you know, people could get jobs and get off of welfare and turn welfare into something that would be very small and only for the most, the most, I wouldn't say most destitute, but for people who that there was absolutely no other option for them in terms of survival, which would be welfare and that, those were radical changes. And so we spent a lot of time working on policy proposals and gave me a real opportunity to travel around the country and meet with a lot of people. Story_ID: 322001 Speaker 1: But, one of the real insights in all of this for me goes back to the blackness theme that it became quickly obvious to me that my value to the administration and the president [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] had to do more than anything with my credibility with other people that looked like me, that it was not that I could be a convincing, credible person even in diverse audiences, I mean that was okay, but the real expectation, the real payoff was that I would be credible with African Americans, African American leaders, African American legislators, mayors, those people that I would be credible with in terms of pushing the president's agenda. And for a guy who's trained in political science and public policy you would think gosh well you, obviously you, you knew that right; well maybe I knew it, but I was experiencing it at such a level if you understand what I mean, I was, even I was learning something as this played out and it wasn't grossly racist or anything, but you quickly start to notice. I mean, the groups that you're going out to talk to, the kind of questions you're responding to, the kind of questions the president is asking you as he's thinking about these things it had to do with the 35 million or so people in the country who look like you and the presumption is that you're gonna be better able to articulate those interests and have credibility with those folks as we put this thing together. And that was true and I for probably the first time not only understood this from a practical point of view that this was the way you're gonna get something done, but I just had tremendous pride in who I was and, and what I was doing and what it represented in the context of this, if you understand what I mean. I mean, I didn't take it as an offense that this was the role. I took it as a badge of honor, which was a different thing. It wasn't that I was being pushed off into a corner, but that I was happy to bring to the table in a serious way the concerns of these folks that were African Americans like I was, and that was a change for me in my development 'cause if you remember in the Civil Rights Movement when we were talking about we're gonna broaden these vistas, we're gonna, we will no longer have this narrow sort of place in American society. Well, it was broader, but it taught me, I mean one I guess the fundamental tenets of pluralism that, that you know you are who you are fundamentally, and that's important in American society and that's a constant that, that, that is true for not only our group, but all the groups. I mean, at some level it's important to Italian Americans issues that are germane to Italian Americans. They may not be important to Polish Americans or Jewish Americans; they're important to Italian Americans and this particular case there were some issues clearly important to African Americans and I was proud as I could be to be a part of trying to help shape and do something about those. So, that was kind of a small epiphany. Maybe it was a big epiphany, but, but for me. But that was a great time with the president. But, that, that work is just excruciating difficult. It is 24/7. You are hardly ever home. People ask why do people stop doing it, because if you want a life behind being in that job, then you've gotta chose at some point to save your marriage, save your family, and go on and do something else that's a little more normal. You can't be on an airplane and out of town 95 percent of the time and be a successful husband, father, you know, whatever and so people do it and then they get out and they go do something else. But, I'm glad to have been chosen and again I got chosen, truth of the matter is because Vernon Jordan [HistoryMaker Vernon E. Jordan, Jr.] and Ron Brown were there and [HistoryMaker] Alexis Herman and that's why I got chosen. Speaker 2: Okay, all right now you were there until what time? Speaker 1: Ninety-six [1996]. I served from, I, I transitioned in '92 [1992] and then was confirmed by the [U.S.] Senate in '93 [1993] and worked from '93 [1993], March of ninety--February of '93 [1993] to May of '96 [1996]. Story_ID: 322002 Speaker 1: What would you consider to be your major accomplishment there [U.S. Department of Health and Human Services]? Speaker 2: Boy, that we tried hard. We, we tried with healthcare reform and we didn't get it done, but I think it made the country really conscious of what the issues are again and I think as this country now is facing massive issues regarding to the quality and cost of healthcare a lot of the lessons that the Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] administration learned and, and taught the political leadership I think are gonna be of value. On welfare reform, I mean, we actually got it done. For better or for worse, the welfare system in the United States has been changed, and a lot of people who were on welfare actually are working today. They're not neurosurgeons necessarily, but they go to work every day, their kids see them going to work. There are some educational opportunities there for them to work themselves up in the, in the world of employment and so I think at the end of the day that even though I had some concerns about welfare reform, that the president was absolutely right. I mean look at this country and what it is, that you're never going to achieve the kind of dignity you want in this country without having a job. I mean, if you're living on what we call the dole, that you're just not going to have the dignity and self-respect and the respect of others that you want and so you have to moved on and so this forced the system to move people on into jobs. Story_ID: 322003 Speaker 1: --I was saying that there's an interesting pattern in my life and career that I will go off and work in government and the practical word for a while, often returning to the university and what I've been able to do is that the experiences that I've accumulated in the, in the world of practice I've been able to take those back to the classroom and in this case I went to the University of Maryland [College Park, Maryland] to teach graduate students primarily in, at the School of Public Affairs [School of Public Policy] where you're training people for professional roles in public policy, public management in the country. So, I went there to, to teach and do research. So, I became the chairman of the social policy program. I was director of the Bureau of Governmental Research [Institute for Governmental Service and Research], and I was a full professor teaching public policy and management courses. It was a great time there. On my first year back, I was chosen teacher of the year and I like kids and I think kids like me and teaching is just a great experience, a great way of connecting with people and you're blessed because each spring you get to see some of the fruits of your labor. I mean, there's a graduation. Something happens to give you some reinforcement for all the work that you've put in. So, it was a great time at Maryland, but I found myself being restless after a year and a half. I mean, there wasn't enough hurly burly for me, I mean, it's too sane a life. I mean, it's a very sane, predictable existence. My wife [Angel Wheelock Broadnax] knew exactly when I was going to work. She knew exactly when I was coming home. I mean, there weren't many surprises, and I think that I'm sort of an excitement junky at some level and so the deanship at American University [Washington, D.C.] was sort of put in front of my face, and I found myself being extremely interested in, in becoming a dean, which is a real change from being a professor. Speaker 2: So just to catch up chronologically from '96 [1996] to '99 [1999] you were at University of Maryland? Speaker 1: Right. Story_ID: 322004 Speaker 1: Then in 1999 you became the dean and professor of public administration in the School of Public Affairs at American University [Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 2: That's right. And so I went through the interview process and so forth and met with faculty and everything and they decided I should come. People had said to me very gently you know you would be the first dean of the School of Public Affairs at American University that was an African American. What people didn't say was that I'd be the first dean of anything at American University and the first African American that was coming to the place as a tenured full professor and dean. Now if somebody had told me that it would have me, my ears would have perked up a little bit, but probably not enough to really be sort of ready for what that would indicate to the folks who were about the receive me and, and what it would mean for my time there. But, it was a good time all things said, but the matter of--again of race and one of the things I've said during this whole interview is that the, the bright line of race has been in my life, I mean, it, it's just there, you can't get it out of the equation. To try to minimize the importance of race through my life is, is heresy, that you, you start to explain something so radically different than what the truth of the experience has been and race was extremely important in my existence and work at American University. It didn't dominate everything, but it was present in everything that I did. I--one was just getting the trust of the faculty and to have a black man with even all the experiences and training that I'd had and having them to be able to come to a place where they could trust me to be their dean; this is leading an academic enterprise, there's nothing about the African American experience that says to the world that if you look like [HistoryMaker] Walter Broadnax people should be able to expect that you could lead a high-powered intellectual enterprise. So, for them, for the white faculty to get themselves to a place in their minds where they seriously could embrace that was not an easy thing. But, I think we, we fundamentally were able to get that done, but thank God I was of the age and experience that I was when I took it on. If I'd a done it as a younger man it could have turned out to be a not very good experience in a lot of ways. Story_ID: 322005 Speaker 1: So, you're at American University [Washington, D.C.], dean [at the School of Public Affairs]. Now you were dean there until 2002-- Speaker 2: Two [2002], yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Are there any stories from American University that you can tell us before we move on to Atlanta Clark [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 2: Probably--the one I guess I would tell that fits with what I was saying about the faculty and the growth that was required in terms of our relationship and how important it was that it develop. I had gone to the political science department for a departmental meeting earlier in my deanship--the political science department was, is a part of the School of Public Affairs at American University, and they were having a department meeting and of course it was not unusual for the dean to be invited to the department meeting and I was a new dean and so I was invited there and there were about thirty faculty members in the department of political science, a big department, and I went. And it was one of the most obstreperous, fractious, just yelling and screaming and accusations being hurled, people saying to me you know I hadn't made plain what my agenda was and you know that I was up to probably something nefarious. And one white female faculty member said yeah you probably intend to bring on your black buddies and your, you know the next thing we know is that you know the place is going to be black and me trying to handle it with humor at first and I said you know I don't know enough black Ph.D.'s in political science across the country and I know most of them. There are not enough of them to take over all the jobs at American University for political science. This did not put that to rest. I mean people had convinced themselves, even though I'd been hired, that I was to be worried about because now we're gonna test what does it mean to have a black man who is our leader, that it's okay to say yeah I'm up for that, I can vote for that, and then the guy arrives and now it's like oh my God this doesn't look right and I have never had this experience and does he know what he's doing. One young kid said to me, young political scientist, he said, "You know Dr. Broadnax [HistoryMaker Walter Broadnax] what we're really saying is that we don't know if we can trust you." And I thanked him. I said this young man has finally said what the issue is; it's all a matter of trust. But, what, what a hard thing to, you know, to now acquire. I mean to have someone's trust is a, is a big thing, to say yeah I, I believe even though everything I've learned in my whole life, I have been taught about folks who look like you, I'm gonna overcome that so that I can trust you enough that I can be at least relatively comfortable with you being my leader. I mean, that's a big deal, and you think about that in reverse in terms of what African Americans have had to deal with. The number of leaders, think about the president of the United States, the number of presidents across our history where African Americans can say I really trust the president, that I believe he is really representing my issues and concerns and push come to shove he's not gonna let me down. And I don't think there are many presidents where we as a people have been able to say that, but I learned so vividly in this job how important that is and how bereft we have been of having that in our interaction with the leadership that we've had to depend on and it was just an incredibly difficult thing to do. I mean, people did lots of wild things. I had one female faculty member come in my office and scare me to death. She threw herself on the floor like a small child and was kicking and screaming and so here I've got this white female in her late forties lying on the floor in the dean's office and I didn't know quite what to do to, sort of it scared me because I thought the last thing I need is for someone to come here and I got this six foot white woman lying on my floor kicking her heels up, you know, so her legs and stuff are exposed, I mean she's just like a child having a temper tantrum. She's kicking and pounding and doing all this and actually passed out, and my assistant who was black who was in the office just outside my door I went to her and said, some, you know, get somebody up here we need a witness. Instead of saying we need a doctor, I said we need a witness (laughter). We haven't done anything to this woman. And we had some people come over and we got her to the infirmary and you know I talked to her husband, I thought I should do that myself, so that no one was trying to interpret what was going on here. And I laughed about it later and so did she, but that's the level of insanity. Story_ID: 322006 Speaker 1: What was it? What was it that caused her to do that? Speaker 2: Again, unhappiness with me, fear that I wasn't gonna support her with no evidence that I wasn't, that I was gonna undermine her research, that I wasn't going to continue to finance it and she came to my office with all these conclusions. She didn't come in and say Walter [HistoryMaker Walter Broadnax] I just want to know are you gonna support this research? I've been working on it for five years, the other dean did and I need to know if you're gonna support me, and I would have been able to quickly tell her yes you're one of the leading research scholars in this university [American University, Washington, D.C.], I'm gonna support you, but I didn't get a chance to do that. She came and said you're not gonna support me, I know you're not. Speaker 1: And just flipped out. Speaker 2: And flipped out. And of course I went into the sort of this, you know, this almost Muhammad Ali playing in a rope a dope 'cause I don't know where you're coming from. I've tried to tell you I'm on your side and you get crazy. I don't have another dance step right now and so I'm now watching you 'cause I don't know what to tell you. If I basically give you what I think you came for, and then you start turning blue and the next thing I know you're on the floor, that's a little puzzling and frightening. And she laughed about it with me later, but it was not a laughing matter at that time. It was very frightening, and I think that was the--I'll never forget that afternoon as long as I live. I mean, this six foot tall white woman, a distinguished political scientist lying on my floor kicking, turning blue, pounding the carpet yelling and screaming like a two-year-old; and you deal with it. Speaker 1: I guess this black presence in academia can really boost the fear level. Speaker 2: It's absolutely right, the fear--and it's true in other roles too where I think it doesn't get as up close and personal, but a part of the challenge that you have in terms of bringing the races together in meaningful interactions has to do with that very thing. I mean there is a lot of fear. There is a tremendous amount of distrust. There is a tremendous amount of, of not understanding. And when people don't understand--people will say to you I understand what it means to be black, they don't understand and so we need to know that. I think people need to get that. That as you take over these corporate chieftain jobs or high governmental posts whether it's elected or appointed, one of your challenges is gonna be is if you're black it is helping people who aren't black to come to a place that they can work with you in a way that's effective for both you and for them, and that typically isn't day one on the job. That isn't typically the first day you get there. You have to work that through until you can get to a place where they can work with you and interact with you and have enough confidence in this black man who most of those folks have grown up not having very high expectations of folks who look like you. And like one of my students said to me at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], you know I gotta tell you Walter [HistoryMaker Walter Broadnax] and he said you know I just gotta tell you Walter I'm from Louisiana and where I come from I'm not used to having folks like you stand up in front of me teaching me anything, so the reason I'm asking you all these questions today is I'm trying to figure out what is it that you can teach me. Making it plain as they say. Story_ID: 322007 Speaker 1: You said last time and I don't know if this was off camera or on camera, but you were saying that your friends questioned your decision to become the president of Atlanta Clark University [sic. Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia]. They said why would you leave a position where you're the dean at American University [Washington, D.C.] and you had a great answer for that. Could you tell us what, what was the answer? Speaker 2: Well, the answer is, is that for the first time in my life I had an opportunity to do something that clearly speaks to my past, my present, and my future, and it's bound up in these young people. In other places, there's been some of that, but it is not the overwhelming purpose of what's going on. Those campuses were not constructed for people who looked like me nor for my students who looked like me. They were constructed for, for other people and now people who look like me are there. So, the burden for them is trying to fit into this thing such that they can get some positive benefit from it. Being at Clark Atlanta University, my students don't have to try to fit in. This entire enterprise was structured to meet their needs, and that's a powerful thing. And to arm them as, as, with as many tools and weapons as you possibly can such that they can be successful in American society. So, it ain't about just getting the education, it's about getting the education such that you can be successful, so the belief and expectation that you're gonna go out there and succeed, you're gonna make a contribution, you're gonna be an important person in American society, in your community, in the nation, in the world, and for me and all the wonderful opportunities I had had heretofore, none of them looked like that. There was no cheering squad of folks saying, you know, let me teach you just one more thing Walter [HistoryMaker Walter Broadnax] before you go. It's the last thing that I know about this, but you should know it. In fact, when I was a graduate student to make my point a little plainer, I really got enamored with statistics and I was talking I guess by then my fourth course in statistics and so it was a very advanced course and I went to the professor, who had been a nice person and he was a young guy and this was back in the '70s [1970s], so he had real long hair and a Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey] Ph.D., I'll never forget it, and considered himself to be very liberal and all this here stuff, so I went to his office and I'd done my homework and it was before class and you know you're a doctoral student so you stop by and he had me in and we were talking and I said you know professor I said I just really wanna understand this, this, this formula a little bit better. I said you know I can use and manipulate the formula, but the, the derivative, what, you know, driving this formula help me understand better how this was derived? Where did this really come from? And we worked on it for a while and I was really advancing. I was starting to get it, and I'm asking more questions and finally he leaned back and said, "That's enough you don't need to know anymore." And I said, "Well what do you mean?" He said, "Hey Walter I don't want you to know as much as I do." Well, and I'll never forget that and I'm not sure I had the capacity to know as much as he knew, I mean, he had a Ph.D. in statistics. That wasn't what I was working toward, but I was interested in this and he was my teacher and I found it so foreign even with all the experiences I'd had to have a teacher say to you, you know enough. This is fine, you don't need to know anymore. Well, that wouldn't happen at Clark Atlanta and if it did I would be out trying to make sure that faculty member was no longer on my campus. That's verboten at Clark Atlanta. The deal is, is to teach 'em all you can and if they got questions and want to go further, then your job is to go as far as you can go with that student. So, that, that's the point I'm making and I hadn't had that experience. That isn't American University. It's not there for African American kids. There are about, I think, three percent of the student body at American University is African American and you were welcome, but it wasn't for you. You were a minority, a distinct minority, and there was some expectation you ought to express from time to time that you were happy to be there and you ought to behave in ways that demonstrated you were happy to be there and not to confront the system too often with a bunch of sort of side questions that didn't have to do with the main thrust of what that university was there to do. So, that's--I don't, you know I, but that's the, I mean I think that's the guts of it. That's what I think is one of the really important fundamental differences. Story_ID: 322008 Speaker 1: That's why I say the job at Clark Atlanta [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] is the most exciting and rewarding thing I've ever done of all these things we've talked about, and I don't mean to minimize their importance, but it's as almost as though I lived my life and learned the things I learned getting me ready to do this and to have the strength to do it because it's also a world where I have fewer resources than I'm accustomed to having and where the needs for excellence and productivity are extremely high, but in a world we don't have the kind of resources. I mean, a lot of places I've been like Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], well yeah okay I need some more resources, well chances are you are gonna get 'em; if that's your only problem, you're gonna get those. And where I am now you may have I motivation and determination and all of those things, but getting the resources is, is sometimes a real challenge. Speaker 2: Is that the biggest challenge being the president of, of a college like Atlanta Clark? Speaker 1: Not the biggest, but it's right up there. Resources is clearly, I would say it's certainly number two or number three if it's not number one. I think the other is and, and it's either number one or number two or number three is, is making sure that your student body really develops the confidence that they're gonna need to go out into the larger society and compete and it's back to what we were talking about before, I mean, confidence in your ability, confidence in yourself as you interact with the larger society, to be more plain with white society. To sit at the boardroom table where decisions are being made and feel confident about your perspective and what you bring, and that confidence has to be big enough to carry you when if the room is dominated by whites or people who don't look like you that your perspective may be rejected many times and you have to have enough confidence to not give up on your perspective just so that you feel like now that you belong to the group. And the interesting thing about that is most of us quickly learn what the right answer is, so as the discussion is going around the table and this consensus in--decisions starts to take shape, I mean, you have to be awfully stupid not to know where the thing now is going; you can see it. And you're confronted often with whether you wanna be a part of the group and a good guy, get patted on the back, oh you're a good guy, or you wanna be a real participant and make sure that the perspective you bring as an African American really is a part of that decision that is being made, and that can be jolting. Story_ID: 322009 Speaker 1: Now what I wanna--want I you to do and we ask other college presidents to do this to when we interview them can you give us a capsule you know of what, what Atlanta Clark University [sic. Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] is, how it got started, where it is now, and where you, where you're taking it? Speaker 2: Okay. Well, Clark Atlanta University came into being in 1988 as a result of the consolidation of Clark College [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia], which was founded in 1869 and Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia], which was a free-standing graduate school, which had been founded in 1865 immediately after the end of the Civil War and so those were two venerable academic institutions that came together in 1988 as one and became Clark Atlanta University. Atlanta U [Atlanta University] was the place for training African Americans, particularly in the sciences before desegregation. So, if you met an African American who had a Ph.D. in chemistry, physics, biology, mathematics the probability there was something like 78 percent that they were trained at Atlanta University. Clark College was a college, one of the colleges in the Atlanta University Center smaller, but it was there with Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] and Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] and you had Clark College and so it was a college and it was co-ed, where Morehouse was a men's school and Spelman's a women's school. Clark was the co-ed college at the AU Center [Atlanta University Center Consortium, Atlanta, Georgia]. Now, it's become large. I mean Clark College was only about one thousand students, I believe, when we had the consolidation. Atlanta University wasn't that big either, and now we are right at five thousand students, so we've grown. Our mission is to be excellent in higher education where Africa Americans are concerned such that they can make professional and intellectual contributions for themselves, their families, to their communities, to the nation, and to the world; it's just that simple. Story_ID: 322010 Speaker 1: The history of Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] includes W.E.B. Du Bois who was the-- I guess known was the preeminent scholar of the 20th century I guess in terms of the black community and maybe of the larger community as well-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --a great scholar. Speaker 2: Actually he's the father of social science virtually in this country because he was, he was a sociologist. He was an economist. He was a political scientist. The guy was--. Speaker 1: Historian, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah historian, I mean, he was a renaissance person, a statistician. He was doing empirically-based research in 1895 and the sociological and political science research in terms of the empirical base research and the larger academic community didn't begin until the 1950s, late 1950s. This guy was doing it in 1895. I mean he's just an incredible--I can't imagine what it would have been like to be in this man's presence, probably a little scary, although people said he was somewhat likeable, that he wasn't the sort of foreboding you know you sort of wonder what he'd be like. People say he was kind of likeable. You had to be on your toes, but he was, he was kind of a likeable character. I guess as he got older he was even more likeable, but you look at his work it's just, and the body of work, and he's clearly the founder of sociology. That it's, and I'll say that it's not Dr. Park [Robert E. Park] from the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], it is W.E.B. Du Bois. He's the father of modern sociology, no doubt about it. So, yeah an incredible scholar, awfully productive, and the number of people he trained and his students who went on to the finest universities in the world and made great contributions in the social sciences, I mean, just--and you had people of that, that ilk. Now, they weren't W.E.B. Du Bois, but it was that level of performance in scholarship that you had at Atlanta University before desegregation. Desegregation just sort of was like a bomb in the place because the big elite white institutions moved in immediately and started recruiting the top people and so Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] was greatly populated with professors from Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], Atlanta U, Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee]. I mean, they just went in, and I'm not being critical, but I'm saying when they said they were gonna bring black professors and you knew who the great black professors were, and they just went out and gave them bunches of money and had them come to Cambridge [Massachusetts] and other places and that's what they did and it left this place for a while reeling. I mean think about raids like that where in an academic year you lose half of an entire department. So, the place was reeling and the merger has helped and you know our graduate programs now stabilize at about a little more than 1,000 students, and we think that about 1,500 graduate students is about right for us and about 3,500 to 4,000 undergraduates. But, a lot of that is because graduate education is very expensive. Research is very expensive, I mean, the equipment and all the things you need. If you think about a chemistry lab or biology lab; we're doing a lot of prostate cancer research at Clark Atlanta. We have one of the leading prostate cancer researchers in the country heading up our cancer research in, initiative. But boy, it's millions and millions of dollars every year to make that thing go, so you have to pick your, pick your shots in terms of what you want to try to be excellent in because unlike an Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio] we don't have the resources to be, excuse me, that broad in terms of the things that we're gonna be excellent in. Story_ID: 322011 Speaker 1: There's still a need for black colleges [HBCUs], you're saying, today. I mean some people have questions on why do we have black colleges anymore, I don't, you know, I'm being, you know-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: But that's not an answer to that. Speaker 2: Sure, I start off by saying okay I'll play the game if you will agree that there's no need for Notre Dame [University of Notre Dame, South Bend, Indiana], then I'll be open to talking to you about whether there's a need for Clark Atlanta [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia]. If you're open to saying that Wellesley [Wellesley College, Wellesley, Massachusetts] should close its doors tomorrow, I'm open than to talking about no need for Clark Atlanta, but if you start to tell me you think there's a need for Wellesley or Catholic University in Washington D.C. or Notre Dame in South Bend [Indiana] or Wellesley, which is a fine women's college, then I think people start to understand that there may be a need for a Clark Atlanta. There is something extraordinary about the single sex, predominant race, predominant religion in the context of people being educated and so just like the Catholic church says that religion is important in one's life and that's all of one's life, I would agree and I would say that race is important in one's life, all of one's life. And the second thing I'd say about is, I mean, I often say to my students you know who come to Clark Atlanta yeah there's some people just like who go to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut], or University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] turns out it was a mistake for them and if you find out it's a mistake for you, then we want to work with you to find a school that works for you. Now, hopefully we don't have many kids that do that, but I don't want kids staying at Clark Atlanta if they discover that what they really need and want is a Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois] experience or a University of Chicago experience. But, for 98 percent of our kids who come, they sorted that out. They know they want to be educated in the context of something that looks like the black experience. Last night was our induction ceremony and I was talking to the students on the promenade and one young lady from Boston [Massachusetts], from Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts] was talking to me and I said how did you decide to leave Boston, I mean, you know the largest college population in the country resides in Boston, Massachusetts. So you leave this place where there's so many different kinds of colleges and universities to come to Clark Atlanta. We're glad to have you, but why did you come? She says it's the only place that I could be educated in the black experience. Story_ID: 322012 Speaker 1: What are your head projects at Clark Atlanta [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia]? Atlanta--the proper name is Atlanta Clark University right? Speaker 2: Clark Atlanta. Speaker 1: Clark Atlanta. Speaker 2: Clark Atlanta. Speaker 1: All right, okay. Speaker 2: Clark College first, which is Clark Atlanta University. Speaker 1: Which makes CAU the acronym? Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: Okay, so what are your pet projects, your favorite projects at this point? Speaker 2: Well, I think the thing that's really exciting is the five centers of excellence that we're working on, that because of our size you have to, you have to pick what you wanna be really most excellent at. It doesn't mean you don't want to strong general education curriculum, but there have to be things that where you're going to pick your bets, you gotta place your bets. And one of the things that we're extremely good at and I think we can be world class is in the world of mass communication arts. It's our largest major at the university, and so we're going to be investing about eight million dollars a year over the next four to five years in those five centers of excellence, but I picked mass media arts as just an example of one that has a lot of popularity, a lot of strength, and I think I can bring a lot of pride and visibility to the university. The other, just to give you the other end of the spectrums is in the, in the prostate cancer research and the development of, of cancer therapies and we have just brought in our first endowed professorship in the cancer research area and we're considered one of the top cancer research centers now in the southeastern United States and so I think we can become world class in prostate cancer research and obviously that's a big issue in the African American community. Speaker 1: Okay, in terms of mass communication arts is there like a television facility there? Speaker 2: We have our own TV station-- Speaker 1: Film? Speaker 2: --Channel 26 [sic. CAU-TV, Atlanta, Georgia] and we have our own radio station, 91.9 [WCLK Radio, Atlanta, Georgia], and we're--we carry NPR [National Public Radio], so you get some public radio through us. We're a public radio affiliate, and we're the best jazz station in the southeastern United States. Story_ID: 322013 Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: Well, I think the concern is that--maybe this happens to people as they get older--I'm concerned that broadly speaking African Americans are not concerned enough about the fact that it ain't over yet, that we haven't arrived yet and even though we have a lot of stuff, we're not there yet. The struggle has not been completed, and that worries me. Because I'm worried that people are relaxing and getting comfortable and saying well let's--don't worry about that, and that being that the struggle isn't over and that education is central to what we're gonna have to do to run this race. And when you look at the shortage, particularly of black men on university campuses, it becomes plain. Black women are doing terrific. I mean, it's kind of a scary situation, but my graduation last year I graduated nine hundred students [from Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] and 80 percent of those kids that walked across the stage were women and only 20 percent men. And they're getting degrees in computer science and physics, and they're going to medical school. You go to Morehouse School of Medicine [Atlanta, Georgia], it's 80 percent women, 80 percent women, so that's a crisis, that's a crisis, I mean, what's happening here? All these black women, high powered, going to law schools, getting MBAs [master's in business administration degree], getting master's degrees in social work, all this stuff and there're no men. Where are they? And I'm afraid I know where they are. I'm afraid I know where they are, and that's a crisis and, and we seem to be accepting this. We, we seem to be saying it's okay. I read stuff, even where ministers are saying well, you know, brothers are choosing to go to jail and you know too bad and you know, in fact I'm glad they're no longer in the community. Oh boy, I tell you if that's the answer, we're in for a real bumpy ride, I'm gonna tell you. And you can see that the, the, the sort of the beginnings of the problem on the campus, the social dynamic that you're wrestling with. You got all these women and you only got 20, 20 percent men. What will our society be like when you get that as the play? That's not a comfortable world. A lot of friction and conflict and stuff, and you know we don't need any more of that, nobody does. Speaker 1: Not gonna make for a lot of happy educated women. Speaker 2: Exactly right, very unhappy women and, and they will be very unhappy with the productivity of their relationships and the quality of those relationships. So, that's what I'm worried about and how do we do something about that and I'm deeply worried that we, we aren't, we aren't scared as a people. We aren't worried enough. We're just sort of kicking the can down the road as they say. Story_ID: 322014 Speaker 1: Tell me when you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently? Speaker 2: If I could do my life over, I would have, the one thing I do miss and I miss it even more now that I'm at Clark Atlanta [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] I had wanted to go to a black college [HBCU] when I was young. Now, my motives weren't good, but I did want to go to a black college, and I had told you earlier that I had not had dates in high school [Hoisington High School, Hoisington, Kansas] and so I was interested in being where some black women were to be quite honest with you, but having been at Clark Atlanta I do believe that I could have even been a stronger player and I think God blessed me, I think I was, I don't mean I became weak, but I think I could have been even stronger if I had that experience 'cause I think my confidence level earlier would have been greater, that I would have been firmer and clearer in my resolve about what was important to do and so I had to get there without the benefit of a lot of folks around me saying yeah Walter [HistoryMaker Walter Broadnax] that's, that's what you wanna do, but rather I had professors who said why do you wanna learn anymore, you know enough, so get out of here. And so I do often think about what would I have been like if I would have had a Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois], since I ended up being a social scientist? What would I have been like? What could I have brought to the world? Maybe not much more, but I think I could have been a stronger inside person sooner in terms of, of what I brought to the, to the field of play. Story_ID: 322015 Speaker 1: Likewise when we look back at your life what would you consider at this juncture to be your legacy? Speaker 2: If there is such a legacy, I think it is that I'm a guy who cared deeply about his race, who cared deeply about his country and tried to do something positive to, to make things better for both his race and his country and if you wanna extrapolate from that end of the world, but I've cared deeply about those things and I've devoted my life to trying to do something about that. And so if there is a legacy, it's the people that I touched along the way who are exponents of the work that I was trying to do to do something to make those two things better. Story_ID: 322016 Speaker 1: Well tell us about your family. What does your family consist of and--? Speaker 2: Well, it's small. I have a wife [Angel Wheelock Broadnax] and a daughter [Andrea Broadnax Green]. My wife is, has just retired. She will have been retired two years this September. She spent most of her working career as a statistician for the United States Bureau of Census [U.S. Census Bureau]. She went to a small Presbyterian college in, in the Midwest. Having grown up in Baton Rouge, Louisiana, she was among the real sort of first wave of African Americans that were really now going to integrated colleges, and so she was heavily recruited by a lot of the sort of small elite colleges to, to attend and she ended up going to Tarkio College [Tarkio, Missouri] in Missouri, which was a small Presbyterian school. Ans she was an outstanding statistician for the federal government for over thirty years. My daughter was born in 1965 as I told you, the year and close to the time that the Voting Rights Act was signed, and she lives in Corpus Christi, Texas, and she's an accountant. She graduated from Mount Holyoke College [South Hadley, Massachusetts] and I'll tell you I tried desperately to get her to go to Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] and she came close, but at the end of the day she decided she will go to Mount Holyoke. And I ask her at least once a year and like I said she will be forty in November, I said do you ever think about what it would have been like to go to Spelman? And even if she's thought about it, she's not gonna tell me yes at this point in her life, but she's got a good life. Her husband's an engineer who went to the University of Miami [Coral Gables, Florida]. He's of Haitian descent and that may be sort of tying the two things together. One of the ways we get the problem sort of partially solved for African Americans, a lot of black men at the university are of African descent, Caribbeans, Haitians and so forth, and my daughter ended up marrying a Haitian gentleman. He's a fine guy, but there was no sort of native born guy that had the tools and the kind of background that was attractive to her, and she married this guy. He's a good guy. I have no questions about that, but it did make me think one more time of all the guys she dated that none of the African American guys broke through and it turns out he was the one with the master's degree in engineering, I mean he looked more like her, right, so she had a master's degree in accounting, he had a master's degree in engineering, they got together and they have a home and so forth and so on so, but that's, that's it. I've often thought that it might have been nice to have, you know, like when you get old you're thinking what would it have been like if I had four or five kids, 'cause now you, you know you see you starting to slow down a little bit and you like to have 'em around, but it's been awfully fulfilling having a one of my, my daughter is just a joy. But, I'll be honest, I, I do sometimes think it would be great if I'd had four or five, and, you know, twenty grandchildren and all that sort of stuff. Story_ID: 322017 Speaker 1: The last question is similar to legacy, but a little different. Sir, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: I would like to be remembered as a guy who did his level best, that when you got involved with [HistoryMaker] Walter Broadnax on an initiative or on a project or you were trying to get something done that you expected that he would do his level best and your expectation was met. He did his level best. And so for me the, on the tombstone, here lies Walter Broadnax he tried his best and I think that's, that's it, that's who I am. Speaker 1: All right, well thank you sir. Speaker 2: Thank you. Story_ID: 322018 Speaker 1: That's my paternal grandmother [Caroline Broadnax], my father's mother. Speaker 2: What's her name? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: That's me when I was at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] at the Kennedy School [John F. Kennedy School of Government, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. Speaker 1: About what year was that? Speaker 2: Eighty in the early '80s [1980s], '81 [1981], '82 [1982], '83 [1983], maybe '84 [1984]. I was still smoking, so it was in that period, the Harvard Kennedy School teaching in the classroom. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Tell us about this one sir. Speaker 2: Oh right here. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Yeah. Speaker 2: Oh that's, that's Kennedy School of Government, Harvard. I'm teaching. Speaker 1: My mother, Mary Lee Broadnax [Mary Cotton Broadnax], her maiden name Cotton. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Very good, next. Speaker 1: My wife [Angel Wheelock Broadnax] and I, our wedding day 1984, Washington, D.C. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay good, next. Speaker 1: Dean of the School of Public Affairs at American University [Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Year? Speaker 1: I think it was, that was 2001, I believe. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Speaker 1: A reception for Ambassador Masekela [Barbara Masekela]. Oh no, that's my, I'm sorry that's my inaugural, the day of my inaugural as president of Clark Atlanta [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay next. Speaker 1: That's when I was president of the New York State Civil Service Commission in Albany [New York], and that looks like it's probably about 1988, '89 [1989]. Actually, it says 1987 down there on the bottom, so it's right, right after I was appointed. It was the first year of me, me in the job, first year. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Go ahead. Speaker 1: American University. That looks like it's probably about 2001, 2002 just before I left a year or so. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay next. Speaker 1: That's at the mansion, the president's mansion at Clark Atlanta University, my wife and I giving a reception. Speaker 2: My daughter [Andrea Broadnax Green], my wife, and myself at the Woodruff Art Center [Woodruff Arts Center] here in Atlanta [Georgia] the day of my inauguration. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Speaker 2: My wife, picture of her the first year we were married. So that is about 1984. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Good, next. Speaker 2: My daughter and her husband, Leonard [ph.], and that is ninety, I mean 2004. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Good, next. Speaker 2: That's my dad [Walter Broadnax] and a little piece of my mom, and this is nineteen--early 1940s I think probably about 1941. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Good, next. Speaker 2: This is my daughter and me at our house in Washington D.C., and it was about, the year was about 2000, 19- 2000, about 2000. Speaker 1: Me and my wife and--where the hell are we, we're, oh we're at the Kennedy School at Harvard, at Harvard University. So that was about, that was about 1985, '86 [1986]. Speaker 2: This is at Harvard too, running along the Charles River at, at Harvard between MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and, and Harvard, and I'm running with a couple of my colleagues on the faculty. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Very good, next. Speaker 2: That is--I'm in, I am in, I think, I think I'm in Mexico. That is from Mexico, and it's 1983 and we were advising the de la Madrid [Miguel de la Madrid] government. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): All right, next. Speaker 2: Yes, that's what it is, hey that's pretty good. That's another picture from that same time. Actually no it's, it's, it's Paraguay, not Mexico, Paraguay. I'm down advising the Paraguayan government. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Speaker 2: It's 1988, yeah it's a 1988 picture. Speaker 1: This--Mario Cuomo and it's a bill signing ceremony and we're in the governor's bill signing room in Albany. And you say it's 1988? Yeah. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Very good, next. Speaker 1: That's my high school [Hoisington High School, Hoisington, Kansas] graduation picture, 1962. I look just like that don't I? Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Next. Speaker 1: That's me with Al Gore and Donna Shalala and this looks like it's about 1994, maybe '95 [1995], Washington, D.C. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Speaker 1: President Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] and Mrs. Clinton [Hillary Rodham Clinton] and my wife and I; Christmas party in the White House [Washington, D.C.], probably 1994, I think. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Very good. Speaker 1: That's me when I'm president of the Center for Governmental Research in Rochester, New York, excuse me, that's probably about 1990, 1990, '91 [1991], '91 [1991] probably, 1991 I think. Speaker 2: What does it say up there? Speaker 1: Oh it says 1993. Oh, it's me on my--it's talking about me as I'm getting ready to go. I think it's 1993. So, yeah just before I left because it's February, right...