 Story_ID: 643435 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers, our videographer is Matthew Hickey, observing are Anna Diop and Eraka Bath. Ma'am, can you please state your full name for us and spell it, please? Speaker 2: Patricia Era Bath: P-A-T-R-I-C-I-A, Era, E-R-A, Bath, B-A-T-H [HistoryMaker Dr. Patricia Bath]. Speaker 1: Okay, your name is not that unusual, but is there a story behind your name at all? Speaker 2: Yes there is (laughter). My father [Rupert S.M. Bath] was born in Trinidad, and his ancestors were from West Africa, and the name Bath is a West African name from the region of Mali, Senegal and East Africa. Speaker 1: Okay, so, so it was Western Sudan, basically, Mali, Senegal, yeah. Speaker 2: Yes, as, as a matter of fact, the Bath family in Trinidad is part of the, the history. There's a street named after Bath, and there's a plaque adjacent to Fort George [Port of Spain, Trinidad and Tobago], and it indicates that the plaque commemorates the road and the fort built by my [paternal] great-great-grandfather, Jonas Mohammed Bath, who was a sultan. Speaker 1: Okay, so, so, when did he live? This would have been--it would have been-- Speaker 2: Eighteen hundreds [1800s]. Speaker 1: --eighteen--okay. Speaker 2: Eighteen hundreds [1800s]. Speaker 1: So he was a sultan from the Western Sudan, basically, who came over to-- Speaker 2: From West Africa, and part of my quest is to identify the specific area and village, you know, from whence, you know, he was taken, as a slave. Speaker 1: And he built the-- Speaker 2: He, when the slave ship arrived, they appointed him as the magistrate because he was already a leader in his native country, and he basically served as judge, high priest, mayor for the, the other slaves. Speaker 1: Okay. All right, all right, okay. And, ma'am, what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: I was born in New York City [New York, New York], November 4th, 1942. Speaker 1: And what is your occupation and title? Speaker 2: Physician, ophthalmologist. Speaker 1: Okay, are you still director of the--? Speaker 2: I'm the director of the national--of the American Institute for the Prevention of Blindness. Speaker 1: Okay, AIPB, okay. And what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today is November 29th, 2012. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: (Laughter) We're at the Clayton Library and Museum in Los Angeles [Mayme A. Clayton Library and Museum, Culver City, California]. Speaker 1: In a courtroom it appears (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: Right, okay. Story_ID: 643436 Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we ask as a warm up, and they only require a short answer. The first one is, do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Perhaps. Speaker 1: Okay, favorite color? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay (laughter). Speaker 2: Okay (laughter). Speaker 1: What is it, what is it? Speaker 2: My favorite color is purple-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and I would say I have a favorite category of food, which are fruits, fruits. Speaker 1: Okay, okay fruit and purple. Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Probably springtime. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: I would say Hawaii. Speaker 1: Okay, and do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: (Laughter) "(Gesture) Yes." Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So I'm going to ask about your family history. I'm going to ask about your-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): You were going to ask her what the favorite phrase is? Speaker 1: Oh, yes, oh. Speaker 2: Oh, but that was it. Speaker 1: That was it, yeah, that's what I thought. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, I thought it was, "Yes," yes, absolutely yes, right? Speaker 2: Yes I can, yes I will; you know, positive. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 643437 Speaker 1: I'm going to ask about your family history, as I said. I'm going to ask about your mother's side separate from your father's [Rupert S.M. Bath] side, so we can keep them straight (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Gladys Elliott Bath: G-L-A-D-Y-S, E-L-L-I-O-T-T, B-A-T-H. Speaker 1: So, Elliott is her maiden name? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: I don't have her exact date of birth, but she was born in Milton, North Carolina. My mother is deceased. She was born, let's see, in 1920. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: March, March 4th, 1920, approximately. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now, what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family? How far back can you trace them and what were they doing, and what are the stories? Speaker 2: Well my mother was one of originally two children and, but my mother's mother [Fannie Elliott (ph.)] died in childbirth within a, within a couple of weeks of her birth and her father [Ernest Elliott (ph.)] then married again and so, you know, I have half uncles and aunts, you know, but her father was a carriage driver, as I recall. My grandfather was part Cherokee Indian [Native American], about half, and his other makeup was African and Caucasian. My grandmother was also part Cherokee Indian with the similar makeup, and I think she was simply a stay at home wife. Speaker 1: Okay, so your grandfather drove a carriage. Did they drive it for a particular person or a company or? Speaker 2: I don't know, but he did drive it for someone in the town who was very prominent. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, all right. Now are there any stories--now, was the family always connected to this prominent employer? Speaker 2: In other words, was his service always connected? I don't, I don't know. That was not discussed too much, and then I grew up in New York [New York], and he was living in North Carolina, so we didn't have too many stories. Speaker 1: Okay, well there aren't many people that do have a lot of stories that they can, you know, bring forth about, you know, 19th century or anything, but I always have to probe and ask, if there are any stories about like emancipation or what it was like during the slavery that are passed down in your, on your mother's side. Speaker 2: Right, right. Well I believe that my grandmother on my mother's side, you know, certainly she was a slave and I understood that, you know, she was raped by the, the master, and that was a common thing. Speaker 1: That's true, that's true. So, the--is there a story about the Cherokee side and how, you know, how that relationship was made? Speaker 2: No, there's not too much of a story from, from that side as well. I think the story would be based on the photographs and you can see the physical structure, you know, of the face, high cheekbones, reddish, reddish color skin and dark, straight hair. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, but there are no stories about the Cherokees that are passed down or? Speaker 2: That's a good point. I should have asked. Speaker 1: Okay, well just to--when you grew up, I mean, was it really, you know, practice in the family to really talk about family history at all, I mean on your mother's side? Speaker 2: I would say not very much, but there was a lot of talk on family history on my father's side. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, and that's often the case that if one family will not talk about it at all, and another one might. So-- Speaker 2: In fact, you know, as you know part of American history is that there were things only whispered about and, you know, that was the case back then. Story_ID: 643438 Speaker 1: What was your grandfather's name? Speaker 2: Ernest. Speaker 1: Okay, Ernest Elliott [ph.]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, and your grandmother? Speaker 2: Her name was Fannie [Fannie Elliott (ph.)]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now, what did--did your mother [Gladys Elliott Bath] share anything with you about growing up and what it was like? Speaker 2: Not, not too much. She was anxious to leave the home (laughter) as soon as she could. She wanted to come to New York [New York] and be with her aunt. Her mother had died, it was difficult for her. Speaker 1: So this is her mother's sister, her--your aunt, her aunt-- Speaker 2: Actually, she was a great aunt. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She was a great aunt. Speaker 1: Okay, and do you know her name? Speaker 2: Yes, Ann. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So it would have been Ann--is there a last name for her? Speaker 2: Mitchell. Speaker 1: Okay, Ann Mitchell [ph.], okay. So she had migrated to New York then, what, before the turn of the century or what do you think? Speaker 2: (Laughter) I don't know, I doubt it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I doubt it, but I don't know. Speaker 1: Okay, but--all right. So your mother really joined her in the 1940s, I guess, or around 1940? Speaker 2: I would imagine, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, was she still a teenager when she went to New York? Speaker 2: I got that impression. Speaker 1: Okay, so that could have been in the late '30s [1930s], early '40s [1940s]? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now did your mother, did she get a chance to finish school in North Carolina? Speaker 2: My mother did not finish high school, I believe. I think she finished junior high but not high school. Speaker 1: Okay, and did she have any aspiration that she shared with you that she wanted to do that she either, you know, wanted to attain and didn't, or, or, or did attain, you know, when she was growing up? Did she have a career goal or? Speaker 2: I don't think so. Speaker 1: Okay, do you know if she wanted to get, leave North Carolina and come to, go to New York? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yes, she wanted to come to the, the big city and to leave the farm because she grew up living a farm life. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, now what did she do in New York? Speaker 2: Well, she got married to, to my father [Rupert S.M. Bath] and at a certain point in time she then began to do domestic work. Speaker 1: Okay, now some of those jobs, you know, lead to a lot of stories, depending on what's, you know, who she worked for and what she was doing. Did she have any stories about work, you know the--? Speaker 2: (Laughter) She, she may have. I don't recall a lot of the stories, but she worked for a family on Park Avenue, New York, and she enjoyed working for them, and as I have told the story, she was very proud to scrub floors so that my brother [Rupert Bath] and I could get a good education. Speaker 1: Okay, so she was, she's education focused and-- Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: --for you, okay. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: All right. Story_ID: 643439 Speaker 1: So I'm going to go to your father's side now, and then we'll, we'll, we'll put 'em back together. Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Rupert, R-U-P-E-R-T, Sebastian, S-E-B-A-S-T-I-A-N, Michael, M-I-C-H-A-E-L, Bath, B-A-T-H [Rupert S.M. Bath]. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Well he was born in Trinidad, in the West Indies, and I believe, let's see, about 19- 1905, perhaps. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. And what can you tell us about your father's ancestors? Now you told us about one of the ancestors-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --already-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and this is Jonas Mohammed Bath-- Speaker 2: Jonas. Speaker 1: --right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Was he the first Bath to come over, I guess? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, and he came over from West Africa and had, and was a leader there? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: You said a sultan. Was this a story that's passed down? Speaker 2: Well it's more than a story. He's actually in the history books (laughter), and, you know, when I mentioned that, you know, I had volumes, the volumes could start with a book of Trinidad history by the author Michael Anthony, and the story of Jonas Mohammed Bath is also in a publication called, I think it's 'Pan Africa' [ph.], something like that, written by Professor Campbell [Carl Campbell] at the University of the West Indies [Kingston, Jamaica]. So the, the life of Jonas Mohammed Bath and that part of the family history in Trinidad is fairly well documented. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So were there any other, other of his adventures documented now, other than the leadership role he took up? Speaker 2: Well, he bought his own freedom and then began to buy the freedom of some of his countrymen who were the Mandingos [Mandinka], at least some of them were Mandingos. He wrote his name in Arabic and was able to have a couple of petitions to obtain funds to return. Unfortunately, that goal did not, was not achieved. Speaker 1: Okay, what thwarted it? Speaker 2: Well, he wrote a, he wrote a petition that was presented in England, and it was denied. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I imagine it was denied because of funding, at least, you know, that's, you know, that was alluded to, you know, in the reference in the article. I'll give you a copy of the article. Speaker 1: Okay, so he bought his own freedom, that means that he--that the British hadn't freed the slaves yet, so that's like, this is like prior to 1833, I reckon? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --yeah, this is-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --so, right, and the Mandingos, now he would have been from present day Mali or Senegal, I guess, or-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Yeah. So, any other stories about him? Speaker 2: (Laughter) There's a story about his humor. When the British wanted to give him certain honors and absorb him in their society and he basically said, "Thank you very much, but--I'm happy to receive these favors, but I prefer to stay with my own kind," something like that (laughter). He said it in a way that was not offensive but humorous. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, all right. So I definitely have to look him up-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --at some point. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Did, did he maintain his religion of Islam throughout? Speaker 2: That is very sketchy, but--it's very sketchy as it, as you would expect when, you know, you're captive people. I do know that he helped build a church, also, and in fact that's where he was buried, St. Joseph's Church [ph.] in Trinidad. Speaker 1: Okay. Now I'm guessing that Jonas is a Christian name given to him after he got here, I'm thinking, but-- Speaker 2: Yes, probably. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, so he has a direct line from, you know--so your fa- father's on a direct line from him? Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 643440 Speaker 1: Well what did some of the other ancestors on the Bath side do? Speaker 2: When you say what did they--? Speaker 1: Do, yeah. Speaker 2: Well I was told that there was a marriage with someone named Rose Jabu [ph.] who was very creative in terms of clothing and design, and that she could just make beautiful, beautiful clothing. And I sometimes wonder if my facility with surgery has a root (laughter) in her talents. Speaker 1: Okay, there's an art to what you do. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Yes. So, how would you spell her name? Speaker 2: I don't know. Speaker 1: But it's-- Speaker 2: I'd have to just guess because-- Speaker 1: You pronounce it Rose Jabu? Speaker 2: Yeah, well keep in mind, part of it is written history which, as I said, I have the article, but the part about Rose Jabu is oral history and I don't know how she would spell it. Speaker 1: So they pronounce it Rose-- Speaker 2: Jabu. Speaker 1: --Jabu. Okay, all right. Speaker 2: And probably Rose was a given, Christian name, and maybe the Jabu was not, I don't know. Speaker 1: Okay, so she would have lived in the 19th century, too, I take it? Yeah? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Any other stories about the Baths? Speaker 2: Well my father [Rupert S.M. Bath] was a pupil of Professor Williams-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --who was the legendary prime minister of Trinidad for-- Speaker 1: This is Eric Williams, right? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. He was a pupil of Professor Williams, who was legendary, not only in Trinidad politics but also at Oxford [University of Oxford, Oxford, England] from what I understand, and so my father grew--was a graduate and he always boasted that he was a pupil of Professor Williams and he was very brilliant. Speaker 1: Okay, yes he was, author of many works and in fact, the Trinidadians in the United States have a reputation of being like the scholars and activists, you know. Speaker 2: Guilty (laughter). Speaker 1: It was people that agitate--you know. Speaker 2: This is true. As a matter of fact, I was, I've always planned to write a book, and the book would be four generations of protest and, you know, would start with Jonas [Bath's paternal great-great-grandfather, Jonas Mohammed Bath], and then there'd be my dad, I would be next, and my daughter [Eraka Bath] is the fourth generation. She led some revolts at Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California] (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so we'll get to that too before this is over (simultaneous). Story_ID: 643441 Speaker 1: So your father [Rupert S.M. Bath] now, he, from what I read, he came over here as a merchant seaman, right? (Background noise) Is that--? Speaker 2: That came later. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That came later. When he came, he had ambitions of being king (laughter). He had am- he had great ambitions and he wanted to be a motorman with the subway system and he passed, not only passed the exam, but he got 100 percent, and I have a news clipping showing that he got 100 percent on the exam and they refused, because of his race, to give him the job. He then, he then became involved with what was a fledgling, NAACP chapter [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] in Manhattan [New York], they took up his case, it took him maybe fifteen years or so and he eventually won the case, in the courtroom, as well as in the work place and was the first black motorman with the IRT subway system [Interborough Rapid Transit Company] in New York City [New York, New York]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But, but after that, he formed a union and was fired (laughter), and then he became a merchant seaman, had to get out of the USA. Speaker 1: All right. So, now was he, was he associated at all with the Garvey movement, the UNIA [Universal Negro Improvement Association]? Speaker 2: He knew Garvey [Marcus Garvey] from what I understand, he knew Garvey. Speaker 1: But he wasn't a member or anything that you know of? Speaker 2: I don't, I wouldn't know. Speaker 1: Well there were so many people who were members in those days and you meet so few people who were actually--you know, say they were so, I just wondered but, okay. So, yeah, Eric Williams' famous book is 'Capitalism and Slavery,' I think, right? That's the biggest one I think people talk about. Okay, so, so after your father was fired, he had, he, that's when he took the job as a merchant seaman and--? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: About how old--was he married to your mother [Gladys Elliott Bath] by then? Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Oh, yes, yeah. Speaker 1: All right, so, so he was, he was, what, about forty, I guess when he, when that happened? Speaker 2: Let's see. Speaker 1: (Unclear)--yeah, okay. Speaker 2: I'm trying to think. (Unclear) let's see, I think it was 1938. I think, I'm trying to visualize, sometimes I have a photographic memory and I'm visualizing the article, which, when he got the promotion, it was in the newspaper. I think it was around 1938, '37 [1937], something like that (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, so he was about thirty-three then? Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Story_ID: 643442 Speaker 1: Now let me backtrack a, a bit and just, before we talk about his travels as a merchant seaman, is there a story about how your parents met and got together? Speaker 2: (Laughter) I think it was my aunt [Ann Mitchell (ph.)], my aunt, she was the matchmaker. Speaker 1: So this is the [maternal] great aunt? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and where did she know your father [Rupert S.M. Bath] from, do you know? Speaker 2: (Laughter) My father, my father was very well known during that time. I under- I understood that he would be equivalent to Jay Z (laughter). He was a mover and shaker in Harlem [New York, New York], and, because of his Trinidadian heritage, was always involved with the party making. If you've ever experienced Carnival in either Rio [Rio de Janeiro, Brazil] or Trinidad, you know what I'm talking about. So, there would be, there would be the West Indian Day Parade, which to this day exists. They have it in Brooklyn [New York] now but they used to have it in Harlem and he was one of the organizers of that in terms of the broadcasts and the music, the floats, so he was, you know, very well known in town. At some point in his life, I know he had a radio and TV shop, he wrote for the Amsterdam News [New York Amsterdam News], he was in politics, so my aunt felt that he was a good catch (laughter) and she wanted my mother [Gladys Elliott Bath] to marry him and it happened. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 643443 Speaker 1: Now your father [Rupert S.M. Bath], well now tell us a little bit about his, you told us some more about, so he seemed to be really quite a person, you know-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh, yes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) Harlem [New York, New York] in those days-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --someone that-- Speaker 2: It was yin and yang, you know, and my mother [Gladys Elliott Bath] was the quiet one, you know, and, but the anchor, you know, of the family because he was always gone, you know, a lot. Speaker 1: Now as a merchant seaman, where did he go? Speaker 2: He went all over the world. He went to ports in Africa, went to Sweden, Germany, ports all over the world, Russia. And we could always look forward to gifts and stories from the places that he visited. And one interesting one was when he went to South Africa and he told us about the apartheid. Now because he was a foreigner, he was somewhat exempt and, you know, he was able to move around the city, but it was an odd, very odd situation there because he was on a ship where blacks, whites, Asians all lived together on the ship, but it was different when they arrived at this port, you know, in terms of the apartheid. It troubled him, but he brought gifts. I still have some of the gifts. For example, I have a necklace made out of animal teeth (laughter) which he said belonged to a princess and he was giving it to his princess (laughter), and the necklace consists of maybe thirty or forty teeth, they're all incisors, so, you know, the conclusion is many horses had to be slain to create that necklace. Speaker 1: So this is--these are horse teeth? Speaker 2: Something, I, I imagine, that's the story. Story_ID: 643444 Speaker 1: When you think about your parents' personalities, your, their, their talents, their hobbies, their mannerisms, dispositions, you know, who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, people generally say that I take after my dad [Rupert S.M. Bath] and, and my brother [Rupert Bath] takes after my mom [Gladys Elliott Bath]. And in appearance, you know, that's, that's the obvious answer because my mother is fair complexioned and people might think that she was white because she has fair complexion, freckles and reddish hair (laughter), and my father is my complexion, you know, with black hair. So, you know, as I said, people immediately, you know, come to the conclusion. But it, it has to do with personality too because I'm a lot more outgoing than my brother. Story_ID: 643445 Speaker 1: Is it just the two of you, you and your brother? Speaker 2: Yes, it's just the two of us at this point in time, my brother, Rupert Bath. My father [Rupert S.M. Bath] had a son, Ronald [ph.], before he left Trin- Trinidad. So I had what is called a half brother. Speaker 1: Okay, so, I take it you met him at some point, or? Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely. As a matter of fact, after my father, my father died, I felt the, the need and the urge to go to Trinidad because I had never been. He had always sent money to Trinidad for his mom and the family that's over there, but I had never visited Trinidad. And after his death I decided that I would go and I went and met my brother Ronald, and we had a wonderful relationship and it was immediate that I had more in common with him (laughter), you know than my brother in terms of just spirit and feeling. We were immediately brother and sister. Speaker 1: Okay, now what did your brother, Rupert, do for a living here? Speaker 2: He, he didn't want to go. Speaker 1: Oh, no, I just ask- what did he end up doing vocationally? What did he--? Speaker 2: Oh, my brother is a graduate of CCNY [City College of New York, New York, New York] and he has a degree in chemical engineering and he pursued that because that's what my father wanted. My father was the first advocate for STEM education: science, technology, engineering and math. And he wanted us to pursue careers in science and math, and for me it was natural but for my brother it was not. He really didn't wish to do that, he wanted to be a writer. However, he did, as I said, graduate from CCNY, CCNY, with a degree in chemical engineering, and decided to do social work after that. Speaker 1: Okay, so he worked in the social work field (unclear)? Speaker 2: He worked in the social work field in New York [New York] for a few years until he could no longer bear the pain of saying no to families in need. And then he moved to the police department and he worked at the NYPD [New York City Police Department] for thirty or more years, and received a commendation for all his years of service and was the branch manager. He had the highest civil service office there was with the NYPD until his retirement, which I think was around 2000, something like that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 643446 Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: (Laughter) (Pause) I would think it's when my brother [Rupert Bath] and I are playing, playing cowboys. Note I said cowboys (laughter). Speaker 1: No Indians [Native American], then (laughter)? Speaker 2: Well, not cowgirls. Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: Well, fortunately, or unfortunately, most of my cousins were boys, and so I was accepted as one of the boys, and I hung out with the boys as a young child and that, that was probably helpful during my career in the male dominated, you know, halls of medicine and surgery. Speaker 1: Okay, so you had-- Speaker 2: But, yes, but my earliest memory relates to a photo of myself and my brother, you know, playing cowboys. Speaker 1: Okay, now did you all have a favorite cowboy that--or cowboys that you would play? Speaker 2: (Laughter) The Lone Ranger, Roy Rogers, Hopalong Cassidy; the younger generation has never heard of these people. Speaker 1: Yeah, but those are the dominant figures in that era, right. Speaker 2: They were the dominant figures, right. Speaker 1: Right, 1940s-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --cowboys dominated radio and the movies and, you know. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: It's true. Speaker 2: And another thing I remember is my brother teaching me to read. He would, I would sit, he would sit in a chair, I would sit (laughter), I would sit between his legs and he'd hold the book and he would read and teach me how to read. Speaker 1: Okay, so, so when you were growing up was--your father [Rupert S.M. Bath] was so busy, was he around much? Speaker 2: He was around enough. You know, there were certain period- and, again, I should have thought about this before because I can't just give you the dates but there was a certain period when he was a merchant seaman in which we would see him maybe every other month or every two mon- you know, something like that because he would be, you know, on the ship. So, yes, that was the nature of his job so it was normal for him to be away and come back for a large part of childhood. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now did your dad retire as a merchant seaman or, or did he-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes he did. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So he was, he was a merchant seaman until about what year, you think? Speaker 2: 'Til probably the '60s [1960s], I think the '60s [1960s], late '50s [1950s]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --early '60s [1960s]. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: And it was the NMU, he was a member of the National Maritime Union [Seafarers International Union of North America]. Story_ID: 643447 Speaker 1: Did you grow up in the same place in New--in--now you grew up in Harlem [New York, New York], right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Harlem, yes. Speaker 1: Yeah. So where did you grow up? Speaker 2: On 122nd [Street] and 7th street--2031 7th Avenue [Adam Clayton Powell Jr. Boulevard], we had a large apartment in what they call a pre-war building and it was huge, it was almost a whole floor. And my aunt [Ann Mitchell (ph.)] lived two stories above, and another aunt lived nearby. You know, we had lots of family. Speaker 1: Okay, mostly your mother's family? Speaker 2: On the mother's side, none on the father's side. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now, we always ask this question: can you describe, you know, what your home, you know, kind of looked like, it was large but can you describe your home, and what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Well, I would, I would say the most important thing is that it was a happy home and I had my own room, my brother [Rupert Bath] had his own room, we had a little doggy and we had lots of books. My father [Rupert S.M. Bath] had a library. He had a very special bookcase that he prized. It was a mahogany, antique type bookcase and he would quote from Shakespeare [William Shakespeare]. We had lots of books. We had an encyclopedia set, that was very important to have books, and he was always reading. We also had lots of records, lots of 78 records [78 rpm record], and there was always music in the house. It was either classical or calypso. Speaker 1: Did he have favorite artists? Speaker 2: Sparrow [Mighty Sparrow] (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, Sparrow, okay. Speaker 2: And what was the other one? Lord Kitchener. Speaker 1: Okay. Now these artists are from Trinidad (unclear). Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Lord Kitchener and Sparrow and-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So classical music and-- Speaker 2: Yeah, my mom [Gladys Elliott Bath] liked classical music. Speaker 1: All right. Now what was the, so in your neighborhood, you're growing up in Harlem so I take it most of your neighbors are black people? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And this is a celebrated enclave, kind of, at the, this is the winding down of its heyday, I guess, on some level but it's still a bustling place, a center of-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --black activity. So well describe the neighborhood and some of the, as I said, sights and sounds and smells of Harlem when you were growing up? Speaker 2: Well, you know, it was a great place. You know, I felt, it was a great place to grow up. I didn't realize that it wasn't (laughter) for man- for many years because you're in the box and not outside the box, and the most important things were family and, you know, we had a stable family environment, we had a nice comfortable home with amenities, you know, a TV, a radio and, we did not feel want or need, although many people looked upon Harlem then as an area of poverty and neglect, but it was not that way at all as we experienced it, and I think that was a great thing and, you know, I have to kind of salute and tip my hat to mom and dad who were able to raise us under those circumstances where we didn't feel needy, you know, we felt whole and as I said, that's a tribute to them because, you know, in fact, there were many times when my, where my father did not have a job because of his political views (laughter) and because of his spirit, and my mother picked up the slack by doing domestic work, you know, when necessary. So, I imagine on some sort of scale, we might have been considered poor, but we didn't feel poor, so. Story_ID: 643448 Speaker 1: Now what were some of the--Harlem's a type of community where people walk down the street, they don't get in the car and then drive somewhere (laughter), actually meet other people a lot. And so, what were some of the cultural and, activities going on and, day to day activities going on in Harlem [New York, New York] when you were growing up? Speaker 2: Well, I guess, one person was a fixture, Colonel Harper [ph.], he was a World War II [WWII] hero and it was as if he would stand guard as I look upon that because he was always there, you know, when you, we'd exit the building, there was Colonel Harper and he was a community fixture, you know, a proud, you know, World War II hero who was there, night or day, more or less standing guard (laughter). Speaker 1: So he's a World War II hero or? Speaker 2: I believe so. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So-- Speaker 2: So he was important. We would go to church, we would walk to church some Sundays; it was a Baptist church. Speaker 1: So what was the name of your church? Speaker 2: I don't remember the name of that church, but it was a Baptist church and I guess it was Sunday school we would go to occasionally. Speaker 1: Okay, so you didn't go, go all the time then? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: So it wasn't--was church a significant feature in life, you know, in growing up? Speaker 2: I would say no. Speaker 1: But you did go occasionally (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My father [Rupert S.M. Bath], well my father was Catholic, my mother [Gladys Elliott Bath] was Baptist, and--but we would go to the Baptist church primarily because my mother was there and my father was usually away. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. What else in the neighborhood, I mean a neighborhood like Harlem, there's always something going on, but what about music when you left the home? Was it--? Speaker 2: Not, not much but, you know, we had friends, my father's friends were, you know, physicians or, you know, politicians, Dr. Marquez [ph.], he was around the corner from our apartment building and we would see him socially, occasionally, and he was the family doctor. Speaker 1: Okay, was he the first doctor that you basically knew-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --growing up? Speaker 2: Yes, right. Speaker 1: And where was he from, his name, Marquez? Speaker 2: Trinidad, he was a buddy from Trinidad. Speaker 1: Okay, so he knew your father from Trinidad? Speaker 2: Oh, yes, uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know, so there was Harlem during that period which was adjacent to the so called Harlem Renaissance, which was really before I was growing up, was the Harlem Renaissance. Then there was that Harlem in which, because of segregation, you had the steel worker living next to the taxi driver, living next to the physician, living next to the merchant which was very powerful for us kids growing up. And then you have the Harlem after that in which those who could left Harlem (laughter), leaving, you know, a kind of monotonous, one dimensional community, you know, economically, politically and socially. But, no, I grew up during the time that, you know, it was very diverse in terms of education and the occupational demographics. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 643449 Speaker 1: Did you have favorite--now you said you played with a lot of male cousins and had to be a cowboy-- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: --but (laughter) did you have a fa- favorite pastimes? Speaker 2: And had to be a doctor rather than a nurse, you understand (laughter). Go ahead, did I have a favorite pastime? Speaker 1: Yeah-- Speaker 2: Well we would pla-- Speaker 1: --what were some of the favorite things that you would do? Speaker 2: Oh, well we would play, you know, we didn't play tee ball, we played what we called stickball (laughter) where you have this little pink Spalding ball and a broomstick, so we played stickball. Speaker 1: That's the little pink ball-- Speaker 2: A Spalding-- Speaker 1: --that little (unclear) ball that-- Speaker 2: Yeah, it's a Spalding, you know, ball. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, that was a favorite. Also, a game we call lodies, which is a game you play by creating boxes on the sidewalk with chalk and you have a little, a bottle cap filled with wax (laughter) and you use the sidewalk as a pool table and try and, you know, flick the little cap to certain spaces where you get points, lodies. So we played that, we played stickball. Played something called, stoop ball because many of the brownstones had stoops, and you would take the ball and throw it against the stoop and the ball would go and then you run to first base, something like that. Speaker 1: Okay, so the stoop acted as a batter, I guess-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --for-- Speaker 2: Yes. Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, so we played those games. I had a bike. I liked to ride a bike. Story_ID: 643450 Speaker 1: What was your first school? Speaker 2: P.S. 68 [New York, New York]. Speaker 1: Okay, that's another neighborhood school in--? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Within walking distance. Speaker 1: So, did you like school? Speaker 2: I loved school, yes. Speaker 1: Okay, did you have a favorite subject in school as a grade schooler? Speaker 2: I don't really recall, but, but I was always recognized to be an excellent reader, and because I was an excellent reader I got selected to be in plays, which I didn't really like that much. Speaker 1: Okay, so these are grade school plays about various things then? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Now who, what did you, do you remember who you played or what you, what part, part you may have played? Speaker 2: Pocahontas or, what is it, the 'H.M.S. Pinafore' [Arthur Sullivan], you know I'm playing, you know, the star role because, it had to do with being able to read and memorize so even though I didn't really enjoy acting and being on the stage, it was a default thing that I had to do. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaking of acting, were any of the, did you have any notable neighbors in the arts or, you know, there's so many artists in Harlem [New York, New York]? Speaker 2: Well, I had family members who knew Langston Hughes, I believe, at some point, and some of the entertainers my family knew, but I didn't, you know, they never came to my house but, you know, we'd hear them talk about it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Billy Eckstine and, you know, singers. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, in school did you have a favorite teacher in grade school? Speaker 2: I remember one name, Mrs. Smith [ph.], as, you know, my first grade teacher or kindergarten teacher, I remember her. Speaker 1: Now were you the kind of student that could be a teacher's pet? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Unfortunately, I suppose so. I remember one funny story and I know the first day of school I cried, but then after that I got used to it. And Mrs. Smith told me one day, "Patricia [HistoryMaker Dr. Patricia Bath], you're very pretty," and I said, "I know it." And when I told my mother [Gladys Elliott Bath] I said that, she said, "You should never say that," (laughter) and I said, "Oh," (laughter). Story_ID: 643451 Speaker 1: In grade school [P.S. 68, New York, New York], did you have any inkling that you wanted to be a doctor? Speaker 2: I would say, not necessarily in school but, you know, at that age I did, very early, I would say by the time I was six or seven I knew I wanted to be a doctor, or at least I felt I did. I enjoyed p- the role play in games, you know, playing the doctor-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --you know, being the one in charge (laughter) of the patient, and being the one to diagnose, investigate, find out what's wrong and be the hero and take care of it. Speaker 1: Okay, now this is the doctor instead of the nurse, right, definitely the doctor? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Did you have any female doctors as a role model around you at all, or any that you knew of? Speaker 2: No, Dr. Marquez [ph.] was my role model. My (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, but you had the idea that you could do that when you were-- Speaker 2: Yes. Story_ID: 643452 Speaker 1: Where did you go--did you have middle school or junior high school? Speaker 2: Yes, we had middle school, which was P.S. 81 or Julia Ward Howe [Julia Ward Howe Junior High School 81, New York, New York], which is another neighborhood school. Speaker 1: I know, I'm trying to figure out who Julia Ward Howe is. I know she's, she's, well it probably doesn't really matter but I know she's some prominent person. I should, I should-- Speaker 2: I have no idea. Speaker 1: I recognize all the names but I don't know, I'm not sure, I'll put them all together, I'm not sure who this is, but, yeah. Any rate, so now in middle school, did they offer science in middle school? Speaker 2: I don't recall if they did. I had a favorite teacher there, Mrs. Miller [Mildred Miller (ph.)], and I believe I have some photos showing our class, classroom photo. Story_ID: 643453 Speaker 1: One inspiration in your life was Dr. Albert Schweitzer, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And when did you first learn about Dr. Albert Schweitzer? Speaker 2: I think probably when I was somewhere between twelve, maybe ten, eleven, twelve, thirteen [years old], sometime around then, and I read about him in the newspapers and I was so impressed that, you know, he was devoting his life to heal the untouchables, so to speak, lepers. I thought that was such a great thing and I was inspired by his story; it just helped me confirm that I wanted to have a life of service as a physician, you know, to humanity. Speaker 1: Okay, now I remember in those days that Albert Schweitzer was well known and well respected in the black community. Now, like you, I saw him in the newspaper first-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --I think, didn't he win a Nobel Prize [Nobel Peace Prize] for--? Speaker 2: I believe he did-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --for his work in Lambarene [French Equatorial Africa; Gabon]. Speaker 1: My mother knew about him and other people in the black community knew who Dr. Albert Schweitzer was. Speaker 2: Right, and then, of course, at that time, as you know, there was racism, actually legalized racism in the United States so it was even all the more worthy and noble what he was doing. Yeah, it was very powerful. Speaker 1: Okay, so, so he became--did you read more about him or did you try to, you know--? Speaker 2: Well, no, I did not, you know, study his life and try and get lots of books about him but, you know, it was just a little (makes sound) (laughter)-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --that resonated with my (makes sound), and I said this is a good thing. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 643454 Speaker 1: Now did you enter any science fairs in middle school [Julia Ward Howe Junior High School 81, New York, New York]? Speaker 2: Yes I did. I guess, actually that was high school, high school [Charles Evans Hughes High School, New York, New York]. Speaker 1: Okay, well lets, we'll get to high school in a minute. Speaker 2: It was in high school, I think, yes. Middle school we zoomed past that but it's only three years (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, anything else that happens in middle school that's significant when you were growing up to really-- Speaker 2: Well, I think, I had this, this teacher was really incredible, her name was Mildred Miller [ph.], and she really--I remember it was a eureka moment one day after her classes, she helped, she helped me understand disciplined thinking and orderly and logical thought. Now, it was like a revelation just being in her class and, you know, her teaching methods, you know, it just helped me understand thought processes and, you know, I realized that, I said wow, this is important, you know. So that was, that was the main thing that happened, I think, in middle school. Speaker 1: Okay, now middle school is like in the late '50s [1950s], right? Or '57 [1957], '58 [1958], around in-- Speaker 2: No, it was more, I guess, '54 [1954]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --because I, I know I graduated, I went to col- I went to college [Hunter College, New York, New York] in 1960. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, it must have been more like '54 [1954]. Speaker 1: Okay, right, right, all right, '54 [1954], '55 [1955]. Now '54 [1954] was the year Brown versus the Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka]--. Did you, did your father [Rupert S.M. Bath] really talk about that a lot at home or your mother [Gladys Elliott Bath]? Speaker 2: Well, TV was a part of daily life then so, you know, and looking at the news was, was a daily event, looking at the news together over dinner, that was a daily event and I think there was Edward R. Murrow (laughter) and David Brinkley, they were the main anchors and I think as we look back, they were liberal, we would look upon them as, as liberal and so they would tell the story and it was very powerful to look at the news and inch by inch see that the civil rights were going to be a reality for brothers and sisters in the South who were really suffering. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So. Speaker 1: I know 1956 was the Montgomery Bus Boycott and that was, that was covered in the news so you-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah I was a part of that. Those were great times, and-- Speaker 1: You know, sometimes, you know, people in the North, you know, would criticize nonviolent direct actions, you know, requiring a servile attitude to be able to do it. Did your parents discuss the nonviolent direct action type stuff at home? Speaker 2: Well, you can imagine that my father felt that, you know, the people should seize the moment and seize their time and have their rights because that's what, you know, he fought for, and my mother, to a similar degree but more passively. But it was a, it was a really great time, you know, to be a part of that history. Now, I don't want to jump to college, but if we do, you know, then we jump to a period where I was involved in the Civil Rights Movement even though (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. We'll wait, we'll get there. Speaker 2: Okay (laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah, all right. Speaker 2: So-- Speaker 1: We're moving towards it, so. Story_ID: 643455 Speaker 1: High school, you attended, was it-- Speaker 2: Charles Evans Hughes High School [New York, New York] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Charles Evans Hughes, right. I know he was, wasn't he the governor of New York at some point or something like that? Speaker 2: I don't know. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But answering the other question, the science fair that I participated in-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --was during high school, science fairs and contests, and that's when I won that fellowship. It was a National Science Foundation fellowship to do research, summer research, and I was assigned to Yeshiva University [New York, New York]. Speaker 1: Now let me go back a minute, just ask you like, what was your project-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --the science fair project? Speaker 2: Well, the science fair project was creating a slide rule (laughter) and based on that project, I got selected, and then the research project had to do with culturing bacteria and using the properties of fluorescence to determine quantitatively the number of bacteria. Yeah. We were using a bacterium called pseudomonas aeruginosa, which has a bioluminescence, produces a kind of greenish hue, color, and you can put that, the culture, test tube culture in a device called a spectrophotometer, and then you read the, the intensity of the luminescence and that's correlated with the number of organisms and then you can use that to measure some of the things that you're testing. And we were testing different substances to accelerate the growth. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So that's the pro- that was the project that I did in 1959, 1960, around then. Speaker 1: Okay, so you were a junior and senior in high school then? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So was this your first lab [laboratory] work in high school, or had you had lab in (unclear) school? Speaker 2: I had done some lab work in, in high school, but this was lab work that we did, that I did in a hospital setting, you know, with university instructors and doctors, other physicians. Story_ID: 643456 Speaker 1: Now how would you, just for the sake of asking like, what, how, what was your high school life like otherwise? Were you a member of high school clubs and, did you have like typical high school experiences otherwise? Speaker 2: Well, the high school activities were kind of boring for the most part. It was really an odd type of high school because I really didn't feel a part of the high school. Speaker 1: Now, is Charles Evans Hughes [Charles Evans Hughes High School, New York, New York] like a, where is it? Is it-- Speaker 2: Well, it was my first experience being out of the community. The odd thing, or the interesting thing is that in Harlem [New York, New York], there were no high schools, there were only elementary schools and junior high schools; there were no high schools that we could go to. There was one high school that was in Harlem, it was called Rice High School, but that was a private high school for Irish boys (laughter). It still exists there. So, for those of us who wanted to go to high school, we were assigned to high schools outside of Harlem so I was down 18th Street--you know had to take the train down to 18th Street and, you know-- Speaker 1: Is that like Greenwich Village [New York, New York] or--? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Right now I think it would be the Meatpacking District [New York, New York] or Chelsea [New York, New York]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. But Greenwich Village as you know, starts at 8th Street [sic.], so it's close enough. But anyway, I didn't know anyone there except my brother [Rupert Bath] and then gradually, you know, we made friends but the social life was not there. The social life was back with my friends. Some of us went there, some of us went to tech--fashion, was it--Commerce, a school called Commerce [High School of Commerce, New York, New York], some of us went to Fashion Technology [sic. High School of Fashion Industries, New York, New York] and, so we'd go to these different high schools but then the social life would be in the community. So, but, the most important thing was that the education was, was good there. I had some great science teachers there. Mr. Sinclair [ph.], who was from Jamaica. Dr. Leibowitz [ph.] who was the one who mentored me with the National Science Foundation fellowship. Dr. Aaron Kranz [ph.], who mentored us, my brother and myself, in terms of literature; there were fabulous teachers but there was not much of a social fabric. For example, I don't think there was a prom. There was no football team or basketball team, you know. It was a high school, you know, that was primarily educational as far as I'm concerned. Speaker 1: Okay, so it's serious kind of academic environment? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 643457 Speaker 1: In 19--now, well this experience at Ye- Yeshiva University [New York, New York] was, was life changing in some ways, I guess? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, and now you, you won a merit award from Mademoiselle magazine in 1960 as a-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yes, yes. Speaker 1: And what was--tell us about that. Speaker 2: Well, as a result of the science fellowship that I won, and the fact that, what, this was 1959, 1960, you know the cusp of the civil rights era and there I was, a teenage high school phenom (laughter) at Yeshiva, black, you know. And so, there was a photograph of myself and Arnold Lentnek, who was a white student, white teenager who was also there and, you know, we're both, one of us is looking through the microscope and the other one is there and so that photo went viral, as we would say, and as a result of that--and then there was a scientific paper that was published by my mentor, which was Dr. Leibowitz [ph.] and Dr. Bernard [ph.] and then the professor at Yeshiva, Dr. Tendler [Moshe David Tendler], and as a result of that publication, the media took notice and that's, that was the reason I got that Mademoiselle award and some others at the age of sixteen, it was a bit much. Speaker 1: Did Amsterdam News [New York Amsterdam News] pick up on it as well? Speaker 2: Probably, yes (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And Sepia, yeah. Speaker 1: Right, Sepia magazine, right, that's right. Speaker 2: Sepia almost all of the--Po- the New York Post, The New York Times, I was actually on the front page of The New York Times back then, 1960. Speaker 1: Okay, now-- Speaker 2: So, it was life changing because I didn't want to be (laughter). You know at that age you want to be like everybody else and you don't want to be different, you know, that's, you want to be like everyone else and most of my other friends were not science nerds, they were not on the front page of a newspaper. Speaker 1: Okay, now, so, did it really change how people dealt with you and, and--? Speaker 2: I don't think s- not with my friends, no. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They knew that I was just Patsy [HistoryMaker Dr. Patricia Bath] around the block (laughter). Speaker 1: Now were you asked to make appearances or anything? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No, I was not but I got lots of award, The Links [The Links, Incorporated], you know, different organizations gave me awards and things like that. Speaker 1: So they'd bring you to a function, I guess, and have you stand up and-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --honor your scholarship? Okay. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right. So, but I know that can make young people uncomfortable being in that kind of situation? Speaker 2: Right, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, this is a good thing, you know, 'cause you did want to be a physician? Speaker 2: Right, right, no, it was a good thing. Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 643458 Speaker 1: Did you have good counseling about where to go to college when you were at Charles Evans Hughes [Charles Evans Hughes High School, New York, New York]? Speaker 2: Not, not really. I would say no counseling (laughter). No, it didn't really exist back then. Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: You know, I don't know when counseling became an optimal part of our education infrastructure. I don't know when that happened but it certainly didn't exist then. Speaker 1: Okay, so you didn't have a faculty advisor or anything, or a counselor? Speaker 2: No, my only goal back then was to go to a school in New York where the tuition was free (laughter). Speaker 1: So, I mean, I would think a counselor would have helped you to secure a scholarship or something maybe but there was no counselor to--? Speaker 2: No, but, you know, we knew that if you had a certain grade point average, that would guarantee admission to Hunter College [New York, New York] or CCNY [City College of New York, New York, New York] or Brooklyn College [Brooklyn, New York], which were the city colleges of New York and, you know, that's where I wanted to go. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, but you didn't have any inkling of scholarships or anything? Speaker 2: Well, when I got accepted to Hunter College, I was offered a scholarship. Speaker 1: Okay, so-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --I'm sure you accepted it, right (laughter)? Speaker 2: Well, as it turns out, I didn't accept it because I didn't feel that I needed it which, you know, goes back to what I mentioned earlier that we didn't think we were poor. When--well I graduated about six months earlier. Instead of graduating in June, I graduated in January and entered Hunter in January of 1960, and so by the time they discovered I was there and offered me the scholarship, I had been there and they said, "The scholarship committee has selected you, and please tell us what you need," and so I went to talk to my mom [Gladys Elliott Bath] and dad [Rupert S.M. Bath] and ask them, "Well what should I ask for?" And they determined, they said, well, you know, "Your tuition is basically free," which it was, "We've already bought your books," and so my father looked at me, he said, "You don't need it." (Laughter) So I went back and told them that I didn't need it (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, that's interesting. I've never heard that before from anybody we've interviewed, I don't think. Speaker 2: It's true. Speaker 1: That's, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, but, as you know, nowadays, that's not what people would do and that's not what they're advised to do, but life was a lot simpler back then. Speaker 1: Okay, I guess, proportionately tuition was even cheaper in-- Speaker 2: Tuition was absolutely free. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I don't know what it is now. Speaker 1: So, so if you went to a city college in New York in those days, and if you could gain admittance, your tuition was free? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay, did you have to maintain a certain grade point average to keep your tuition? Speaker 2: I don't think so; it was the admission. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So as long as you are passing, your tuition-- Speaker 2: Well, you had to have--it varied. If you had an A average, you could always get in, but the B, you know, it was the B average, which is about an 85 [percent] average, it had to be somewhere between the 85 and the 90 and each year it would change a little, by a couple of points, but basically, if you had, you know, B plus average, generally, you could get into one of the city colleges, tuition free. Speaker 1: Okay, there's something. Story_ID: 643459 Speaker 1: At Hunter College [New York, New York] now, you majored in chemistry. Did you-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --did you start in chemistry from the very beginning (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so and were you thinking of it in terms of a pre-med course? Speaker 2: Yes, yeah, I majored in chemistry and minored in math and physics and, you know-- Speaker 1: Okay, now did--who were some of your teachers at Hunter College that kind of stand out? Speaker 2: I can't remember a single one (laughter). Speaker 1: But we know you did well, and (laughter)-- Speaker 2: It was, it was just a grind. Speaker 1: Was it? Okay. Speaker 2: Just a grind. Speaker 1: Now we've, I've interviewed quite a few people and I don't, you know, some people say they had to work hard and other people--others, you know, just kind of breeze through, don't really concern themselves that much with the grades. So were you, did you have to work hard for your grades or did you, did they just come to you? Speaker 2: I had to work hard. I had to work hardest in, in language. I started out with--you have to take a scientific language for medical school and--with the major that I had, so I started out with, with Russ- I started out with German and it was very difficult for me, especially when three quarters of my class spoke some German in their homes (laughter). So I switched to Russian where I had, you know, better stats-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --because at that time, there weren't very many people with Russian relatives and descendants so I did much better. Speaker 1: So were they-- Speaker 2: So it was very, but languages were difficult for me, but the chemistry and the math were not as difficult as the language. Speaker 1: Okay, so they graded on a curve in the languages, sort of? Speaker 2: I guess so. Speaker 1: Okay, yeah so if you had a classroom of less competition you-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, that makes sense. Speaker 2: It was a more even, even-- Speaker 1: Even playing field? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, so, okay so you--now did you get involved in any activist activities at Hunter College? Speaker 2: Did you say athletic? Speaker 1: No, activism, in terms of-- Speaker 2: Oh, yes, yes. I pledged AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority] and we were a very activist organization in terms of community service and politics. In fact it was our group that organized what we would call, well it's, we would call it a sit-in because during that time, and that period was between '60 [1960] and '64 [1964] that I was at Hunter College, and the sit-in demonstrations were spreading throughout the United States. And even though we did not experience segregation at the counter, let me underscore that, 'cause we experienced segregation but not at the Woolworth counter [F.W. Woolworth Company] in New York [New York], we decided to stage a demonstration to show solidarity with what was happening in the South. So the AKA chapter, at certain periods, we would stand--eat our lunches standing up in the cafeteria, you know, to protest. Speaker 1: Okay, for those who don't know, like Woolworth's was a major target of, in the South for demonstrations because they discriminated against black people. Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: So, would you do any demonstrations at Woolworth's then? Speaker 2: We did, occasionally. Speaker 1: Okay. So who was the leader of your AKA chapter [Lambda Chapter of Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.]? Speaker 2: Back then, it would probably have been Claudette Whitten [ph.] or Yvonne Butler [ph.], still friends of mine, but the grad chapter [graduate chapter] was Clara Skipwith [Clara Skipwith Burgess], Skippy, but the students, the grad chapter didn't organize this. This was something that sprung from us because we were fiery, young and driven. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: It was our generation's time. Story_ID: 643460 Speaker 1: Was there a chapter of Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee on campus? Speaker 2: I don't believe so, and not that it was gender specific, but, you know, Hunter was an all-girl school and I don't think we had a SNCC chapter there but we did have two very important organizations: we had the Toussaint L'Ouverture Society there, and we had Eleanor Roosevelt--(laughter) in her day, you know, she spoke up. Speaker 1: So Eleanor Roosevelt was on campus? Speaker 2: No, no, no. Speaker 1: Oh, no. Speaker 2: We had Eleanor Roosevelt House [Roosevelt House; Roosevelt House Public Policy Institute at Hunter College, New York, New York]. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: Okay, she had donated a brownstone, you know, in the '60s [1960s]. Our school was 68th Street and Park Avenue, so in that vicinity there was a wonderful house that she had donated to Hunter College [New York, New York], and it was the site of, you know, meetings, organizational meetings, planning. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so this is, this is like student run or--? Speaker 2: No, I'm pretty sure the house was run by the bureaucracy of Hunter College, but we had access-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --to the house. Speaker 1: Yeah but were the activities like student derived, you know? Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, okay yeah and Eleanor Roosevelt was a strident, you know-- Speaker 2: Totally. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So she drug her husband [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt] into it. Speaker 2: (Laughter) I know, the Tuskegee Airmen-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --one example of that. Speaker 1: Right, so she was a big service example, I guess, for people. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: Also, now what was the nature of the Toussaint Louverture Society? Speaker 2: Well, it was, it's very interesting. You know, nowadays, they have African American studies and they even have clubs on campuses that are named, that are ethnic clubs. Well this was Hunter College's way of having an ethnic club for people of color and they called it Toussaint Louverture Society, you know, after the Haitian revolutionary. Speaker 1: Okay, so, so it was like a black s- like a black student union would be today-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --on campus? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, so the girls who were involved in Toussaint Louverture--you know, it's a lot like being in a black student organization? Speaker 2: You know, I guess so because I was not a member of that. You know, I didn't have time for too many activities. The only one that I had time for was the AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority] 'cause I was a pledgee and in addition to pledgee activities, you know, we have to do community services, like singing at Christmastime and hospitals and doing other things, you know, attending parties and, you know, doing a lot of things, so I didn't have time. Story_ID: 643461 Speaker 1: So at Hunter College [New York, New York] then, did I ask you about your teachers, about who, you know-- Speaker 2: Yes, you did-- Speaker 1: Did I? Speaker 2: --and what, based on the questions you asked in the past, I'm making the observation that no one stands out, and chronologically I can remember, you know, my first grade teacher [at P.S. 68, New York, New York], you know, Mrs. Smith [ph.]. No one stood out (laughter)-- Speaker 1: Now was-- Speaker 2: --in col- in undergraduate school. Speaker 1: All right. So was any of the science a challenge at all in undergraduate school? Speaker 2: Yes, physical chemistry was really tough. I loved organic chemistry, quantitative analysis was grinding, it was very, very difficult, but it was a good fit. I loved chemistry, I loved science, I was very happy. Speaker 1: Okay, now when you decided to go to medical school, you went to Howard-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --medical school [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.], and how did you make that decision? Speaker 2: Well, I applied to Downstate University [SUNY Downstate College of Medicine, Brooklyn, New York], I applied to NYU [New York University School of Medicine, New York City, New York], I applied to Howard and probably a couple of others, but I was only accepted at Howard University so that's how the decision was made. And I remember, I remember getting a letter from Downstate saying that I had great grades and I remember the interviewer said, "She has a twinkle in her eye," but they didn't want to give me the spot because I was a woman (laughter). They actually said that and I should have saved, you know, that for historical purposes. But at that time, Howard, Howard's entering class, I think we were the first class that had maybe twenty or thirty women, which was a first for Howard and I was happy to be in that group and as it turned out I was really happy that I went to Howard because it was the first time I had professors that looked like me. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, Howard, I think I read a book about, that mentioned the first black female graduate of Howard medical school as having come out around 1900, I believe it was, and I can't think of her name right now, but, her last name was Keye [ph.], her last name was Keye, I think. But, so they had, you know, I don't know how, what the volume was, you know, but they, they at least did that at a certain point, you know, but-- Speaker 2: It was a great medical school. Speaker 1: --but to think that a school would actually have the temerity to tell you that, that you had great grades but you're a woman so we're not going to admit you is-- Speaker 2: Well, yeah, that was done back then, and I think without hesitation or shame (laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah, and it really seems that way like they weren't even ashamed of it. This is 1964 when, this is Freedom you know, Freedom Summer in Mississippi taking place and all these civil rights strides and struggles are going on and-- Speaker 2: But it was not for women, it was, you know, based on race. As you know, gender inequality is still a front and center issue, you know, in 2012. Speaker 1: Yes ma'am. Story_ID: 643462 Speaker 1: Howard University [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.] in 1964, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, and I've read that one of your mentors at Howard was the great physician Dr. LaSalle Leffall [HistoryMaker Dr. LaSalle D. Leffall, Jr.]? Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I'm sure that so many physicians have given him accolades and really he is, is extremely gifted, brilliant, compassionate; he's just a fabulous surgeon, yeah. He was certainly a role model and a mentor and, you know, instrumental in me choosing a surgical specialty as a career. Speaker 1: Okay. Now was Dr. John Clark [HistoryMaker Dr. John Clark, Jr.] there when you were at Howard? Speaker 2: I don't know Dr. John Clark, no. Speaker 1: Yeah, John Clark is a doctor that we interviewed, I think, back in 2002 [sic. 2003]. He's retiring maybe, or had, had retired for, he's about ninety years old, I think, when we interviewed him, and there were so many famous, who else was at Howard? Speaker 2: At Howard? Speaker 1: Were there any, any women on the faculty? Speaker 2: Oh yes, Dr. Lois Young, Dr. Lois A. Young, ophthalmologist extraordinaire. Dr. Young inspired not only myself, but she inspired another ten members of my class to go into ophthalmology. She was really great, you know. She had the same levels of brilliance and skill as a surgeon, as Dr. Leffall, she was gifted, compassionate, a wonderful human being and she was a very cool lady, you know. You know, we admired her as a woman, too. She had style and beauty, and we admired her both as a woman and as an ophthalmologist. Speaker 1: Now where was Dr. Young from do you know or, or do you know much about her background? Speaker 2: I believe she was from the area of D.C. [Washington, D.C.], Virginia or Maryland because I, I recall that her parents, when her parents became ill, you know, due to old age, she, she cared for them, each of them, and I know they were in the area. She eventually left Howard and went to Maryland, the University of Maryland [University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland] where she was the first African American on the faculty there. Speaker 1: Okay, so this was right after University of Maryland--was this after the University of Maryland integrated its faculty? Speaker 2: I, I don't know when they did, but I do know that her father had worked at some level at that university and at his retirement banquet, when he was given a gold watch, as he accepted it, he cursed the university for not giving his daughter a chance, and when I say cursed, I'm editorializing. He didn't use any blasphemous language, but he scolded them for their racist policies (laughter) and as, and as a result of that, the next year Lois was offered some training there. She took some fellowships there and eventually joined the faculty there. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So these were the days when the major white universities in that part of the country did, had no blacks on the faculty whatsoever for the most part? Speaker 2: Well, during that period of time, as you may recall, African American physicians were not allowed in the AMA [American Medical Association] in certain states, which is why the NMA [National Medical Association] came into being. While I was at Howard as a student, as a part of our civil rights activism, we founded a Student National Medical Association chapter there. So the present Student National Medical Association was founded by myself, Dr. Jack Moore [ph.], who recently passed, and a few others. Dr. Jack Moore was the first president, I believe, of Student National Medical Association, and I believe I was the second, either the second or the third president of SNMA. Story_ID: 643463 Speaker 1: At Howard [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.], now you gravitated towards ophthalmology-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --as well, was it be- because of Dr. Young [Lois A. Young]? Speaker 2: Yes, it was. You know, one has to make a choice during graduation, before graduation of what you're going to specialize in, unless you choose to be a general physician, and I knew I had to make that choice and I chose ophthalmology primarily because of her, but then also I enjoyed the surgical aspects of it, which are very demanding in terms of precision. I liked the aspect of it of the dramatic curing of blindness, which I felt was fantastic to be able to remove a cataract, someone who's blinded by cataracts, and do great surgery and restore vision so that aspect appealed to me rather than some other specialties that would involve being successful in surgery and the patient could still die, like brain cancer or something like that. So I enjoyed that aspect of the specialty, you know, the surgical precision and artistry that was required, and also the medical aspect of it, being able to see into the eye and see blood vessels, you know, without doing anything invasive or taking an x-ray, I thought that was really great. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, okay, so now did, were there, maybe this, this might come later, I don't know, but I read somewhere along the way that that there are some people in your family that had cataracts that they suffered from that, you know, made it, you know, kind of more personally like the-- Speaker 2: Actually, no. I had an interest in cancer that was related to my project at Yeshiva [Yeshiva University, New York, New York] because the rationale for the project related to cancer. But, no, the, there was no family connection to cataract surgery or blindness. Speaker 1: Okay, so I'm going to just throw that page out (laughter). Speaker 2: Um-hm, right. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 643464 Speaker 1: What was the most, most difficult thing about getting your M.D. at Howard [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.]? Speaker 2: (Laughter) I, I look back--that's, that's going to require some thinking. I look back upon those times as the happiest times. It was really the happiest period I would say because, you know, we were all friends and all, we studied together sometimes, we partied together, we ate together, you know, I lived in a house with other medical students; it was what kids have now in college that I never had as a student in high school [Charles Evans Hughes High School, New York, New York] or in college because, you know, I lived at home and didn't live in a dorm. So it was, it was a great time. I don't look back upon anything too difficult during those days except staying up late nights and, you know, booking, as we would call it. Speaker 1: Okay, so the, I take it, well, it just seems to me that the environment, I guess, is more, was more conducive to you, you know, well it was a more positive environment to learn in than say Hunter [Hunter College, New York, New York] was, am I correct? Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay. So, so you finished your M.D. in 1968-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --right? Oh, there's no, is there an equivalent to a dissertation for an M.D. or, or what is it? Speaker 2: No, but what there is, is there's a National Boards [National Board of Medical Examiners], so one has to pass an exam in the third year and then in the fourth year and that's a requirement of graduation, plus, there's licensure and licensure is a combination of having graduated from medical school and having passed National Boards, and any other state requirements. So, when I graduated from Howard in '68 [1968], and having passed National Boards, I think I had one state, Maryland, you could take that license exam immediately and I took that because I wanted to get my license as soon as possible, even though I wasn't going to practice in Maryland, so I got that license and then I went to New York [New York] and had to part--pass the second part, the last part of the National Boards and got my license in New York the following year, during my internship [at Harlem Hospital; Harlem Hospital Center, New York, New York]. Speaker 1: Okay, so when you get a, you go through licensure, does it mean that you can only practice in the state that you got a license to practice in? Speaker 2: That, that is how the law is in the United States, right. If I'm licensed in California and I want to practice in Nevada, I can't do that unless I have a license in Nevada; so it's state controlled. Speaker 1: So and the only way to get that license is to pass a board--or pass an exam? Speaker 2: Yes, unless the state has reciprocity and, for example, in Washington, D.C., if you have a Washington, D.C. license, in general, Maryland and Virginia will have reciprocity because they're adjacent, and if you present your D.C. license, they'll recognize, they'll recognize you and for paying a fee, they'll issue the license. Now that changes over, over time. You know, I don't know if that's still in effect. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, all right, that's good information. Story_ID: 643465 Speaker 1: Right after graduation [from Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.] then you were licensed then in Maryland and in New York State? Speaker 2: Not immediately but, yes. Speaker 1: But soon after? Speaker 2: Yes, soon after. Speaker 1: Soon after, so, so by 19--would you say, by 1969, you had both licenses or? Speaker 2: Yes, yes, and I was in New York [New York]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, I did my internship at Harlem Hospital [Harlem Hospital Center] in New York City, Harlem was affiliated with Columbia [Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons, New York, New York] and that was one of my dream objectives achieved because I always had planned to go back to the community I was raised in and give back. So, I was happy to do my internship at Harlem as a part of that fulfillment, but also because Columbia University decided to affiliate with Harlem, which was earthshaking, it was a major change in how medicine was practiced in New York. Speaker 1: Really, okay, I mean, and this is-- Speaker 2: Right, in other words, the ivory tower center of excellence, which would be at Columbia University or Cornell [Cornell University Medical College; Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, New York] or New York University [New York University School of Medicine, New York, New York] was going into Harlem [New York, New York], which had no university affiliation at that time and I think the civil rights era was a driving force behind that action, and a part of the great society that, you know, we were going to create. Speaker 1: Okay, and it makes sense geographically because Columbia basically, I think, is technically in Harlem, actually. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well you know, gerrymandering and political and social--no, it was not, you understand. Back then, 110th Street to about 150th Street and Columbia was 166 or 165th [Street], at least the hospital [Columbia Presbyterian Hospital; New York-Presbyterian Hospital, New York, New York], and the university is over there on Riverside Drive and the boundaries were kind of crazy, they're artificial boundaries. Speaker 1: Yeah, but, yeah, 'cause you, but-- Speaker 2: But you're right, yeah. Speaker 1: You could walk from Columbia to Harlem-- Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly. Speaker 1: --in five minutes, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, it made more sense to do that, it was the right thing to do. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, Harlem Hospital, right in the heart of Harlem, across the street from the Schomburg Center [Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture]-- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: --you know, which I, you know, something I (unclear) even remember but-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --but, yeah, that's, yeah so what was it like doing the residency right there in your own neighborhood? Speaker 2: Oh, it was great. I found many of my colleagues, in fact, I was class of '68 [1968], but the class of '67 [1967], you know, they were the first ones to gravitate towards Har- to Harlem Hospital because that was going to be the philosophic and the strategic political center for, you know, medicine; we were going to change things. You know, we wanted socialized medicine back then. We have Obamacare [Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2010] now which is a fraction of what socialized medicine would provide. And part of our civil rights activism in the '60s [1960s] was to provide medical care for all because, again, medical care, that was the, that's perhaps one of the most tragic aspects of segregation in that era, not only school segregation, but segregation to healthcare was, had tragic consequences. So, as I said, my upper classmates in the class of '67 [1967] had already gone. Ray Ransom [Raymond W. Ransom], Greta, Greta Fields [Great Fields Clarke], Carol Leo [ph.], Linda [ph.], Claudina [ph.], Dolores [ph.]; they had all gone the year before, and then in my group I was coming home, so it was great to be there. Story_ID: 643466 Speaker 1: I neglected to ask you about 1968 at, at Howard [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.]. Now were you on, you were, I guess, on the verge of graduation when Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was killed, right? Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yeah, that, that, you know, I wanted to mention about Dr. King earlier, and somehow it escaped me, but when I pledged AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority] as an undergraduate at Hunter College [New York, New York], my chapter [Lambda Chapter of Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.] nominated me for a national office which I did win, and I became the highest ranking undergraduate officer on the board of directors, second (unclear) basileus is what they called it and in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], when King, Martin Luther King, Jr. was speaking at the boule, I had the honor of introducing him to the boule. And so I met Dr. King and it was a brief interaction, you know, moments, minutes, but he was the type of charismatic person that could change (laughter) your whole perspective and so it had a great effect on me. And when I later went to medical school, and when he was killed, it, it did have a big effect on me and I participated in Resurrection City. I organized the medical students so we could provide healthcare, to some extent, during the Poor People's Campaign. You know, we had, that was really, it turned out to be a linchpin in the success of Resurrection City because they were trying to close it down for whatever reason and they didn't want to close it down because they didn't want poor people at the mall that would have not been an American way of closing it down, but, so they thought they could close it down based on health reasons, you know, overcrowding, unsanitary conditions and that's where the medical students came in and my role, with the role of some others, but we established the medical coordinating committee for the Resurrection City. Dr. Mazique, Ed Mazique [Edward C. Mazique], I recall, and Reverend Fauntroy [HistoryMaker Reverend Walter Fauntroy], they were the ones--and Joseph Rines [ph.] from Seventh-day Adventist, they were the ones who came up with this concept and, you know, the medical students supported it and so every time the Department of Health [U.S. Department of Health and Human Services] would come up with an excuse to close it, you know, we'd put our heads together and find a way to mitigate, you know, whether it was clean water testing, food preparation, number of infections, kids who needed shots, you know, it was my first field, battlefield experience. Speaker 1: Okay, now this happened, I guess the march, the Poor People's Campaign was a dream of Dr. King's and took place after his-- Speaker 2: Death. Speaker 1: --assassination, and-- Speaker 2: Yes, yes, '68 [1968]. Speaker 1: --after the riots and all those-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --were over, basically-- Speaker 2: Sixty-eight [1968]. Speaker 1: Yeah, '68 [1968]-- Speaker 2: Um-hm, the year I graduated [from Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 1: Yeah, so was that in, did that take place in June, May or June of that year? Speaker 2: Well, the Poor People's Campaign was for several months-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --but, you know, and, of course, when I graduated in May, I stayed, I stayed there until July, had to start my internship [at Harlem Hospital; Harlem Medical Center, New York, New York]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So I left. Speaker 1: So, yeah, my recollection is that it, yeah, it started maybe a month or two after Dr. King was assassinated then, with the march, then occupation of the Mall [National Mall, Washington, D.C.]-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --you know, so, okay so you there until Ju-- Speaker 2: It was great to be a part of that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I have an article on that too. That's, that was published in the Journal of the National Medical Association, there's a shot of myself and Dr. Mazique and the coordinating committee there and our story, what we were doing. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 643467 Speaker 1: Back at Harlem, Harlem Hospital [Harlem Medical Center, New York, New York], so you were a resident, I mean an-- Speaker 2: Intern. Speaker 1: --intern-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --at Harlem Hospital, and then you were a resident at the NYU-- Speaker 2: Yes, New York University. Speaker 1: --yeah--School of Medicine [New York University School of Medicine, New York, New York], right? So that's in 1970, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, and well, anything about that experience you want to share with us? Speaker 2: Well, at NYU I was, I think I was probably the first African American resident there, and it was a great program and it was a wonderful opportunity. I had some great moments (laughter), great moments there, great cases and some wonderful faculty members there. Dr. Harvey Tatiker [ph.] is one. Dr. Siegel [ph.] is another. Dr. D'Amico [ph.], Dr. Castroviejo [ph.]; I had wonderful teachers. Speaker 1: Okay, so you were NYU for--is that for a year or-- Speaker 2: I was there from '70 [1970] to '73 [1973]. Speaker 1: Okay, '70 [1970], '73 [1973]. Now, now your daughter was born in '72 [1972]? Speaker 2: Seventy-two [1972]. Speaker 1: Okay, right. Is there a story around--? Speaker 2: (Laughter) There's always a story. Well, you know, the story is that, first of all, you're the first African American resident, and then you get pregnant (laughter), what could be worse? You know, this is one of the, the major reasons that industry offers, when, when they say they don't want to hire women, it's because they get pregnant. So, that was, you know, I took some time off and then I had to make up the time, but it was worth it. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, now what about Eraka's [Eraka Bath] father [HistoryMaker Dr. Beny J. Primm]? Now, what, how does he fit into the story? Speaker 2: Well, I was married before I went to medical school [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.]. I got married, let's see, in 1964. Speaker 1: Oh, okay, now this is--yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, I got married in 1964, however, that marriage did not last and then in 1971, I fell in love, got pregnant, decided to have the baby and had a beautiful baby. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, but you, but it wasn't going to last as a relationship--? Speaker 2: Well, not as a typical orthodox relationship. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 643468 Speaker 1: So Eraka's [Eraka Bath] father, you know, he didn't, you all didn't have a-- Speaker 2: Well, let's just say-- Speaker 1: --traditional kind of-- Speaker 2: --well, her father is Beny Primm [HistoryMaker Dr. Beny J. Primm], we have a relationship, he's helped with tuition and, you know, things. Although fortunately, when I became pregnant, I was a physician, you know, I had income, assets and didn't need, you know, additional financial support, but certainly he has provided for her. They have a relationship, we have a relationship, and things have grown up well, as her growing up as a member of a single parent family. And what I find interesting today, and it just shows the long arc of time in how things change, I just made a decision when I became pregnant to allow the truth of, of my feelings and what was growing inside of me to exist and, you know, that's before Angelina Jolie and others have made this a popular thing for whatever reason. But, you know, there are moments in life when you have to make a decision and fortunately I have the strength of character to make the right decision and, you know, my daughter is a physician, faculty member of UCLA [David Geffen School of Medicine, Los Angeles, California], and I have a beautiful granddaughter (laughter). So, you know, life is good. Speaker 1: Okay, that's the right decision. Story_ID: 643469 Speaker 1: In 1973, you have the position as assistant surgeon at Syd- Sydenham Hospital [New York, New York] in-- Speaker 2: Oh, that's, yeah, you've really done some good research (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, well thank you (laughter). Somebody else did the research, I just kind of, you know, read it. Speaker 2: Uh-huh, right. That's usually not in the--you know, my bios are on the Smithsonian [Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C.], MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and National Library of Medicine [Bethesda, Maryland] websites, to name a few, and no one's mentioned (pronunciation) Sydenham Hospital. Speaker 1: Sydenham, okay. Speaker 2: But, yes, I was there briefly. You know, I'd actually finished my residency [at New York University School of Medicine, New York, New York] and it was a period where, you know, I had to make a decision of where am I going to build my career. And in New York [New York] I cobbled together appointments at Syd- Sydenham Hospital and also Flower-Fifth Avenue [Flower-Fifth Avenue Hospital, New York, New York] and New York Medical College [Valhalla, New York] and in the midst of that, Charles R. Drew Medical School [Charles R. Drew Postgraduate Medical School; Charles R. Drew University of Medicine and Science] had just begun in Los Angeles [California] and, more importantly, the affiliation with UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles School of Medicine; David Geffen School of Medicine, Los Angeles, California] had just begun and having experienced the chemistry of Columbia [Columbia Presbyterian Hospital; New York-Presbyterian Hospital, New York, New York] and Harlem [New York, New York], and liking it, I decided that I wanted to be in California. And so, you know, it seemed that, that the world was my oyster and what I wanted I could get, and I got the job. So, then I began my career, you know, out here in California. Speaker 1: Now tell us a little bit, now Charles R. Drew University is new, was new then-- Speaker 2: It was new. Speaker 1: --it's a historically black college [HBCU]. Speaker 2: Well, it's inter- interesting one would call it that when it just started (laughter). But, right, they put themselves in that category for, I guess, a number of reasons, most of them tied to funding and that's--that's fine. But in the memory of Dr. Charles Drew [Charles R. Drew] who was a famous surgeon, you know, all that it's-- Speaker 1: At Howard, yeah-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --itself, yeah, at Howard University Hospital [Freedmen's Hospital; Howard University Hospital, Washington, D.C.], yeah. So, so there are Drew health centers and Drew medical clinics all over the United States. Speaker 2: All over the United States. Speaker 1: And, I think, all of them named about the same time, you know, and we have one in Dayton [Ohio], my hometown, Charles R. Drew [Charles R. Drew Health Center]-- Speaker 2: Well, yeah, what he did, what his accomplishment was really great, absolutely great, and the timing of it during the war [World War II, WWII], wow, to discover how to obtain lifesaving plasma, save the troops, contribute to medical science, it was really extraordinary. Many have said that he was deserving of the Nobel Prize in medicine, and, and I agree, but they don't award it posthumously, as you know. Story_ID: 643470 Speaker 1: I don't want to go past this, but you completed a fellowship in ke- keratopro- prosthesis? Speaker 2: Yes, keratoprosthesis surgery (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 2: --which is like corneal transplantation surgery. That was done also between '73 [1973] and '74 [1974] in New York [New York] during that period of time that I was at Sydenham Hospital and at New York Hospital [Columbia Presbyterian Hospital; New York-Presbyterian Hospital, New York, New York]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: And at that time, that was really a very important accomplishment in my career to snag a fellowship with Dr. Ramon Castroviejo who, at that time, was one of the most famous and brilliant corneal transplant surgeons in the world. He was so famous that the three universities, three medical universities in New York, allowed him to have simultaneous faculty appointments. Usually you can't be at both; you can't be at both NYU [New York University School of Medicine] and Columbia [Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons], you have to be at one or the other. It's like you can't be both a Giant and a Yankee [sic.], you know, you can only be one team. But he had appointments at all three, you know, universities in New York, he was that great and-- Speaker 1: Now was he from another country or was he-- Speaker 2: Spain. Speaker 1: Spain, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, and he invented many instruments for eye surgery and he and Dr. Cardona [Hernando Cardona] invented what was called the keratoprosthesis, which fascinated me because, you know, when one wants to cure blindness and restore sight, you wonder what are the limitations, and sometimes the limitations are the human--are the availability of human tissue. I mean you've heard many times that these, this one is going to die because we can't get a kidney, and this one will die because you can't get a liver. Well, sometimes the limitation is you don't have the corneas, however, what they invented was the artificial cornea. And so, that was really exciting to be able to know that hey, if I can learn this, I won't be limited by the lack of available tissue, but there is this device called the keratoprosthesis. And the other important thing is that sometimes the nature of the disease dictates the use of artificial tissue, and one of my oft-time quotes is, 'The limits of science are not the limits of protoplasm," which is great, you know, there's always possibility. So, yes, that was a big period that one year period where I apprenticed with Cardona and Castroviejo, the keratoprosthesis. Story_ID: 643471 Speaker 1: Now, once again, Charles R. Drew [Charles R. Drew Postgraduate Medical School; Charles R. Drew University of Science and Medicine, Los Angeles, California], now, was Charles Drew conceived of as a hospital to give opportunities for African American and maybe even minority medical students? Speaker 2: Now keep in mind, I'm in New York [New York] and they, they founded this institution before I arrived. My understanding is that Charles Drew medical school was founded as a result of the McCone Commission. There were riots after the assassination of Dr. Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and--there were riots in Los Angeles [California] and a commission was set up. One of the findings of the commission was that the area of Watts [Los Angeles, California] and South Central [Los Angeles, California] was not only impoverished, but the people lacked access to medical care. So, the McCone Commission determined that one of the positive things that they could do was to promote the establishment of healthcare. So two things happened. One, they built Martin Luther King Hospital [Martin Luther King Jr./Drew Medical Center; Martin Luther King Jr. Outpatient Center, Los Angeles, California], which was the county; and secondly, the Drew medical school was created to nurture the hospital, in the same way that Columbia [Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons, New York, New York] would nurture Harlem Hospital [Harlem Medical Center, New York, New York]. The problem though was that Drew had not existed as an established medical school. It's not as if it was a transplant of Howard [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.], which couldn't be done. So in order to empower the newly established Drew medical school, the leadership at Drew decided that they would affiliate half of their departments with UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles School of Medicine; David Geffen School of Medicine, Los Angeles, California] and half of the departments with USC [University of Southern California School of Medicine; Keck School of Medicine, Los Angeles, California]. They felt that that way Drew could maintain autonomy. Had they only affiliated with UCLA, then they would, they felt they would lose autonomy or the same would happen if they had only affiliated with USC. But they felt that by having two major strong institutions that they could maintain autonomy and grow and then eventually, if decided, cut ties with both. So, it was mainly established to provide service to the underserved community of Watts and South Central. Story_ID: 643472 Speaker 1: So you come aboard in 1974, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And now you're the first woman member of the-- Speaker 2: Faculty. Speaker 1: --woman member of the faculty of UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles School of Medicine; David Geffen School of Medicine, Los Angeles, California], is that true, of the Jules Stein Eye Institute? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. The interesting thing is that--well first of all, as I said, my reason to go to California was to be at both institutions, not one--that was the arrangement. So, I immediately had appointments at both UCLA and Drew [Charles R. Drew Postgraduate Medical School; Charles R. Drew University of Science and Medicine, Los Angeles, California], and I didn't realize that at UCLA I would be the first woman. I didn't realize that. I really didn't realize it until a couple of years afterwards when there was another woman faculty member bec- and, and understandably, I'm at three different institutions, working twelve hour days, it's very busy. So, I didn't have time to, to pan around and say am I the only one (laughter), I mean, but, yeah, those were some tough days. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But great days. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: I mean to be, to be a founding member of a new department; that was one of the reasons I left New York [New York University School of Medicine, New York, New York]. New York is established and even to get on the staff as a full time faculty member, is very difficult because they already have huge faculties, and to have a leadership role in a residency program, a teaching program, that's even a more far reach goal. So, when the opportunity to have all of that by just moving across the country, in the land of palm trees, snowcapped mountains and beaches (laughter), yeah, it was an easy decision. Story_ID: 643473 Speaker 1: In '77 [1977], now correct me if I'm going too fast here, but in 1977 you and some of your colleagues established the American Institute for the Prevention of Blindness-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --right? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. So after I had established myself--by then, I believe, I had purchased a home, I wanted to fulfill another dream or goal, which is to go to Africa. Remember, Albert Schweitzer was my hero. So going to Africa was always a dream and I had made contacts at Drew [Charles R. Drew Postgraduate Medical School; Charles R. Drew University of Science and Medicine, Los Angeles, California] and at UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles School of Medicine; David Geffen School of Medicine, Los Angeles, California] with Dr. Aaron Ifekwunigwe who was a member of both schools, and he was from Nigeria. He was a Biafran who had led the United Nations UNESCO [United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization] effort in Biafra during the war [Nigerian Civil War], you know, feeding thousands of children, he was a pediatrician. And he had contacts at the universities and he knew that I wanted to do some blindness work there so I had the faculty connections and through correspondence arranged to do a, what would we call this, this was not a sabbatical, but it was just an exchange. I went there for about a month, between the university teaching hospital in Enugu [Nigeria], in Lagos [Nigeria] and Kano [Nigeria] and provided eye services, you know, with other ophthalmologists and faculty there. And when I came back, having seen the extent of blindness, I realized that we had to come up with a solution that was not based on Dr. Bath [HistoryMaker Dr. Patricia Bath] flying over there; we had to come up with a long term solution that was organized by the people and for the people. So we came up with the idea of creating an organization that would promote methodologies of self-help, and there would be cadres of personnel, members of teams to do different parts: you know, training indigenous people to become health educators, health educators to educate the people about the warning signs of glaucoma, cataract, eye infection. Health educators about nutrition, you know, there's not too much you can do if there's starvation such as in the Sudan or Somalia. Of course, you know, giving vitamin A is appropriate to protect the eye, but if there's calorie malnutrition, and protein malnutrition, you have to treat the whole patient. But the point is that health educators are a necessary part of the team in addition to the doctor who can fly over there maybe once a year, and also you have to train ophthalmic assistants, which is comparable to the physician's assistant. Now around that time, communities in the United States had taken proactive roles about medicine. And the concept, the discipline of community medicine came into being at medical schools; it started in the community, then finally came into the medical school. So we came up, not only with the organization called the, American Institute for the Prevention of Blindness but we came up with the concept called, community ophthalmology and in community ophthalmology, you have the concept of using the public health tools of epidemiology, biostatistics and demographics to modulate and to determine what the blindness causes are within a community, and what the eye problems are in a community and allocate resources, you know, based on those determinants as well as needs. Community ophthalmology is now practiced worldwide, but it started with the AIPB, AIPB is for American Institute for the Prevention of Blindness, and started through traveling one year to Nigeria, another year to China, another year to Pakistan, you know, speaking at conventions, having partnerships with Dr. Kermani [ph.] in Pakistan; Professor Kwaku Oppong [Kwaku Oppong Asante] in Ghana; and the International Agency for the Prevention of Blindness; and WHO [World Health Organization]; and as many people as you can get to listen to you. That's how community ophthalmology started. Story_ID: 643474 Speaker 1: I know that, you know, prevention in this country wasn't really a national dialog until, around the time that you founded, you know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) I would love to take credit for that. Speaker 1: --those organizations-- Speaker 2: I'm not sure I-- Speaker 1: Yeah. I'm not saying that you, you're the one that did it, but I know that--we interviewed a doctor, black doctor in Hampton [Virginia] who wrote his senator because he found out he, Medicaid would not pay for prevention and it changed the whole course of Medicaid. I mean, he changed the-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --it refocused Medicaid on some prevention too and he specialized, I can't think of his name now, but he's at Hampton, but he focuses on three major diseases in the black community, you know, diabetes, heart disease and hypertension, and those diseases also are major-- Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yes, yes, education and prevention. Speaker 1: Yeah, those are major causes of blindness. Speaker 2: Yeah. No, you're absolutely right. Speaker 1: Okay, so did you, did you all conduct a study too about this, about the--? Speaker 2: Not only did we conduct a study, but I published the study [in the Journal of the National Medical Association]-- Speaker 1: Oh, that's right. Speaker 2: --and I'd like to say how happy I am that finally the American Academy of Ophthalmology [San Francisco, California] has acknowledged some of my contributions and this year the academy met in Chicago [Illinois] this year, in November, and I was at the academy and my oral history transcript is now part of their museum [Museum of Vision, San Francisco, California] and published and it turns out that I am--my publication, which found that blindness among black Americans is double the rate among white Americans, and glaucoma is the cause eight times more frequently, you know--I was the first person to discover that and publish that. And as I said, you know, from early, the early residence with Albert Schweitzer about wanting to help humanity has translated into activities and programs, whether it's eye surgery with the keratoprosthesis or community ophthalmology, it's all part of my mission. Speaker 1: Okay, now, now that's a tremendous contribution, and you, and I wish I can think of the doctor and-- Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: --I can't think of his name right now but I can, we can get it for you at some point. But he had documented his correspondence with, with Medicaid and stuff to, you know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I would love to get that reference. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 643475 Speaker 1: But you did something in 1981, now this is really, changes a lot of things, this is the, a laser approach to eye surgery-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --laserphaco probe, right? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Well, you know, it actually--and that's interesting you have the 1981 date (laughter), which shows the scholarship of your research (laughter) 'cause most people will say 1986 because that's when I filed for the patent but, you know, by the time you file the patent, you've already had the idea and reduced it to practice; therefore, you can file the patent. But, yeah, you're right. It was around '81 [1981] that I had begun thinking about this but it wasn't until '86 [1986] or '85 [1985], '86 [1986] that I got the opportunity because it takes time and, you know, I'm at Charles R. Drew [Charles R. Drew Postgraduate Medical School; Charles R. Drew University of Science and Medicine, Los Angeles, California], I'm at UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles School of Medicine; David Geffen School of Medicine, Los Angeles, California], I'm at the Jules Stein [Jules Stein Eye Institute], Martin Luther King Hospital [Martin Luther King Jr./Drew Medical Center; Martin Luther King Jr. Outpatient Center, Los Angeles, California], and single mother (laughter), and so, but in '86 [1986] I had a sabbatical which is when, as a full time academic at a medical school you're given the opportunity to do research and not have clinical responsibilities. So that was the time I took to perfect, you know, my invention. Story_ID: 643476 Speaker 1: Now how did you come up with this invention? How did this idea come to you? Speaker 2: I know. Well, well that's back in '81 [1981]. I was trying to--I had a patient who was blind, I was planning to operate on her eye and the night before I was envisioning what I was going to do the next day and I realized that the instrument I needed didn't exist (laughter), and the technique, you know, the technique had not been tried. I did the operation anyway but, you know, I had figured out how I'd like to do it if I had the tools, and the tool that I was thinking about was a f- a laser that I could project through, focus through a fiber. Now, we do that all the time with la- laser fiber optics. There's toys like that but back then there was not that device for eye surgery or for urologic surgery back then. So, I had the opportunity to do a sabbatical, I chose Paris [France] and Berlin [Germany] because I knew they had the lasers and, you know, I cobbled together with off the shelf available things and created a delivery system, you know. After working, doing some fundamental research on the lens at the Laser Medical Center in Berlin, it was one of those eureka moments (laughter) when it worked at like 3 a.m. in the morning when, you know, the coffee machine, you know that horrible coffee that comes out of the machine, but that's all that was there and, you know, you finally realize it, it was worth it because, you know, what you've conceived of is actually working, it was really a great moment. Speaker 1: Okay, what did you try it out on initially? Speaker 2: Well, we started out with what we call bovine lenses, and these are lenses from beef eyeballs. So we started out with that, and the first thing that we had to do was to calculate something called the ablation threshold. You have to do that so that as you're firing laser, you're right within the range of ablation. You don't want to be too high, cause an explosion; you don't want to be too low and not have anything happen. So you have to do that determination so a lot of preliminary fundamental work was done with those lenses. Then based on that, we moved to human lenses. Now the human lenses we got from Eye Bank eyes [Eye Bank Association of America], and it turns out that, you know, the human lens absorbs a lot of radiation in the ultraviolet range that we were working at. And so, after doing that, then we had not only the human lenses, but we had donated human globes because when we do corneal transplant surgery, you know, we use donated eyes, and we take the cornea from that eye and transplant it. So these were, you know, this was vi- human eye tissue that was suitable for donation so we used those to prove that laserphaco was feasible, it was based on that research that the first patent was applied for and obtained. Story_ID: 643477 Speaker 1: The laserphaco eye probe is patented in 1988, I think, right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right. Speaker 1: Okay, and did it, so was it pretty much as you envisioned it? Wh- I mean, did you, work exactly the way you kind of dreamt it would, or? Speaker 2: Well, you know, the thing about medicine is that everything is going to change and be improved upon. So, that's the reason that I have five patents and not one because, you know, with improvements in technology, you can improve the way your device functions and make it do things even more proficiently. But at this point in time, given how innovations progress, there is a new technique called femtosecond laser cataract surgery that is now the cutting edge of cataract surgery. And in this technique, one is able to simply focus the laser beam through the cornea, onto the lens and basically, I could say vaporize but it's really a fragmentation and oblation, and it's pretty amazing technology that has really surpassed laserphaco as it was invented back in 1986. Speaker 1: Okay, but-- Speaker 2: You know, that was what over, almost thirty years ago. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, inventions, you know, get better over time. I mean, procedures get better over time-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --I know-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --but at the time, what you were doing was-- Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely (laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah, this was a brilliant (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was the wave. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: It was the wave for a period of time. Story_ID: 643478 Speaker 1: From '83 [1983] to '86 [1986], I have a note here that you are, you know, while you were developing laserphaco probe and improving it and trying to get it pa- patented, you were the first woman chair and program director-- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: --of post-- Speaker 2: Oh, yes, yes, how could I forget that. Speaker 1: Yeah. This is at, at UC-- Speaker 2: At Drew [Charles R. Drew Postgraduate Medical School; Charles R. Drew University of Medicine and Science]--UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles School of Medicine; David Geffen School of Medicine, Los Angeles, California], Drew, yeah. Speaker 1: --at Drew, Drew, yeah. Speaker 2: Right. Again, I had started out there as assistant chief, and then in 1983 I was made chief. Now, what's amazing is that when I was made chief of ophthalmology, of a residency program, that was the first time a woman had been chief in the United States of an eye training program. So, as I said, that's one of those incidental firsts; it's something that you don't really aim for but it just happens along the way as you're doing your job. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So this is--are there any stories about that? I mean, did-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) I remember when I was appointed chief, you know, there is certainly too much hard work that comes with that territory. So, you know, the buck ends with you. But there's an organization called the American association of university professors in ophthalmology, AUPO [Association of University Professors of Ophthalmology]. So as chief of a residency program, you have to attend the annual meeting, and it was on my schedule, you know my secretary had booked the travel and I'm on a plane and I arrive and that's when I knew I was the only woman chair (laughter), and it was, it was an awkward situation (laughter). It was awkward. Many times, you know, it was a surprise, I didn't realize that, and it wasn't a type of social occasion. You know, it was all, you know, meetings and business and that sort of thing. It would have been nice to have had another woman there. Now, that's changed. There are several women chairs of ophthalmology now. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 643479 Speaker 1: Well from the time of the patent, let's see, in '88 [1988] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Nineteen eighty-eight [1988]. Speaker 1: --and what were your, were you pri- primarily consumed with-- Speaker 2: Research? Speaker 1: --yeah-- Speaker 2: That was a period-- Speaker 1: --laserphaco [laserphaco probe]? Speaker 2: Yeah, that was a period of lots of publications, lots of, lots of work writing the patents and doing the research and, of course, you know, I was still practicing. Speaker 1: Okay. Now we have a note here you published over a hundred, maybe more, you know, now I may be-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) Oh, I brought a couple of the books, I brought a couple of the books. Well, there was just a lot. It was a very productive period in life. A couple of textbook chapters, you know, like 'Atlas of Ophthalmic Surgery' ['Atlas of Contemporary Ophthalmic Surgery,' Henry M. Clayman and Bruce A. Barron], there's my chapter in that book on keratoprosthesis surgery, and then another book on 'The Pathology of the Eye' [John Herbert Parsons], well, there's my chapter on, you know, lenses; so, a lot of different publications. Speaker 1: Okay, now as a lay person listening to what you do as a eye surgeon, now what, I'm suppo- when I listen to the laser--I suppose what you all are doing are slicing off cataracts or, with a laser beam, right, basically, or? Speaker 2: Yes, we know there's a video, there's a video that you can actually watch in one of the links that I provided for you. But you want to know how it's done, I should articulate? Speaker 1: Yeah, you should explain it for people watching this and know exactly what, what you're doing. Speaker 2: Well, well, in standard cataract surgery, one makes a small incision about three mm or so at the limbus of the eye and you insert a device called a phaco probe, which is a device that uses ultrasound energy to fragment the lens nucleus, it's like a jackhammer, and it fragments the nucleus into small pieces so that you can aspirate them around the sleeve of the probe. And with laserphaco, instead of using mechanical energy like a jackhammer, you use the laser light, it's the pulses of light that do the same thing, they accomplish the same result but in a different manner; they not only fragment but they call- it causes disintegration or oblation, the material not only becomes smaller but some of it is, is vaporized, and you remove it with the same manner of irrigation and aspiration. Once that's done, then you've removed the cataract and the next stage is to implant a lens, a clear lens, an artificial manmade lens to restore the power which will allow the eye to focus and see without glasses. Prior to the invention of the intraocular lens, which had its debut in the, in the early '80s [1980s], people would have to wear thick spectacles, cataract spectacles, and the type of vision they had, though functional, was not similar to natural vision prior to cataract surgery. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: But I think that when, when and if the oral history is done, there could be links to the videos, you know, to show some of this. I'm hoping that, you know, these enhancements will be possible. Story_ID: 643480 Speaker 1: What were you wor- working on leading up to your retirement? And just--so you retired in '93 [1993], which-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --to me it seems young to retire-- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: --but I don't know, you had done a lot by then, I mean it's not like you hadn't done anything, you know, you've done a lot, so. Speaker 2: Well, you know, I had achieved a lot of my professional goals, one of which was to have my residents publish. Keep in mind, I'm working, my residency program is not at UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles School of Medicine; David Geffen School of Medicine, Los Angeles, California], my residency program is at the Martin Luther King--King/Drew Medical Center [Martin Luther King Jr./Drew Medical Center; Martin Luther King Jr. Outpatient Center, Los Angeles, California]. So, the access to lab [laboratory] research is not there and the, the time to do clinical research does not exist. We all know that county hospitals are overburdened with too many patients, not enough staff, not enough resources. So it's very hard for the residents to have the time to publish and to do research but nevertheless that was a goal. So, by the time I had retired, each of my residents, you know, had co-published with me a paper and that was a big goal. And I think moving up the faculty rank from starting as an assistant professor to becoming chairperson, you know, that was another goal; and inventing something (laughter), that was not necessarily a goal but it was an accomplishment that allowed me to pause and reflect. And the other important thing by that time my daughter [Eraka Bath] was at Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California], you know, and, you know, she, she was soon accepted or was going to be accepted to medical school [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.]. But there are two things to look at in terms of why I decided to retire. One is that I wanted to do some other things, have some break from, you know, working at three different institutions, you know, all the time and you really not having free time because as a real doctor, and I was a real doctor, you're always on call, even when someone else is quote unquote taking call for you, you're on call. If I operate on this lady's eye and she's doing well but somebody's covering for me that weekend, I'm still on call if she needs me, so, you always have a beeper and so part of it was wanting to pause and reflect. And the other had to do with the, the jealousy and--the jealousy of those who didn't, who hadn't accomplished what I had accomplished (laughter). It's not easy to stay on the farm. It's not easy to stay on the island when you have made these achie- achievements. Hubble [Edwin Hubble] found that out, so many have found that out and I found that out and, and by that time I wanted to have a different type of practice, which I felt I was entitled to. And, let's put it this way, those who could have made the decision to allow that, didn't agree, and so it was time to say goodbye, and so, that's what I did. Story_ID: 643481 Speaker 1: As a matter of fact, one of the first things I did in my retirement is resonate with another inventor who is the famous peanut inventor, Dr. Carver [George Washington Carver]. Did you know that he loved to paint, and he was an artist as well? It's not well publicized-- Speaker 2: Right, he was an art major in school, I think at Iowa State [Iowa State University, Ames, Iowa]. Speaker 1: --but they're beautiful, yeah, they're beautiful drawings of flowers that he did but I loved the arts and I have been on several museums and art boards over my years here. As a matter of fact, I was a founding board member of CAAM [California African American Museum, Los Angeles, California], it was called the Afro-American Museum of History and Culture [ph.], but I was a founding board member there. And after years of being a collector and a patron of the arts, I wanted to take the time to express myself artistically. And so for a few years, you know, I created on canvas and, but of course, my, my passion to help the blind, I could devote more time to that and the American Institute for the Prevention of Blindness, and so I did and that, that probably gets us up to around the '94 [1994], I think that you were asking about that. Speaker 2: The time that you retired, yeah. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: Ninety--that's '93 [1993], right? Or ninety-- Speaker 1: Yeah, around that. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: You know it's hard to kind of pinpoint. Speaker 2: So you oil paint? Is that what it is? Speaker 1: Actually, my interest is in collage, I like collage. Speaker 2: Okay, okay. Now it's just amazing how many scientific people, or people in science play an instrument or do art. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: Well there are quite a few than more than people would think, you know, so that line between science and-- Speaker 1: And art (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) creativity and art is not so heavy. Speaker 1: Yeah. And surgery is an art-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --I feel. Speaker 2: Right. Story_ID: 643482 Speaker 1: I have a note here that you were also involved in the invention of an ultrasound method of removing a-- Speaker 2: Cataract? Speaker 1: --ca- yeah. Speaker 2: That was my latest patent, the one I got, I think, in '04 [sic. 2000], I think in '04 [2004]. Yes, that was a combination device. Speaker 1: Okay, well-- Speaker 2: It was really, actually, it's related to my first patent; it's a modification that allows you to use both ultrasound and laser. Speaker 1: Okay, now your work with the American institute to prevent blindness [American Institute for the Prevention of Blindness]-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --has taken you all over the world, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So, can you, is now a good time to describe this? Speaker 2: Sure. As a matter of fact, I brought many photos and things related to that. In the beginning, the organization, which was, had as its founders, physicians and the good part about that is we could give services and also, we could, we could solicit drugs, eye drops, equipment, from the vendors because we were physicians, and we would go to conventions and ask for donations and, basically, that's what we did for about a decade or so. We would donate either services or equipment and eye drops to those hospitals and clinics affiliated with institutions that we knew through relationships worldwide: some in South America, in China, in Pakistan, in Africa. But then, as the geopolitical climate changed and it became somewhat dangerous to go to various places, and as we grew older, we decided to change the thrust of what we did to educational, educational support and educational infrastructure. Currently, we see it to be very important to empower the blind people. Yes, it's important to restore sight and to prevent blindness, but in order to achieve those goals, you really have to rely on infrastructure and funding, and it's very difficult to achieve those goals from afar. And if you think, think about that, as an institution, you can't control that, and you can't simply pour in funds. So, the goals of prevention and treatment rightly remain as the responsibility of each state, each government, to its people. But educational empowerment, that's something that we can do and do that in collaboration and consultation to help those who are blind because frequently, as the government allocates their resources, sadly, they don't care about the blind, they care about the prevention and occupational rehabilitation more so than those who are blind. Story_ID: 643483 Speaker 1: We have started a couple of programs, and--first in Tanzania, then in Kenya, by donating computers to the blind children at the blind schools and we launched a very successful program in Tanzania in 2006 at a school with about eight hundred blind children [Mwereni Integrated School for the Blind, Moshi, Tanzania] and from a few laptops, has grown a computer lab, a satellite dish and now, you know, computers. These kids are in the digital age. In 2008, we started a program in Kenya at the St. Oda School [St. Oda School for the Blind, Siaya County, Kenya], which is a school for blind children run by Franciscan nuns and, and again, we started with donation of just a few computers, and configured these pu- computers with voice activation software and, what is called in the industry, assisted technology. We started with about eight computers and then we sent one of our tech people to the school and we established an IT [information technology] library there and gave hands on teaching to some of their instructors, and the program has blossomed. This September, we brought Sister Leonora [ph.], who is the headmaster of the school, we brought her to Los Angeles [California], had a fundraiser, she had some educational activities and we sent her back with about a dozen computers and the school is doing well. And so this is our current program, we call it ComputerVision. By installing these computers with specialized accessibility software for the blind, they can surf the net [Internet], they can learn, they can educate and empower themselves, and they use the computer as you would. They can now have access. The school starts from kindergarten all the way up to K-12 [kindergarten to twelfth grade]. So they have access to the courses that, you know, they're free online courses at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and most of the major universities, Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California]--they're free online courses. The limitation that we know exists is, is bandwidth; that's something we can't control. The school needs better bandwidth and a lot of technical things, you know. They need a network administrator (laughter). But at least, you know, we've started and we think, you know, this is the next dimension, you know, so from, you know over the years, in terms of what I've done, it's gone from removing cataracts and putting in the keratoprosthesis and restoring vision to now, even giving the vision to those people who can't have vision through those surgeries. So it's a good thing. Speaker 2: Okay, okay. So, in terms of your activities today, does that, does the American Institute [American Institute for the Prevention of Blindness] take up a large (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 2: --part of your time? Speaker 1: Yeah, that, plus my granddaughter (laughter). Speaker 2: Okay. All right. Story_ID: 643484 Speaker 1: We always ask this question: what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: Well, on the cusp of the election of [HistoryMaker] President Barack Obama, I think the future looks good because I think that, that's enough to inspire those who would be without hope. I think his example should serve as a great inspiration but my hope and concern for the community is that education be embraced (laughter), that there be more of a passion for education. I see, as I look back on my life, that education was the key to whatever success I have achieved, and I'm pretty sure that President Obama would also cite education as being very important. And, and now we have all kinds of opportunities to education, even if you can't afford the tuition at Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] or Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California] or Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], you can take those courses online. So I really don't see any barriers to people achieving their dreams, except their limitations within, and I would hope that they would allow some inspiration to enter. Story_ID: 643485 Speaker 1: Now when you look back at everything you've, well, done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could now? Speaker 2: (Laughter) (Pause) A period of silence follows as I think. It'd be pretty hard (laughter). No, I think I have been blessed and I think that I have lived the American dream, that I am the American dream and, you know, I've had it all (laughter), and I'm happy to share it too. Story_ID: 643486 Speaker 1: Now once again, when we review everything you accomplished to this time, to this point, what today would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: Ah ha. Well, you know, that's a question that I get asked pretty often these days, and it's difficult to say. Most times, people say that it would be the laserphaco invention [laserphaco probe], and that's close to my heart. But I think the, for me, the most exciting moments have been when, as a surgeon, I remove the patch and a patient says, "I can see." So for me, that's been the most exciting part of my life as an ophthalmologist. But I believe that if community ophthalmology and the work of blindness prevention prevails, and continues, that that would really be the most important legacy because of the blind people it would help, and the people who would not be blind because of the concepts of prevention and treatment. So I would hope that an understanding of community ophthalmology and all its goals, all its methods and its expanse further than it is now, would, would continue. Story_ID: 643487 Speaker 1: I know your parents [Gladys Elliott Bath and Rupert S.M. Bath] were probably proud of you, so how did they react to you, you know, becoming a doctor and--? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Oh, I'm happy to say that both my parents lived to see me graduate from medical school [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.] and to enjoy some of my successes. I was able to bring each of them out to California and we went to Disneyland [Anaheim, California] (laughter). So, no, they were, they were very proud, proud of both myself and my brother [Rupert Bath]. You know we both graduated from college, which was their dream and, you know, they worked hard and did what they had to do so that we could achieve that goal. Story_ID: 643488 Speaker 1: Your family today, you've got a daughter [Eraka Bath] and a grandbaby and--? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes, cousins, friends, extended family, tribe, posse. Speaker 1: I know you mentioned before that your, your daughter was a doctor-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --assigned to, at UCLA Hospital [Ronald Reagan UCLA Medical Center, Los Angeles, California]? Speaker 2: Yeah, my daughter is, she graduated from Howard medical school [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.], then got credentials as a child and forensic psychiatrist at NYU [New York University School of Medicine, New York, New York] and she's triple boarded in child forensic and adult psychiatry, and she's the director of forensic child psychiatry at UCLA Department of Psychiatry [UCLA Department of Psychiatry and Biobehavioral Sciences, David Geffen School of Medicine, Los Angeles, California]. So I'm happy that she's in academia and is happy (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 643489 Speaker 1: Is there anything I have not asked you before I ask--that we need to cover before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: (Laughter) I can't think of any, you've been very thorough. Speaker 1: Well all right, there'll be something but we'll, we'll remember it tonight, probably (laughter). But the last question is similar to legacy but a little bit different. Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: I would like to be remembered as someone who loved life and was very passionate about everything, whether it was saving sight, saving lives or love...