 Story_ID: 83630 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewing for The HistoryMakers today. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: All right, I am T, L, Barrett, Junior. The "T", "L", stands for Thomas Lee. T-H-O-M-A-S, L-E-E, B-A-R-R-E-T-T, Junior. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: January 13th, 1944, Jamaica, New York. Speaker 1: Okay, here is what they call it Jamaica Long Island, New York. Speaker 2: Jamaica, Long Island-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --New York, better known as Queens. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and sir, what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I am a pastor, the senior pastor of the Life Center Church of God in Christ. Speaker 1: All right, and what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today is the 25th of March, 2003. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: You're in my office, the Prayer Palace, which is the affectionate spiritual name of our building, the Life Center Church House of Worship. It is located at 5500 South Indiana Avenue, in Chicago, Illinois. Story_ID: 83631 Speaker 1: All right, now before we get into depth, there are five "People Magazine-ish" type questions we always ask and they just require a short answer. The first one is, sir, what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: My favorite food. I would have to say it's my wife's [Cleopatra Barrett] chicken and dumplings. Speaker 1: Okay, now sir, do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: My favorite color is black. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Yes, early summer. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: When it's not too hot or too cold. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Favorite vacation destination is actually home, because I spend such few precious hours at home that when I get a time to just relax, I do like to relax at home. Now my favorite getaway vacation is Seoul, Korea [South Korea]. Speaker 1: Okay, now tell me, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Yes, it's my personal philosophy and that is, "I am alive in this season for a divine reason." Story_ID: 83632 Speaker 1: Okay, let's--let me ask you about your family history, I mean, and what I mean is, how far can you trace your family back to--do you know anything about what your family was doing in the 19th Century, say, or beyond? Like how far can you go back? Speaker 2: It's an interesting question that you ask because it's a very deeply emotional, important subject matter in my life. I think that family is the most important asset that any man has so, therefore, it's his most important involvement no matter what he becomes involved in, there's nothing more important than family. So, you should put family first and you should know as much about your family as you possibly can. And I am frustrated that I do not know as much about my family history and lineage as I would like to know. I only can go back as far as my grandfather, on my mother's side, and my grandfather, on my father's side. Beyond that, I cannot go too far back because they didn't keep records. But to show my deep regard for family, for the past twenty years, I have been keeping a personal journal of my life. Some of them were lost in the transition from our old church building to this one. But my children and their children can go back at least ten to twelve years from this date and they can see the history of my life for at least twelve years every day, every minute for the past twelve years and for as long as the good Lord will allow me to express here this plane of existence, there will be a history of my life. And I teach my children to keep journals of their lives so that three, four hundred years from now, our family lineage will be intact and our descendants can trace their lineage and their history back to this present day and time. It's very, very important and I appeal to my church members to do the same thing. Speaker 1: That's--that's valuable-- Speaker 2: Yes-- Speaker 1: --you know what you're describing. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: But do you have any idea why--why, well I--let me ask you, did your grandfathers talk about their parents at all? Or, their (simultaneous) (unclear)-- Speaker 2: I was too young to comprehend if they did. By the time I was of comprehensible age, they were a little up in age then and as much as I could question them, their--it was just very limited. Speaker 1: Did you get the sense that your family or that the community even, you know, didn't value that kind of history that-- Speaker 2: It wasn't that important to them, just as sadly it's not that important to many people today. If you ask the average person where were they this day last week, this is a Tuesday. If you ask them, where were they last Tuesday, they may not--the majority of the people couldn't be able to tell you. And they have no written record as to where they were and what they did. I received a summons from the court to come to court for an accident that I was supposedly involved in on a particular day. So I went to my journal and saw exactly where I was. I was having my car repaired in another city, in a suburb of Chicago [Illinois]. And I could take that journal to court and the judge was able to contact the car dealer, the repair shop that I was at--I like old cars and I had my old Jaguar, and this is the car that they said was in an accident on Lake Shore Drive on that very same day when I was actually there and had many, many witnesses. But my journal was able to verify where I was and what time. I just think it's very, very important that people keep history of their lives. Story_ID: 83633 Speaker 1: Okay. So, now what did you know about your grandfathers? Were they from the New York area, too? Or-- Speaker 2: My grandfathers, my entire family, both on my father and my mother's side, came from the South, Mississippi, around the area Itta Bena and Mount Bayou, Mississippi, both of them-- Speaker 1: Down in the Delta-- Speaker 2: Down in the Delta, yes. Speaker 1: Okay, Itta Bena, Mount Bayou, that's where [HM Reverend] James Bevel's from it-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Itta Bena. Speaker 2: So that makes me New York fruit with Mississippi root. Speaker 1: Okay, now that's unusual in the sense that a lot of black people in New York have their roots in the Carolinas-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and Georgia. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Florida-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --right down the coast-- Speaker 2: --'cause it's on the East Coast. Speaker 1: Um-hum. So, sir, how did your family come to New York City? Speaker 2: My grandfather, Addie Burns [ph.], desired a better life for his children and he heard that there was opportunity in the North and New York--in the New York area. So he moved his family. He had twelve children. So I have a huge family. He had twelve children and each one of them had a lot of children. But he moved them to New York and my father and my mother were engaged to be married at that time. So my father, not wanting to be separated from his bride-to-be, he moved to New York as well while his family stayed in the South but then they came up also, his mother and father. And I remember vaguely his father. I do not remember my grandmother because she passed away before my grandfather did. But I just remember vaguely. And the only memory that I have of my grandfather when he was trying to chastise my sister and I, and me, and he was trying to whip us with a belt and he was very old and he really--we--it was hilarious to us. But that's the only recollection that I have of my grandfather and it's a very precious memory to me. Story_ID: 83634 Speaker 1: Now is there a--do you know what route he took to get to New York from Itta Bena or was there a natural rail route going (unclear). Speaker 2: No, they drove. He had an old vehicle that he piled his family in and they drove, as far as I know. Speaker 1: Now was this in the '40's [1940s]? Or-- Speaker 2: It had to be in the--either late '30's [1930s] or early '40's [1940s] because I was born in New York in the '40's [1940s], in the mid '40's [1940s], '44' [1944], as a matter of fact, the year that the war [World war II] came to an end. I'd like to say that I caused the war to come to an end. I was born for that cause. Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: From birth? Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We have a whole philosophy about that. We can get into later. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because we believe that people choose to come depending on the condition of the earth and what we have been given before the foundations of the world were lain and the agreement that we made with God that if these gifts and talents that we were given back in the eons of time ago before all of this came into being, that we would be willing to come and use those gifts. So I truly believe that that's why I was born--why--and one of the reasons why I came. Story_ID: 83635 Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now, can you tell us something about your father? Can you give us his name and spell it for us and give us his date of birth? Speaker 2: All right, his name is the same as mine, Thomas Lee Barrett, Senior. His date of birth was not very clear to us because it wasn't--they didn't keep birth records as much as we do now. So we weren't really very clear. Now my mother, we were very clear, April the 7th, I believe. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But the birth date of my father, we're still searching and that now we're trying--I just got in touch with an organization that's going to help me put my family history together. Speaker 1: Do you have an approximate, you know, date that you--year that you think that he was born? Can you approximate for us? Speaker 2: Well, we can mathematically deduce because I was sixteen years old when he passed away and he was forty-four years old, when he passed away. So, and that was in 1960. So if you deduct 44 from 1960, you get the approximate time that he was born. Speaker 1: Which is? Speaker 2: Nineteen. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: --1919 [sic, 1916]? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: All right, and was he born in Itta Bena or Mount Bayou [Mississippi]? Speaker 2: In that area. Speaker 1: Okay, around that-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And--now tell us about him. You know, what--what did--what was life like when he came up? Did he talk about that or did--what kind of schooling did he have? You know, what did he do? What kind of person was he? Speaker 2: My father was a good man, highly moral man, highly principled man. He was not highly educated, neither was my mother but he--the most outstanding thing that I remember about my father is that he loved his family. He had a strong sense of family and I suppose that's why I am the way I am. He loved my mother. He adored my mother. He was passionate about my mother but not possessive of my mother. But it was just very clear to everyone that she was his honey. That was his pet name for her, Honey. That's what I thought my mother's name was until I grew up and found out her name was Addie May, named after my grandfather. But I thought my mother's name was Honey. When I would go to school and they would say, what is your mother's name, I'd say, Honey. They said, no, what is her maiden name. I said Burns. They said, no, we mean, what is her first name? Honey, you know, 'cause that's what my father always called her. My father was a musician. He could play the guitar and he formed a singing group called, "The Southern Wonders" and that's--that, between his being a salvage collector, is how he cared for and provided for his family. The Southern Wonders became a very popular group on the Eastern seaboard and they would travel through the New York--Upstate New York area, the Virginias, the Carolinas and he would be gone for days at a time. And then as we grew up, he formed the Barrett Singers and we began to travel. And in our travels we met a wonderful family called, "The Staple Singers". And we traveled together and we grew together. Our families landed in Chicago [Illinois] about the same time. So, that's--and then my father got his call to the ministry and began pastoring a church. And that was what he did until he passed away. Story_ID: 83636 Speaker 1: Okay, now, the Barrett Singers are fairly well, you know, well known all over the world. Speaker 2: DeLois Barrett Campbell and the Barrett Sisters. Speaker 1: The Barrett Sisters, right. Speaker 2: Yeah-- Speaker 1: Yeah-- Speaker 2: Yeah, we were very close. Speaker 1: Yeah. We had albums of the Barrett Sisters-- Speaker 2: Right-- Speaker 1: --at home when I was-- Speaker 2: Right-- Speaker 1: --when I was growing up. Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Speaker 1: So, that's--so it must have been exciting being around all that--all that music? Speaker 2: It was, and then some. That was back in the days of The Soul Stirrers, the Highway Q.C.'s, singing Sammy Lewis, the Barrett Sisters, Inez Andrews-- Speaker 1: The Mighty Clouds-- Speaker 2: The Mighty Clouds. And then that's when my father [Thomas Lee Barrett, Sr.] informed me that we were related to Reverend C. L. [Clarence LaVaughn] Franklin and the Franklin family, that he and Reverend Franklin were cousins. Speaker 1: Now this is Reverend Franklin from Detroit [Michigan]? Speaker 2: Yes, Aretha's dad. Speaker 1: Aretha Franklin's father, C. L. Franklin. Speaker 2: Right, and I'll never forget one day I was in New York. I think I was traveling at that time with--I must have been playing for Inez Andrews, she had broken away from the Caravans and I was with her group. I think I was the keyboard artist for them. And Reverend Franklin was on the bill. And after the service I made my way to him and I told him that my name was T.L. Barrett, I'm Tom Barrett's son, and he recognized the name immediately. He said, "Yeah, that's my cousin." "We're related". And he invited me to come and preach at his church and I met his mom and it was just a wonderful fellowship. He came to preach at my church 'cause now when I met him, I wasn't pastoring and I wasn't even preaching, I don't think. But years later we, you know, we just kept in touch. And when I became pastor of Mount Zion Baptist Church, I invited him to come and preach, and he did, and he invited me to come and preach at New Bethel [Baptist Church] in Detroit, and I did. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: And so you, you know, got--not--do you think that when your grandfather moved to New York, he was thinking about the entertainment industry and the opportunities of that when he-- Speaker 2: No, my grandfather was a preacher. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He wasn't entertainment oriented at all. As a matter of fact, back in those days, the Church of God in Christ, which is my family church, it taught that anything outside of church and religion was a sin. So entertainment was a sin. And, of course, now the church is much different today, thank God. Speaker 1: So it's kind of loosened--it's loosened up a little? Speaker 2: Oh, please. Most of your major stars are members of that very same church. Denzel Washington, The Pointer Sisters, Andrae Crouch, Magic Johnson, he's--they're all members of the West Angeles Church of God in Christ. Story_ID: 83637 Speaker 1: Okay, so, now tell us about your mother. Can you give us her name and spell her name for us? Speaker 2: Her name is Addie May. A-D-D-I-E, just like the male but she was named after my grandfather. His name was Addie Burns. When she was born, he was in the war and he wanted the child that was born while he was away to be named after him, just in case he didn't make it back. So my mother was the one born. She's the oldest of five girls. No, I think there was seven girls and five boys born to that family. But she was born while he was in the war. Speaker 1: Okay, now what year was she born? Speaker 2: My mother was born in 19--what is it? It must have been 19--this is 2003, she passed away in '76' [1976]. It must have been somewhere around 1921, '22' [1922]. Speaker 1: Okay, now tell us about her--how, you know, did she talk about how she was raised and where she was raised in? Did she, you know--what kind of person was your mother? What did she do? Speaker 2: My mother was very much like my father [Thomas Lee Barrett, Sr.]. Very highly moral, highly principled, they just believed what they were taught, such values as, "If it's not yours, don't touch it." "If you borrow, pay it back." "If your parents didn't buy it, don't bring it home." You know, things--just, just good morals. "Don't steal." The first whipping that I've ever witnessed, and I still remember it, that my brother got, was when he stole some money from, I think my mother's purse, and they whipped him and I just--I still can't get that out of my mind. They just--and they were crying, you know, 'cause they said it was hurting them more than it was hurting him. I could never understand that until I became a parent (laughter). But that's just how much it meant to them. They said that we may not have much, but what we have is ours and it will be obtained legally. We--when we moved here to Chicago [Illinois], we lived in the projects. So I know all about project life. But my father said because--just because we live in the project, does not mean that our house can't look like a mansion and look as if we have servants who clean up our house. And since we don't have servants, we're just gonna have to make the neighbors think we have servants. And you're going to have to be the servants, you know. We couldn't leave dirty dishes in the sink. We couldn't leave garbage in the house overnight. Just tremendous value systems they had which I live by and have passed onto my children and they're passing it onto their children. Speaker 1: Okay, now, tell me-- Speaker 2: One other thing about my mother, she was a domestic worker-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --'cause you asked what did she do. My mother didn't have any formal education so she used to clean up white folks and Jewish folks homes. As a matter of fact, many of the clothes that we wore were given to her by her employees--employers. And some of the food that we ate was given to them--given to her by her employers. So, just knowing the sacrifices that she made and that my father made just so that we could have a roof over our head and food in our mouths and decency of consciousness of being. Story_ID: 83638 Speaker 1: My father [Thomas Lee Barrett, Sr.] refused to put us on welfare even though he was disabled because my father was very obese. He was a blind man at birth--and not at birth but at youth. I think he lost his sight when he was about sixteen years of age. Miraculously, he regained it at about twenty years of age when he married my mother. But for years he, you know, just got around as a blind man and he gained weight during that time and never lost the weight. When he passed away, which I think his weight contributed to his death, his early demise, he was almost 600 pounds. But he refused to be a charity case. He would crawl to get his circulation going early in the morning to get to work at Rathborne, Hair and Ridgeway Box Company, here in Chicago [Illinois]. And when he could no longer work there, and had no benefits after they had all run out, he became a salvage man. And we'd get up early in the morning and on school days we wouldn't--I wouldn't have to go with him, but on Saturdays and Sundays, early in the morning, I'd have to go with him to get the scrap metals and whatever and the papers just so that he could say, "I'm taking care of my family, not the government." And it just really put some values in me that would not have been there had I been born into a rich family. And my mother, in the meantime, worked domestic work, to supplement the income. Risked her life, I heard them talk about, when they didn't think we were listening, about the time when she was almost raped, almost abducted at the bus stop because in the wintertime it would get dark very early and she'd be way up on the North side. So, I just always wanted to give back to my parents because of sacrifices they made for me. My father passed away before I was able to do it for him but I was able to bless my mother [Addie May Burns Barrett] with two brand new cars. She'd know what that is--she knew what that was to drive new cars. She knew what it was to live in a nice home and just kind of took care of her to say thanks. But that's just to give you an idea of the kind of parents I had. Story_ID: 83639 Speaker 1: Okay, now, when did your family move from New York [New York City, New York] to Chicago [Illinois]? Speaker 2: I was born in '44' [1944]. We came to Chicago when I was nine years old. So that mean we came--that means we came to Chicago in 1953. Speaker 1: Okay, and-- Speaker 2: That was back when it took you three days and two nights to drive from New York to Chicago because the turnpike system was just being started then but it wasn't completed so we had to take the rural routes. And the very mountains that we tunnel through now, when we go to New York, we had to go around them and above them and it would take you days to travel. I had some treacherous times. Speaker 1: That's news that most, you know, most of us can't imagine that. Speaker 2: I know. Speaker 1: You know. They go on a scenic route to New York. Speaker 2: I know, but I remember when it wasn't so scenic. It was very treacherous. We almost ran off the cliff one day. My father fell asleep at the wheel and he heard horns blowing. He doesn't--and he didn't know till the day he passed whether it was other cars or whether it was Gabriel blowing his horn, or what. But that's what woke him up and when he woke up, he saw no highway. He jammed on the brakes. The car was that far over the cliff. That all he saw was space. The front of the car was hanging over the cliff. One second later, we wouldn't be having this interview because we were children in the backseat asleep. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's something. Speaker 2: That's why I say, "I'm alive in this season for a divine reason." "My existence is not an accident, not happenstance." I have no fear of flying, taking cruises, riding my motorcycle, I'm a motorcyclist. I'd ride all over the country. I have no fear. Even now, I just got an offer to go to Israel and to Korea and people are saying, "We're at war, you can't be flying." God is in control at all times. If you believe that you have a destiny, and that you have a purpose for living, and that purpose is in agreement with God's will, I just--it's just my faith consciousness and nothing can happen because I'm on a divine mission from God. Now, when that time is over, it doesn't matter whether we're at war or at peace, you gotta leave here. So, you may as well enjoy yourself while you're here. Story_ID: 83640 Speaker 1: Now, since grew up in two places. You have to sort of--I want you to reflect back and give us an idea of some of the sights and sounds and smells of the neighborhoods that you grew up in. Speaker 2: Oh, the sights and sounds and smells of New York [New York City, New York] cannot be duplicated, replicated, imitated or mitigated, they remain intact. The sights and the sounds of the people in New York City, it's a city that never sleeps. It's a city that's so nice, they named it twice. It's a city that has the best hotdogs in the whole wide world, either Nathan's or Sabrett's. I stopped eating red meat about fourteen years ago. Just one day I lost my taste for it. But when I go to New York, I gotta have a hotdog. Sometime, my wife [Cleopatra Barrett] and I get on the motorcycle and drive to New York just because we have a taste for hotdogs. I mean, it's just such a wonderful place to live. Coney Island, even though it's nothing like it used to be, it's still an exciting place to go. The graffiti in New York and in Coney Island, it's like no other place. The people are like--so when we moved to Chicago [Illinois], it was a hard task to adjust to the slower pace, the aloof attitudes of the people, it's just so unlike New York. And New York is almost like everybody's family, especially in little towns like Queens, you know. But in Chicago, it's so metropolitan and everybody's so into their own thing and they're so businesslike. But then New York, when we were living in a little communities like Queens, you can go right next door to your neighbor's houses, they're close together, and it's just family. So, but I love Chicago, too. Speaker 1: Now, you know what you just described is opposite of what most people describe when they describe New York or-- Speaker 2: Really? Speaker 1: --Chicago. Most people say that New York's impersonal and Chicago's more country-like and down home-- Speaker 2: Or maybe these New Yorkers you talked to are the city dwellers. You see, remember, I'm from Queens and then my grandfather was at the tip of Queens, out in Center Moriches, almost to the point of--I think it's Montauk Point but--and it's just a lot of homey type attitudes out there. But even when I went into the city, I found it very exciting. Story_ID: 86160 Speaker 1: Alright. Well tell us what the neighborhood was like and what were some of the sights and sounds and smells over there. Speaker 2: All right, I have three neighborhoods. You know, I haven't lived in many places. I was born on Claude Avenue in New York [New York City, New York]. Grew up, spent nine years of my life right there, in a little street there, right near New York Boulevard and we moved to Chicago [Illinois] in '53' [1953] and my first residence in Chicago was on the West Side. So that makes me an original West Sider. I used to say the "West Side was the best side. South Side is the big mouth side" (laughter). But we lived on 14th and Hastings and we lived in a tenement building that had rats and roaches and many times we'd come home from church at night, on our way up the stairs, the lights would be out 'cause children in the neighborhood, for some reason, they had--got their jollies going through buildings, breaking out light bulbs. So, we'd be on our way upstairs and the rats would bump your legs going down the stairs, you know, it was just--they were all in the apartment, but that's the way life was, you know. That's where we could afford to live. They were so big. One time, I remember, one got in the toilet. My daddy [Thomas Lee Barrett, Sr.] tried to flush him down and he couldn't go down the toilet, he was so big, it was crazy. Speaker 1: Now, these are rats, these aren't mice. These are-- Speaker 2: No, these are rats. These are rats. Big rats. You could hear 'em scratching in the wall at night, you know, just crazy stuff. But the neighborhood was, again, it wasn't anything like the neighborhoods are now, you know. They didn't have drive-by shootings, and things like that. They didn't have gangs. It was just people, mingling and living together. The character that we knew in that neighborhood was a drunk man, that used to say, "Don't worry about it". That's the only thing we ever heard him say. No matter what you asked him, "How you doing this morning?" "Don't worry about it." He was always drunk. Where are you going? Don't worry about it. What's your name? Don't worry about it. You got any money? Don't worry about it. You want something to eat? Don't worry about it. Here it is--that's all he ever said and that's what we remember from that neighborhood. We would always come out and say, "Where's, don't worry about it?" and after a while he'd be walking by here, hey, where you going? Don't worry about it. That's all he would say (laughter). And we often wondered what happened to him but if we ever--I guess if we saw him today and asked him how you been, he'd say, don't worry about it (laughter). But that's what I remember about that neighborhood. I met some dear friends over there at the school that I attended. It was Medill Elementary School. And we moved from there after we got the call from the Chicago Housing Authority that our application had been accepted into the projects, the Ida B. Wells [Homes] projects, and it was on the South Side. And we really didn't want to move from the West Side because we had heard so much about the South Side, that it was bad. But then after we got on the South Side, we heard that the West Side was bad, so. Story_ID: 86161 Speaker 1: But we moved over to 35--574 East 36th Street [Chicago, Illinois]. That was our address. And we were the third family that moved into the building. And it was amazing how, for the first week, or two, maybe even the first month or two, we'd get the elevator anytime we wanted. But it looked like overnight, we woke up and there were neighbors everywhere. People were moving in everywhere. And you had to wait for the elevators and you'd press the button two or three times, you know. And then we formed alliances with different guys and that's when I first got my sense of community gangs because they began to form gangs in the different areas of the projects. And then we got the--worried that you couldn't go in certain areas of the projects unless you were in a certain gang. But my father [Thomas Lee Barrett, Sr.] was a barber and he would cut hair for all of the guys 'cause he would only charge fifty cents. So, no matter what gang you were in, you would come to our house to get your hair cut 'cause he was the cheapest haircut in town. And so that gave us cart blanche to go in any area. I could go to any area in the projects because everybody knew me and I didn't have to join the gang, but they knew my father. But the "Valiant Men," that was one of the most popular gangs there, everybody looked up to the Valiant Men and they would play ball and we'd just harmonize singing groups at night. We'd stand out on the courts and sing. Then there would be the tragedies. I hope that you all are going to--to a brother named, John Crawford, Reverend John Crawford. He heads an organization called, "FAITH [For Action In Togetherness Holdfast] Incorporated" where they take inmates after they get out of jail and work with them to rehabilitate them, to re-orientate them, into a better way of living. But John Crawford came out of the Ida B. Wells experience. He was a notorious gang member. Well, I wouldn't say he was a gang member but he was in that mix and went to jail and did time. He was a notorious brother but he found the Lord in jail and came out and now he's one of the most respected men in this city. I just really hope that you find out about him if you don't already know about him and get a chance to talk with him. But he comes out of that Ida B. Wells experience. He preached here. We honored him here one Sunday and he came and preached for us. He lost--he lost--he had twelve brothers, the Crawford brothers. No, there were nine brothers, I think, and three girls. And, you know, the normal tragedies--he had his share of tragedies, brothers dying, or being killed. And just being in that whole era of becoming whatever we were going to become and going through whatever we had to go through to become, and he's--he has a history. Speaker 2: John Crawford. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: All right, okay. Story_ID: 86162 Speaker 1: So did the projects stay decent 'cause, you know, the story is, that many people tell, that when they first moved in they were--they had services, everything worked and there's enough--apparently enough money to finance to make it work right-- Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: --and then the things started to slip. Did you experience that kind of slippage there? Speaker 2: Yeah, well, as the population grew denser, you know, the services became rarer and the people who would provide the services became more and more afraid to even come into the projects because we did have gangs and it wasn't safe for you to come in the projects if you weren't known. Sometimes it wasn't safe if you were known. [Reverend] John Crawford, the brother I just told you about, he has--he got all of his teeth knocked into his head. I mean, I--just in case you're going to interview him, I'll let him tell you the whole story. But I remember that night, I was a little boy when that happened to him, right on the steps of 574, where we lived. And the brother almost died from it. Somebody hit him with brass knuckles and he has, you know, a plate right now--today. But that's just part of the stories that come out of the asphalt jungle. So, it was a challenge living in the projects. Story_ID: 86163 Speaker 1: Matter of fact, we had to move out of the projects because they found out that my brother was working at Jewel Food Store and you had to maintain a certain level of poverty to live in the projects. And when they found out that that income was coming into that house, they put us out of the projects. So we had to go into a storefront where my father [Thomas Lee Barrett, Sr.] was pastoring. He was pastoring a little storefront church and we made living quarters on the side of the other area. The church was right here and you go through a little passageway and go into our living areas where we had to go back to primitive lifestyle. We had to have a wood burning pot belly stove. You may not know anything about a pot belly stove. My mother [Addie May Burns Barrett] had to start cooking on a wood and coal stove in the kitchen. Speaker 2: After having been used to-- Speaker 1: After-- Speaker 2: --gas. Speaker 1: Yeah, gas and electric in the project [Ida B. Wells Homes]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And that's where my father passed away, right there, on October 16th--October 17th, 1960. That's where I was living and I was sixteen years old. If the fire went out in the middle of the winter, in the middle of the night, I had to get up and open--go outside, open the trap door and go downstairs and get some wood where we stored the wood and the coal. But that's--that's what life was like. Story_ID: 86164 Speaker 1: Okay, what kind of young man were you when you were grown up and before you start that, I'm sorry, how many brothers and sisters do you have? We have (unclear)? Speaker 2: I had one brother, I have one sister. My brother passed away about five, six years ago. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But I was-- Speaker 1: Yeah-- Speaker 2: I was a decent young man. I was very frustrated because I was trying to live a Christian life and life was so, I don't want to use the word, miserable, but uncomfortable, that I really had hope in the eschatological promise of the teachings of my church. Eschatology deals with the hereafter; ontology deals with the present. But the basic, or the premise, of the theological concept that we were given as a steady diet, was that Jesus, number one, died and paid for our sins so that we could have a right, as they call it, to the tree of life and go back to heaven with Jesus when he came, which would be any day. That's what we were taught. Every time we went to church, they told us you better be ready 'cause he's on his way back. Well, if that was the case, then it didn't make sense to me to wrestle with all of those mathematical equations and algebraic equations and history and science and spelling and all. It just didn't make sense. Speaker 1: So school became irrelevant based on? Speaker 2: Irrelevant because I really believed what my church was teaching me. I remember one Evangelist came to our church and he was preaching and all of a sudden, he stopped, and his eyes bugged and he said that he had just gotten the word that Jesus had just left heaven and that he'd probably be here before day. And man, and I wasn't even ready--I wasn't even about to go to school the next day much less try to do some homework. This is a, shoot, why, Jesus will be back before morning. Well, as you know, he didn't come back. And I got left back. I was very, very frustrated after, you know, so many years of this. And I found myself very unprepared, educationally. Speaker 1: So, did you like school, initially? Speaker 2: I did, but then out of my frustration, I didn't. And I got very angry with my church, I felt that they had lied to me, that there must be another interpretation of the Bible. After I got kicked out of school, I got put out of the grammar school that I was going to. They said that I was incorrigible, so they put me out. And I had to leave my family because the superintendent of schools, at that time was Dr. Benjamin Willis, and he said that the other alternative was to send me to St. Charles, Illinois, which was a school for bad boys. And he said the only way he wouldn't send me to St. Charles, out of respect for my father [Thomas Lee Barrett], who was the minister, that I would have to leave his district. So I had to leave my family at 12 or 13 years old and go and live with relatives on the West Side and I attended Gregory School [John Milton Gregory Math and Science Academy] until they put me out. And then I got into Wendell Phillips [High School] summer school and that's how I got out of grammar school through their summer school program. And with that summer school diploma, I could get into high school. And I did go to high school at Wendell Phillips until I was sixteen and then they kicked me out. And I'll never forget that day when the counselor told me, she shook her well-manicured finger in my face, and told me that she was sure that I was never, ever amount to anything. That I was a disgrace. I left the school that day. I could not go home. Now mind you, we lived north of Wendell Phillips in Ida B. Wells [Homes] but my mother [Addie May Burns Barrett] and father weren't home. I couldn't get in. My sister lived on 57th and Indiana. And I called her and she said, well you can come here. I walked from 39th and Prairie to 39th and Indiana and I walked from 39th and Indiana to 57th and Indiana. We are sitting at 55th and Indiana. I now own 55th and Indiana. The same street I walked by, the same day and the lady told me I would never amount to anything. Story_ID: 86165 Speaker 1: Now what were the reasons that you were kicked out of school? What kind of things did you do? Speaker 2: When you're frustrated, you do all kind of crazy things, you know, like while there in study hall, I'd get a drummer, well you have five, six hundred young people in study hall in the assembly, we were all supposed to be studying. I wasn't interested in studying 'cause I didn't know what it was about, anyway. But there was a piano backstage and I had a drummer, [Edmund Leonard] Ed Thigpen, and I had a bass player, his name escapes me right now, but he became very famous out in the West Coast. And we had a trio. So we'd go backstage and start jammin' and the whole auditorium would start jammin' and, of course, by the time the teachers could get order, and found out who it was back there, it was T.L. Barrett and they'd suspend me for that, just crazy stuff like that. And I--they never had to suspend me for fighting and things like that because my father [Thomas Lee Barrett, Sr.] and mother [Addie May Burns Barrett] were peaceful people so I wasn't--it wasn't about that but not turning in homework and--and I was a comedian in the class, you know, I could really make people laugh. And sometimes, now, members of my church say I missed my calling, that I really should have been a comedian. But, you know, I would raise my hand to answer a question, I'd tell a joke, and the whole class would be laughing. Sometimes the teacher would even laugh but she'd have to report me or he would have to report me. So they put me out and I went to Wendell Phillips [High school] night school and then my father passed away [1960s], though, I had to start working 'cause being the size, weight that he was, there's no insurance, you know. If something happened to me now, then my family could make it because I'm in good health and well-insured. But my father had nothing but a $1200 burial policy. So I had to start working and I went back to New York [New York City, New York]. We buried him on October 24th. I got to New York on October 25th and I started working at Flushing Hospital [Medical Center] around the 27th. I didn't waste any time. And then I studied, educated myself, met my wife [Cleopatra Barrett] and she would put my dictionaries together for me because every book I read, if I didn't know the word, I'd look up the etymology of the word, the history of the word and I would write it out in long hand and then she would type it up for me. Then I went to the New York State Board of Regents and told them that I wanted a high school diploma. And they gave me a ten hour exam and I passed the exam and that's how I got my high school diploma. Story_ID: 86166 Speaker 1: And I came back to Chicago [Illinois] in 1967. My wife [Cleopatra Barrett] and I got married. I brought her to Chicago and she wanted to know why can't we stay in New York. I said "Because there's a lady in Chicago who said that I would never amount to anything. I gotta go back there and prove to her that she was wrong." Speaker 2: Is that really--that was the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: That was the motivator. I wanted to--I could not get that word of hers out of my mind, then I came back to Chicago and started my career and-- Speaker 2: Now, you--were you--while you were in New York, now, in the--I guess around 1960 or so you? Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: You came-- Speaker 1: I went back to New York in 1960. Speaker 2: Okay, so you--you come back and then you go back, when? Speaker 1: Yeah, I--when my--when we buried my father on October 24th, I drove his car to New York [New York City, New York] the next day but we left that night and I arrived that Sunday. It was on a Saturday we buried and I arrived that Sunday and moved in with one of my uncles and my mother [Addie May Burns Barrett] was still here [Chicago, Illinois] and I, you know, just made it. Worked--started working two full-time jobs and then studying in between. Then once I got my GED, and I realized that it was time for me to come back to Chicago, I did. And seven months after my wife and I got married, I got called to a church and that's when I started building my career. I got called to a church right down the street here, at 5512 South Lafayette Avenue and I became so popular because of the work that I was doing, I went and adopted my school, Wendell Phillips [High School]. My church adopted that school. I had a stay-in-school program where I started giving away brand new cars to the valedictorian of the class and that company and--I became a very much sought-after motivational speaker and I started speaking for the principals of area, I think it was eight. And one day, in one of my speeches at the annual luncheon, I told the story of being kicked out of Wendell Phillips High School and about that lady who told me I would never amount to anything and how I was looking for and asking if she was in the audience, please stand up because I want to take her to my home in South Shore [Chicago, Illinois] and I wanted to--and I have a seat reserved for her at my church. And Mr. [Daniel W.] Caldwell was the principal at Wendell Phillips at that time. When I finished that speech, he stood up and made a plea to the other principals that they would join him in petitioning the Board of Education that they would give me a high school diploma, now an actual high school diploma from Wendell Phillips High School. And they were successful in doing it. They awarded me a high school diploma, an actual high school diploma from Wendell Phillips High School. Then Wendell Phillips inducted me into their Hall of Fame because I would go there and that was my home school. I'm the only one up there that doesn't have a graduation date. The only Hall of Famer that did not actually graduate. So my whole ministry has been about discovering the power of God within you because that's one of the reason why I went into the ministry because I hated what my church did to me. I hated the fact that they prepared me for life after breath, for life after death rather, but not life after breath. You know it was all about what's going to happen after you die. Nothing about what's happening now while you live. So that's really why I went into the ministry because when I found this power of God and the presence of God in me, not some man up in the sky, sitting on a cloud looking down on us, that's not God. God is not a man but you know this interview is not my personal theology but I'm just trying to get you to-- Speaker 2: That's what we want. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: We want to get it. Speaker 1: Oh, well, wonderful. Speaker 2: (Unclear). Speaker 1: Well wonderful then. I mean, how much tape do you have because I can tell you-- Speaker 2: A whole bunch full. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Well that's what I discovered, that God was not ten zillion light years away from me. That God is in the very air that I breathe-- Story_ID: 86167 Speaker 1: Now, now, this--just hold on a second and let me try to--'cause you moved real fast through a lot of territory, I think, anticipating not having a lot of time. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: But, just go back now--now when you--after your father died, you went to New York City? Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: And you worked--what did you do in New York City? Speaker 2: What I did in New York City, I worked as a morgue attendant, that was my first job, at Flushing Hospital. I was only 16 but I told them I was 18. And back in those days they didn't check like they do now. I looked 18 but you're not supposed to be doing autopsies at 16 years of age. Speaker 1: You were a morgue attendant? Speaker 2: I was a morgue attendant. That means I assisted the pathologist in the performing of an autopsy. Speaker 1: I mean, did it require any skills or did (simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 2: They had to teach me, yes, because my job was to open the cranial cavity and take out the brain but the most important part of that job was the removal of the pituitary gland, which sits on a prong, at the base of the brain. It's under the brain. And that pituitary gland, of course, is the master gland of the body and they have to study that gland. So I had to meticulously remove that gland and suspend it and the brain in formaldehyde. So they had to teach me those skills. Speaker 1: Now, how did you run across a job like that? I mean at 16, I mean-- Speaker 2: Well, first of all-- Speaker 1: --even though you were saying you were 18. Speaker 2: Yeah, first of all, my uncle let me know when I got there that you can stay here but you can't lay here. He said my wife is the only one that can stay in this house and don't work. So it was just very clear to me that I didn't have any options. So I got up the very next day and went looking for a job and I found one in Flushing, New York, not Jamaica. I couldn't find anything in Jamaica so I said so what's the next town? Corona. I didn't find one in Corona, so what's the next town? Flushing. I went to Flushing. And the first thing I found in Flushing was a hospital and I went to the hospital and said "I want a job." And they said "Well the only job that we have available is working in the morgue." And I said, "What do I have to do?" They said "You have to assist the doctor--the doctors in performing autopsies." "And what is that about?" They said, "We have to find out why people died. And it's going to, you know, entail cutting open the body, taking out the body parts and your job will be to cut open the head and the doctors would leave. Once they finish the body, they leave you there alone in the morgue." Well, I said, "Okay." I took the job, you know. And that's what I did. I did that for two or three years. While I was doing that, I got another job with Maclean's Cleaning Service. Speaker 1: Yeah, but, back to that one for a second. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: That sounds sort of an odd job to have. Story_ID: 86168 Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: A lot of people will probably wonder like, how, I mean, you had no trepidation about cutting--sawing people's--I mean cadaver's heads open and--? Speaker 1: Well-- Speaker 2: Dead people's-- Speaker 1: --it just so happens that I was studying at the same time the science of being. I was studying the science of the mind and it was just very clear to me that once the soul left the body, that it was just absolutely nothing there but remains of the human being. The human being is gone. There's just the remains. And I understood that the process--the pathological process of what they call the review of the gross review, would be for the betterment of that family and of mankind. I also got a chance to--and I'll get back to that, but I got a chance to work with the eye-banks because when the organ donors would pass away, the eye-bank doctor would come to--I would have to help him remove the eyes because, you know, and that's where I got my desire to share my body, my remains. I'm an organ donor. It's on the back of my license, based on my experience. And I know that people can be helped. Medical research can be furthered. The advancement can be--can jump by quantum leaps if we would just cooperate. So, I wanted to learn. You know if I had my choice of driving a truck, if there was a truck driver's job available, which I also did, driving dump trucks, but at that point that's the only thing that was available and I took it. I'm very glad that I did because I got a chance to work with some wonderful doctors who didn't mind my questioning them because as long as they weren't talking into their microphone, I would ask them questions. I wanted to know everything that I could about the human body. And they would talk to me. And then once they would leave, then I would have to, you know, cut open the head and take out the brain, remove the brain, and the pituitary gland and then stuff the body and stuff, you know, the head and sew it back up and put it back in the refrigerator. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: It was a very, very challenging job because sometimes, like I'll never forget, I was up on the floor, 'cause when we didn't have any cases, we had some time to ourselves. And I went up on the floor to talk to some of the people who worked up there and I saw this young muscular black man sitting on the side of the bed. And I spoke to him and he spoke to me. And at lunchtime, they told me that we have a case. And I said, yeah, I said, there was no--nothing--and they'd say, yeah, but there's a young man upstairs who just passed away. And it was the same young man. Muscular young man, well-built, looked like an athlete, and he was sitting on the side of the bed, and he spoke to me. He didn't look sick but he had an attack, an asthmatic attack, and just passed away. And then, that afternoon, we were doing an autopsy, performing an autopsy on him. You know, just memories like that and you're always on-call, always, that's the other thing they told you about this job, that you are on-call at all time-- Story_ID: 84102 Speaker 1: Yeah, we were always on-call. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: That means, that was before the days of beepers and cell phones. I don't--I don't even think we had pagers. I know we didn't. I--the doctors had some kind of communication system but they depended on your home telephone. And if you didn't have a message unit hooked to your phone, you had to have a message service because they should always be able to get in touch with you. And one--one weekend, one Saturday night, late one night, I got the call to come into the hospital. It was about eleven or twelve o'clock. So I got there about midnight. And they had this case that was very, very important that they do the autopsy that night. And the doctors did what they had to do and then they left me in there. I'm 16, 17 years old by this time. It's midnight, it's in the cold wintertime. It was the early Fall, mid-Fall, around Halloween time, and the person that whose remains I was left to take the brain out and do all that to, was an elderly, and I don't know how to put this, but it was an elderly white lady, she had one tooth and she died looking like she had seen something very frightful. Her mouth was open and she had that witches look, you know. So I did what I had to do and then I was in the process of sewing the body up and-- Speaker 2: You had to re-attach the part that you-- Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, you had to take the--you had to, you know, cut the scalp, pull it down over the face, then take your handsaw and go under the cranial cavity, remove the brain, pituitary gland, and then put it back and then sew it back up. Speaker 2: It was just a needle and thread? Speaker 1: Yeah, needle and thread, and I did that but then you had to sew the body back up. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Oops, sorry (pause). Speaker 1: Go ahead. Speaker 2: Oh, continue? So you have to sew the body back up and they cut the body in a "Y" shape, you know, from here to here, then down. So you start here. So I reached over, put the needle and thread in, and I pulled--the first pull, this cadaver's hand came up and hit me in my stomach. So, I just realized that, you know, my imagination was working. It was late, you know, I was tired, it was the weekend, so, that didn't happen. Just my imagination. So I'm going to finish my job. So I proceeded. I pulled--put in another stitch in and pulled and the hand came up and hit me again. I looked around, and the morgue was made out of complete concrete, there were no windows, there's--so I looked around and I said now, I have one or two choices: Either make a door through this concrete wall or I can (laughter) try to make it to the door over there. But since this cadaver is right here, hitting me in my stomach, I don't think I can make it around there and I'd probably kill myself trying to and I said, so- Story_ID: 84103 Speaker 1: In some of my studies, I had come across some teachings that said your mind can do more damage to you than a bullet or knife on another individual. And you can do more damage to yourself just by, what you believe. Think. I can actually feel my heart fluttering, I'll be very honest with you. But, you know, just in a millisecond, I'm running all of this through my mind, "Just think". You know this person doesn't have a brain. You took the brain out. This--I did all this computerization within a tenth of a second. Traced the thread. I--before I traced the thread, I said, I noticed every time I pull, she would hit me. So I pulled again and I pulled slowly and she hit me slowly. And I pulled again and she hit me slowly. I said, let me trace the thread. I traced the thread. The thread had to be so long 'cause it had to last, you know, it had to go all the way over here. What had happened was, rigamortis had set in. The thread had gotten entwined around her fingers and as I leaned over and pull the thread, I brought her hand up. I sat down, I was drenched in sweat (laughter) and I looked at her face and she was going (made a face) and I put a towel over her face and I was finished with that. Just one of the many, many stories that I experienced during that period. Story_ID: 84104 Speaker 1: Some very sad things I saw [at Flushing Hospital in New York City, New York]. I saw some needless deaths occur. A young mother, a beautiful Hispanic lady, came in for surgery. She had the surgery and went home. Complications developed. She died. The family was so distraught because it was a simple surgery. And it was such an emotional case because she was doing so well. We opened her up. There were some scissors that were clamped where the doctors had left the scissors. And infection set in. Spread throughout her body. And I don't think the family was every told that the scissors were left in her. Speaker 2: Now, that--that--this scenario that you just described, is something that's now an issue now on the television and talking about-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --surgeons leaving tools and-- Speaker 1: But it was unheard of in that day and I never heard it on the news. Story_ID: 84105 Speaker 1: They covered up a lot of things in that day. I just left the gym when you saw me today. I was just coming back from the gym. One of the reasons why I exercise every day is because of something they [Flushing Hospital in New York City, New York] covered up that happened to me, at that hospital. They never taught me how to lift a body out of the refrigerator. There's a different way to lift a rigamorted body and there's a different way to lift a body that is just supple. And I didn't know the difference. And this body was up on the upper shelf and rigamortis hadn't set in but I was used to lifting stiff bodies. But when we pulled the body off, I was on my toes, and the weight sank down in the middle and crushed something, a plate, right here in my spine. I have never had pain like that in my life. And I went to the Emergency Room and they took x-rays and all of that, and they just told me that it was a bruise and it would be all right. But for years, sometime I couldn't walk. For years, I would have to sleep with a board, sometimes, and I just had terrible--sometimes I'd be preaching, and something would slip and it was like cutting in a nerve and I couldn't move and I'd have to grip the pulpit. And I finally went to my specialist and he told me that I had injury to a disc and he could tell it was an old injury and that's what had happened at that hospital. This was years and years ago because I was sixteen when it happened, I'm about twenty-six now [sic, then]. So it was like ten years later. So he said that you need to strengthen your back muscles so it could take the weight. He said because your muscles are weak, all the weight is on your spine and the only thing that can strengthen it, is exercise. So I started a rigorous exercise program. I started doing sit-ups every day. I built up to 100, I could do 125, 150 sit-ups. At first, I couldn't do ten. But now I'm pain free. Very seldom do I get a pain because I exercise every day. I'm the only one--I'm the oldest person in our class, at the gym, and I'm almost sixty years old. But I'm the only one who can touch his head to his knees. I can do it anytime. If you say right now, let me see you touch your head to your knees, I can just get up and do it 'cause that's just how limber my body is because I've been exercising so many years. And these young guys in there, they got all these muscles but they're not limber, you know, they're not supple. They can't do what I do, you know, with my body. Even in stretching, they can't do it. But I started that because of that experience I had at Flushing Hospital. And I couldn't sue because statute of limitations had run out by the time I realized what they had told me. And if I stopped exercising now, for a week or two, I could feel it, you know. This is something I have to do for the rest of my life. But I enjoy doing it. Story_ID: 84106 Speaker 1: So, while I was working, now listen to this: I'm working from eight to four, at Flushing Hospital [New York City, New York], but I really wanted to have more than I had. And I had met this young lady that I wanted to make my wife [Cleopatra Barrett] one day. So I just had to have more. So I went in and applied for a job at Maclean's Cleaning Service and they stipulated that you can't have another job because they said that at many times we will call upon you to work another job that someone else couldn't attend and you have to be able. So I said, okay, but I must work nights. But they didn't know I had a daytime job. So they sent me--they assigned me to Polytechnic Institute on Long Island. Have you ever heard of that Institute? Well, I'm the man who used to clean up Polytechnic Institute [now known as New York University Polytechnic School of Engineering], that's right. All of the offices and the bathrooms, whatever. It took about three men 'cause it's a huge building, but I had a certain section. I would work there from ten o'clock at night till six in the morning. And I had--and it was in Farmingdale. And I had to--or was it? I think it was Farmingdale. But it took you about an hour and forty-five minutes to two hours to drive from there to Flushing Hospital, in rush hour traffic. So I worked there from ten o'clock at night, six in the morning, get off, drive to Flushing Hospital, work there from eight in the morning until four, and that's when I would go home and get three hours of sleep. I would sleep from 4:30, 5:30, 6:30, 7:30, I'm up 'cause I had to drive back out to Farmingdale. However, there are times when Maclean's would call and say that someone didn't show up, you have to put in three hours at A&P, from six to nine. So that means I couldn't go home after--now watch this. I worked from ten till six, go to Flushing, work from six, I mean from eight to four, and then leave there and go to the A&P and work there from six to nine, then back to Farmingdale, from six to ten, then back to Flushing, from eight to four, and it would be like two days later before I could get three more hours of sleep. Then I'd be up again. Right today, my wife [Cleopatra Barrett] is amazed that I only sleep three hours at a time. If I go to bed at midnight, I'm up at three in the morning and my body just wakes up. And I mean I'm ready to go. I'm refreshed. And, you know, later on in the day, I'll get a nap or something but I sleep in three hour limits at a time. And I worked like that for a couple of years, two or three years, until I was ready to come back to Chicago [Illinois]. Story_ID: 84107 Speaker 1: And- Speaker 2: Now, why did you come back to Chicago [Illinois]? Speaker 1: Because that lady [his teacher] said-- Speaker 2: Oh, right. Speaker 1: --that I would never amount to anything. Speaker 2: Right, now we get--all right. Speaker 1: And I really, really wanted to prove to her--because you see, I had made a promise to the Universe, which is what people call "God." To me, God is the entirety of the Universe. There is no spot where God is not. In our church, you don't hear any talk about the devil because we believe that God is all there is. If there's any evil influence, it's the power that you give it. So we choose not to give it any power, therefore, we don't preach or teach about the devil. We talk about God. I made a deal with God while I was walking to my sister's house, I said, "If you would just reveal the truth to me, I promise to keep my mind keen and my body clean from drugs, from alcohol or from any foreign substances that would alter my state of being. I will make my mind keen. I'll do that. I will keep my body clean but I want a personal relationship with you." That was my agreement with God. I said that because that lady just told me, I'd never amount to anything, and I want to make her out of a liar. I don't want her opinion to become a fact. And I believe that you do exist but I just think that theology has gotten mixed up. I don't think you are a God that's a way away from me and I don't think I have to wait until I die to see you. I think I can experience you right now. And that was the agreement that we made. I said okay, you're going to keep your body clean and you make your mind keen, I'll reveal myself to you. And he did, she did, it did. See, in our church, you may hear--you hear people referring to God as her, she, it because God is all there is. If you need a mother, God is your mother. If you need a father, God is your father. Speaker 2: Now, that time, now--at that time, how had you been exposed to--that you had been in the Church of God in Christ a long time? Speaker 1: All my life. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: Born and raised there. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And I was taught from a little boy, Jesus is soon to come, and I'm five years old. Gee, I'm looking for Jesus. I'm ten years old, I'm still looking for Jesus. I'm twelve, thirteen, fourteen, fifteen, sixteen, still looking for him. And it's very sad, but today the church is still teaching the same thing that Jesus is soon to come. Story_ID: 84108 Speaker 1: So is there a--I'm trying to figure out where to go? So in New York [New York City, New York], when you were there working at Flushing Hospital, you weren't playing music at that time? Speaker 2: No, I didn't start playing music in New York until after my father [Thomas Lee Barrett, Sr.] died and I went back because now, I mean, excuse me, I didn't start playing music until after I had been there for a year or so. What really happened was that while working, I believe it was at Flushing Hospital, I met a Jewish couple who--oh, I know where it was. After working, man, I don't know how I could even miss this part. After working for two to three years at Flushing for those--and working with Maclean's for two or three years, working those two jobs, I was getting burned out 'cause you can't keep up that pace. So I started looking for something else. And I didn't want to work for anybody 'cause with the knowledge and the power that I had achieved from this knowledge, with the power that I had achieved from this knowledge, I knew that I could do anything that I wanted to do. So I went downtown. My cousin had a shoeshine concession downtown. But what was unique about his concession was that he didn't have a stand where people would come and put their foot up on the stand. He had a box that he would take to the people in the different buildings. So I said to him, I said, "How does this work 'cause I want to work for myself?" And he took me around and showed me how it worked. And I paid him to let me in. So he gave me one of his buildings and I built my business to about, I think I must have had about four or five different buildings, that I would service. I would put on a shirt and tie, just like I'm dressed now, and if you're a businessman, I'd show up at your office door, especially if it rained. That's what made me really successful. I would be the only one to go to work when it rained. And they would be amazed that I'd come to your door, saying, "Do you want a shine today, sir?" And you'd say, "Oh, it's raining out there," I'd say, "but your leather needs to be protected" because I had studied stuff about leather and how it breathes and I'd talk about how it breathes and how--especially if they have salt out there, how the salt would get into the leather and a year from now, so the leather is going to separate and you need some protection. I said, "come on in," you know. I made money, good money, like that. I bought my first new car in 1966, shining shoes. I built up a rapport with Percy and Julian Uris. You ever hear of the Uris Builders? Some of the greatest builders of skyscrapers in New York. They were my clients, Percy and Julian, and their son-in-law became my financier, for me to expand my business. Speaker 1: That's U-R-I-S? Speaker 2: U-R-I-S, Uris Buildings. And one of the guys, his name escapes me right now, was married to one of their daughters, married to Percy's daughter. He was working for them and he took a liking to me, this young millionaire and I told him that I wanted to expand my business, I wanted to branch out from my cousins because I gotten too big for them and they were trying to clamp down on me. So I just went into business for myself. And he financed it for me to buy all my products. They gave me an office in the buildings, in one of their buildings. I had an office and I was very respected because it was the way I presented myself. Story_ID: 84109 Speaker 1: I met a couple, a Jewish couple, who just took a real liking to me. And they invited me to one of their house parties. They wanted me to mix the drinks at their house parties. And I told them I could do it. Any time anybody had asked me if I can do anything I say, yes, even though I didn't know anything about it--I didn't know jack about it, but I said yes because I just knew that the power of God in me would enable me to do it. All I would have to--they would have to show me and I would pretend like I needed some refresher. I went to their party and they had a piano there. And instead of me, you know, while there was a lull in the serving of the liquor, I started playing the piano. And the people were just, wowed, and they were wowed by my ability to play. And they said, well, where did you study? I said, I haven't--I've never studied music, I just wanted to play it. I started playing. So they wanted to make me their investment project. They said that we will--we see so much potential in you and we have connections with "The Tonight Show" and all of the things in Hollywood. We want to make you a star. I said--but we want to send you--you have to have some formal training 'cause with your raw talent, if you just get some formal training, you know, you'll be a mega star. So they sent me to Julliard School of Music. And I went right into Julliard saying that, you know, I've got, you know, my tuition paid and everything. And George Rhodes was there, and George was Sammy Davis Jr.'s music director, and he's the one who talked to me 'cause he was on staff there. And he talked to me and said that you cannot attend Julliard unless you are a graduate from another school. You know, Julliard is a graduate school. I didn't know that. And so he said, you would have to go and get training somewhere else. But he gave me his numbers and, you know, let me keep in touch with him and all. So they found one of the greatest piano teachers that money could buy. At that time Irwin Stahl charged $30 per half an hour and he took me on for an hour each, twice a week. And these people paid him for me. I don't know whether you remember the blackout in New York [1965]. Speaker 2: Yup. Speaker 1: Well I was at Irwin Stahl's studio when it blacked out. I was late because I was still working my concession and he was very particular, very meticulous about being on time and doing your lessons because he was expensive. So I needed gas. I had a--I was driving a '58' [1958] Cadillac then that drank gas. But I was on "E", but I said, well I'll--rather than get gas now, I'll wait until after my lessons, then I'll get gas. The blackout hit while he was teaching me. And there were no gas stations open because they all run by electricity. I was way up in the Bronx and I lived in Queens. But I was studying the science of mind and the power of the mind and I said all right God, I gotta put you to the test. I'm gonna make it home on prayer and air 'cause my car was laying on "E." I got in my car, I drove on the expressway and to really show my faith, I let the windows down, put my arm out the window and just relaxed, instead of driving, you know, all--'cause I was really testing my own consciousness. And I made it all the way to my house. And when I pulled into my parking space, I'll never forget this, as long as I breathe, when I went to turn the gas--the engine off, the car died by itself. That, I swear to God, that happened. And I realized then that this is what I want to do, teach people about this. Story_ID: 84110 Speaker 1: And so when I went back to Irwin, he said to me, he said there's something else you're doing. He said you have the talent but you are not practicing when I teach you like you should and I can tell, there's something else preoccupying your mind. What is it? I said, the Bible. I'm studying the Bible because I really want to preach. And he said these words to me, he said, "You're going to have to leave that Bible alone." I made my decision then. I told the couple that was paying for me, don't waste your money any more 'cause Irwin said I'd have to leave the Bible alone. And that's my calling. I've got to teach people. I've got to teach my people. There are--I told them the story about that lady telling me that I'd never amount to that. I said, you don't know how many others are being told that same thing, that they'll never amount to anything. I gotta teach them that there's a power within them that will enable them to control their own destiny and they don't have to live a capricious life all que sera sera like, whatever will be, will be. No, it'll be what you make it be. But the power of God that is within you because the dynamic law of life controls the quality of mind. And the dynamic law of life says emphatically "as a man thinketh in his heart, so is he." But it needs to be explained because it's not as simple as a man thinketh in his heart. You got to understand what the writer was speaking of is the merging of the thought processes and the feeling processes. When you can think and feel the same way about the same thing, then that's consciousness, and that becomes the law of your being. You see, most people think one way but they feel another way. They think faith, but they feel doubt. They think, "Oh, I wish I had a Cadillac, but I know I can only drive a Ford." So that's not as a man thinketh in his heart, as a man thinketh in his heart, is that I think Cadillac and I feel Cadillac but then the universe is going to have to start arranging things so you can drive a Cadillac because it respects and it responds to the dynamic law of mind. Speaker 2: Now is this the teaching of the Church of God in Christ? Speaker 1: No, no, it's not the teaching of the Church of God in Christ. I--I maintain my affiliation with the Church of God in Christ because I guess I'm a--don't like the word victim, but I'm part of that emotional family tie group, you know. It's my--it's my church. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: It's like some Catholics don't agree with priest not being able to be married but they're not going to change from being Catholic because that's their church. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: They have emotional ties to their church and I love my church but I wish my church would, you know, teach some different things. Story_ID: 84111 Speaker 1: So at this--this point in time, what are you coming in contact with, this influence in you, you know, basically in terms of this train of thought? I mean, are you reading that--you mentioned the book, "A Man Thinketh", you know-- Speaker 2: No, that's in the Bible. That came out of the Bible. Speaker 1: Oh, there's a book entitled, too. Speaker 2: Yeah, I do more writing than I do reading. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I do more, you know, revealing. Speaker 1: So it's your own reflection-- Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: --on these issues? These matters that really (simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 2: Yes, when I go into, what I call, the "Thunder of Silence," and God speaks to me, the universe reveals things to me, I write them. I write two or three sermons every week, two new sermons every week for my congregation and the lesson for the men's class, that I teach. And because I found out that there is a well of information, a reservoir of information within each one of us, many people think that they have to go to the Book for knowledge. Sometimes I go to the Book for confirmation. Most of the things that I read, I've realized already. Speaker 1: Now, what I was going to ask you about, I guess--well, what--I need, I guess, to try to figure out if we resolved why--how that--the Bible fits in with that. If the--you were saying that you were distracted by reading of the Bible, that was now, we have is another internal thing going on too? Speaker 2: No, I wasn't a distracted by the reading of the Bible. Speaker 1: Distracted from music, at least that was how-- Speaker 2: Oh, from music? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, by studying the Bible-- Speaker 1: Yeah-- Speaker 2: --because I had decided that this power was so fantastic working in me and I didn't know it. If I had known what I knew then--if I had known it ten years earlier, I think I'd probably be the president, that's what I was thinking. I'd probably be the president of the United States. If I had been taught this from a child up, but I had been taught just wait on the Lord and he's gonna fix it for you, even though you broke it, he's gonna fix it, you know, that's not the way life is. If you break it, you're gonna fix it but the power of God in you is going to do two things: It's gonna help you fix it and then it's gonna fix you so you won't break it anymore. But as long as you're being taught-- Story_ID: 85932 Speaker 1: I felt an incumbency to share the treasure that I had discovered. And what was so beautiful about the discovery is that, along with the discovery of the power that is within you, is the awareness and the conscious knowledge that this power is in everybody else, and they just don't know it. So that's the reason that I am a pastor of a church. You know, I'm not a pastor of a church because I want to be a preacher or because I want, you know, all of the adulation that comes with being a minister, I'm basically a pastor because I want to awaken the individuals to the power and the presence of God within them. Most churches have what they call, "Soul Winning" programs. Ours is called, "Soul Awakening." And if you win a soul and you're still asleep, what good have you done? We want to awaken people to the power that is within them. For instance, my ophthalmologist was a member of our church fifteen years ago. Let me see now, I am 60 on my next birthday. Let's just round it out to that. I was 43, 44 when he was attending our church. So, what does that make it about 15, 44, 54, 16, it's about 16 years ago, right? Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: I was in his office and he said "You have twenty twenty vision." He said "but, by the time you are 45, you're going to need glasses." I said, "No doctor, I'm not going to need glasses by the time I'm 45." He said, "Yes, pastor, you're going to need glasses by the time you're 45. I am not only a medical doctor but I'm an ophthalmologist." Now there's a difference between an optometrist, optician, ophthalmologist. An ophthalmologist is the highest because he's a medical doctor. An optometrist is not a medical doctor. Optician's not a doctor, at all, he just makes whatever the prescription is called for. But a medical doctor, who goes on to study the eyes, is an ophthalmologist. And he's saying based on his credentials, he's telling me that I'm gonna need glasses when I'm 45. We used to have a restaurant that both of us liked to eat at downtown called, "Scampy's." My wife [Cleopatra Barrett] used to love to eat at Scampy's. So we made a wager. It's all right, I'll be 45 in the next 13, 14 months. If I don't need glasses, you'll have to buy me dinner at Scampy's. If I need glasses, I'll buy you dinner at Scampy's. Well, needless to say, he had to buy me dinner when I was 45 and if the bet was contingent upon each year, he'd still be buying me dinner 'cause he's still my ophthalmologist, although he no longer attends our church, but he's still my ophthalmologist and we're still very good friends. Speaker 2: And you still have twenty twenty vision. Speaker 1: No I don't. I have twenty ten. Speaker 2: It's better. Speaker 1: Better (laughter). One day, excuse me, my wife [Cleopatra Barrett] was in there, I think my last examination, and he covered my eye. He said, "Can you read that," and she was in the examining room, and I read the small print and he shook his head, she said that's disgusting, isn't it? He said, yes it is 'cause he wears glasses. He wears contacts. So does my wife wear glasses or wear contacts, but I don't. The power, presence of God. My mother [Addie May Burns Barrett] wore glasses, my father [Thomas Lee Barrett, Sr.] wore glasses. My father was blind. So, speaking in terms of heredity, I'm supposed to have terrible eyesight. I only use reading glasses because I like to read when I go to the hotels when I travel and hotels are notorious for dim lights, you know, but I guess that's--they have so many rooms, they save so much money, with dim lights. So, I do use reading glasses when I'm reading small print but I can read 'em--I can read the small print without the reading glasses. It's just more comfortable to read with. And guess what my power is on my reading glasses? Speaker 2: What's that? Speaker 1: One hundred, and I only use 125's because they don't make 100's any more and all my 100's, I think, are just about gone, you know, but that's--125 is a little too strong for me. And you's getting to the place where you--I bought up all the 125's I could find 'cause getting to a place where you can't find any 125's. Story_ID: 85933 Speaker 1: It's the power and it is the presence of God within us that enables us to overcome any difficulty. I mean, I've had doctors that tell me I had incurable diseases even my own doctor my--my endocrinologist, Doctor Early Butler. I had a cyst that come up on the back of my ear which was aggravated by my--my career in radio, which is another whole story, about how I broke into radio. But when it got aggravated and they looked at it, he said this has got to come out. It's got to come off and they took me to Mary Thompson Hospital [Chicago, Illinois] and performed the surgery. And they put a drain up in there and on the third, I guess it was the second day, after putting the drain in my ear and in where the operation took place, he almost panicked. He said because my skin was closing up, healing itself and it was gonna heal the drain up in there. It was going to close the drain up but he said, "I've never seen anything like this." But anyway, he told me that they had done a thorough blood work on me and that I had a particular blood disease that was incurable and fatal in some cases, you know, and he wanted to know how did I want him to tell my wife [Cleopatra Barrett], you know. I says, it's not how what you tell her, I says it's what I want you to tell her 'cause she knew that they were doing all the tests and she was waiting for me. I said, you're telling my wife that everything is fine and that I want her to buy me some new pajamas when I get home, 'cause I'm coming home. And he looked at me, he said, "Pastor Barrett, you know, this ethic--matter of ethics here." I said I'm not asking you to lie. I'm asking you to speak the truth and the truth is, I am fine. I says, tell her to tell the church, tell everybody in the church, that I am fine, that I'll be home. And that's what he did and that's what she did. She told everybody in the church. You see, I knew. You see there's a scripture in the Bible where the Psalm said if I was hungry--if I were hungry I would not tell you. And I never heard a preacher, you know, explain that to me. If you're hungry, why won't you tell somebody you're hungry so you can get something to eat. Well, through my studies and through my revelations I realized that Psalm was saying, "It's not good for other minds to think that you are hungry because those minds will collectively cause you to starve to death." What you're supposed to do is make people think that you have plenty to eat, that'll bring more food to you. So that's why he said it and that's what I base my teachings on. That's what I base what I told the doctor. If he had told my wife what he told me, and she had told the church, you would not be having this conversation with me, today. I'd be out there where my father's [Thomas Lee Barrett, Sr.] body is, in Burr Oaks Cemetery [Chicago, Illinois], somewhere. But because he told her that I'm fine, things all right, she told the church, told my mother and everybody started thinking that I was fine, that everything was all right. And when they did the test again, what they saw the first time, they didn't see again. That same doctor, I eulogized him at Rockefeller Chapel [University of Chicago in Illinois]. There he was telling me, you know, to get my house in order, but I'm the one who eulogized him. There's an awesome power within every end--that's the most powerful thing about this. That's why I know that this country--no country has to be at war. We don't have to go to war. If we could just get the principles of the science of being into people and they start operating out of it, we can deal with any enemy 'cause first of all we get--we will know that we have no enemies. I fear no man, I fear nothing. I don't travel with bodyguards, I come and go as I please, I come into this church, sometimes three or four o'clock in the morning, people say, aren't you scared? No, I am not, because the minute you can convince me that there's something to be afraid of, then I'll be afraid. Story_ID: 85934 Speaker 1: Okay, now let me try to put in some sort of historical perspective. Now, you came back to Chicago [Illinois]--when was it again? What year was it? Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-seven [1967]. Speaker 1: Sixty-seven [1967]. Speaker 2: That lady that just came here, we eloped and came back to Chicago because her parents didn't want me to marry her. Speaker 1: Okay, now what was the reason that they gave--did they give for that? Speaker 2: You really want to hear this story? Speaker 1: Well-- Speaker 2: It's--it's ugly. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It's very ugly. When I was shining shoes in New York City [New York], I was dressed like I'm dressed now and I would take a lunch break and there was a gentleman sitting across the counter from me and he kept staring at me--staring at me through lunch and I nodded to him and I just--I finished lunch. When walking down the street, going all the way back to one of my buildings, and I noticed in the mirror that he was following me, so I stopped because I'm not afraid of anybody. After he kept following me two or three blocks, I started to say, "Do I know you?" He said, "Yeah, I think I know you." "You look familiar to me, that's why I'm following you." "I think I know you, I've been trying to figure out who you are." I told him who I was. He said well, I'm Melvin. And I said--he said, what do you do? Well, I don't tell people that I'm a shoeshine man. I said "I'm a musician" and I said that I play for churches when--he said, "Well a friend of mine has a church in New Rochelle [New York] and he needs a musician." I said, okay. And I was looking for another church to play because I was doing everything, you know, to make money. So he gave me the address of the church, he said "Tell him Melvin sent you." So I went to that church the next Sunday morning and while I was standing there looking for Melvin, I mean, looking for Reverend Bullock, he told me the pastor name was Reverend Bullock, a lady--a young lady walks by and I just liked the way she looked. It was the lady that you just saw, my wife [Cleopatra Barrett], that's thirty-five years ago. And I asked her if she could give me some water, or something, I just wanted to stop her, to talk to her. But in the meantime while I was waiting for her, this same guy comes out in a robe and he said, "Oh, I see you made it." I said, yeah, well I'm looking for Reverend Bullock. He said, "I'm Reverend Bullock." And I said, all right, so he's playing a cat and mouse game. Anyway, after service, he interviewed me and he hired me and I started playing for the church. I started dating my wife. And to make a long story short, I got very popular with the people at the church because he let me preach one time. And I really, really got popular with the people. So one day, after service, we were going to a visiting church, he asked me to come to his house with him to change. And so while he was changing, he said to me, he said my people like you a lot. I said, yeah, I like your people a lot. He said, "They would like for you to stay." I said, "Well, I'd like to stay." He said, "Well, where do we go from here?" I said, "We're going to the other church." He said, "Don't be funny." He said, "I told you my people like you and they want you to stay." I said, "I told you, I like your people, I wanna stay." "So where do we go from here?" I said, "We're going to the other church." Well, to make a long story short, he was hitting on me. He said, "No, I mean me and you, what do we do?" I said, well, if you talk about what I think you're talking about, we don't do anything, you see, because there's three things I've never done in my life and there's three things I'll never do. I've never done drugs, I'll never do drugs, I've never done children and I'll never do children and I've never done men and I'll never do men. He said, "Oh, you'll do men, with me, if you want to stay here, you'll do me." And a long story--to make a long story short, it put enmity between us. He decided to get rid of me 'cause I wouldn't and he did everything he could to get rid of me. He told Cleo's parents that I was a pimp and that I didn't have a job and that I was going to have her on the streets, and all like that. In the meantime I stopped playing for the church and started running a revival and the Lord had its soul. I was in revival here at the church that was pastored by Reverend Golden, I was in revival, he was murdered. And I didn't know it but another minister called me and told me. He said, "Where are you?" I said, "I'm in Chicago [Illinois]." He said, "How long have you been there?" I said, "I've been here all week." He said because the police are looking to talk to you because the whole town knew, it's New Rochelle, it's a little town, they knew about the stink between the two of us. And so when he came up murdered, quite naturally the police wanted to talk--they asked if was there anybody he's having a feud with? They said, yeah, his musician, 'cause it was ugly. I mean, he could not move me 'cause the people didn't--the people loved me. But it just so happens I was out of the city, I knew nothing about it. He had picked up some drifter, and that's what happened to him. But anyway, their minds were poisoned against me. Her parents' minds were, especially her mother. So, when I got ready to leave, she decided to come with me and I may as well tell you that her mother thought I was the greatest person in the world before she died, you know. Says I was the greatest husband that she'd ever had because she realized that that was a bunch of lies that he told me. But that's why we eloped. Speaker 1: Now this is a--quite a drama. This is--this would make a screenplay. Speaker 2: Yeah, it would. It really would (laughter). It really could make a screenplay 'cause--and I'm not telling you everything 'cause of the time, you know. There's some more drama in there that I just have to leave out some of the stuff, but it's--it was--it was quite a story. Story_ID: 85935 Speaker 1: So when you come back here [Chicago, Illinois] in 1960-- Speaker 2: Seven [1967]. Speaker 1: Seven [1967], and you, basically you found your church in '68' [1968] right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And so--so tell me about what--what-- Speaker 2: Well, what happened--what happened was, I was here--I didn't have a job, I started working for my brother who had a wig salon, and back in those days wigs were real big and that was before the orientals came over and just took the market out. But back in those days, women were paying three and four, five hundred dollars for wigs and my brother only paid $15 for the wig. But he was just making money hand-over-fist. And I started working for him but I was a member of the Omega Baptist Church and Wednesday--he would set aside our leads, but Wednesday night my church was having prayer meeting and Wednesday night service. And that's where I was supposed to be. But he wanted me to be selling wigs so I'd go out and if they didn't buy it by the time it was prayer service time, I'd tell them "Later, I gotta go to church." So I'd leave. But my brother, being an astute businessman, would always call the customers the next day to find out why I didn't make the sale. And one lady told him, he said he had to go to church. So he challenged me, just like Irwin Stahl challenged me. He said you either give up the church or give up the wig business. And I just chose to, you know, to be with the church. But anyway, one Friday night, our church had an outing to the Metropolitan Baptist Church, right up here on 59th and Wabash. My pastor, Reverend Edmond Blair, had to go out of town. And he said to me, you take the church over to Metropolitan, he said, but Mount Zion Baptist Church and their minister is going to be there and you let him be in charge 'cause you are just an associate minister. I said, yes, sir. I was doing my duty. I took the church over there and when we were in the back, in the pastor's office, I didn't know anybody 'cause I was just here from New York and the man who was back there who--which turned out to be Reverend Williams, I didn't know, he claimed that he was waiting for Reverend Williams, so to make the decision on who was going to preach. So when they called for the preachers, he says it's time for the preaching, he said to me, you preach. I said, no, doc. I said my pastor told me to do what Reverend Williams say. He said, "Well I am Reverend Williams." Said "Why didn't you tell me? It's time for the preach?" He said, "I'm gonna put you up to preach." So he gets up and tells the people that I'm not going to preach tonight and Reverend Blair sent his young minister here and I'm gonna give him a chance and you could hear people groaning all over the place, "Oh, boy, we'll have to listen to a novice preacher." He said but that's all right. He said don't worry. Whatever he doesn't finish, I'll finish. Whatever he doesn't do, I'll finish when he finishes. Well, thirty minutes later, the ambulance was there to take people to the hospital. I swear to God. One lady had shouted so much until she went into some kind of fit--they had to call the ambulance. The church was in shambles. And I sat down until Reverend Williams finished. And he couldn't get control of the church. It was ridiculous. Well, anyway, the next week, or the next month, he left the church and that church remembered me preaching and they sent for me to come and be their pastor, and that's how I started pastoring. Story_ID: 85936 Speaker 1: Okay, so that's how you started this--with this particular church [Life Center Church of God in Christ]? Speaker 2: Well what happened was, there was a Baptist church. They called me to preach. I think he left in November, they called me to preach in November, I went back in December and they called me back in January and I told them I wouldn't come back again unless I came back as either pastor or a guest of the pastor, that I won't just keep coming back. And that March they had their vote, this month, I mean, that's why I'm celebrating my 35th anniversary. They had a vote and they called me to be the pastor. It was a small church but it had potential. And I went in there telling them we were going to build a new church and this that and the other and then I started teaching my philosophy. And a lot of the old deacons did not want to hear this new thought on theology. So they wanted to get me out of the church. So what I did was, I organized my own church and so many people stayed with me until we kept the building 'cause it was the majority of the people and those who were dissenters, they had to leave or they tried to take me to court to get me out of the building, but the majority of the people were with me. And the court had to go with me. So that's how I formed my own church and organized this church. And then in 1991, I brought the church back into the Church of God in Christ. Speaker 1: Okay, so it was a Baptist church for a while? Speaker 2: It was a Baptist church, from 1968 until 1974, it was a Baptist church and in '74' [1974] I organized--I reorganized it as an independent church. Story_ID: 85937 Speaker 1: Okay, now I don't--I've always heard that early in your career here in Chicago, you were associated with [HM Reverend Dr.] Johnnie Colemon's church (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: --Christ Universal Temple. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Can you tell us about (unclear)? Speaker 2: Well, I looked for a church that I could associate with and I looked for a minister that I could share my new thought--unorthodoxed views with and I heard about the Reverend Johnnie Colemon, that she was either the Unity School of Theology and that their concept of God--people were telling me was much like mine. But I didn't know Johnnie Colemon. So one morning, now I'm on the radio at this time, because in 1975, a radio station called, "WGLD", I was sitting in my bathroom, looking in the paper and it said, I saw where it said WGLD is going black and it's going to be called, "WBMX," the black music experience and that they're gonna have gospel early in the morning and I said then, that's my job. I would be on the air from six to eight in the morning. So I found out where the church--where the station was located and I drove out there, early one morning, and a man named, "Little David Anderson" was on the air, doing gospel. And I was listening to him on my way up there. He said, "I'm the new gospel host of WBMX." He said, "I'm Little David Anderson from Louisville, Kentucky." He said, "They searched the country to find the best in the business and I am he." I went right up to him and I knocked on the door and by my presence, you know, he let me in. And I said, "I'm Pastor T.L. Barrett" and he said, "Well, I'm Little David Anderson." "Did you came to welcome me to our city?" I said, "No, I came to ask you to show me how to work these controls." He said, "Why?" I said because I'm gonna--this is what I'm gonna be doing. So he got leary, you know, about letting me in 'cause he's looking at me real strange, said, this is my job. I said, "No, this is my job." I said, "What's that button they're playing on?" "And what's that knob they're playing?" He wanted to call security. I'm being real serious. I said, "If you don't mind, I just want to watch you." He said "Look reverend," he said, "my home was up for sale in Louisville, my wife and children are re-arranging they're--transferring the schools, they've given me a budget that enables me to look for a home, here in Oak Park, Illinois and the homes are very expensive here." He said "and they're paying me a good salary." I said, "Wonderful, but what is that red knob for?" You know, I wasn't paying no attention 'cause I knew that was my job. So he let me watch him and I gave him my card. I said, this is the number where you can reach me. Thank you so much, I said, I think I can handle it now. He said, "Reverend, it's nice to meet you and you've got a real voice here, but too much is happening, this is my job." So, I said, "You'll call me." It was seven days, my phone rang. It was Little David Anderson. He said, "Pastor Barrett," I said, "Yes sir," he said, "I don't know what you did," he said "but in the seven days since I've talked to you, since you were up here, everything has changed." He said, "all of a sudden my wife changed her mind, didn't want to move to Chicago." He said, "I haven't been able to find a house." He said, "plus my old radio station called me and offered me twice what these people are paying me to come back to Louisville." He said, "Man, I'm on my way back to Louisville, come up here and get your job." And that's exactly what I did. I said, "I told you it was my job." I went back up there and I started on the radio. They gave me the job. Story_ID: 85938 Speaker 1: I started on the radio. I became the hottest thing in the city [Chicago, Illinois] and one morning while I was on the air, getting back to [HM Reverend Dr.] Johnnie Colemon now, the spirit of God spoke to me and said, "You wanna meet Johnnie Colemon?" He said, "Johnnie's going through something right now, just open the mike and bless Johnnie Colemon and have a bless Johnnie Colemon week." So I opened the mike. I said, I'm blessing the Reverend Doctor Johnnie Colemon, pastor of the Christ Universal Temple Church. And I got the address and said, "Now what I want you all to do this week, I want you all to send Johnnie Colemon some cards and letters and just say God Bless you Johnnie Colemon." Johnnie Colemon told me that that morning she was going through a crisis in her life, in her ministry, said, "Lord, I just need some encouragement." She said she turned on her radio and while she was flicking, you know, turning the dial, she heard this preacher saying "This week is Bless Johnnie Colemon Week." She said my mouth flew open. She said, who is this? And what does he know about Johnnie Colemon and what does he know about what I'm going through right now to say "Bless Johnnie Colemon Week." And she said she kept listening and said she couldn't recognize the voice, she didn't know--and after a while I called my name, this is Pastor T. L. Barrett, blessing Johnnie Colemon. She said, well, Jesus, who is this man? I gotta find out who this man is, for him to pick up this. She said she got so many cards, so many letters, and that's how Johnnie and I met. That's how we became friends 'cause I sent her a card and sent her, you know, a letter or something. But we've been friends ever since and that's been, I guess, over twenty-five years ago. Speaker 2: That's quite a story. Speaker 1: Oh, God, yes it is. And that's why Johnnie and I know that God put us together. I mean, especially when she heard of what I was teaching, you know, so similar to what she was teaching. She said, because--and then I invited her to preach at my church and ministers, back twenty-five years ago, a woman preacher, invited to your church, that was unheard of 'cause men--the male preachers were putting her down and hindering her so and here was a man preacher on the radio saying, "Bless Johnnie Colemon", just when she really needed to hear it. Speaker 2: Now, it's been said, by some ministers, that Johnnie Colemon is really not a Christian, as such, as they were defining Christians. Speaker 1: Well, she's not-- Speaker 2: --as Christians-- Speaker 1: --neither am I-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --as to what they define a Christian. Now, because we say we're not Christians, we are Christ. I mean, Jesus--I mean the scripture tells you, "Let this mind being you which was also in Christ." Jesus, who being in the form of God, thought it not robbery to be one with God, and that's exactly what we teach people. You and your father, mother, God, are absolutely one. Story_ID: 85916 Speaker 1: Sir, in Chicago, there's a--it seems to be a tradition in black community, which can fall into some negative patterns to read quite a bit of self-improvement type of literature, you know, like [Augustine] Og Mandino, Zig Ziglar, who is the guy with the--Stone, with the-- Speaker 2: W. Clement Stone. Speaker 1: --Stone, you know, those self-improvement-- Speaker 2: Norman Vincent Peale, positive (simultaneous), "Power of Positive Thinking." Speaker 1: Positive thinking-- Speaker 2: Yeah, those are like little bibles to a certain segment of the religious community and to a greater extent even those who profess no religion, at all. But they believe in improving self. They believe that that is the most important task that you're given here on earth, and it is, the improvement of yourself. Jesus talks about it when he said that, "You struggle with the moat in your brother's eye and you're very consciously aware of the moat that is in your brother's eye but you don't seem to even realize as a beam, in your own eyes." That the first thing you ought to do is take the beam out of your own eye, take the stigma out of your own eye and then you can see clearly how to take the beam, or the moat, out of your brother's eye. So, self-improvement is the first law in the survival of the fittest. You can't survive, and you can't be fit to survive, if you do not constantly improve yourself. So that's your first order of your day. The first law of your being, is to improve yourself. So, that's why those books are so popular and those motivational speakers are such sought-after speakers, because they help people reach where God intends for them to reach, within. And that's what our philosophy, and our theology does, or seeks to do. Our church creates, there's something like the philosophy of universal awareness, allows man, it doesn't make man, but it allows man to realize their oneness with God 'cause we believe that if we show you the truth, and don't try to force it on you, but allow you to ingest the truth, and then prayerfully we pray that you will digest the truth and then we know automatically you will manifest the truth. It's called, "Ingest, Digest, Manifest." And we affirm that we ingest, we digest and we do manifest, the truth that we are taught. And the greatest truth that you can ever be taught is, you are one with God. That's why people like the [HM] Reverend Dr. Johnnie Colemon, and myself and others, who teach similar to what we teach, are not considered mainline Christians, and some don't even consider us Christians at all. They think we're heretics or blasphemous. Story_ID: 85917 Speaker 1: But actually if you really study the teachings of Jesus, his teachings are more in line with what we teach, than they are with mainline religion's teachings. Speaker 2: How so? Speaker 1: Well, notice, if you go to the average church, you're going to hear a lot of talk about the devil and they spend a lot of energy rebuking the devil and beating up on the devil. Read the teachings of Jesus. He says very little about the devil. He says, if you resist the devil, he flees from you. To me, anything going in the opposite direction from me, I don't have to chase it, I don't have to run from it, it's not bothering me, if it's going in the other direction, so why talk about it? So, that's why you hear very little talk, if any, about the devil among new thought Christians or new thought religions because we understand, number one, that if you resist him, and the way you resist him is ignore him. How many of us can just remember, when we were children, and there was somebody picking at us, and if we took our parents advice, just ignore them, after awhile it's no more--it's no fun. If they can't get a reaction out of you, it's no fun. What do they do? They go on and leave you alone and find somebody that they can get a reaction out of, right? Speaker 2: Or they hurt you? Or they hurt you real bad. Speaker 1: Yeah, try to hurt you, yeah. But-- Speaker 2: After they (unclear), you know. Speaker 1: Right, but I'm just saying, the average person, even if you and your wife, or you and your friend, are discussing something and it becomes a discussing--a discussing, more than a discussion, if you ignore them, if somebody's cussing you out, and you just don't respond, what do they do? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: They leave you alone. So Jesus said, if you ignore the devil, don't give energy, don't give a place with no energy to him, he is going to flee from you 'cause he doesn't like being ignored. He likes attention. He loves these preachers who talk about him all the time. "The devil is busy. The devil is trying to do this. The devil is doing that." He loves that. So he goes to those places. But in a church like this, where he gets no placement, gets no mention, no energy, can't stand this place. So my people don't hear about him, they hear about God, and their oneness. Their wonderful oneness with the God, their powerful, efficacious oneness with God. So when they hear these things, and they live by these things, then that's what they celebrate. They celebrate God and that's what we do, we celebrate God but we're branded "non-Christians" because we don't teach the traditional way. We don't teach that one day you're gonna die and go to heaven and heaven is gonna be--you're gonna make heaven your home. We teach that one day you're gonna wake up and realize that instead of trying to make heaven your home, you ought to make your home your heaven because God is right here. You're not gonna die and go to heaven. You can live in heavenly consciousness, right now, just by understanding that you and your father, you and your mother, God are one and that all things work together for the good. But that's just one thing I was telling you about, that Jesus said, "Resist the devil". But the other thing is located in--the principles located in Isiah 26 and 3. Isiah clearly says, "Thou will keep him in perfect peace whose mind is stayed on thee." Now, that's just another way of saying that there's nothing that can frustrate you, nothing that can eliminate you, nothing that can destroy you, no force, no entity, no influence, if you keep the most powerful part of your being fixated on God and the most powerful part of your being is your mind, there's nothing--if you lose your mind, forget it, okay. You can have twenty twenty vision, you won't know what you're looking at. You can have perfect hearing, you won't understand what you're hearing. You can have all of the workings of your olfactory organ, you won't know what you're smelling. Your tactile can be--you won't know what you're touching--your taste buds, you won't even know what you're eating, if your mind is gone. So the most important part of your being is your mind. Speaker 2: Now this is like after--kind of reflect back to your job at Flushing Hospital. But you certainly know this point better than most people-- Speaker 1: Yes sir. Speaker 2: --who are just saying this, you know. Speaker 1: Absolutely, I know it. I know it. So Isiah said, "You will be kept, this is a promise" and I'd like to illustrate it when I'm teaching this by telling people that God showed Isiah a panoramic view of life and of the sojourn of men. And God miraculously allowed Isiah to know the condition of all of these men and women and he saw some who made it, some who didn't. He saw some who went insane, some who stayed sane. And he showed them the activities of these people and he asked Isiah, explain it. They all started out, but they all didn't end up. What's the difference? Some went crazy, some went askew, some failed, some made it. You explain to me. I've shown it to you, Isiah, now figure it out. It took Isiah a little while but he said, I see where some men, when they started out, they had their minds on you, but their minds deviated from you. I saw others who start out with their minds on you, and they kept their minds on you. And I saw-- Story_ID: 85918 Speaker 1: So Jeremiah [sic, Barrett was previously telling a story from Isaiah] was saying that I saw him, those who ended up at the bottom of the heap of the dregs of society. They did not keep their minds on you. I saw those who were frustrated, worried, anxious, full of trepidation, those are the ones that I noticed they were always fixated on the devil or some other entity, but those that were at the end of their journey, no matter what they went through, no matter how many traumatic experiences they had in their lives, no matter how cataclysmic the vicissitudes of their lives were, they remained calm and at peace. And he says I see what you're showing me, what you're actually showing me, God, is that you will keep him in perfect peace but the condition is he must keep his mind fixated on you. Now that's the interpretation of that scripture and that's the warning that Jeremiah is giving to us. He's saying that if you really desire to make it through life with peace in your mind which is, I told you before, your most important asset, you've gotta keep your mind on God. You have no energy, you have no placement to give to Satan or to any other entity for there is but one power, one influence that you should recognize and that is of God the good. Story_ID: 85919 Speaker 1: Now, what do we--what do you mean when you say "God?" Are you talking about the--I know you're not talking about the traditional-- Speaker 2: Anthropomorphic being? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: God-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --the Hebrews-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --and--or even, you know, the other subsequent versions of God that the different denominations have come up with where God, you call on God, he responds in some way, does something or--or God that--I mean, I'm just trying to figure out what--are we talking about a set of moral precepts and concepts or attitudes or are we talking about an energy or what are we talking when we talk about keeping our mind on God because some people would suggest that, which was part of another question I was going to ask too, about all of the traditional components of Christianity that fundamentalist bring into play. Every--the devil, the--in as you alluded to, all the saints and, you know, I mean that certain Catholics would pray to a different Saint for different things, you know. You've got a whole universe of things-- Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: --that pray to and deal with the Virgin Mary, you know, all these things, you know, comprise some people's belief in God. So, like how does, what you're talking about, differ from any of this and what is it really, in essence, come to when we talk about God? Speaker 2: Well, first of all, let's just be very clear that as the old folks say, and they knew nothing about higher consciousness, they knew nothing about cosmic awareness, anything like that. But they said things come up in my life that makes me want to cuss and fight and swear and act a fool but there's something within me that holds the rein. They said that when I'm real hurt, there's something within me that banishes all pain. Something within me that I cannot really explain. All I know is something within me. Now I took that word, "something" and said that's God. It's something. Even you--the psalmist said, when I consider the heavens and the stars and all that your hands have made, I know there's something. I mean when you look at this universe, never mind about the parallel, you know there's some scientist that believe in parallel universe and the only way you can get through there is go through the black hole but we don't even want to get that deep. We just want to deal with this universe. We can deal with this universe with its solar systems, with its galaxies, and each solar system having its constellations, I mean just those three entities right there and how orderly they are. I think it was Wernher von Braun who said, there's so much order in the universe that if two galaxies pass through each other, with all of the movements in those galaxies and those solar systems and those constellations, he said not one would bump into another. There would be no collisions. He says just that orderly out there in the universe. There's got to be something. The old folk put--the old folks said it. Now, I'm not--don't blame me. They said it's something. So that we know that it is a power, it is an energy, it is a force. Never mind what you name it, him, it, Elohim, El Shaddai, all of that, those are man's attachments to God and what--even God itself comes from a German word, Gott, and that's what God is actually, good, but it's something. It's real. And whatever it is, we seek to teach people or to make people aware 'cause we contend we're so entrenched in this new thought that we contend that we can't even teach people anything because God said to Jeremiah before you were formed in the belly of your mother, I knew you. So it means that we were there with God. So, therefore, if we were there with God, then everything that came after God, we were aware of it. So we have all knowledge of all things. That's why we like new things because we were there when they were made and they're just coming into physical manifestation now. The scripture says there is nothing new under the sun. But the main thing for us to realize is that whatever your concept of God is, whether you think it's a man up in the sky, that's fine, God will be your man up in the sky 'cause it's according to your faith. If you think it's an energy that permeates every iota of this universe, if you believe like we believe that there is no spot where God is not, and there is no--not on any spot that God knoweth not how to unknot, if you believe any of that, that is your God. We don't relegate God to a man's concept. If you want to believe that that's a man up in the sky, God is greater up to be according to your faith, but the important thing for you to know is that there is something and that something is God. And that's something that is God is good. And that's something that is God and that is good is in you, waiting for you to make your claim to the power that is available through that something that is good, that is God. Story_ID: 85920 Speaker 1: Now, in our community, it's often been said, and I think it just illustrated a movie called, "Antwone Fisher", there was a segment where Denzel Washington is a psychiatrist in an effort to explain certain behaviors to Antwone- Antwone Fisher who had endured some tragic, you know, a tragic childhood. He gave him a copy of "The Slave Community" by John W. Blassingame, which is the only book on slavery written by a black historian, I think, for many, many years. I think there are more now, but for many, many years, that was the only one. In that book he intended to explain slave thinking and slave mentality and a lot of the negative concepts that black folks have of each other and the world that grew out of the slave experience. And, you know, what do you think--do you--how does--I've often thought that, you know, the positive thinking theologies are, in the black community, are a constant attempt to change that course. What do you think about that? Speaker 2: That the positive thinking theology-- Speaker 1: Yeah-- Speaker 2: --is an attempt to change the course of the-- Speaker 1: Yeah-- Speaker 2: --slave thinking? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Absolutely, because the slave mentality is a mentality that says, respond to pain, respond to orders, respond to the master, you are servant. It is a slave mentality that has our people smoking cigarettes--can't get started unless they have a cup of coffee and a cigarette. It's that slave mentality that has our people hooked on drugs, hooked on alcohol. It's that slave mentality that has our people who can't function unless they go to the gambling boat and gamble all their money away. It's being controlled. Our theology, if you want to call it positive thinking, but it's much more than positive thinking, it's scientific thinking, and you can be positively wrong in your thinking. So we don't really purport to be a positive thinking theology but a scientific thinking theology. We are scientific spiritual practitioners. We work by the sciences that govern the laws of this universe and if you are comfortable being controlled and not comfortable being in control, then you are a servant. And Jesus said, I don't call you servants, he said, I call you Gods. Gods are in control. That's all he's saying. I see you, my concept of you is as a God. The first commandment I gave you was to be fruitful, multiply, replenish the earth and have dominion. (phone rings) Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Do not be dominated but have dominion. Story_ID: 85921 Speaker 1: We teach our children, remember I said earlier, that if I had known as a child what I know--what I knew as a--an aware, seeker of wisdom and truth, I'd probably be president of the United States. What we seek to teach our children, our children who grow up in this church, know nothing about a devil, they know nothing about being born in sin, shaped in inequity, because half of your battle is lost when you accept the conscious awareness that you were born in sin and shaped in inequity, which is a lie that has been perpetrated upon the Christian man because some preacher misunderstood what David was saying. David was giving his personal assessment of himself. He's saying, any man who can have another man's wife, first of all, can have sex with a man's wife while the man is in the Army, in his Army, fighting for him, if he can do that, and then, when he finds out the woman is pregnant, have the man come home from the Army and try to get the man to have sex with his wife but the man says, no, I'm an altruist. I can't have sex with my wife while my men are out fighting and they can't have sex with their wives so I'll sit downstairs all night. So, David knowing that the man--that the whole town know the man sat outside his house all night, the woman is going to come out pregnant, and he's the only cat in town, so it's gonna fall on him, so what does he do? Have the man put in the thicket of the battles so he can be killed, so he can marry his wife and out of that union Solomon was born. But David, thinking about himself, he said, anybody who can do something like this, had to be born a sinner. You see, I was born in sin and inequity was I shaped. Then preachers looking at that and say, oh, it's in the Bible, not even looking at the context that it was written, not even studying the background that it was written in, just said, oh, we were all born in sin and shaped in inequity because they're perpetuating that original sin lie. That sin entered the race of man through one man not realizing that Adam wasn't a one-man situation and Eve wasn't a one-woman situation. Adam was a nation of men, a company of men. Eve was a company of women. It wasn't just one man and one woman. No way possible that could have happened but any- I want to get back to, you know, trying to answer your question. We're scientific thinkers, not just positive thinkers. Any time you can accept being controlled, whether being in control, then you haven't been taught the truth or you have been taught the truth but you reject the truth. Anybody who comes to our church and they really receive this truth, they leave here challenged to be in control. Some of them become control freaks. They want to just be--control everything. Story_ID: 85922 Speaker 1: But getting back to what I started to tell you, we teach our children to learn this mantra. It becomes a mantra to them, that "I am a master, I learned it from my pastor, I refuse to be a disaster" and so it is, that's what they live by, as they grow up. And then when they--when they come through their twelve years of discipleship, we teach them that you--that a disciple of Jesus--we teach them that as you walk down the corridor of life for twelve years, there's a disciple of Jesus, at each year, waiting to walk with you. And each disciple has a spiritual faculty that he's going to give you and he's going to share that spiritual faculty with you. Each disciple of Jesus represents a spiritual faculty and a corresponding color. So by the time they get to be twelve years old, they have all these disciples that have walked with them and all of the corresponding colors and the meanings of the colors. Then we teach them that they're entering their twelve, their--excuse me, seven years of perfection 'cause seven is the number of perfection. You only are a teenager for seven years and for seven years with these powers of these disciples, you are to live a perfect life. And we give them the right of passage but in order to go through the right of passage, the night before they are elevated and confirmed, they spend the night here, with me, and with, of course, their youth leaders, but I serve them breakfast in the morning. And I personally have to serve them the breakfast because I'm asking them as I serve each one of them, do you believe there are drugs in this food? Do you believe that there is some hallucinogenic substance in this food that I'm serving you? And they have to be honest and say, no. Do you believe I would serve you any? No I don't. But suppose something has happened to me during the past week that my mind has changed. Suppose I have put substance in this food and I tell you that I have cocaine, or some other substance, that will alter your thinking and alter your being in this food. Based on the teachings that you have had for the eleven--past twelve years, would you accept it, even from me? And they have to be honest. First of all I ask them, do you love me, do you trust me, and all that? Yes. But if I told you there's cocaine in here, there's marijuana, would you accept it from me based not on how you feel about me but based on the teachings that you've received? And they'd have to say, "No, I wouldn't." So, the challenge is, if you wouldn't accept it from me, a man you love, a man you trust, a man you look up to, a man you revere, that I challenge you to don't accept it from anyone else. Those are the challenges that they have to accept because you have said for twelve years, well you can't say it for the whole twelve years 'cause they can't talk for the first year or two, but ever since they are able to talk, they have to say "I am a master, I learned it from my pastor, I refuse to be a disaster" and drugs lead to disaster, alcoholism leads to disaster, sex before marriage, leads to disaster. I even ask young girls, if I wanted to have sex with you, if I--have I ever put my hands on you or any other, no you haven't but if I tried to, now I'm your pastor, I'm your spiritual leader and I'm the next thing to God, would you allow me to? No pastor I wouldn't, not based on my teachings 'cause we teach them and show them that even if your daddy, your brother, your uncle, your pastor, anybody puts their hands on you in any way, that is less than respectful, you refuse it and scream. We teach our children, if they are together and a stranger comes up to one of them, everybody go. If a stranger walks up to one child and tries to talk to them, all of our children go right to him 'cause they can't snatch all of 'em, you know. But--so when they get to that point, of that breakfast, and I ask them, if I tried to have sex with you, would you allow me to, based on the teachings that you have received? They say, no I wouldn't. Then if you wouldn't allow me to have sex with you, do you allow me to give you drugs, if you allow me to give you any alcohol, you can't allow anybody else to do it. Teaching them how to be masters. How to be in control. If your job depended on you letting your boss have sex with you, what would you do? Give up your body or your job? Coming through these teachings, they said, I'll give up my job 'cause the power of God in you that brought that job to you will bring a better job to you. You don't let anybody control you, you don't let anything control you. You don't let any cigarettes control you, you don't let any alcohol control you. You don't let any drugs control you. We work with drug addicts all the time. We worked with one right now. I'm helping her have her car fixed 'cause just based on these principles, she's getting unhooked from drugs because drugs have been controlling her, most of her life. And now she's hearing that she doesn't have to be controlled by drugs. And without going through any kind of detoxification program, she's getting detoxed. . Story_ID: 83674 Speaker 1: Is there anything else about the philosophical aspects or the theology of your--of your teachings that you want to share before? Speaker 2: Yes, I really would like to share what we really believe is the answer to the question of: Why does God allow killings and murdering of children and why does God allow such historical massacres as the extermination of six million Jews and the loss of hundreds of thousands, even millions, of lives in the slave trade, especially in the middle passage? How does God allow that? Brother, if you could convince me that there's a man and his son sitting up in this cloud somewhere, watching all of this, and they both have power, all power, and they allow this to happen, not only would I not preach, I wouldn't even want to go to heaven, I'd rather go to hell. And to meet somebody who could allow that kind of mayhem to go on. Here our hearts are saddened, a young lady grew up in our church, I married her mother and her father, right here in this church. And someone breaks in her house, or comes in her house, murders her, twenty-two years old, shoots her five-year-old daughter who--how could someone even do that and then how could a God allow them to shoot a five-year-old little girl through her liver and then take a knife and cut her two-year-old son's brothers throat and almost cut his tongue out of his mouth? You mean to tell me there's a man--an actual man sitting on a throne watching all of this and I'm gonna pray to him? For what? I want to give praise and glory to him? It's crazy. It's ludicrous. The same people who praise God, I've even heard people say, "Oh, we've got to thank God for all the things," that's just a lie. Those same people, if I let their dog get run over, if I could see a car rolling down in front of their dog and didn't pull the dog out of the way of the car, they'd hate me for the rest of their lives. But yet they can serve a God who would allow little babies to be blown up with bombs and millions of people exterminated by a mad man. Something's wrong with that concept of God. So then, what is the answer? The answer is we are part and parcel of God and whatever we want God to be, that's what we must be. God has no other power aside from us. Every act, whether it is positive or negative, must have the corresponding commensurate energy to carry out that act. For instance, right now, in this room, if I wanted to, just hypothetical, if I wanted to injure you and anyone else in this room, with a knife or a gun, I couldn't do it unless there was sufficient negative energy commensurate to the task that I have in my mind to do. That's the only way I can do it. If the energy in this room is so--if the molecular structure is positively charged, the idea would have to stay in my mind and die in my mind. I couldn't do it. Story_ID: 83675 Speaker 1: So you're saying that one negative person coming in here couldn't, you know, fulfill their negative-- Speaker 2: Not if the vibrations are--not if the molecular structure is populated and positively charged by those of us who are positive, and Christ-like, in see, in my office, I don't allow certain things to go on. In my counting room, I don't allow certain conversations to go on. You can't talk about how bad the economy is and you're countin' money for this church. That just can't happen because I know what it'll do, it'll bring on the negative forces that will mitigate the power of the money that we're counting. You want this money to be multiplied. So you got to talk about purchasing mansions. If you want to talk about purchasing the gems and jewels and anything that deals with prosperity, talk about it but you can't talk about losing jobs, or nothing like that. So if--if those of us in here, if all four of us in this room, are just very positive and very powerful and very Christ-like, and somebody comes in here wanting to commit a crime, they couldn't do it. They wouldn't have the power. Now, if they came in here, started cussing and we allowed them to bring us down to their level, then there would be some bloodshed because we would--we would contribute to that negative cesspool of energy that they would need to carry out their heinous crime. Speaker 1: But sir, there are--there's disasters and--that occur all the time that seem to be just things that happen regardless of whether we're positive (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: No, things just don't happen, things happen just. Speaker 1: Well, for example, I can give you an example, maybe respond within yourself, suppose there is a storm, a tree falls on a car and crushes some people inside. What--that's one example and another example would be, we just talked about the other day where someone else we interviewed, the--who was at there--the murder of Dr. King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.'s] mother [Alberta King] at Ebenezer Baptist Church in Atlanta [Georgia] where a young man [Marcus Wayne Chenault] who was mentally disturbed, just decided he would shoot some people of their church. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: I don't think that--I mean he had a--he was insane but he had a negative bent to it but I don't think that the people in the church were necessarily negative as to the reason why they got shot, I mean, or do you--can you show me? Speaker 2: Let me give you an example. At the funeral of that young lady this past Saturday, I asked the people how many of you are hurt by what happened to her? Everybody in the church raised their hand. Then I said, how many of you contributed to what happened to her? And they looked at me like I was crazy. I said, oh yes, many of you in here contributed. I'm searching myself to find out if I contributed. And I talked about how we contribute. I said, if you just argue with someone, if you let somebody cause you to make--to produce a negative feeling towards them, if you spoke in a harsh way, you've contributed to their negative cesspool of energy, I said, and out of that energy, anything can happen. Martin Luther King's mother getting shot, a tree can fall on a car full of innocent people, anything can happen. Planes can crush, anything, because the negative energy is out there and that's how the so-called accidents happen and how the so-called heinous crimes are committed. I said, the way we stop it is that we have to understand the powerful words of Jesus. He said, by this, shall all men know that you are my disciples, is that you have love one for another. That doesn't sound heavy but it is so heavy. What is he saying? He's saying that if every man would live by the principles of love, love ye one another, forgive your enemies. When he's on the cross, he said, "Father forgive 'em, they don't know what they're doing, so forgive 'em." I'm not going to contribute to what they're doing. If I hate them, then I'm going to just make it possible for this to continue to happen. So I'm asking you to forgive them. I said, if you contributed, if you put forth any negativity whatsoever, you contributed to this young lady's death. So I'm going to ask you again, and you know who you are, how many of you contributed? And then they started raising their hands. I said, now what we can do? We can't bring her back but we can stop others from going the way she is and going the way she went. We got to make up in our minds that we're going to be that one that Joshua talked about. He said, "One of us can chase a thousand." That means one person that is positive, can chase a thousand negative persons positive--vibrations out of the atmosphere and when a hundred of us come together, then we can put ten thousand--we can mitigate it. Story_ID: 83676 Speaker 1: And I said if there's anybody in here, I'm going to show you two miraculous things that happened, if anybody in here who has had a negative encounter with anybody, I want you to leave here today and promise you're going to go and call them or go to them and settle it. If you have to be the one to apologize, do it. How many of you will do that? Several hundred hands went up. I said, as a matter of fact, if there's anybody in here today that knows of someone else in here, that you had something negative against them, get up now and go to them. One sister got up and came out of the audience and went up into the choir stand and hugged her sister that she had had an altercation with right here in our church last Sunday. They had a fight in my kitchen. And they hugged each other in the choir stand and people started weeping as they hugged each other and started praising God, because they knew that negative forces were being defeated then. My own daughter was living on the West Coast with another daughter of mine and they had had some bad words because one was keeping the other one's children and they were supposed to be getting paid and something happened with money, you know, things remember--she said she prayed to God when she heard that message that I gave Saturday at the funeral, that she wished she had her sister's number because her phone was shut off, her cellphone shut off, she said because I want to--I don't want to contribute any more. Who showed up from California here Sunday but her sister? She flew in Saturday night, didn't tell anybody she was coming, and on Sunday morning, when my other daughter came to church, she saw her sister here in church and after service she went to her and told her, said daddy preached a sermon at the funeral Saturday, said I was trying to get in touch with you 'cause, and she explained to her what the funeral, you know, what the message was about and how we contribute to these so-called accidents or what they call "acts of God" and--and how these murders can be committed and we think God allowed it to happen to--and the only explanation they give, say he's trying to get our attention. The hell with that kind of teaching. We have to get our own attention and realize that every time we commit a negative act or think a negative thought, we are contributing to what's happening in the world in terms of people getting killed, planes crashing, trees crashing, or the weather being cataclysmic and my two daughters made up right here, Sunday. That dispersed a lot of negativity. Story_ID: 83677 Speaker 1: If we could get the world to do this, the War would end tomorrow. If we could get them to do it tonight, the War would end tomorrow 'cause anybody wanting to fight, wouldn't have the energy to pull the trigger. Guys would be flying the planes with all the sorties and they get over the targets and want to drop the bomb but they wouldn't have the power to release the lever. We just don't know the power we have. As scientific spiritual practitioners always, they want to call them "Christians," of people of God, we have the power to stop the Wars, to stop the killings, to stop the murders, to stop the rapes because God is in us. It's no God, once we ever wake up and realize there is no man up there controlling things. It's in us, we're the ones that have to control it. And when I saw the response of those people, I said I've got to get my television ministry moved from just a local cable station to a worldwide station 'cause God gave me the word to the world as the title. So it's supposed to be on the world. The world needs to hear this so that's what we can start teaching. And if I can get my fellow preachers to leave the devil alone, okay. First of all, he's got to be the baddest cat in the world to be in existence as long as he's been in existence 'cause ever since I was a good boy, I've been hearing people talk about we're rebuking the devil and we're going to run him out and we're going to tear his kingdom down and we're going to do this. I'm sixty years old and they're still rebuking him. They still haven't been successful in tearing his kingdom down. This got to be the baddest cat in the whole world. After he's lasted so long, he's the undisputed heavyweight champion of the world. Leave him alone. Let's start teaching the people how to control what happens in this world. Story_ID: 83678 Speaker 1: Sir, there's another train of thought to, if I can be the, I guess the fundamentalist advocate-- Speaker 2: Advocate, right. Speaker 1: --that God should be feared, you know, 'cause God would smite you, I've heard people say this, you know. They say, don't say that, God will strike you down. Or they'll say that they speak of God in a--you know, I have the fear of God, that's why I won't do this, "X", "Y" and "Z". And they--and they, I think they act accordingly in their own lives, you know, and they scare their children. They scare their neighbors. They figure that when they, you know, to--if they're right, they have the--they have the God given authority to make others frightened and to, you know, exercise their world on them. Speaker 2: Please remember this. Never forget this. You cannot truly love something you really fear. It's impossible. That's the reason why there's so much hypocrisy in the church because people are finding out they don't truly love God. They get up and say, they've given honor to God who is the head of my life, but God is not really the head of their lives. God might be in their lives but he's not the head of their lives 'cause they don't follow and obey God as they should because they don't truly love God. And the reason why they don't truly love God is because they can't truly love God. Why, because they've been taught to fear God and that's an impossibility. You cannot truly love what you greatly fear. It just doesn't--it cancels out, the love quotient. So what are we supposed to do if we're not supposed to fear God? You're suppose to respect God. You're supposed to be in awe of this awesome presence that enables you to be what you want to be, do what you want to do, overcome what you want to overcome. You're supposed to respect that awesome presence that's--you don't have to send off for or wait two or three weeks for delivery and pay your shipping and handling fee for--but it's nigh thee even in your mouth speaketh, and it becomes a reality to you. I'm in awe of this power. I don't fear God, I honor God, I love God and once we can get man to realize he's making a mistake, teaching to fear God, and all you have to do is go back to the basics. Do you have any children? Do you want your children be afraid of you? You--your children can't truly love you if they are afraid of you. They can't truly honor you, if they are afraid of you. Even if your child does something wrong, you won't pick up, not in your right mind, you won't pick up a bolt of lightening and strike them down. How dare someone reduce my God to some kind of a maniacal anthropomorphic being. That's not God. Story_ID: 83679 Speaker 1: Now does the youth of the Bible, especially the Old Testament, pull you into a kind of a contradiction because if you--the Old Testament is filled with these kinds of stories? Speaker 2: Yeah. (simultaneous) Speaker 1: (Unclear)-- Speaker 2: Children made fun of a prophet. He said, go up baldy and a bear came out and ate him up. That was God. God sent the bear to eat him up 'cause he called the baldheaded man--the bear was hungry, okay. Children look like a Big Mac to him, I mean, they were in the wrong place, at the wrong time. They should have been with their parents, the parents should have had the children, they shouldn't have let the children out in the woods by themselves, God did not send the bear to eat up the children because they called the profit, baldheaded. It's ludicrous. So I don't mind being at odds with the Bible because I know I'm not at odds with God's word and everything in that Bible is not the word of God. There are some things that contain the word of God but everything in there is not the word of God. I can show you in the Bible where--how to deal with juvenile delinquency. How to just eradicate it from your community. Twenty-fourth chapter, I believe it's, what is it Deuteronomy, where they talk about if you have a son who is disrespectful to your parents, disobedient, take him to the center of the city, the men of the city pick up stones, stone him to death and thereby you put away that kind of evil from Israel. They're good children now 'cause nobody wanted to be stoned. They stone you. They had a--they had a fire God named Moloch, and if you were bad, they would send you into the Valley of Moloch, where you get burned up. He said, send 'em down there, that way you can put away the evil out of Eden. It's crazy. And all of this is under the guise of the word of God. If a man marries a woman, and she didn't tell him that she had a scar on her body, then he goes in and finds out that she has a mark on her body, she can be stoned to death. All of this under the guise of the word of God. Speaker 1: So--so you gotta use the Bible with care, I suppose? Speaker 2: Meticulous care. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: I contend that you ought to have a license to teach from the Bible, I mean a serious license. I'm not talking about just a license from your denomination. I mean there ought to be some sensible board, a screening board, that would just--you cannot preach the word unless you have a license to go through this Bible. And you have to prove to that board that you can't--you will have teached them some crazy notion about God. Speaker 1: Have you ever thought about extracting the parts you wanted and leaving the other parts? Speaker 2: No, that's not necessary. It's not necessary. It's just like this interview. There's no sense--sense of me thinking that you're gonna--I mean if it's a regular interview like I've done many, many times, I've done interviews where they sat and interviewed me for an hour and when I saw it back, it was like 15 seconds (laughter). They took out what-- Speaker 1: Context (unclear). Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Yeah, this is intact. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: One of the good things about this is it's all being intact. Speaker 2: Oh, all right. Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: But I'm just simply saying that you deal with what you can and you know the truth when you see it in the Bible and you leave the other alone. Story_ID: 83680 Speaker 1: Now, maybe I can change the course here a little bit and ask you about a couple of things. I know you've been involved in community activities for a long time and you're on the Board of Operation PUSH [People United to Serve Humanity], here in the city. Is it a--I mean, in terms of your theology, your theological point of view, is it a--should we oppose laws and government--governments and other things that hinder and oppress us as a people or as humanly? Speaker 2: Yes, we should. If we hadn't, we'd still be under Jim Crow. We would still not be able to go to institutions of our choices for secondary or higher learning or we wouldn't be able to worship in houses of worship that we wanted to. We wouldn't be able to ride and sit on any seat on the buses if we didn't oppose these laws. There were laws. Speaker 1: Now, is this approach--does the opposition of--does this opposition like--how does that correspond to the positive thinking of theology or theology where you should be positive instead of? I--this is my-- Speaker 2: Remember, these movements were led by ministers who read the Bible and could see the inequities and in equalities of society and it didn't jive with the Bible. So based on what they read in the Bible that--that out of one blood, God created all men and all they needed was just a little inspiration. Like a seamstress saying, I'm tired and I don't feel like going to the back of the bus. And the preacher started saying, you heard her, that's right, you shouldn't have to go to the back of the bus. It was wrong for them to accept it in the first place. But just when she made that move, it just gave them impetus to let the dam burst. Story_ID: 83681 Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Tell me, now you have been involved, I guess recently on some level with the community and Reverend Sun Myung Moon. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: And I wanted to ask you about his influence on you and there's a particular incident concerning your wife [Cleopatra Barrett], I think, that I read about. Could you explain that? Speaker 2: Yes, about thirteen years ago, my wife had decided she had enough of the rigors of being a preacher's wife and she left. And she stayed gone for ten years. I refused to get married. She remarried but I refused to because I, again, going back to what I told you earlier about family ethics and family ties and the consciousness of family that I was given by my father [Thomas Lee Barrett, Sr.], divorce in our house was just something unheard of. I could not imagine my mother [Addie May Burns Barrett] and father divorcing and I just couldn't imagine divorcing my wife for any reason and I meant that, any reason, even if she became impregnated by another man, there wouldn't be reason enough for me to break up my marriage and break up my family because without family, you're without favor, as far as I'm concerned, I think a man with family is a man with favor of God favored the universe. And I always want to be in favor of God and favor of the universe. So I waited for ten years and Reverend Moon, the reason that I started working with him was because he was so pro-family. As a matter of fact, the--the banner of his movement when I got involved was "true family values." That's what they were espousing. True family values and I liked that. So I started working with the True Family Values Ministry. And I had heard all the negative things about Reverend Moon but I know that there are a lot of negative things being said about me. So I didn't judge people by what others were saying about him. I was dealing with what he was dealing with and they would send me to speak on family values. And then he started this 50-city tour on restoring, rebuilding and renewing. Restoring families, rebuilding communities and renewing nations in the world. And it just, you know, it just really harmonized with my thinking 'cause you can't rebuild communities unless you restore families, you can't renew world, unless you rebuild a community but you can't rebuild a community until you restore the family. So it all started with the family. So we were on the tour and we were in Miami, Florida one Saturday night. And after we did our speak--I would speak before he would speak, then he would speak. I'd get the crowd really, you know, up and ready. And then he called me up into his suite about midnight that night and told me that he wanted me to be married because I'm the only one on the tour with him that's unmarried and he's pro-marriage. So he wanted to select a wife for me, like he does for all of his followers. And I thanked him. They had sixteen beautiful Filipino women that he and Mother Moon had selected for me or they had, I understand now I was told, they had selected the wealthiest woman, Korean woman, in their movement to be my wife, either one that I wanted. It was up to me but I told him, and I thanked him very much, but in my heart I am already married and I cannot accept another wife but the mother of my seven children is my wife and Reverend Moon--and I said and I believe that God is going to bring us back together. So, he was not very pleased with me but he said that something would happen very soon. Something would have to happen very soon and within seven days, she was on her way back. I mean we hadn't talked, we hadn't discussed 'cause I respect marriage and she was married so I wasn't about to violate her marriage. But within seven days, she was on her way back to me, to my church, to my children, that we're a family again and she became my wife again on our original wedding date, three years ago this July, we'll be reunited. But I don't count those ten years. I still say we've been married thirty-five years 'cause I never got divorced...