 Story_ID: 178557 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe; I am interviewer for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: My name is Calvin W. Burnett, that's C-A-L-V-I-N, W., B-U-R-N-E-T-T. Speaker 1: And what does the W stand for? Speaker 2: Wilks, W-I-L-K-S. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, do you have any nicknames? Speaker 2: No, no. They tried to give me nicknames as I was coming through. I was a basketball player but I wouldn't respond to a nickname and a nickname will go away right away if you don't answer. Speaker 1: Yeah, there's an African proverb--it's not what you are called that counts but what you answer to. Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: Now what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: I was born March 16, 1932, five miles from Brinkley, Arkansas, born in the country, two-room house. Brinkley sits halfway between Little Rock [Arkansas] and Memphis [Tennessee]. In fact, it's sixty miles both ways to Brinkley. Speaker 1: On Highway 40, right? Speaker 2: Highway 40. Speaker 1: Alright now what is your occupation, just briefly we're just trying to establish--? Speaker 2: Education, I was a college president. Speaker 1: Of Coppin State College [Baltimore, Maryland]? Speaker 2: Of Coppin State College from 1970 through 2003. I retired three months ago. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today is September 10, 2003. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're at my home in Westminster, Maryland, which is thirty miles from Baltimore, yeah Westminster, Maryland, thirty miles from Baltimore. We're not rural but we're not urban. Story_ID: 178558 Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five People magazine-ish type lightweight questions that only deserve a lightweight answer. We always ask these. The first one is, sir, what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: My favorite food, salmon. And I make a mean tuna salad. They tell me that nobody can match my tuna salads. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Blue. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Evenly matched, well really there are four favorite times, sounds real funny. I like the first few days of spring is wonderful, fall and I like crisp winter time when there is a lot of snow because I am from Davenport, Iowa. Speaker 1: Okay, now do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Yes, Hilton Head. Speaker 1: South Carolina? Speaker 2: South Carolina, yes. Speaker 1: Okay, and finally sir, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Yes, and the favorite saying and I don't use it that often but it's so significant and that is life has a board for everybody's behind and a different board for every behind. Speaker 1: That's a board of education philosophy. Story_ID: 178559 Speaker 1: Okay, well I'm going to ask you about your--what you know about your family history. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: My mother's full name was Vera Rayford, V-E-R-A, R-A-Y-F-O-R-D and my mother has passed away. She passed away in 1962. My father's was Elmer Burnett, and Dad died a year ago in August. Speaker 1: Okay, now, what is your mother's date of birth? Speaker 2: My mother's date of birth was April 6, 1915; my father's date of birth was August 8, I believe, 1914. Speaker 1: Okay now were they both born in-- Speaker 2: No, my mother was born in Memphis, Tennessee and my father was born in Brinkley, Arkansas on a farm near where I was born. Speaker 1: How much do you know about your mother's side of the family? Speaker 2: Very little about my mother's side of the family. I have an uncle who lives in Cedar Rapids, Iowa and my mother told me about my grandmother, who died when she was eight years old, and my grandfather on her side died when she was four years old. She tells a story about--in Memphis on Beale Street that my grandfather and grandmother had separated and she was living with my grandfather and she tells the story about one night that he woke her up and told her that he was ill and she said he rolled over and said, "Baby, daddy is gone," and she often told that story. Then later on she went to live with my grandmother, and my grandmother had two or three children, my uncle--one of my uncles and she died when she was eight years old and my grandmother had a close friend that I called grandma, who is dead, and she called grandma over and told her to take my mother because the other kids were going to be taken care of by their father and my grandmother--this lady who I call grandma, Ida Goodlow, took mama to Arkansas. Speaker 1: Okay so that's how she got to Brinkley? Speaker 2: That's how she got to Brinkley. Speaker 1: Any stories passed down through the family about life in the 19th century? Speaker 2: Oh yeah on my mother's side--I knew a lot about my father's side, but on my mother's side it was a very difficult life, very difficult. She had to leave school when she was in seventh grade or something like that because she was on this farm and they needed the farmhands to chop cotton and pick cotton and all that kind of thing and then you know she had--they had these animals to take care of. The cows to be milked and the chickens to be fed and the hogs--and all that kind of stuff. They moved about with animals, they had a buggy and a mule and this kind of--it was a very, very difficult and very hard life out there picking that cotton and what have you and I suspect that she passed away so young, she was forty-eight years old-forty-nine years old because of--no telling what she contracted during all of that time that she was out there. Speaker 1: Okay. A very rough time of it. Speaker 2: Oh gosh yes, a hard time. Now, my grandmother on that side--the Burnetts, I knew a lot about them; my grandmother was very wise. Now my father and my mother split when I was--they separated when I was quite young and when I was seven or eight years old, my mother went to Iowa because there was a family that lived in the area that relocated to Iowa because there was work there at the cement company. Uncle Aubrey I called him--the Colemans and they relocated there and they came back to Brinkley on a visit and in the process of visiting Brinkley and what have you and my mother was a very good friend of Aunt Alberta. They were not relatives--just you know how that goes and so my mother went back with them and she got a job and that's when she sent for me. And that side of it--and that goes on from Davenport [Iowa] all the way up to now-- Story_ID: 178560 Speaker 1: But the other side of it--my [paternal] grandmother who was Minnie Burnett was a very bright, bright lady. She probably had a fourth or fifth grade education but boy did she have good insights into things that was my father's mother and my father [Elmer Barnett] he went to Arkansas AM&N [Arkansas Agricultural, Mechanical and Normal College; later, the University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff, Pine Bluff, Arkansas]. That was that flight school at that time in Pine Bluff [Arkansas]. He left there and he went to--when he got his degree he worked at Fargo Agricultural School [Fargo, Arkansas]. He had a degree and so he worked there for a long time and then later on he went to Mariana, Arkansas. In the meantime he was building a family. I have three half brothers and a half sister--two half sisters. He was a very, very strong, strong person. He drove back and forth from Mariana which is about eighty miles at least to Little Rock, Arkansas during the summers and what have you and worked on his master's degree and he got a master's degree after a few years in industrial education, very, very strong, strong person. And my brothers, we're all in contact and my sisters and all. So that side of the family is here but my grandmother was just amazing. If she could have gotten an education--you know one of the things I remember about her, I don't want to deviate too much but you're just causing me to recall so many things that just stuck with me. She said that she was--during those days African Americans went to school seven months out of the year; whites went nine months out of the year because the schooling was centered around raising that cotton and working on that farm because you had to--up through October you were picking cotton and all this kind of thing. So sometimes you would go back a month in summer and all that. I think they went five months and then two months in the summer. But in any event, she said that it was time for him to go to school that summer--my father and she said she went out there and he was plowing and she went out in the field and she said to my grandfather, who died in 1932, incidentally. She said to my grandfather do you know, Elmer should be going to school today and my grandfather said, well, I'm keeping him out of school because I need him on this farm and what have you. She said I'll do his farming because I want him to go to school. She looked at me and she said I wanted me a teacher. That's like somebody saying I want me an astronaut. Speaker 2: So, that far away from what people were doing? Speaker 1: Yeah, can you imagine somebody now saying I want me an astronaut and she said I want me a teacher. So later on I mentioned this to my uncle and I told him the story that she told me and he said did she tell you that she was pregnant when she took that plow? Speaker 2: Sacrifices have to be made. Speaker 1: Yeah she was just a very wise person. I remember she told me one time and I never will forget this--she told me one time she said--I forgot something and she said, "A weak mind will work you to death." So every time I forget something I think of her. My office was in the library and I would sometimes come down past the circulation desk and forget something and have to go back up to the office to get it and one of the circulation clerks would say, do you remember your grandmother? (Laughter) Speaker 2: She is Minnie Burnett? Speaker 1: Minnie Burnett, yeah she was something. Speaker 2: Okay, so your father had his mother help him get through school. Speaker 1: Yeah but I think he worked on his own to get through school, nobody had anything. I understand that she paid-she bought a house in Brinkley there and she was earning six dollars a week working at a cafe--the Moonglow they called it. You can see these things just stick in my mind because it was so significant for how strong those people were, just very strong. Story_ID: 178561 Speaker 1: So you basically lived with your mother [Vera Rayford] when you were growing up? Speaker 2: Yeah I left--I know very little about--I remember some of those early childhood experiences then go back and talk with my grandmother [Minnie Barnett] and then visit my father [Elmer Barnett], mostly my grandmother that I understood quite a bit about Brinkley [Arkansas] and that situation. No I was with my mother and my mother remarried in Iowa and I lived with my mother and my stepfather. My stepfather, I must say, that I used to from the time I was little until I got grown I would say to myself everyday I'll never take a drink as long as I live. I'll never take a drink as long as I live. I've tried to enjoy beer, that Hamm's beer is a real light beer and what have you, and I see people enjoy beer so much, I can't stand any kind of alcoholic beverages, beer or anything else. I attribute that to my stepfather. But in any event-- Speaker 1: What was the--did they admonish you about that? Speaker 2: Oh gosh he was a--no, he drank everything up coming to him and all the rest of us in the family for the rest of our lives. Speaker 1: Was that your stepfather? Speaker 2: My stepfather, yeah and my mother was a day worker. She worked in the homes of white people and she was just a very hard worker but a lovely person. You talk about being kicked around, she's a very kind, very gentle person and she caught it because sometimes the world isn't kind to people like her. Speaker 1: Did your stepfather work? Speaker 2: Yeah, he worked but then he'd have a job and then he would just float back and forth. In the end when I graduated from high school and went to college--went to the army, my mother later divorced him and she went back to Brinkley and she remarried there but she died a few years later. Story_ID: 178562 Speaker 1: Now, I want to take you back to early childhood and I want you to give us a sense of some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up. I guess first Brinkley [Arkansas] and then in Cedar Rapids [Iowa]. Speaker 2: In Brinkley [Arkansas] as an early child I remember the farm. I remember the peach orchards and the freshness of the spring and the--something about the farm when people plow the earth. I can't describe it; I can remember that very, very vividly. I remember going to school there--segregated school, I must have been five or six years old or what have you and-- Speaker 1: What was the name of your school? Speaker 2: What was the name of that Brinkley school? I cannot remember the name of the school in Brinkley, because I went there for a very short period of time. I remember the school burned down and they had have classes other places and we went to the Methodist church, we held classes there, I think my last year. I remember Professor Hayes who I later found out he really--well the professor--I remember some of the teachers and I can remember Professor Hayes being afraid of him. Speaker 1: You later found out something about him? Speaker 2: Well I later found out my uncles and aunts said that he really had not graduated from college and he really was not qualified but in those days you just had to have the right connections and I don't want to say that out of any uncomplimentary thing for him but I mean that's what I later found out. Speaker 1: Why were you afraid of him, was it just his manner? Speaker 2: I thought he was kind of mean, but as a kid who knows. I remember that and I remember Ms. Wilson my teacher--first grade teacher was--she was a tall, if I remember, very attractive lady who was strict and some of those things. I remember in the spring, I was so glad when the first day of spring would come and what have you because during those days in the winter you wore those hobnail shoes. I don't know if you--and those doggone shoes maybe you would get them before school starts or what have you and by the time school was out those tacks were coming up through the sole and what have you and to be able to pull those shoes off and walk barefoot in the fields and it would just feel so great. That was before the tennis shoes days, if you didn't have tennis shoes, you went barefoot. Speaker 1: Now a lot of people can't imagine a world without Nikes. Speaker 2: Yeah I know, I know. Story_ID: 178563 Speaker 1: And I remember when I was about six or seven years old and I was living with my [paternal] grandmother [Minnie Burnett] because--this was just before I went to Davenport [Iowa] with my mother [Vera Rayford] and my grandmother and my Uncle A.J. and Luther [ph.] and then I had an Uncle W.H. Luther and W.H. have passed away now but I remember they had--they didn't have recreation parks for African Americans, you did what you could. They had something called the creek--what was the name of that creek and they would go down there and swim and Mama Minnie told them not to go down there because people--I think a couple of people got drowned and they'd go down there anyway. When they would go down I'd tell on them and the next day A.J. said I'm going to kill you. (Laughter.) Speaker 2: So you and your grandmother were very close? Speaker 1: Oh yeah, Mama Minnie was--oh very close. I remember when I went to Saint Louis University [Saint Louis, Missouri] and I came home one evening and we lived in a apartment quite a ways from the school because I got married in my sophomore year and it was late in the evening and I pulled up and there was this lady who was sitting on the porch on her suitcases. She had been sitting out there since ten o'clock or so. I said Mama Minnie--this is the age when you didn't have phones and all this kind of stuff--she said I knew you'd eventually be here. She was the kind of person that she would-[Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] was on television and he was really railing against the things that were going on and how African Americans were being treated and what have you and you know how articulate he was. Mama Minnie sat there and she looked at it--this was when I was visiting her in Buffalo [New York] because I have an aunt that lives there--and she was looking at him and when he got through she looked at me and she said, Lord God speaks through that man. I mean which tells you a lot about her. Story_ID: 178564 Speaker 1: Now, when you were a little kid what kind of little kid were you? What kind of a little boy were you, what did you like to do? Speaker 2: Oh I loved to run and jump and pitch horseshoes and that kind of thing. When I went to Davenport, Iowa they had a little park--it was Ripley Street Park, and I'd go down there as much as I could because you could play tennis and pitch horseshoes and all of that. So I loved to do that and then later on I liked the Y [YMCA, Young Men's Christian Association], that's where I learned to have so much respect for sports, basketball and those other things. When I grew up in Davenport, instead of a lot of other things that one would do because of idle time, you spent your time at the YMCA and swimming, of course I never learned to swim very well and ping pong and all that kind of stuff. I liked that and then later on was softball. We had the softball league and I played on the softball team, I was the pitcher and that kind of thing. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: One thing I want to say is this, and that is I saw my mother [Vera Rayford] struggle and work so hard and suffer, she was highly religious too; she was a very religious person. I said to myself I'm not going to do anything, any way whatsoever to embarrass my mother; I'm just not going to, she goes through enough and that's the way I felt all the way coming through. So if people want to go down to the drugstore and maybe slip out a candy bar or something like that and not pay for it and all of that, no I couldn't see that. You just get your mother and father in all kinds of trouble, just think how they feel. Now later on now hopefully I inculcated that value, you know when you say I'm not going to do that because I don't want to embarrass my mother, I love my mother and I see what she goes through and I'm not going to put anymore burden on her, that's kind of an external value. But later on it becomes inculcated, you take that value and maybe I had it in at that time but that's what I remember. Speaker 1: What do you think the difference is in people that don't--I mean that maybe drink too much or steal too much--I mean you had examples of people around you that did that and you had examples of people around you that did right. What influenced you to choose one path over another? Speaker 2: I don't know, I wanted a better life and I always felt that if you worked hard enough, you probably could achieve that. I remember I used to say to mama and grandma when I get grown I'm going to buy you a house because I always thought if you just--if you could just get out and work hard, you could do that. Later on after about ninth or tenth grade it occurred to me that education was the key to all of that. But I don't know why some things happen the way they did and we all lived in the same neighborhood. I remember some of my friends had dropped out in tenth grade and all that kind of thing and I can't put my finger on it. Story_ID: 178565 Speaker 1: Now, what was the name of the school that you attended in Davenport [Iowa]? Speaker 2: Well I attended Jefferson Elementary School [Davenport, Iowa] one year and then we moved--we moved a lot. Then the next year--then the next couple of years attended Washington Elementary School [Davenport, Iowa] then from there--Davenport has elementary, middle and high school levels--not middle school but junior high, seven through nine. I attended J.B. Young [Intermediate School, Davenport, Iowa] from seven through nine then I attended Davenport High School [Davenport, Iowa]. What's significant in all of this that I still look back and see it had a real impact on me. When I got in tenth grade, I thought well what I'm going to do is I'm going to try and get my degree and then I'm going to go into the [U.S.] Army for twenty years because it's safe and secure you've got a pretty good living and you don't have to worry about anything like that. So I thought I wanted to do that and I was pretty good in basketball at that time. I had a teacher in ninth grade by the name of Evelyn Ludwig [ph.] and she was my English teacher and Mrs. Ludwig took an interest in me for some reason and now when I moved from ninth grade up to tenth grade, Mrs. Ludwig somehow--not somehow but Mrs. Ludwig was transferred from J.B. Young to high school. So that means I had Ludwig for two years in a row because I had her for English--I got her for English in high school too and I had her in ninth grade. So I was--she was talking to me and I told her that I thought that's what I was going to do and she told me you don't want to do that, you go ahead, she said I know it's hard for you but you get your degree and you go on to college. She said because you've got potential; don't let anybody tell you that you haven't. And I kind of--I changed my mind on that. Story_ID: 178566 Speaker 1: Now you started playing basketball at the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association]? Speaker 2: Yeah, that's where I learned. I started in seventh grade, actually J.B. Young [Intermediate School, Davenport, Iowa] and the Y in the junior high and the Y, loved basketball. Speaker 1: Now you're tall, you are about 6'3"? Speaker 2: 6'5", 6'6", yeah. Speaker 1: Okay so you were especially in those days, you're really a big man on the basketball court. Speaker 2: Yeah I was, I could play center in those days and I remember in high school [Davenport High School, Davenport, Iowa] we won the state championship three years in a row, because we had such a big school. What happened during that time, I started in about eighth grade I started setting pins. In those days they had pin boys, you didn't have the automatic machines like you do now. Speaker 1: Bowling alleys. Speaker 2: Yes, pin boys and you'd get--when I started I got eight cents a line and then later on it moved up to ten cents a line. But that was a way that I could earn twenty, twenty-five dollars a week back during those days and it really was helpful to my mother [Vera Rayford]--helpful to both of us. But what I'm saying is that during basketball season after practice, I would go down and set these pins and then I would be off on Saturdays when we played our games and all that kind of thing. But it was between setting pins and the basketball and school that kind of kept me pretty busy there. I can remember recalling all of that in high school. When I got to high school--when I got to senior year bowling season usually ended in about April, it would start out in September with the league bowling and you could get thirty lines from each league--that's two leagues a night, sixty lines which was six dollars but if you take that times five, that's thirty and if you set open bowling on Saturday but in any event by the time April comes, everything just kind of dissipates and you don't have that money coming in and what have you. I remember that year in my senior year, my mother and my stepfather decided that they were going to move away, they moved to Kansas City [Missouri] and it was my last year in high school and I had run out of money because what I'd done, I was paying my room and board because my mother was gone and I think it was fifteen dollars or something like that; things were just really rough. So that was about May 1 a fellow by the name of Jones--Steve Jones owned a implement company and you know in that area is a lot of farm area and he owned the implement company and he called down and he said Mr. Hempstead who was the principal--assistant principal at Davenport High had noticed and asked me was I going to participate in graduation and I told him that I couldn't because I just didn't have the clothes and so on and so forth. He sent me to this Mr. Jones and Mr. Jones told me he said when I was your age the same thing was happening to me and there was a man that called me and-that was years before--he said that he gave me money for my room and my board and to get clothes so I can graduate and all that and he told me that he didn't want that paid back to him, he said that somebody called him in years before and done that to him and said that was a tradition that was passed down. He said and I'm passing that on to you what I'm saying to you is that what I'm giving to you, I don't want it back but you've got to pass that on to somebody else because I think that you're going to be okay. Which I thought was very interesting. He sent me over to his clothing store; he gave me enough money to pay my rent up until the time I could get a summer job and this--quite interesting. Speaker 1: Yeah it's a remarkable story. So you were able to pass that down to someone else. Speaker 2: Yeah I've passed that on. Speaker 1: Okay we can get into that story later on. Speaker 2: Yeah and I think the person is a lawyer now but he told me and of course he said that he would never reveal my name and of course I won't reveal the other person either but he said it's a tradition. Now I've passed this on to the other person which I want him to pass on to somebody, just amazing. Story_ID: 178567 Speaker 1: When you were on the verge of graduating from high school [Davenport High School, Davenport, Iowa], what were your favorite subjects in high school? What did you want to concentrate on when you went to college? Speaker 2: I thought I wanted to be a doctor, I thought the biology and the chemistry and all this kind of thing--I thought I wanted to be a physician and I wanted to study pre-med. In high school when I graduated, I was a pretty good high school basketball player but I didn't have the kind of ability to command a scholarship from the large schools. I think I had part scholarship from Parsons College [Fairfield, Iowa] and I would have to do this that and the other and Robinson--Eddie Robinson came through Davenport recruiting and he came over to Lucy Williams' house--that's where I was rooming and he said he heard about me and he told me that if you could come down to Grambling [Grambling State University, Grambling, Louisiana], you can get your room and board and books and everything down there, I'll take care of it. So I went to Grambling that year and that's how I went down there and saw how a hard worker he was. The values that he placed on excellence and he wasn't famous then but I knew he was going to be just really a great--not basketball but a great football coach. I used to go out and watch him play football. I remember one time he'd say kind of comically, he had a quarterback and he told one of his defensive linemen when that quarterback comes up and you're going in on him and he's doing all that flashy stuff, you don't know whether he's got the ball or not, he said you wrap him up side of his head and next time he'll let you know if he has the ball (laughter). Another funny story that I remember they had a huge kid called him Little Stein, he was about 6'9", he was a defensive end and coach thought he could convert him into a basketball player because he was a basketball coach too. So he got Little Stein out there--boy he was beating up on us. He was under the basket with elbows and clubbing us and what have you and coach would blow his whistle and he said Stein why do you hit them boys in the head like that? He said coach he moved the ball but he wouldn't move his head (laughter). But in any event, that's what happened after I got out of high school and then after I got out of high school and went to Grambling and I came back and I didn't want to go back to-- Speaker 1: What happened at Grambling, you were only there for a year. Speaker 2: Yeah, well you know it's in an environment that I wasn't familiar with, I mean even though you get room and board and all this kind of stuff, it was just such a hard struggle. Didn't have the clothes that I needed and I was in an environment--see when I was in Davenport [Iowa] you can set pins, you can go here and do that and the other; couldn't there. So I decided that I wasn't going to go back, that I was-- Speaker 1: So you didn't like it there. Speaker 2: Yeah parts of it I didn't like. Forgive me for saying this but I didn't like the South even though the first seven, eight years as a kid, I didn't like the situation in that--I didn't like Louisiana period. With this regulation that whites couldn't play against blacks and you couldn't do this and couldn't do that and the other. I remember when we would go on trips, Coach Robinson would tell somebody you go with him and watch him because he doesn't know, he'll go in one of these places--you know that kind of thing. So I really didn't like that and then also I just thought that I didn't want to go back. Story_ID: 178568 Speaker 1: So then after that--after a year in Davenport [Iowa] then I was drafted into the [U.S.] Army and went into the army for two years and when I was in the army, again the Lord just played such a role in all of this and I'm not trying to pawn my God off on anybody because that's my belief and other people believe what they believe and I respect that. But I just know that some of these things that have happened are beyond accident, this could not have been accidental. When I was in the army, I tried out for the basketball team and it's a long story the way that happened. I mean I just--actually I was the platoon guide in my company, I carried the flag for our training company and I wanted to go down and try out for the basketball team and I remember the field first told me, oh, you can't make it down there because they've got a bunch of pros down there, you'll never make it down there. So what I did, the next morning as I didn't go with my company, they went out and I went on the truck--there were sick call trucks and I got off and went over to the gym and tried out for the basketball team. I remember the coach was a Lieutenant Bunker, and Lieutenant Bunker said, you know you're a darn good rebounder, obviously you can't shoot well now because you've been in basic training and what have you, but I think you're okay. I said Lieutenant Bunker I'm in real trouble. He said well why and I said because I am AWOL [absent without leave] from my company. He said what's the rank of your company commander? I said he is the second lieutenant, he said I'm a first lieutenant. (Laughter) So he sent up a note that says that I should be allowed to come down and try out for the post basketball team and I made the post basketball team and on that team there was Bobby Leonard, he was an All-American from Indiana [Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana] at that time, there was Dave Pollack who had been a big star at one of the schools out of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], he had Marvin Mills who played with Kansas State [Kansas State University, Manhattan, Kansas], they had McGee, I've forgotten McGee's first name and had all these people and so because I was a pretty good rebounder and what have you and I was in pretty good shape and I could catch up on my scoring a little later on. I made the post basketball team. So then after my basic training, I transferred into that. Now because in post basketball, we played about fifty games--a few games on the post but most games you're playing all over the country and what have you. The second year I played and so were Bobby Leonard and all those people. Bobby Leonard was trying to get me into--he wanted me to go to Indiana and I got offers from Indiana, from Kansas State and there was a school in Utah that wanted the whole five of us that were eligible to come. But I wanted to be a doctor, so I wanted to choose a school that had a good pre-med program and had a big time basketball program and that was Saint Louis University [Saint Louis, Missouri] and I got an offer from them, that's how I wound up there. Story_ID: 178569 Speaker 1: So you're in the [U.S.] Army for two years and you go to Saint Louis University [Saint Louis, Missouri]. About what year was that? Speaker 2: Saint Louis University I went in 1955 and I was ineligible the first year. Speaker 1: So you had to sit out--you didn't play until '56 [1956]. Speaker 2: '56 [1956] through '59 [1959], and I had a chance to know and respect very much Wilt Chamberlain. Wilt was a friend; Oscar Robertson was a good friend. You know something comes up there too, in those days the top African American basketball players--the blacks they would wind up with the Harlem Globetrotters or somebody. You didn't go right into the pros; it was sometime after that it would open up. Sweetwater Clifton, Walter Dukes and I'm trying to think of some of the other people on the Globetrotters. They would come to Saint Louis U and it was amazing, they would come to Saint Louis to play. Sweetwater Clifton and those people always come up and find me to talk with me and ask me how things were going and what have you and I was so impressed with that. Speaker 1: Okay, I know Wilt Chamberlain was in Kansas. Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm talking about these guys who were on the Globetrotters team when they came. Wilt was at-- Speaker 1: Wilt was a Globetrotter? Speaker 2: No, I just mentioned his name, he was at Kansas [University of Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas]. He wasn't with the Globetrotters at the time that they came to see me. I met Wilt in Dallas when we were in a tournament, the NCAA Tournament, but Oscar was in our conference [the Missouri Valley Conference]. Speaker 1: And Nat Sweetwater Clifton was one of the first--if not the first black pro basketball player I believe, I don't know. Speaker 2: Well I think--yeah it was somebody with Syracuse [University of Syracuse, Syracuse, New York] who was the first. I've forgotten who he was. Clifton, I don't know if he played that much with--he may have played with somebody but it was almost at the end of his career. Marques Haynes was with them in those days. Speaker 1: The Globetrotters? Speaker 2: The Globetrotters. Speaker 1: Yeah, Marques Haynes. Speaker 2: Yeah I remember in 1948 I think it was that the--remember the Minneapolis--no you wouldn't remember--Minneapolis Lakers, the Lakers were in Minneapolis [Minnesota] before they relocated into Los Angeles [California]. Speaker 1: That's how they got the name the Lakers. Because of the lakes. Speaker 2: Yeah, Minneapolis Lakers, they were the champions of their league and they used to barnstorm against the Globetrotters when the season was over. The Globetrotters ate them alive. I can still remember the guard just watching Marques Haynes as he would go through all of his antics with that dribbling. Speaker 1: That's when the Lakers had George Mikan, I think. Didn't they? Speaker 2: Yeah they had George Mikan. Oh how can I forget the name--had two great forwards. Yeah, they were well-heeled then. Speaker 1: So the black ballplayers would come to Saint Louis-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm kind of mixing things together. The Trotters when they were barnstorming coming to various towns. They'd go to Minneapolis and Saint Louis [Missouri] and this, that and the other. When they came to Saint Louis they'd always come up to Saint Louis University and find me, they did that two years in a row. Speaker 1: Okay. Did you ever think about playing with the Globetrotters? Speaker 2: No, in fact I could have gotten a trial with the Minneapolis Lakers, but I thought number one, if I made it I'd probably only hang on for a couple of years because you know All-Americans would come in and I realized that I was a pretty good college player, did well there but I wasn't going to do well in the pros. Instead of using that two years or whatever it is to get bounced out of there, I thought I'm going to go to graduate school and be ahead on that. I had a little more because I was a little older; I had a little more realistic view of my basketball skills beyond the college level so I didn't want to do that. Story_ID: 178570 Speaker 1: What did you major in at Saint Louis University [Saint Louis, Missouri]? Speaker 2: I majored in biology and it was a double major, biology and political science and then philosophy and chemistry were the minors because it was pre-med major. Speaker 1: Now that's an interesting mix. You took biology and political science. Speaker 2: Because it was a pre-med major, I was still very much interested in structure--political structure and all that. But I thought I wanted to be a doctor and I took as an undergrad I took the general chemistry, the quantitative analysis, organic chemistry, botany, biology, comparative embryology. I had all of that as an undergrad but by the time I got to senior year and the whole world began to open up to me, economics and social psychology, psychology and anthropology--all these other fields and I took genetics, in fact I took genetics under a person who had just studied under a Nobel Prize winner but then after I got to my senior year I decided, no, I don't think I want to do that. It's one thing to see the glamour from a distance because where I grew up in Davenport [Iowa] there was a minister and there was the doctor and there was a lawyer and nobody knew anything about any economists and political scientists and all these people. Once that opened up, I thought I wanted to shift and so I shifted into social psychology. Speaker 1: Okay social psychology--what are we talking about when we talk about social psychology? Speaker 2: You're talking about the personality functioning within the system. The inner action between the group and the individual and social science and what the impact is on the personalities as well as the influence on the group. My specialization--my specialty was socialization and my doctorate when I studied for my Ph.D was the process of moving from a psychiatric institution to a halfway house to the community, that socialization process; that's what I was studying. I was thinking the institutionalization itself creates a kind of a dependency on the personality that the person that's in the institution that's released all at once out into a community that dependency is then very difficult for them deal with. So I was wondering what implication that a halfway house had. Halfway is halfway between the two to give it time--adjustment period. I used Tom Landry's theory--he was an anthropologist at the University of Pittsburgh [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] in terms of that socialization process. I used his theory as a study as well as I used Osgood--Charles Osgood's semantic differential who is from the University of Illinois [Champaign, Illinois] as the instrument that I used to measure the differences and then I used the statistical tools mostly interval and not the ratio. But that was--my goodness that was a long time ago, that was almost thirty-seven--that was a long time ago, that was forty years ago. Speaker 1: Did you--in doing this, did you think about the parallels between someone leaving an institutionalized life and going back into the real world and black people just trying to get from a segregated world into mainstream-- Speaker 2: No I didn't have that kind of insight, no I didn't. Now there were, of course, blacks as part of my study because of the halfway house business but I didn't focus on that which is an interesting question, no I didn't focus on that. I did find that there was significant difference in terms of recidivism and return to the hospital between those who went in a halfway house and those who did not go in a halfway house. Those who went in a halfway house had a significantly greater chance of remaining outside than those who didn't because as I say, those days at these big state hospitals, they developed a dependency in and of itself. People had a very difficult time of shaking when they were discharged. Now they have gotten rid of the big hospitals, supposedly have the community treatment centers and all this. The other kind of problems now because society doesn't look out for those people, that's the reason I think we have so many homeless people because hospitals let them out and they are out there and this whole business of our community treatment centers are going to take up the slack is a lot of bunk, it isn't happening. I mean the money isn't going into those and so you have a lot of people sleeping under bridges with their families and all this kind of thing and it's a shame. Story_ID: 178571 Speaker 1: Now in the mid-'50s [1950s], the Civil Rights Movement was heating up and what was your reaction to some of the things that were going on? The Montgomery [Alabama] bus boycott in '56 [1956]/'57 [1957] and that made national news and people were talking about it, you saw it every night on the CBS News or ABC News, nightly news. What impact did that have on you? Speaker 2: Like every other African American I suspect and a large majority of non -African Americans were enraged to see those dogs jump on those people and this kind of thing. Then there were a few demonstrations in Saint Louis [Missouri] that I participated in but I was not an out front civil rights leader, I was a supporter. I tried to do as much as I could in terms of my own studies and what have you to look at that. So yeah, I very much appreciated what the African Americans and Jewish people and other people were going through in that Civil Rights Movement. Speaker 1: You mentioned off camera when you were talking about Jackie Robinson cracking the color line in baseball. What were some of your thoughts at the time when that was occurring? Speaker 2: I was a great, great admirer of Jackie Robinson because I was such an advocate, sports fan, and I thought he was just marvelous and the way that he conducted himself and he was a good baseball player, not the best from the Negro League but he was good. But somehow in coming up back in the '30s [1930s] I guess I was about--in '36 [1936] I would have been six years old or what have you and I loved Joe Louis; to this day I have these ongoing arguments with my friends who are a decade younger than I am that Muhammad [Ali] couldn't have stayed in the ring with Joe for five minutes (laughter). That's an interesting discussion, in fact, my wife knew that I was such an admirer of Joe Louis--in those days in every body's house--all African Americans homes that I went into, there was a picture of Joe in his stance and you can't hardly find one now. My wife [Gretta Burnett] looked around about ten or fifteen years ago and found one out in Seattle, Washington and bought it for me for a birthday present. But Joe Louis was just a marvelous but talking about people that I admire now, Charles Houston who was the dean at this law school at Howard University [Washington, D.C.] is and probably could not have been a civil rights movement without him, I mean he was Thurgood Marshall's mentor and he's the one that mapped out all these cases and how you bring them through; a great intellectual that doesn't get credit for it. I'm not saying that I was stuck on all athletes but I admired very much athletes and musicians because of their intellectual strengths particularly musicians, Louis Armstrong, Charlie Parker in spite of all of his problems was an intellect of the first order. I mean those kinds of things but then it's not all blacks that I have great admiration for. I respect enormously Earl Warren, we could not have had some of the things and public accommodations and the desegregation of schools and what have you without Earl Warren's very strong stand, I just really admire him. Story_ID: 178572 Speaker 1: Do you have any stories you want to share about Goose Tatum? We're rolling again now; we're about to roll, so-- Speaker 2: Yeah well the only thing about Goose Tatum that I know is indirectly from Bennie Purcell, who was an All-American from Murray State [Murray State University, Murray, Kentucky] that was on the post basketball team, he was our guard and Bennie was on the team that played against Goose Tatum--played against the [Harlem] Globetrotters every night when they travel around the world. Benny said that he saw Goose Tatum pull those stunts every night--same stunts and he said, and let me tell you Calvin, I laughed every time I saw him. (Laughter) Story_ID: 178573 Speaker 1: So, you got your Ph.D. from Saint Louis University [Saint Louis, Missouri]? Speaker 2: Saint Louis University in social psychology in 1963 and I went to work for Health and Welfare Council as a research director from '63 [1963] to '66 [1966]. Then I left there and went to Catholic University [Washington, D.C.] in their Division of Education as a researcher but in my field, social psychology, and I was there through '69 [1969] and then I went back there--I thought we wanted to go back to the Midwest because we really missed the Midwest. Went back to Southern Illinois University Edwardsville [Edwardsville, Illinois] and after I was back there for about three or four months, I found out that I was missing the East (laughs) and so what I did was I came back to the East. I came back as president of Coppin State [Coppin State University, Baltimore, Maryland] in 1970. Story_ID: 178574 Speaker 1: Saint Louis [Missouri]--well southern Illinois is more southern than people realize, in a lot of ways. It's not the heart of the South but it's southern in its orientation. Did you find yourself kind of restricted in any way? Speaker 2: No not at all. I was the, I gather the first African American to play for Saint Louis University [St. Louis, Missouri], first or second I forgot and not restricted in Saint Louis but when Houston [University of Houston, Houston, Texas] came into the conference and North Texas State [later the University of North Texas, Denton, Texas] came into the conference that got to be a real problem but I tell you, we had a president, Father Paul Reinert, and he didn't take any foolishness from any of those and Coach Hickey--Eddie Hickey was our basketball coach. Bob Ferry was our center; Bob Ferry was an All-American. He played pro and all that kind of thing. But I remember we went to North Texas State and they just had come into the conference and so everybody was going to their room and I was still sitting over there and so I walked over and this lady said--I heard her say to Coach Hickey, she said you know I don't mind myself but the people in Denton just wouldn't accept this. So when she said that to him I said coach, I'm going to give you five minutes to give me a room because if you don't, I'm going to go right over to that pay phone over there and I'm going to reverse charges and I'm going call Father Reinert and tell him and we both know what's going to happen, don't we. He knew what was going to happen because the year before that, it was a summer and I was working at Ryerson Steel and read this in the paper. I didn't know anything about this myself but there were three teams to play in the Sugar Bowl [New Orleans, Louisiana] during the Christmas holidays--basketball. Tulane [University, New Orleans, Louisiana] was one of the teams there, Saint Louis U, Notre Dame [University of Notre Dame, South Bend, Indiana] and Dayton [University of Dayton, Dayton, Ohio] those were the three schools that was there playing in the Sugar Bowl. Now they notified Saint Louis U that Saint Louis U could come but I couldn't come--this was around '57 [1957] or so because there was a law that blacks couldn't participate against whites--compete against whites and so they would have to leave me. Father Reinert took the position if I couldn't go, the team wasn't going. So I read Saint Louis U dropped out one day, the next day Notre Dame dropped out, and the next day Dayton dropped out. They had to find three new teams because of one African American and that was me. So when I told Hickey about what was going on at North Texas State and told him we know what's going to happen, he understood very well what Father Reinert was going to say. He's going to tell him you bring this team back home. Speaker 1: And what did they have in common with Dayton, Notre Dame-- Speaker 2: They are Catholic. Speaker 1: All Catholic. Speaker 2: Yeah and they are playing Tulane, Tulane is not Catholic, I don't think. But that was the setup there. Speaker 1: It's interesting, yeah. Speaker 2: And I remember we played--it's called Oklahoma State [University-Stillwater] now but it was Oklahoma A&M then in Stillwater, Oklahoma and in those days they had the bleachers that come right up to the floor--I mean not the bleachers but the stand--it was about that much difference between the floor and where the crowd is and if the ball went out of bounds, one of my team members would have to get the ball because if I went after they'd kick at me. Oh yeah I remember Kentucky [University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky]--we went down to play Kentucky and Kentucky was number one in the nation. We went down to play them and on the floor of Kentucky, we beat them at Kentucky; oh yes sir we beat them. Speaker 1: Adolph Rupp's team, he's the king down there. Speaker 2: I had to be escorted off the floor with security. I remember in Houston when they were in there, it was some people in the stands spitting at me. None of that happened in St. Louis but places that we went. Now later on Bradley [University, Peoria, Illinois] got more African Americans in and Oscar [Robertson] came in for Cincinnati [University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio] and things kind of loosened up. But in those days it was something when we left home. Speaker 1: Still a lot of tensions in the '50s [1950s]. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Story_ID: 178575 Speaker 1: Alright, let's pick your career back up. Is there anything else about basketball that you want to tell us? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: That's good insight into what that was like in those days. Speaker 2: Oh yeah but it was a ticket to--I mean I needed the scholarship. A couple of things in terms of basketball that's just in passing. Coach [Eddie] Hickey was about 4'11", he had a law degree from Creighton [University, Omaha, Nebraska] and our center, [Bob] Ferry was 6'10" and Bevo Nordmann was 6'11 and we had all these fellows--real tall fellows. Hickey used to stand up on the bench and scream at them in practice. So I can remember that Ferry used to try to get his goat all the time and we were in the room with the chalk talk and Hickey was showing us the plays and he said boys, you know when I was at Creighton University I delivered milk, and I had a horse, and the horse was named Old Blue, and when Old Blue went up the hill he'd go to this side and then he'd go to that side and he'd go to the other side. What the coach was trying to point out was do things the easy way when you're out there on the floor, you're running plays and what have you, don't force things just kind of do it the easiest way to be done. And the answer is--and he said Ferry why did Old Blue go to both sides of the hill and so the answer was because it's easier to go that way. Ferry looked at him and said I don't know coach, I guess to deliver milk to both sides (laughter). And then Ferry would be on the floor and they would say give Old Blue his head, and Ferry would go (shake head from side to side). One other story I'll tell you about Hickey and we'll leave that because he was an interesting guy, just consumed with winning, just consumed with winning. We were out in the West, I think we had lost to UCLA [University of California at Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] one night and the next night we lost to Washington, Seattle, somebody out there and anyway we were at the airport--those days they had these turbo props--they didn't have any jets or what have you. Hickey was scared to death of airplanes and we had to use a plane. So a plane was coming in and was going to land. We were all standing there on the landing and then there was a pilot--there was a plane going to take off and somehow they got fouled up in the controller's tower and they were using the same runway. So the pilot that was coming in saw what was going on so he didn't land, he just took off; it was kind of scary. So Todd was standing behind Hickey and there was Bauman who was the actual trainer for the St. Louis Cardinals during baseball season but he was our trainer during the basketball season. So Todd said to Al Serkin, he said you know, Serkin, you see that--well we all saw it and they were just pulling Hickey's chain and somebody said well I read about a plane that crashed in Germany last week and somebody else read about a plane that killed somebody in Sweden and what have you and Hickey turned to Bauman and said, you know Bo that's what's the matter with this damn ball club, who cares if the plane crash and we don't win (laughter). There are other stories on Hickey but I'll let it go at that. Story_ID: 178576 Speaker 1: We had you at Catholic University [Washington, D.C.]--did anything, did anything sig-now you taught there, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, Catholic U. I liked the school, I liked Washington [D.C.] very much but nothing outside of my working with them--did a teacher corps program, we got that and working with a number of students to get there--I was their chair of their committees and beyond that, it was pretty normal. They started up during that particular point in time--oh I've forgotten Father's name over in the school of seminary. He was kind of giving them some problems and some demonstrations began to take place and all that. Between those demonstrations and between my desire to go back to the Midwest, that's how we decided we were going to leave. But the Midwest I wanted to go back to. Speaker 1: Okay so you're at Southern Illinois Edwardsville [Southern Illinois University Edwardsville, Edwardsville, Illinois]? Speaker 2: Yeah I went back there for the year, yeah. Speaker 1: And how was it there, I mean was it-- Speaker 2: Well at Southern Illinois it was--I was just there for one year and it was a pleasant experience and of course at Edwardsville [Illinois] which was about thirty five miles from St. Louis [Missouri] it was a very quiet year. I was able to work with them in terms of their college enrichment program they had in the summer and what have you. And I taught the social psych courses. Speaker 1: Now how did you wind up at Coppin State [University, Baltimore, Maryland]? Speaker 2: Well what I thought was that--what had occurred to me that the grants that I had gotten all along--when the grant ran out, the program was abolished and I've always been interested in the acceleration of learning for people that come from environments that creates that damper on their learning; not their intellectual ability but how can you figure out what can you do to accelerate their learning coming into programs so that they catch up when they get out like everybody else, because it really isn't because they lack the intelligence or the ambition to do something. I've always been interested in those kinds of programs. Speaker 1: Something to help their educational disadvantage. Speaker 2: Yeah because that's my background, that's where I came from and I understand perfectly well how people who are from disadvantaged backgrounds get treated by people from advantaged backgrounds. That goes across the board, that crosses race in terms of the way--and so for some reason and I've never tried to figure out that much because I don't think I can; I always enjoyed working in that environment. So at Catholic U, I developed a center for community development and work with people in terms of we thought that the teaching machines in those days were the answer for some teaching machines in the community development and have the kids come in and I found out that the kids could learn how to beat the machines and still didn't learn anything. After they got tired of that, they just come in and steal all the machines (laughter)--after it was over it was kind of comical. But that interest has always been there so that after any number of grants that I've written and successfully--after a two or three year period of time they're gone. So I thought I'm going to have to become the chief executive officer of an educational institution before I have total control over a budget then I can make the decisions as to what's going to go where and when and somebody just can't come along and say you're not going to do this and just wipe it out. So I looked a number of colleges, one in St. Louis [Missouri] and then there was a person that I taught at Catholic U by the name of Leroy Fitzgerald--Dr. Fitzgerald called me and said that there was a position open out here at Coppin State and you may be interested in it because I know your interests and I think you could get us all working together. So I looked at that and applied and that's how I wound up there because I thought it's inner city, it makes no bones about the attraction of people from backgrounds that are humble, that it has all kinds of potential for working with other institutions in the area because there is a lot of other institutions in the area. There is Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland] and there is UMAB [University of Maryland at Baltimore, Baltimore, Maryland] and there's--so a lot of things. So I thought well I'll apply and I was applied-appointed so I took the position that was the reason. Story_ID: 178577 Speaker 1: So when you arrived in Baltimore [Maryland] it was 1970, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And this is the Black Power era in the United States, 1970? Speaker 2: Oh yes, I was very--yeah then I appreciated that very much. Speaker 1: And what was the mood of the students [at Coppin State University, Baltimore, Maryland]? Speaker 2: Same, I mean when I first got there--the first day I was there--the second day I was there a group of students came--the leaders came and they sat me down and they said we want you to know this, we got rid of one president and we can get rid of another. Of course some interesting things happened with those students over a year--three or four years in order to get some kind of control too. They tested me in any number of ways. Some of it was power and some of it was just sheer "We going to run the place" and I thought the faculty was supposed to run the school; I didn't think no students supposed to do that. So just any number of interesting stories--just oodles of them but there's just one that I'll mention. The first year I was there, I went into our cafeteria and it was not air conditioned, it was just awful and I look up on the wall, there was [Kim] Il Sung from North Korea, there was Che Guevara from China, there was Jomo Kenyatta, [Fidel] Castro and there was--all of these people. I looked around and said you know when I come in the cafeteria, I shouldn't have to eat my lunch in the presence of all these revolutionaries, in fact, not a single one of them are Maryland taxpayers. So they--I told the head of the custodians to take those things down. So he took them down so that evening Fred Jones [Frederick Jones] which is about thirty years old, he was the intellectual leader of this group and he come over and brings a group with him and asked me why did I take the pictures down. I told him because I just don't think that we should do that, those revolutionaries where I have to eat, put them down in your liberation room down there if you want to do something. So in any event, they were angry about it and so what they said is there would be a debate that Fred Jones was going to debate me because their constitutional rights were being violated and I was overreacting and acting independently and all that. So they were going to debate me on the merits of those pictures--those portraits. So then it was a hot day and the place wasn't air conditioned, it was packed with students and they had publicized it about two weeks in advance--the great debate. So a professor told me you can't debate, you can't debate him. So we get there and Fred was first up and Fred said--he was talking about if you look at pictures and you look at these portraits and what have you, that stimulates you to learn more about these people as well as it moves you into learning more about the philosophy and where the world is going all this kind of thing. So he went through all of these things. So then when my turn came I said well you know if looking at pictures and just looking at a graphs or what have you stimulates us and motivates us and all that, why aren't we all experts in geography, we all look at maps and what have you and it doesn't happen there and so the second point is Jomo Kenyatta got about twenty master's degrees while he ran the Mau Mau operation over in Kenya from England, he wasn't even there. Che Guevara is one of the leading intellectuals in the world in terms of guerilla warfare. Nobody can really compare with him. II Sung has a law degree and he has a Ph.D. degree, Castro has a law degree and I went through all these people and when I got through I said, you get what I mean, all these people got their education before they started doing what Fred is talking about doing. And I said now the only thing that Fred can look forward to--he can't deal with them intellectually. The only thing he can look forward to is sitting down with them--he's not going to sit down with them, they send him out to get killed when they can't find a compromise negotiating table because he doesn't have any education--he can't deal with these people. So in any event Fred got up and as a rebuttal--Fred said something in the rebuttal that they didn't like too well and he reprimanded them and they booed him, they booed him out of the place, I won that. (Laughter.) Story_ID: 178578 Speaker 1: That's interesting, now that doesn't happen very often when the college president beats the student revolutionary. Speaker 2: Well that's happened--. Speaker 1: For popularity. Speaker 2: Yeah well a couple of times--I didn't like Saturday night dances over in the cafeteria and I didn't like pool parties in the summer. Well most of those things just draw all kinds of problems and this happened the last five years or so. I just put out something so you know Saturday night parties--there will be no more Saturday night parties and the pool parties are out because the last pool party you had you had a thousand in the pool, three thousand trying to get in the pool, couldn't get in there so they were trying to wreck the place and we had helicopters over and police up here. So in any event they all came in. So we had a big meeting on that and they must have had, oh, several hundred students there and they were just screaming and I would tell them look these Saturday night dances and all this--we went through all this and we had this argument and it went on for about an hour. Do you know that at the end of all this, one little girl got up and said all of you know that he's right, that you bring these hoodlums in here to call them your friends and they come in here and they wrecked the place and we can't do anything about it and you're putting the school at risk. So we worked it out so they could have their Saturday night parties but nobody would get in to a dance if they weren't with a Coppin [Coppin State University, Baltimore, Maryland] student with an ID. The same thing over in the pool and that's how we got that worked through. But a lot of things happened with the students like that and if you just stick to your guns they will--students--they'll come around. They wanted to have liquor served on campus because all the other colleges are doing it. My position was that we are an inner city school, we have a struggle as it is and you have somebody go down there to the rathskeller, they're serving liquor down there and they shoot off an old piece of pistol down there, the whole school is on the line because we're not somebody who can protect ourselves like the other schools can and so we're not going to do that. So they had a big referendum--a survey and they brought in about six or seven hundred names or more. Faculty members, students and everybody said we should serve liquor down there. So I called the liquor board and the chair of the liquor board commissioner said, let me tell you Dr. Burnett, he said, if you don't sign these they can't serve any liquor down there. So they came in with this and I told them but you don't have the one signature that you need, (laughter) and the next year a group of those students came in and told me they thought it was a good decision to make. You can only make those decisions-- you just can't continue to act in a totalitarian way. About five out of a hundred times, the most crucial decisions you can make them and they won't say anything as long as they know that you're willing to give and take on issues that's less important. But the issues that are the life of the school, the president has to stand and say no we're not going to do that I don't care how many people say we're going to do it. Now those things that are not life and--I don't like the co-educational residential halls; I hate those but that's what they want. One floor for girls another floor for boys and I'm not stupid enough to think that they don't mix up those floors sometimes but I'm not going to fight over that; that's the kind of thing I'm talking about. But something come up about a pool party that you're going to invite all these people over the whole area and have helicopters and police and everybody else on our campus, we're not going to have that. So that's the way you can do that. Speaker 1: What I'm hearing also--what I hear you saying is that you're willing to sit down with the students and talk about it. Speaker 2: Oh yeah, you never just sent out a memorandum and say we're going to do this and that, you send it out and then you leave it open for discussion because they're going to discuss it and when they want to discuss it, you have to sit down and logically go through it and if you're wrong sometimes and sometimes you are--if you're wrong, you have to say well yeah I really didn't think about that, okay. Speaker 1: Can you think of an instance where you were actually wrong? Speaker 2: Sure, sure, in terms of some of our games and what have you, in terms of the students coming in without IDs and so on and so forth. Some of the cheers that they want to do--I come out of an era that you don't--when the other team comes up to shoot their free throws, you don't have everybody in the stands catcalling and all that kind of stuff. You behave in such a way that--a dignified way. I don't think we do that these days but I wasn't going to push that. So they came and we had a big conversation on that and they said look, this is entertainment, this is our team, we want to support our team, now they do us that same way when we go to other schools and what have you, that's what they do. I say okay, fine, but we're not going to have any of the fighting and all that kind of thing. They said we understand that. That's one instance that I can think of. Story_ID: 178579 Speaker 1: I went over there to find copies of old black newspapers. I was doing historical research and they told me they threw them out every week, they threw out the Pittsburgh Courier, the Cleveland Gazette and all that kind of stuff. I said what do you have on file and they said the New York Times and I said I can get that at Wright State [University, Fairborn, Ohio]. They've started to awaken now but over the last ten years or so they've started to wake up to the treasure they had on campus but it took a while. Speaker 2: Well some of that has to do with the lack of understanding of the contribution that all ethnic groups make to the strength of our society and it's not based on trying to do everything exactly like somebody else is doing, in fact that weakens things. But it's based upon what one does that contributes and I think it's that shared, learned behavior that brings about the strength and not trying to be like UMBC [University of Maryland at Baltimore County, Baltimore, Maryland]. We're not trying to be un-American, not trying to be unrealistic in some instances but those things at UMBC wouldn't concentrate on which is like history and like art, literature and things like that that has a value and a great deal to offer to the advancement of our society, we should be dealing with that and I think we've had that kind of--rather than saying well we want to be Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] because we want to be like whatever, we want to be like--you can't be like somebody else, you have to be yourself. I think institutions have to do the same thing. It has to find its own niche, its own role. Story_ID: 178580 Speaker 1: In that regard, I want to ask you some questions about your--some of the highlights of your tenure as president of Coppin State [University, Baltimore, Maryland]. You were there for a long time. First of all, what is the history of Coppin State? It's a state school, supported by the State of Maryland. How old is it and how-- Speaker 2: Very interesting, Coppin was organized in 1900, it's a hundred and three years old and Coppin is named after either the first or second African American woman to get an undergraduate degree in this country, Fannie Jackson Coppin was her name. She was born in Washington D.C. as a slave in 1830, something like that. Her aunt from Massachusetts--Bedford, Massachusetts came and bought her freedom and she went out there with them and she later left there and went to work for a noble family of some kind in Rhode Island, worked as a maid and all that and earned enough money to get instructions for two or three hours a week that she paid for. She somehow graduated from a Rhode Island high school out there and then did so well, she went on to a college in Ohio. Speaker 1: Wilberforce [Wilberforce University, Wilberforce, Ohio]? Speaker 2: No, not a black college, a white college and then she was a leader there. Oh how can that get past me as many times--maybe it's Oberlin [College, Oberlin, Ohio]. Speaker 1: Is that Antioch [College, Yellow Springs, Ohio]? Speaker 2: No it was Oberlin--yeah it was that and graduated with honors. Then she left there and she went to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] as assistant principal of the Philadelphia School for Colored [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and it had a high school as well as a one-year college curriculum, I think. And then the next year the principal was appointed as the ambassador to Haiti and she moved up as principal and she became the principal of that. That was a forerunner of Cheyney State [later Cheyney University of Pennsylvania, Cheyney, Pennsylvania]--later on that left and it became Cheyney which is thought to be one of the first historically black institutions in the country. Since Fannie Jackson was an elementary education major, Coppin was organized in 1900 to train colored teachers--elementary school teachers for the Baltimore City Public Schools. Then in 1926 when it broke from the public schools and went into its own--it has a history and it started out as a two year school then went to three years in 1909 and then four years later--then finally in 1936. But in 1926 when Dr. Connors became president and all, it became Fannie Jackson Coppin Teachers College. But it named it after her because of her training elementary teachers and she was such a force in that field. She went on, she married an A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] bishop who--his name was Coppin, her name was Jackson Coppin and she went to Africa with him. She later left the school in Philadelphia and went to Africa with him, contracted some of kind of disease or what have you, couldn't get over it and I think she died in 1915. Speaker 1: That's the same year that Booker T. Washington died, 1915. Story_ID: 178581 Speaker 1: Okay, now when you arrived [at Coppin State University, Baltimore, Maryland] in 1970 there were 1,000 students. Speaker 2: Yeah about 1,100 students, and 4,000 when I left. Of course, you look over a thirty-year period of time maybe that's not that many but we did grow from 1,100 to 4,000; a tremendous expansion of the campus. We were able to buy property in and around the school. When I got there, we were a basically teacher ed school only with arts and sciences programs that were supportive of the teacher education program. Then after I got there we developed into a full arts and sciences school. When I got there we were about 85 percent teacher training, 15 percent arts and sciences. Then as of last year we were probably about 10 percent teacher ed and 90 percent arts and sciences and marketing degree programs and what have you. Speaker 1: That's a tremendous turn around and a change. Speaker 2: And the other thing I'm very proud of that happened there, we tried to develop programs that were marketable, degree programs that you could go on and get your doctorate but as an example, there was a great deal of problems between the police and African American black community, all kinds of problems. We developed a criminal justice law enforcement program in 1970 both at the master's and the graduate level, we brought on graduate programs after that. Then about fifteen, sixteen years later, two of the commissioners had been Coppin graduates. A number of the assistant commissioners are Coppin graduates, a couple or three of those are white too and then some of them went out to other counties. So a large number of members of the Baltimore Police Force have Coppin degrees. So we think that we did a whole lot to do that. Same ways with rehabilitation counseling, in the state, most of the patients are black in the rehabilitation counseling but most of the therapists are mostly--most of the counselors are white. We developed a master's degree in rehabilitation counseling and turned that around. We graduate a large number of the Baltimore City Public Schools teachers--a lot of the principals and what have you so all of those things have happened. We developed a nursing school, we got a nursing school from Provident Hospital [Baltimore, Maryland] when it closed, that was in 1974 and the story to be told on what we went through to get that. But right now in the state of Maryland, I would bet that at least 80 to 85 percent of all of the African American nurses with undergraduate degrees are Coppin graduates. And on top of that we had the highest rating that you could get from the NLN--National League of Nursing that we beat the University of Maryland [College Park, Maryland] a couple of times and Johns Hopkins Hospital [Baltimore, Maryland] on a number of the percentage of our kids who graduated to pass the state boards and all that, oh yeah. Very proud of that--those kinds of things that we've been able to do. We developed a CDC [Centers for Disease Control and Prevention] community development center and worked with the people in our communities. It kind of sits between the college and the community that we got grants to do that--some of our professors work in that. We took over an elementary school that had the lowest ratings that you could find that was on the state education list--State Department of Education list of poor schools and what have you and this was the fourth year that we had that school and it was this year--I'm gone but it was this year we've come off of the list. We are no longer on their list and it was only eight schools able to do that and we work with that. So we've had some good success because what we've tried to do--the whole idea was to try to integrate the public service function of the institution which is to provide services to the community and all that with the instructional function which is the classroom instruction to try to bring those two together so the student will learn more on the one hand and the nurses learn more on the one hand in their classroom experiences but they also learn a great deal and the community gets some preventive care from the use of their services out in the community. We've tried to bring those things together like that; criminal justice law enforcement is another instance, rehabilitation counsel--all those we've tried--and I would've have tried--we wanted to try to do it with every program that we had. But you run into some problems because professors are not orientated that way. You cannot send every professor out into that community--just can't. But those are the kind of programs we developed and I think--and that was unique to us. We wanted our name to remain college because if it remains college, we could do business with UMBC [University of Maryland Baltimore County, Baltimore, Maryland], UMAB [University of Maryland at Baltimore, Baltimore, Maryland], Morgan [Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland] and all that and not have an institutional inferiority complex because you call it a university--because the first order of things is services, the people and the communities. Service to those students on the campus and not how a big shot name and what have you. I think the name is going to be changed. I think the new president is going to change the name, which is okay. But that was the thinking that we had, the faculty went along with that. Story_ID: 178582 Speaker 1: Now you said earlier, in our pre-discussion, that you couldn't have done all this by yourself. Speaker 2: No, no, Lord no, I had the most wonderful people to work with [at Coppin State University, Baltimore, Maryland]. Speaker 1: Who are some of the people that have been significant--I don't want to get you into trouble by not mentioning people, but-- Speaker 2: A fellow by the name of Clayton McNeill. Dean Flossie Dedmond, who is now passed away and gone. She was the dean of arts and sciences with a background in literature and what have you. Guilbert Daley, who has passed away and his background was in the performing arts, it's just so many people. The people there now, Dr. [Geraldine] Waters, who is over in the education division, Shirley Stokes who is a great teacher of education, a specialist, [Ron] Collins [Sr.], who's the head of our honors program, just right down the line, just large numbers of excellent people--good faculty. Cynthia Morton, who's a professor of history, Dr. Bettye Gardner, who's a professor of history and those two people, I mean, their credentials are second to none, all of those people. Ogonji--Dr. Gilbert Ogonji who was in the science program has a very small department but gets lots of grants, he does an outstanding job. Dr. [Janet] Spry, who heads the rehabilitation counseling and psych department got all kinds of grants in from the federal government to carry us. Dr. Hattie Washington who was the head of our institutional advancement program that brought in lots of money, it's very difficult to raise money. I can go on and on and on. We have Coach Mitchell-his name is Ron Mitchell [Fang Mitchell], we have a basketball team. We've gone to NCAA tournaments three times or so. We got past the first round, in fact, and he's brought all kinds of money into it. Nobody in the area--we've kind of been down the last year or two--we'll come back. We've had the very best--the smallest but the very best and that's what we're always after. Whatever we do to try to be the very best regardless of what the image of the college may be or what people may think or this, that or the other. Just keep on doing the job graduating those students, give them the best education we possibly can and let the chips fall where they may. Story_ID: 178583 Speaker 1: Okay, now you [Coppin State University, Baltimore, Maryland] graduated about five to eight hundred students a year. Speaker 2: Yes it runs between six and eight hundred a year depending on what year it is and I would say at least 80 percent of those students were from homes that were very humble; they didn't have to go back into those homes again. We've had kids to graduate out of the computer science programs, software engineering going on to big companies and the companies wind up sending them to Carnegie Mellon [University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] to get their master's, paying everything for them. We've had nurses to graduate and they--Hopkins [Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland] and other people want them, the large hospitals need them and what have you. And that's really contributing to the strength of a family--the strength of a community. We probably have more people who stay in Baltimore [Maryland]--who stay in Maryland after they graduate than any other school in the area. Speaker 1: I know you said too that 85 percent of your graduates are people from low-income communities. Speaker 2: Yeah, would qualify for student financial aid, full or part-time. But we always take the position you may come in with some educational needs and deficiencies but what we want to try to do is make sure when you get out four or five or six years, they're not there. That's changed in the way that you can compete with everybody else. Speaker 1: So that makes your job more complicated and a little bit more difficult than Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] or some place. Speaker 2: Oh, no question about it. Speaker 1: The best students showing up, the best particular backgrounds. Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: These students have a lower education when they show up. Speaker 2: Sure, you have to make up for that, you have a lot of educational remediation that you have to get done. But yet you know that it's--they are where they are not because of their ability but because of their opportunities and because of the provisions that you make for them. Now I worked with a group of people at Coppin that I think did just a splendid job. Not a whole lot of credit, not the money that they should get and all this kind of thing. But lucky enough to get these kind of people who have that type of emphasis and commitment and I was fortunate enough to be--to work with them and be called their leader. Story_ID: 178584 Speaker 1: But the history of Coppin State [University, Baltimore, Maryland] in terms of the State of Maryland is not a pretty one. Speaker 2: Terrible, underfunded--nobody wants to hear that but that's the way it was and for years and years and years we continually pointed out underfunding in our operating budget, deficiencies in our capital program and it would fall on deaf ears. Not only that, the legislative black caucus, whether they like it or not, they didn't help us. The Maryland legislative black caucus did not go to bat for us. They'd go to bat for Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland] and the Prince George's County [Maryland] people would help Bowie [State University, Bowie, Maryland] in some way and UMUC [University of Maryland University College, Upper Marlboro, Maryland], but the history of these three schools-it's four black institutions, UMUC, Coppin [Coppin State University, Baltimore, Maryland], Morgan and Bowie. Bowie is in the Washington [D.C.] area and in the '60s [1960s] things got real bad there and [HM] Sam Myers, one of the greatest educators that anybody could ever find, he's a black man, a degree in Economics from Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], a brilliant man. Later the president of NAFEO [National Association for Equal Opportunity in Higher Education] but he was president of Bowie. He came in and the Prince George's County delegation made a commitment and I know they did because that was stated in our state meetings with our executive director that Prince George's County said to the governor and the general assembly that we don't vote for anything that you want unless you support Bowie. And so Bowie got its capital budget--its capital program and its budget off the ground that way. Morgan's always had the--if you got forty people that are historically--forty black people in the general assembly out of 190 something that you would have--thirty-five of those would be Morgan graduates, very fine people, very able intellectual people too looked out for Morgan. So Morgan gets it that way. There was a fine president of the University of Maryland by the name of Johnny Toll [John S. Toll], who when he came in was president of the University of Maryland and at that time UMUC was in the University of Maryland system. They had chancellors on the campus but you had a president that was the head of all of that, they later changed that. But he made sure that UMUC was supported. He got UMUC's operating budget up there. Coppin had no advocate, no advocate whatsoever and unfortunately unless political people think you can hurt them, they're not going to help you. It's unfortunate but that's the way things are. Speaker 1: Wait a minute, that sounds like something that Frederick Douglass said about power concedes nothing without a demand. Speaker 2: Exactly and if they feel that you are--in fact I would say that one of the major problems in the African American community is that they don't hold their elected officials accountable for what they do down there. They go down there and do pretty much what they want to do or they are directed to do and they don't necessarily operate on behalf of the African American community. They play like they do and the publicity comes out and they run on tickets that say they do and what have you. But you get down to brass tacks and see what happens, that doesn't happen and that's unfortunate and that's not the fault of whites; that's the fault of the African American community not holding these people accountable. If they don't go down there and deliver what they should deliver, they should vote them out of there. But they know that they're not going to do that because people are struggling for food and shelter and clothing. They don't have a whole lot of time to do all the stuff that keeps up with what politicians are doing and all this kind of thing. Not only that, they don't have the education level, that's the reason that--and I'm not blaming them, I'm saying that's what it is; where they're exploited because of that. And so an institution like Coppin, it's a broker between those people and people who have and the people who do not have sometimes don't understand what the broker is up against. They believe when people that have tell them things against the broker and they believe it. That's the image sometimes--that's the way the black college images. I'm not giving you that as an excuse, I'm not--I'm just reporting. I'm not alibi-ing or anything; I'm just saying that's the way that it is. Anybody that's been around in a historically black college [HBCU] for a long time will be able to tell you that's what it is, particularly state. So that was a position we were caught in so we had no advocates. Story_ID: 178585 Speaker 1: So for years and years we [Coppin State University, Baltimore, Maryland] had to struggle and there is no question in my mind that all kinds of shenanigans that the system pulled at various times to try to get us to go out of business on our own. So they wouldn't have to do it, they just deprived us to such a great degree that it would just happen, that a crediting agency would come in and say you should no longer be in operation. That would give them the excuse for closing us down. I remember a year that we had going into accreditation for Middle States [Commission on Higher Education] and we had thirty less faculty people than we needed. Thirty and what I did--we didn't have them allocated and what I did is I hired on contractual arrangements anyway and brought them in and we got through our accreditation. But we had an awful budget deficit that year and you read the papers and the papers were saying that it was misappropriation of funds and I should be fired and we didn't know what we were doing and the books were this, that and the other. But you just keep quiet because we did get accredited and I kind of made it through all of that and continued on. But if that had happened with the chancellor later on that I ran into problems, I had an executive director that was really backing me at that point and understood. But if that had happened with the last five or six years with the chancellor we had, I would have been fired immediately, no question about it. Because the public wouldn't believe that we needed thirty people, they would believe some of those people--even with the blacks saying it's because we misappropriated the monies. They wouldn't believe it was because we didn't have but it's always a misappropriation. And a school such as Coppin has a very difficult time of proving that because you don't have the thirty-second sound bites and this kind of thing and what the big powerful papers want to write and what they want to say, you're at their mercy. They used to come in--there used to be a relationship between the legislative auditors and the papers. A legislative auditor would come in and tear us apart and couldn't wait for it to be printed in the papers. So we kind of got that straightened out when we got a good--so it's a lot of things and again and this is not my way of excuse because if you don't like it, then I can get out of it. If I didn't want it and can't stand it, then just leave and go to the University of Iowa [Iowa City, Iowa] and go on the faculty there or leave and go someplace else and go on the faculty or go into industry or something like that. So I'm not complaining because there is no need to complain because you don't have to take it if you don't want to. But the challenge was something that was wonderful. To be able to intellectually challenge the power structure and beat them--I may be saying more about me than anything else but that's a wonderful feeling. Speaker 2: Now this struggle--this successful struggle, you consider basically your legacy at Coppin State. Speaker 1: The one legacy that I have would be what I left the college with. That the Office of Civil Rights say they've got to do, I did that. All the other things we've talked about, everybody else pitched in and we all helped, it was a common thing. We'd get together and just outthink them together and there is no such thing as a great this or great that and I appreciate that very much. But because we didn't have an advocate and the civil rights people came along looking at the whole issue of segregated education in a higher ed area and saying Maryland was one of the states along with the other eight or nine states, Mississippi and Alabama and all this. But they had to present plans to show where they were eliminating the segregated educa-the vestiges of segregation. Story_ID: 178586 Speaker 1: Now a lot of people, you know, looked at that investigation, I guess the U.S. Department of Education with a lot of trepidation. There was a rumor in the '80s [1980s] that the black colleges--state-supported black colleges all over the United States were going to be closed down-- Speaker 2: But the [U.S.] Supreme Court said they couldn't do it. The first that went up there they said yeah you can eliminate the vestiges of discrimination and segregation but you can't put that burden on historically black institutions [historically black colleges and universities, HBCUs], they have to be enhanced, not eliminated, enhanced. Let me tell you who was a strong advocate, this is going to shock you to your teeth, Clarence Thomas is one of the strongest advocates of black colleges on the Supreme Court. But he wasn't involved in that decision but that decision was made before he got there. But any decision that comes up to them that's going to harm or be harmful for historically black institutions, you can believe Clarence Thomas is going to rail against it. Now I'm not saying anyway other--politically and I'm not trying to give the impression that I'm a big fan of this but I'm just talking facts. Just like the fact here is that nobody wanted to say but the fact is black colleges have always fared better under Republican administrations than Democratic administrations and I'm a Democrat, that's a fact. You can just go back and look at those facts. When [President Richard] Nixon was in that's when a lot of this-the business came up of Title III. A lot of blacks--the expansion of the Title III Program and all this kind of thing is coming under Bush. I'm not saying that I like--I'm just talking about what happens in terms of historically black institutions. I can remember when the solicitor general--who was the fellow who was after [President Bill] Clinton? Speaker 1: [Ken] Starr. Speaker 2: He was the solicitor general at the time and something came up and he was taking a strong position, it was going to be very damaging to historically black institutions. We all had a meeting with him and he wouldn't back off of that. [HM] James Cheek called Mr. [Clayton] Yeutter, who was the chair of the Republican Party. Mr. Yeutter got a hold to [President] George [H.W.] Bush, Sr.; George Bush, Sr. called Starr and he backed off. Story_ID: 178587 Speaker 1: The Maryland Higher Education Commission [MHEC] came to Coppin State [University, Baltimore, Maryland]. Speaker 2: Yeah well what happened is the Office of Civil Rights [Office for Civil Rights, OCR]--U.S. Department Office of Civil Rights had cited eight or nine states. Speaker 1: That's [U.S.] Department of Education? Speaker 2: Yes, the national level as being in violation of--because there were remnants of segregation in their higher ed operations. Mississippi was one of the first--you heard a lot about it but each of these states--I've forgotten how many, eight or nine states, had to submit a plan to the Office of Education which comes naturally through their regional offices that would show that they were eliminating the vestiges of segregation within higher ed. Maryland submitted its plan the early part of the '80s [1980s]. The Office of Civil Rights didn't respond and then I think we submitted another one in the latter '80s [1980s] and they still--no response, they just didn't respond. Finally in about 1995, '96 [1996], my dates are not going to be accurate here but the process is correct. They said they were going to come in and look at these plans of Maryland. Some of the other states, North Carolina and some other states had gotten off the list because they had looked at their plans and approved them. If they don't approve your plan then theoretically they can redraw all the student financial aid--all the grant monies coming into the state. I mean that's a part the Office of Education has to do that. Of course, they probably have to go through a court to get some of this stuff done. But in any event, I knew--I understood they were going to come in to look at the state of Maryland and I knew that even though historically black colleges maybe hadn't been treated like some of the white colleges and what have you. But Coppin had been treated worse than anybody even among the black colleges. So what I did is I made a number of trips to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] to the regional office to explain to them in detail what was happening to us and how it was happening to us and what have you. So when they came in to look, they would look especially at us, that's what I was hoping. So when they come in because of the Maryland Higher Education Commission--is the governor's arm for all of education in the state of Maryland. They come through the commission of higher education but now our system with the University of Maryland's system is the governing body of the Maryland Higher Education Commission institutions with the exception of Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland] and Saint Mary's [College of Maryland, Saint Mary's City, Maryland], they are outside of that but everybody else is in, the four black colleges and University of Maryland and Frostburg [State University, Frostburg, Maryland] and so on and so forth. So when they came, precisely what I thought was going to happen, happened and when the seven civil rights people came in from the Office of Education out of Philadelphia's regional office, they directed them to our campus and they were going to look at one small program that the commission was claiming and our system was claiming that's all that was needed that we had to have. So they came and we had this conference and so they said they were going to look at Access to Success, was the program, and they were going to spend an hour and a half or two hours on the campus or something like that. My position was no, Access to Success is a drop in the ocean as far as what happening to us. You need to take all the time you need to look at all of our facilities, compare them with other facilities, look at our operating budget, look at everything of us and you can't do that in a hour and a half because Coppin should be looked at in a special way because we've had no advocate, none whatsoever. So what those people came there to stay an hour and a half and what have you, they stayed all day and then they came back the next day. So when finally all of this separated out then the Office of Civil Rights people said there had to be a study of the whole issue of vestiges of discrimination within. And black colleges--they had to look at the black colleges and enhance--black colleges needed some enhancement and Coppin had to be separated out and studied specially. There had to be a special study of Coppin State College. Story_ID: 178588 Speaker 1: So that special study of Coppin State College [later, Coppin State University, Baltimore, Maryland]--so they decided there was going to be a taskforce to study the college. The chancellor and I went back and forth for three weeks because we could not decide on who the chair was going to be. The chancellor was going to get somebody that I thought was going to try to manipulate the process; in fact I was pretty sure of that. I wanted someone with an international reputation and I did not want a black person, I wanted a white person because if a black person had taken that position and found these things, they would have just said it's because that person was black. So we got [John S.] Toll and then we got other people on with good educational backgrounds. The chancellor did pull a fast one on me though because he got somebody from--that didn't know anything about this person, didn't check with us. From fiscal end was to look at the finances and right away this person came in from the finance and was going to say it was because we weren't using the money that we had properly. But that team turned him around, I mean they just quickly got him and there was a person on the system that was very helpful too. The vice chancellor for finance on the system when they went to see the taskforce, he let them know in no uncertain terms that what was going on. So again the Lord was really operating and out of that came a study--the results of that came from a study which said that we needed more money in our operating budget, we needed more capital operating money and we needed more attention and then at the same time, again I think the Lord was operating this. We came in with a new administration that happened to be--and I'm not talking Republican or Democrat--it just happened to be that a new administration came in Republican. The first time in I don't know how many years, and the lieutenant governor [Michael Steele] which was an African American and they came in with a commitment that Coppin would have to be enhanced, they're going to see to that. That comes from the executive branch and that's going to be very helpful and as a start even before I got out, there was a piece of property we were trying to buy adjacent to the institution and it's natural for us to buy, the system would not allow us--would not approve it. The lieutenant governor put that in the budget, just stuck that in there and it was purchased as well as another piece of property that we were working so hard to try to get. It only costs us eight hundred thousand dollars but they put us through that people had kept 40 million dollars and 15 million dollars a piece of property that would have to go through but we got that too. So now we've got an advocate now also. Those other people I talked about, the advocates they have, Coppin for the first time in the history of that institution has an advocate. And I don't care what anybody says or how they say it that is my present to that institution. Story_ID: 178589 Speaker 1: Sir, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: First I--first and foremost I hope that the African American community starts paying more attention to who they are electing and sending down to office, at all levels, city, state and national levels because that gets to be a farce sometimes. That is the first thing. Second thing, I don't know how it can come about, but emphasis has to be put on education. Education on the elementary level, secondary level: it has to be there and then of course, the whole family issue. Somehow we got to put these families back together because if you've got--families within the African American community is decimated by the drugs and the alcohol and the unemployment and all this kind of stuff that's going on, it's very, very difficult. With other people--we're going into a situation now that solid middle class white families are declaring bankruptcy and running into problems because they are moving--they're trying to move to a place where their kids can get a decent education and the houses are very expensive out there, it takes two people to work and all that and one person is out of work and they can't make it and all. If that's happening there, just think of what's happening to the African American community. Somehow and I don't have the answers to how this could be, it's got to be pulled together. I used to think the churches were going to have to do more and the religious people are going to have to do more. I've kind of given up on that because a lot of the religious people--a lot of the religious leadership they're going the same way the C.E.O.s are going. How much money I can make and what kind of car I can drive and what kind of house I have and how big I can be viewed as. So I've kind of--I don't want you think I'm cynical, I'm just seventy-some years old, and I've maybe learned too much over the years, and hope I'm wrong about some things. Story_ID: 178590 Speaker 1: Now did your parents [Vera Rayford and Elmer Burnett] get a chance to see you become successful? Well, your mother died when you were young. Speaker 2: My mother died a month before I got my doctorate. My father died last year so he was able to see. Speaker 1: And your [paternal] grandmother [Minnie Burnett]-- Speaker 2: My grandmother was able to see, I don't know how much she understood about it but she was able to see that, yeah. But on the other hand, I'm telling you the honest goodness truth, I don't--I consider myself a pair of hands in the vineyard. The distance between us and somebody down there on Druid Hill [Druid Hill Park, Baltimore, Maryland] where you're going, it's about that much (indicates very small length) as opposed to the distance between people on Wall Street and people who live in Howard County [Maryland]. So I still try to have all of this in perspective. Thank God that we've been able to be where we are and maybe some comfort in life but it's really no big deal. Speaker 1: Okay, now you have quite a number of grandchildren. Speaker 2: Yeah, four. Four wonderful--a little grandson who will be thirteen come December 23. Speaker 1: You have four children? Speaker 2: Yeah, I have four children. Speaker 1: When you look back on all of that, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: As someone that has done the very best they can to work with other people to make life more pleasant, a higher quality, for people who didn't have that opportunity. The greatest compliment that I got and believe me I'm not trying--but I mean out all of it and there is a lot of press. Some of the press came out and said nothing happened the thirty-three years I've been there, as far as they were concern and what have you. So all of that is there which is okay, but because I know differently but the greatest thing that I think is one of the commentators on television, Michael Lesker [ph.] said that at the time I retired, I gave my own commencement speech and the speech was the value of education and what it meant to have an educated society and how important that was. He said that I did a good job on that and he said he should be very proud because when he came to Baltimore [Maryland] that wasn't the case but he said because of him there is a black middle class in Baltimore city now. I thought that was a great compliment. So that would--if you ask me what--in answer to your question that would be the response I would make. That's what I wanted to do, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Thank you very much. Speaker 2: Well thank you. I don't want to come off arrogant and all of this because-- Speaker 1: You don't. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 178591 Speaker 1: Okay, yeah that's [President William Jefferson] "Bill" Clinton, and Elijah Cummings, who's the chair of the Legislative Black Caucus right now, and last night they had their debates out on Morgan's [Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland] campus and he's a member of the Board of Trustees at Morgan. This is our choir that was singing at the-- Speaker 2: Are you in this one here? Speaker 1: Let's see yeah, that one right there and there is the mayor back over there someplace, I guess. That's Clinton, that's Herman Howard, our [Coppin State University, Baltimore, Maryland] vice president for academic affairs. Here that's me and that's--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 2: Hold on a second, he has to get them to focus first. Speaker 1: That's a delegate; he is a Maryland state legislator. Speaker 2: Who's hugging you? Speaker 1: Yes right there its Cummings again. That's Clinton, that's Mayor [Martin] O'Malley who just was elected yesterday--reelected and that looks like me. Here is--the one above there is Cummings and I can't make out who that is talking to Cummings but that's me. Speaker 2: Looks like the mayor in the rear. Speaker 1: I'm not sure and that's--you mean right there. Yeah I think that might be me, I was talking about the person over there talking to Cummings. Speaker 2: Now this was all in 2002. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Friday, October 18, 2002. Speaker 1: About twelve years ago--this was about 1991. Speaker 2: '94 [1994], yeah. Speaker 1: No about '91 [1991] because we had Randy. That's my wife and Randy and me. Speaker 2: Wife's name? Speaker 1: Gretta is her first name. Speaker 2: G-R-E-T-A? Speaker 1: G-R-E-T-T-A. Speaker 2: Thank you. Speaker 1: That's at my retirement, and that's Randy the grandson, and that's me of course, that's Amy, my granddaughter and that's Dana, grandchild, and Sharon, grandchild. That's our vice president for institutional advancement with Dr. [Hattie] Washington. That's the president of Channel 2 and how can I--name slipped away from me now, but he's the president of Channel 2, a really nice guy. That's Tawanna [ph.] a daughter, who's the mother of Amy and Sharon. That's Mr. Mfume--Kweisi Mfume who is president of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], that's me and of course that's my wife Gretta. Speaker 2: Occasion and date? Speaker 1: This would have been at the retirement, which was 2002, and that was April. Okay that's Dr. Washington, my wife, me and then that's the portrait they gave me for--and that was again at that same retirement...