 Story_ID: 26889 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm the interviewer today with The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Sir, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Frederic Bertley, F-R-E-D-E-R-I-C, B-E-R-T-L-E-Y. Speaker 1: Now, do you have a middle name? Speaker 2: I have two middle names. Speaker 1: Alright. Speaker 2: Marcus, M-A-R-C-U-S, named after Marcus Garvey. And Nkrumah, N-K-R-U-M-A-H, named after Kwame Nkrumah. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. And what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Nineteen Seventy [1970], November 27, Montreal, Province of Quebec, country, Canada. Speaker 1: Okay. And sir, what is your title and occupation? Speaker 2: Senior Vice President for Science at the Franklin Institute in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. Speaker 1: Now, is it true that by training, you're an immunologist? Speaker 2: I'm an immunologist, that's correct. Also, my Ph.D. is in immunology. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is today's date? Speaker 2: June 18, 2013. Speaker 1: And where are at the present time? Speaker 2: We're currently in the Franklin--specifically, inside the boardroom of the Franklin Institute. Story_ID: 26890 Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions that we always ask as a warm-up. And they only require a short answer. The first one is do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Yes, I do. Speaker 1: And what are they? Speaker 2: It would be Chicken Roti from Trinidad and Tobago. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Yellow. Speaker 1: Alright. A favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Spring. Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Caribbean. Speaker 1: And the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: I have a few, so let me quickly spin one of them up to the top. "Think, it's not illegal yet." Story_ID: 26891 Speaker 1: Now, I'm going to ask you about your family history. Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side, separately. And then we're going to put them together. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So, can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Maiden name, or--? Speaker 1: Yes, the whole name. Speaker 2: So, June Alleyne Miller. June, like the month, J-U-N-E, Alleyne, A-L-L-E-Y-N-E, and Miller, M-I-L-L-E-R. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: June 29, 1929. Place of birth, Barbados, West Indies. Speaker 1: Now, what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family? How far back can you trace them, and what are the stories about what they were doing? Speaker 2: I mean, that's a remarkable question. So, my mother's mother's maiden name was Hall. And so, my grandmother was Hall. The Hall family in Barbados was a very, very, prominent family, so much so that her and her siblings--who, of course were African Caribbean--actually had Cambridge exam certificates dating back to 1906, '07 [1907], 1910. So, very early in the turn of the twentieth century, my mother's--my mother's mother's side, and the aunts and uncles on her mother's side, were very well educated in Barbados. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I just--to put this in context. This is, you know--persons of color would barely come out of high school in those times, let alone to get the Cambridge certificates at the A levels and O levels. And so, it was quite remarkable. And I actually have photocopies of them in my files, of those actual certificates dating back to 19--I think '07 [1907], '08 [1908], '09 [1909], or thereabouts. Speaker 1: Now these are--so, your grandmother or other Hall members? Speaker 2: My grandmother and her siblings. Speaker 1: And her siblings. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: How many? Speaker 2: So, I'd have to dig up some research to give you the actual facts. But-- Speaker 1: But they all had Cambridge-- Speaker 2: At least, at least four or five of them did. But I can dig that up and then follow with the actual facts. I'll know then to speak on that. Speaker 1: Is there a story about that, about how they were able to--I know it's not easy. Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean--so, there's stories and there's urban legends, and then there are the facts. So I, myself and my brother are trying to research the actual facts. So, we know that several of them went to get Cambridge--and again, to put it into context, this is the British Caribbean. So, in the British Caribbean, they had the British system of schooling which meant you go to--you know, in England, you would do the O levels, which stands for 'ordinary levels', kind of regular high school learning. And then you do the A levels, which stands for 'advanced levels'. And so, all over the British colonies where that education was in place, they would apply that system. And it's called the Cambridge System of Exams. And so, they would mail the exams from the UK [United Kingdom] to the Caribbean Islands, or wherever they were in the British colony. They would apply for exams. The exams would be written. They'd ship the exams back to the UK to get graded, and then they send the certificates, if you pass, etc. And so, some of my mother's aunts and uncles actually then left the Caribbean and came to the United States. And so, again, I have to get you the exact details. But one of them went to MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts], for example, in engineering. One of them ended up doing his Ph.D. in divinity studies in the U.S. One of them became a doctor in the U.S. And so, there's an interesting history and legacy of scholarship on my mother's side of the family--on my mother's mother's side, from my grandmother's side of the family--that precipitated them leaving the Caribbean and coming to the U.S. to further their studies. Speaker 1: Okay. So, these are all Halls, right? Speaker 2: They were all Halls. Speaker 1: Alright. Speaker 2: Now, the legend gets really interesting where, according to my mother, you can trace back the Hall lineage to Prince Hall, the person that founded Black Masonry here in the United States of America. And while his history is very interesting, some people say, "Oh, he came from Boston", and this and that. But there are some archives that talk about him coming from not just the Caribbean, but from Barbados. So, supposedly he may have come from Barbados and landed in Boston, and then began--. But again, some of this is--a lot of this needs to be researched, but there's definitely some aspect to this possibility. Speaker 1: I believe that is true. I mean, I know just from general knowledge that he was from the Islands. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And Barbados sounds like the right one. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: So, Prince Hall founded the Prince Hall Masons. And I was just thinking about him when you mentioned--well, I mean, when I said these are all Halls. Speaker 2: Yeah, no, I mean-- Speaker 1: If you're thinking, like, what Halls are-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, this is interesting. This is--yeah, Prince Hall founded the Prince Hall Masons. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: In 1775. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: So, and a lodge, you know, the African lodge in Boston [Massachusets]-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --is named-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: So, at any rate--so, this is quite a lineage. Speaker 2: Yeah. So, I mean, and again, I'm happy to post-editing. You know, really, she's [June Alleyne Miller] still alive, so I can get some good information from her. And also, we have some sort of archive where I could get some actual facts and dates, if that's helpful. Story_ID: 26892 Speaker 1: Now, now your mother [June Alleyne Miller] grew up in Barbados, right? Speaker 2: My mother grew up in Barbados. And my grandmother and my grandfather had--my mother had one, two--two other sisters. So, there's Stella Miller, Ruthie Miller. There's Harold Miller, Victor Miller, and John Miller. Those are all my mother's siblings. Those who are remaining alive are my mother, who's June Miller, my aunt, Ruthie Miller, and my other aunt, Stella Miller. And one uncle, Victor Miller. So, Uncle Harold just passed and Uncle Johnny has passed. Speaker 1: Did they all live in the United States? Speaker 2: No, the only interesting question--the only-- So, my mother left the Caribbean to go to McGill University [Montreal, Quebec, Canada], and stayed in Canada. And I had an uncle that left Barbados and lived in Canada for awhile and lived with us. But then he went back to Barbados. And then another uncle moved to Canada and stayed in Canada for about thirty years. And then the rest of the folks stayed in the Caribbean. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now, were your--I know your father's side were Garveyites. Were your mother's people Garveyites, too? Speaker 2: So, interesting. My mother's people weren't Garveyites, as such. My mother was a Garveyite, without question. But her lineage, they weren't Garveyites. They were definitely scholars and interested in history. But they weren't identified, self-identified, as Garveyites. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, not necessarily Garveyites. Alright. Speaker 2: Now, what did your mother say about growing up in Barbados? Did she have any stories about growing up? Speaker 1: Yeah, I mean, you know-- She, she, so her father, my grandfather, ran a pharmacy. So, he did--very well off. And of course, my mother has mentioned my grandmother was from (Colonnades?), and they were very well educated. And so, they did well off, too. So, they weren't affluent, but they were certainly comfortable--whatever middle class, if you will, of that era would be like. So, you know, they did really well. They had a very nice house on the hill in an area called Prospect, which is in the state of Saint James, you know. And you could see the--it rolls down to the beach. So, you could actually see the beach from their home. They--that was kind of the last house that they owned. So, they didn't grow up in that house, but that's certainly is where they lived their adult lives. And then, you know, I mean, I guess a typical Caribbean life, you know. Parents emphasized school. You studied your butt off. You did well in school. My mother was the oldest woman in the family, so she helped out a lot when my grandfather passed, which he passed relatively early, in his fifties. My mother stepped up and had a leadership role in terms of the rest of the siblings. But as she finished up her school, she then left to come to Canada to further her education. Speaker 2: Okay. So, that would be in the '50s--1950s, or '40s [1940s]? Speaker 1: It was in the fifties. They--she, they got married in 1957. So, it would have been around '54 [1954], '55 [1955] when they came to Canada. Speaker 2: Okay, alright. Now, did your mother--what did she study at McGill? Speaker 1: So, my mother has four university degrees-Bachelor's of Arts, Bachelor's of Science, Master's of Education, and an MBA--Master's in Business Administration. And then in Canada you get a fifth thing, which is not officially a degree, but is an important certificate if you want to work in the field of education, and is essentially called an educational certificate. And so, you have to go to teacher's college to get that. Story_ID: 26893 Speaker 1: So, can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: So, Leo, L-E-O, Withnol, W-I-T-H-N-O-L, Bertley. Speaker 1: W-I-T-H-- Speaker 2: N-O-L. Speaker 1: N-O-L. Speaker 2: Yeah. It's a very unusual name. We still don't know the etiology of the name. His mother would call him Witty because he was just brilliant. So, he was known, he grew up to be known as Witty. But I don't, we don't know where Withnol came from at all. Speaker 1: Alright. And what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Nineteen Thirty-Four [1934], in a place called Pouie Avenue, which is in South Trinidad, in a town called Pointe-a-Pierre. P-O-I-N-T-E, hyphen A, hyphen P-I-E-R-R-E. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It's a little small town in southern Trinidad. Speaker 1: In southern Trinidad, okay. And you were giving the name of the street a minute ago. Speaker 2: Yeah, Pouie Avenue and Tulip Avenue. He lived on Pouie Avenue. It's spelled P-O-U-I-E Avenue. It's still there, both Pouie Avenue and Tulip Avenue. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. So, what can you tell us about your father's side of the family? How far back can you trace them? Speaker 2: So, again, there's an urban legend. So, we grew up with my father telling us the story of his grandfather, named Pa Bilonga. Speaker 1: Pa? Speaker 2: P-A, space Bilonga, B-I-L-O-N-G-A. It's a Yoruba name. And the story goes that he was a Yoruba king who had to leave Nigeria, and landed in Trinidad. Now, this is, you know, a long time ago, where you have to ask yourself, how is someone, you know, in the 1800s leaving Nigeria and getting to Trinidad? And so, while there's some, again--because of lineage--while there's some inconsistencies, what is interesting is there was a whole area in Trinidad known as Yorubaland. So, there was somewhere sometime along the line of a, a person, or groups of persons, who were clearly Yoruba from Nigeria, who had a presence in Trinidad and Tobago. Speaker 1: Now, what you're saying implies that he did not come over during the slave trade? Speaker 2: So, part of it is absolutely that there's a part of his family that did not come over as slave trades. Of course, there's another part of the family that clearly did. And that's interesting. And so, his last name is Bertley, spelled B-E-R-T-L-E-Y. But there are record books in Trinidad of individuals who volunteered to fight on behalf of the British in the War of 1812, and in some other wars. And if they fought on behalf of the British, they could come back to Trinidad as free men. And so, there's these log books that were identified that have Bertley spelled B-U-R-T-L-E-Y, people volunteering of African descent--but carrying that presumably slave master's name--who fought on behalf of the British. And then when they returned to Trinidad, they were liberated. Speaker 1: Okay. So, in the War of 1812. That's--okay. Speaker 2: And again, some of it is--some of it makes great sense and some of it is murky. And, you know, it's hard, without having a perfect paper trail. Speaker 1: But that's fine though, in terms of--because the stories make the paperwork come alive on some level. Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely. Speaker 1: And without the stories--the paperwork--I mean, who knows if the paperwork is right? Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, fair enough. A great point. Speaker 1: We don't know-- Speaker 2: That's a great point. Speaker 1: --who wrote it then. Speaker 2: That's a great point. Speaker 1: So, you know, we--as we try to put this together, we just have to, you know-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --make the most sense we can, I guess. (laughter). Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So, his--so the Bertley side--but the Yoruba side-- This is interesting. Like, the--so many African Americans in the Caribbean and in this country have a Yoruba ancestry. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: And they always seem to be involved in-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --the fomenting of revolutions. Speaker 2: Yeah, absolutely. Speaker 1: Like in Haiti, with Bookman. Speaker 2: Of course, of course. Speaker 1: And Cuba, with Santeria and all-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. No, you're absolutely correct. Speaker 1: So, I was wondering--do they--is there a story about how Pa Bilonga? Was he, I mean, are they trying to say that he came here independently of slavery? Speaker 2: So, the story, if you want to push that urban legend to urban-urban legend. The story was he had these powers. And he flew. Now, when you say flew, you know, there were no airplanes. So, this legend is that he flew from Yorubaland which is, you know, in Nigeria, to the Caribbean, to the New World. And he ate salt for the first time, and he lost his gift of flight. And so, he stayed there. And that's a story that was told consistently by my father to my sister, to my brother, to my other brother, and to myself. And-- Speaker 1: That's worth passing along, for the-- Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely. I mean--and so, one of the books that he wrote called 'Canada and Its People of African Descent'--which you saw--if you open it up, his publishing name that he selected was Bilonga Publishers, named after his lineage. So, it is a great story. Speaker 1: Okay. So, he flew to Trinidad. Story_ID: 26894 Speaker 1: What, what occupations did your father's people-- Speaker 2: So, my mother [June Alleyne Miller] had four university degrees plus a teaching diploma. My father [Leo Withnol Bertley] had seven university degrees. Speaker 1: Well, what about his parents? Speaker 2: About his parents. Oh, so, his mother was a stay at home mom, my grandmother. And his father worked for Shell Oil. So, as you know, Trinidad is one of the wealthiest countries, in terms of oil, in the Western Hemisphere. In fact, in World War II, Trinidad and Tobago actually supplied all of the allies for oil. And at one point, Exxon moved their headquarters for oil from the United States of America to Trinidad. And they moved them back--I can't remember the year--late nineties or early 2000's. But I say all this to say Trinidad was, had a huge oil presence. And Shell Company was a major company there. And my grandfather, Willie, as he was known, lived and worked for Shell, for the Shell Oil Company in Trinidad. Which meant that, again, they weren't super affluent. But back then to be of African descent and to work at an oil company was unheard of. And so, they were, you know, again, middle class, you know, to slightly better than middle class. Speaker 1: They could afford to send their children to school and to-- Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely. In fact, all the kids went to, again, a British private school. And in the case of Trinidad, it's called Presentation College [San Fernando, Trinidad]. So, essentially a private school. Speaker 1: So, Leo Bertley. This is a well known man, Dr. Leo Bertley. At least in this country he's well known. And he was a history professor, right? Speaker 2: That's correct. Speaker 1: And now, so he went to Presentation? Speaker 2: He went to Presentation College, which is one of the best private schools in Trinidad and Tobago. It was started by these Irish Brothers called the Presentation Brothers. And we can talk about how the book got to Ireland later, when I mention that. And so-- Speaker 1: Were these religious brothers? Speaker 2: Yes, Roman Catholic Brothers-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --who left Ireland and went to India, and went to the Caribbean and started schools. So, they came to Trinidad and Tobago, and they started a college called Presentation College, which was really a high school. Speaker 1: Right. In the Caribbean, yeah, college means high school? Speaker 2: That's correct. Speaker 1: What--do you know the story? You may not know this. But is there a story behind the name Presentation Brothers? Why were they focused on--? Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah, there's a big story behind the name Presentation College, and the person who started that Order. I would have to-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --give you a little more detail. Speaker 1: I was just wondering. Speaker 2: But I can actually give you a book. And I don't have it here, but I can mail you a book called 'His Noble Apostolic Work,' which was actually written by my father about the Presentation College Brothers. And it articulates the entire history as to what the Order was about, what they were doing, and why they moved from Ireland to places around the world to start these schools. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And as a sidebar, that's how that book ended up--so, it really ended up in Ireland because he was flown down twice to launch this book in Ireland amongst great fanfare. And so, his name started bubbling up in Ireland, and so somehow somebody got their hands on the book, and then the book ends up going to a bookstore. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. So, his experiences with the Presentation Brothers were largely positive then? Speaker 2: I mean, that's putting it mildly. My father, who is a Garveyite and an Afrocentric focused person, swore by what the Presentation College Brothers did for him. So much so, that when he finished school he actually taught there for a year. He was very young. He finished high school at fifteen. So, he taught there for a year. And then he came to McGill University [Montreal, Quebec, Canada]. And so, my point is to your question. He was very much devoted to them. They--he said what they taught himself and all the other kids in the school--he just felt was the most remarkable thing ever. And it's important to mention when they left Ireland to start new schools, it wasn't like the conventional, you know, it wasn't the conventional concept of starting private schools to make money. I mean, they, you know, live essentially--they take a vow of poverty. And they, you know, it's about really trying to mold boys and girls wherever these Brothers are starting schools. And so, my father was absolutely grateful to them. Story_ID: 26895 Speaker 1: Your father [Leo Withnol Bertley] being born in 1934--was he raised in the UNIA [Universal Negro Improvement Association], by a UNIA family, or did he-- Speaker 2: Yeah. No--I mean that--the UNIA presence in my father and mother's [June Alleyne Miller] life came as adults. I mean they--I mean, let's be clear--very proud parents. So, they grew up with very proud parents who were strong and supportive and had confidence of self. But getting into the UNIA movement happened, you know, after he left Trinidad. I actually don't know his first experience. But I know his first suite of experiences. In Montreal [Quebec, Canada], there was a gentleman by the name of Ellery Tucker, who worked directly with James [Stewart]. He was the president of UNIA at one point. And Tucker was the secretary for James, and really ran the Montreal Chapter of the United Negro Improvement Association. And he just befriended my father. My father was a bright scholar, passionate about Afrocentricity, and Pan Africanism. And so, he met this person--and you've got to remember, in the context of Montreal you don't have a lot of persons of color, in general. You don't have a lot of black Canadians. And you definitely don't have a lot of black Canadians who resonate with someone like you and I. So, when Mr. Tucker met my father, he was a serious mentor to my father. And that was kind of the beginning of him getting into the UNIA, and he never turned back. Speaker 1: Okay. So this would have in the fifties, then? Speaker 2: That's correct. Fifties, and even--well, no, he studied at McGill [University, Montreal, Canada] in the fifties. They got married, I think in '57 [1957]. So, it could have been, even have been into the sixties. Because he did his--he ended up doing his Ph.D. in 1980, on the UNIA. So, he didn't do his Ph.D. kind of becoming an undergrad, and "Oh, I want to do a Ph.D." He actually went to-- Interesting story: So, he did his undergrad at McGill University, and played soccer for them as a letterman, graduated at the top of his class. Went--entered medical school at McGill University, to go into medicine. Hated it, quit, moved back to Trinidad. So, my eldest sister and brother--and I guess I'll get to them later. But my eldest sister and brother who were born in Canada, went back to Trinidad and lived in Trinidad for awhile. My father was working for Shell Oil. And then some incidents happened in Trinidad, which he just really didn't, couldn't resonate with who he was, with his philosophical approach to being a Garveyite, to being a Pan-Africanist. There was a lot of racism in Trinidad. And he just said, I can't live here, and moved back to Canada. And so, then my other brother and myself were born. And they stayed in Canada ever since. So, his development with this person, Ellery Tucker--I don't know when they first met. But they really got involved in stuff in the, I guess the late sixties, seventies. And then he started working on his thesis. But I mean, all through the Civil Rights Movement, my father was very active in those. Speaker 1: Okay. It's interesting to note that the UNIA was founded in 1914, I believe. Speaker 2: That's correct, 1914. Speaker 1: And then Marcus Garvey reaching his height in the mid-20s [1920's]. Speaker 2: That's correct. Speaker 1: And then government, the U.S. government prosecutes Garvey in 1927. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: He's deported, I think by 1928, '29 [1929]. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: Died in jail. Speaker 1: Yeah, dies--actually lives in Britain. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Dies, dies in 1940. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So, that kind of puts some perspective on it. So--and the organization continued, but not at the level of six million members or, you know-- Speaker 2: You know, its list had been on a steady decline from the death of Marcus Mosiah Garvey. Story_ID: 26896 Speaker 1: Did your father [Leo Withnol Bertley]--now, being an educated man from Trinidad, was he keenly aware of the role of the Trinidadians and Pan-Africanism worldwide--all the different-- Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely, from Chancey D. Williams to Eric Williams to--you name it. My dad-- Speaker 1: C.R. James? Speaker 2: C.R. James, absolutely--George Patmore--absolutely. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: So, it has some trouble making tradition like none other-- Speaker 2: Which is interesting-- For the size of the Caribbean, the number of prolific persons and outstanding scholars is just exceptional. I mean, you know, Barbados, Trinidad, Haiti. I mean, you know, just unbelievable names are coming out of that place. Speaker 1: I know he was a friend and confidante of Tony Martin, too, Dr. Tony Martin. Speaker 2: Absolutely, they were very, very close. Tony Martin, I mean, he came--you know, I grew up with Tony Martin in my house every second year. They were very, very close, of course, both Trinidadians. Tony, you know, had his career at Wellesley [College, Wellesley, Massachusetts], and my father stayed in Canada at Vanier College [Montreal, Quebec, Canada]. But yeah, they were very, very close friends. Speaker 1: Dr. Martin being the author of 'Race First.' Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: About twelve books about Marcus Garvey. Speaker 2: That's right. And 'Race First' is the definitive text on Marcus Garvey-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --as you know. But I just wanted to share that. Speaker 1: Alright. So, now is there a story about how your parents met? Speaker 2: Yeah. (laughter). If you knew my family, it would make perfect sense, the story I'm about to tell you. So, my father, who was significantly younger than my mother--as I mentioned, she was born in '29 [1929], he was born in '34 [1934]. They were in the province of Quebec and the City of Montreal sharing the Quiet Revolution [1960s period of intense change in Quebec, Canada], you know. So, this is the province of Quebec, wanting to secede from Canada. Now, imagine Texas or New York, or Illinois decides they no longer want to be part of the United States. This is something that most Americans can't just, can't wrap their head around. This was happening in Canada. It was happening in the sixties. It was called the Quiet Revolution. And there were things that were vicious. Talking about terrorism, these people were putting bombs in mailboxes, blowing up people. I mean, it was, you know, it was really a tense time. And so with that, and the sixties in general, you know, when you think of the conscious of the United States and the Civil Rights Movement, I mean it was a very wonderfully creative and empowering, but also very tough and dangerous time. And in the province of Quebec, you had a suite of intellectual meetings and conferences, and this and that. So, there was one political event where they had some--I don't know if it was ministers of the province of Quebec or who. But they had high-ranking officials who were giving talks. And so, my mother and father went. I believe it was at McGill University [Montreal, Quebec, Canada]. They went to this talk. And, you know, the talk went on, and they were asking questions. And then they end up asking questions and chatting with each other, and getting into a heated debate as to the Franco-Anglo political landscape of the time. And they're arguing and arguing and arguing. And before you knew it, the hall was completely abandoned. Everyone had gone, and it was just them arguing with each other. So my father, being the classy man that he was, said, "Hey, do you want to go out on a date and continue this discussion?" (laughter). And that's how they met. They met arguing at a political rally/event, and never looked back. You know, happily married until my father passed. Story_ID: 26897 Speaker 1: Now, when you think about your parents' personalities, their disposition, their sense of humor, how they walk, how they talk, what they look like--who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: Interesting. I'll give you my personal opinion, and then I'll give you the opinion of people who know me. My personal opinion is I'm actually a nice blend, a hybrid of my mother and father. My mother and father are completely different people. They're both intellectuals, they're both very much interested in their family and children, and things like Pan-Africanism and Nationalism and Garveyism. So, philosophically, they align really well across a suite of things. But personalities, they are completely different. My mother is quiet, reserved, very few friends, very private. My father is a bundle of energy--gregarious, but not in arrogant, tough way. Gregarious in a very happy, loving way. He will walk into the room, and it's just the electricity in the room. Has more friends than, than, you know, than anybody. And just, you know, extroverted compared to my introverted mother. So, the personality--night and day. I say I'm a hybrid because I wax and wane through that. There are times when I'm in the mood, I'm very social, I want to be engaged, I want to have people around. There's other times when I really appreciate quiet and peace. And then as I got older, growing up I realized that oh, I'm actually more--even though I still think I'm a blend--my father had some of that, but I didn't know it. Because when I grew up as a kid, I'd only see him in wake hours and stuff. But as I got older, I realized that he would spend a lot of down time reading and studying, and being quiet by himself. And so, I'm definitely mixed with both. But you know, I tend to take after my father. And then when you talk about physical mannerisms, as I get older I look more like my father. When I speak, I sound more like my father. The way my body language is, is like my father's. So, it's very interesting. Story_ID: 26898 Speaker 1: Tell us about your siblings. Speaker 2: So, I have three siblings. I'm the baby of four. My sister was the eldest. And I say was, because she passed away in 1989 from breast cancer at the age of thirty. Speaker 1: What was her name? Speaker 2: Deborah. Speaker 1: Now, what did she do for a living? Speaker 2: So, she went to McGill University [Montreal, Quebec, Canada]. And I should step back and say just flat out, all of us went to McGill University--my mother, my father, my sister Deborah, my brother John, my other brother Albert, and myself. She went to McGill University and studied education, and became an educator, which was, you know, in my family you either became a physician, you know--you either went to med [medical] school, you know--you became a physician or an engineer or lawyer or a teacher. I mean, it was a classic West Indian family, scholarship all around. You don't fuss around with doing this esoteric stuff like studying physics or, you know, you don't necessarily follow your dream. You do something that's going to lead to a stable career as a person of color. Which meant that if you got into medical school, you did that. If you got into law school, you did that. If you've gone to engineering--and then you can become a teacher. And so as I got older--and we talk about STEM--science technology and math and the whole ScienceMakers programs--it's interesting how that much wider spectrum of careers in science, you know, wasn't an option for most persons of color. Not because of affluency or accessibility to college, but because if you did have a chance to get to college, you were studying those big, you know, standard three or four professions that would lead to stability for you and your family. So, my sister did education. She was not interested in medicine or science. She did education, and she did well until she got sick. She got diagnosed with breast cancer at twenty-six, she passed away at thirty. So-- Speaker 1: And you have two brothers. Speaker 2: I have two brothers. So, then I have my oldest brother John Bertley. He went to McGill as well. He did his undergraduate there and then did his medical degree there. And he is a doctor working in Saint Catherine, Ontario which is about forty-five minutes from Toronto [Ontario, Toronto] and about fifteen, twenty minutes from Buffalo [New York] in the United States of America. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: It's in the Niagara region. Speaker 1: Yeah, Saint Catherine's is the terminus of the Underground Railroad. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Harriet Tubman-- Speaker 2: That's right, absolutely. And they were right there in Canada--right in Saint Catherine, that's right. Speaker 1: So they were leaving right from the Baltimore--I mean the eastern shore of Maryland, all the way up to-- Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right. Speaker 1: --Saint Catherine. Speaker 2: You're absolutely right. And then there were satellites that shot out to Nova Scotia. But in terms of officially the end of the-- Saint Catherine's. Then Marco--yeah. Speaker 1: It's a historic place. So your brother's there, John, that's the eldest brother. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: And your other brother? Speaker 2: My other brother also went to McGill. He studied physiology, and he now lives in Montreal [Quebec, Canada]. And he studied physiology with the initial thoughts of going into medicine, but he really became--he's a kind of computer scientist by DNA. And so, he works in the computer science industry in Montreal. Speaker 1: What's his name, I'm sorry? Speaker 2: Albert, I'm sorry, Albert. Speaker 1: So it's Albert, okay. And he works in Montreal? Speaker 2: He works in Montreal, yes. Speaker 1: He's more of a computer scientist? Speaker 2: Yeah. So, he's kind of a freelance consultant, just working in computer science. Story_ID: 26899 Speaker 1: Back to the debate during the Quiet Revolution [1960s period of intense change in Quebec, Canada] days. What side was your mother [June Alleyne Miller] on, and what side was your father [Leo Withnol Bertley]? (laughter). Speaker 2: That's a great question. You know, I'm going to call her after this meeting and find out, "So, whose side did you actually pick"? Again, philosophically, they were very well aligned. So, they were probably both on the same side, in terms of what's right versus wrong. But the bigger point about it is--that's why I said if you knew my family--is we grew up debating. Not out of anger, not because I have to be right or you're wrong, but actually the art of debate just became an amazing thing in our household. And it stems from, of course, the oral tradition. But that phrase that I said was my fav-- one of my most favorite quotes, "Think, it's not illegal yet," is actually a phrase that my father gave me. And my father and mother taught all of us all the time, to always think and reflect on things. And if you're always thinking and reflecting on things, and you combine that with the oral tradition in the house of scholars where your parents have collectively have eleven university degrees--"Pass me the butter" becomes "Well, do you mean this butter, or are you referring to this--?" (laughter). Everything becomes, you know, analyzed and, and debated. And there's definitely some one upmanship, and then you want to harness your debating skills and your reasoning skills. And it is fun and enjoyable. I mean, but if you're not from our family, you think we're arguing all the time. And you're like, "Wow, how do you guys deal with this?" But we love it, you know. And it's, you know, it's--as you get older--and now I'm an adult of course, I reflect on how I want to debate. I mean, you don't argue with everything. So, professionally, there's a time for us to do it. And even personally, now, there's a time for us to do it. But growing up in that household just really allowed us to think creatively, analytically, about everything. Speaker 1: This is, what you're saying is something a little different from what a lot of people consider an argument, you know. I mean, so, being the loudest wouldn't win in your family. Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely. As a matter of fact, we had a joke, you know. The sooner you get--I mean it was that line where whoever threw the first punch, admits defeat. So, that line was out there. We had a line that, you know, whoever started yelling and screaming, you know, threw in the white flag. So, absolutely. Speaker 1: So, these are sessions where you have to really think about what you're talking about. Speaker 2: Sure, sure. Speaker 1: And the other person who you're contending with, really has to think about what you're saying. Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly, exactly. Speaker 1: So, it's not just a show of vocal chord strength. Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly, exactly. It's not about yelling and who can yell the loudest. Speaker 1: Who's the biggest and all that stuff. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. This is something-- Speaker 2: Not to say we didn't get loud. (laughter). I mean, you know, a combination of all those bits of DNA coursing through our veins--you know, we're a colorful people. So we're colorful, but it's not an attacking, as such. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 26900 Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: So, that's an interesting question. I studied a little bit of psychology. And you talk about how, you know, you imagine something long enough, you start to remember it, and then it starts to becomes your actual past and identity. So, I definitely know of things when I was really young. But I can't place my exact age. So, the age--the first thing I'm positive of is at the age of three, where I got my skull cut open at the swing of a machete. And it sounds like a horrific story, and it is. But it grew out of an accident. I loved my father. My father was my hero. He was an Adonis figure. He was physically strong, he was mentally able. I just wanted to be like my father, and I followed him everywhere, everywhere, everywhere. And in the house we grew up in, in Montreal, Canada, we had these maple trees--seventeen in fact, that surrounded the entire lot. And you know, they're big maple trees. And so, every now and then you have to prune them. So, you prune them down, and then you get the big branches that fall to the ground, and then you have to chop them up. And so, you know, my father would use what they would call in the Caribbean a cutlass. But basically, it's a machete, and you chop off the branches. And I was always around my father. And one time he didn't notice that I was around him, and I was right behind him. And when he swung back the machete, it planted right in my head. And so, I have a scar on the back of my head, which was there from three years old. And I remember it well, you know. Boom, threw me in the car, drove me at a million miles an hour to the hospital. And I had seventy stitches put on my head. And it's a wonder--maybe this is why I'm creatively different, I don't know. (laughter). But I think I'm relatively okay. But yeah, that's--so that memory, of course, is hardwired literally in my brain. But overall, I mean I have--and we'll get into this. But my childhood was the greatest childhood. I mean-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I will place my childhood against anybody's, in terms of best parents--just giving you enough rope to explore without getting yourself in trouble. Story_ID: 26901 Speaker 1: Now, what town did you grow up in? Speaker 2: The town is called Pierrefonds. Speaker 1: Pierre-- Speaker 2: P-I-E-R-R-E-F-O-N-D-S. Speaker 1: Pierrefonds. Speaker 2: And that's in the province of Quebec [Canada]. It's a suburb of Montreal. Speaker 1: Okay. So, did you grow up speaking French? Speaker 2: In fact, while my parents were English [speaking], they stuck me and my brother next to me into French school. French private school was my first set of schooling. So, I could not read and write in English. So, my kindergarten was in French. And first grade through fourth grade, I was in this French private school. So, I knew to read and write French. And of course I spoke English, but I couldn't read or write in English. So, after the fourth grade of what was an outstanding education, my parents removed me, taught me to read and write English over the summer, and then put me in English public school from grade five through six. And then in Montreal, high school starts in seventh. And so, I went to public high school from grade seven through eleven. And again, in Montreal, high school ends at grade eleven. So, I grew up speaking English. All my friends were English. But the first language I learned to read and write in, and count, was French. And the counting is interesting. So, even now as a grown person--because I formally learned how to count in French and do my first set of math in French, a lot of times when I'm doing math in my head, I'm counting in French. I'm thinking--so, if I buy something and I'm calculating the change, I do it in French, which is really amazing. And I haven't, I've not gone into French school after grade four. I don't have any French friends, or enough French friends, so I'm almost never speaking French. Of course, I moved to the United States of America, so I'm even less likely to speak French. Yet, I still count and do some of my math in French. Story_ID: 26902 Speaker 1: Now, in Pierrefonds in Quebec [Canada]--was there, did you have many African American neighbors or friends? Speaker 2: So, it's interesting. So, I said my childhood was the best. And my childhood was the best, because my parents were the best. With that said, the suburb we lived in, we were essentially the only black family around. So I played hockey, soccer, basketball, baseball, skied, and I swam. And I don't even want to get to how the heck my parents did all of that for myself and my three other siblings, because I can't figure that out. But I did all the sports, and I was always the only black kid on the team. I was always the only black kid in my class for the first four years. And then in the fifth and sixth year, there was one other black kid. In high school, there were two or three black kids. So I was--you know, Pierrefonds was a non-integrated, not very much integrated, back then in the seventies and eighties. Today it is. There are a lot more folks of color. But it was not there when I was there. So, even though I said my childhood was the best, my childhood was the best because my parents were incredible and provided unbelievable opportunities. We never needed or wanted anything. So, that's very important, very important. They did not spoil us. We had a healthy respect of responsibility and money. And we had our own paper routes, and we would generate our allowances out of our paper route. So, yeah, so we weren't spoiled, but we just never wanted for anything. And yet, despite that--well, because of that, I was very secure in who I was. But I was raised in a very, very--for lack of a better word, you know, a racist microenvironment. And when people think of Canada, they always say, "Oh, Canada, it's not racist." And that's a bunch of bullshit, pardon the expression. Canada is very racist. The difference is we don't have a government and a structure that really takes on these tough questions of racism. So, you won't have census where you identify yourself as Afro Canadian, whereas in the United States you identify yourself as African American or Afro American, or Latino, or Latino Hispanic. They don't have any of that in Canada. So, it's just, you know, to the average Caucasian person, "No, there's no racism in Canada", because no one's talking about it. But if you grew up black in Canada in the suburbs, you knew what it was. So, you know, I can't tell you how many times I heard the 'N' word playing hockey, playing soccer, skiing. And skiing was really interesting, and we'll talk about that. But to put it in perspective, my neighbors, who were my best friends--a Portuguese family, eight kids--just, you know, we grew up, they were our neighbors. They were really nice. Now, my parents are academics and intellectuals and successful and accomplished. Again, eleven degrees between the two. My Portuguese best friends growing up--again, so, from kids, you know, we were great friends. Both parents uneducated. The father worked for CN Railroad, which is the Canadian National Railroad, which is the equivalent of Amtrak or one of these American train companies. And the mother, who was also uneducated, worked at a, at a convent. So, despite the huge gulf in intellectual aspirations, capacity, education--they considered themselves completely on the same playing field as my parents, which was unbelievable. And so did their kids. Despite the fact that their children had no bicycles, had no skateboards, didn't have the toys, didn't have the hockey nets, the hockey sticks, all the stuff that we had growing up. And so, we were very generous. So we would always, you know, our toys were their toys. So, they could ride our bikes and this and that. So despite that, they grew up still thinking not that just their parents were equal, but that in general, we were a bunch of N-i-g-g-e-r-s, and they were the accomplished folks. And so, only because of the fact that my parents were Garveyites--had a strong self-identity and sense of self, were nationalistic and strong, did they instill a very consoling strength in all of us, where we were proud to be black. And while you never want to be called N-i-g-g-e-r, and it is hurtful. And anyone who says it's not hurtful growing up, is lying through their teeth. Because if you're a kid and someone who doesn't look like you calls you that, it hurts. We still have the strength to be able to deal with it. Story_ID: 26903 Speaker 1: And I'll give you a story. So, I'm now about-- I'll give you two stories. The first one is--so I loved hockey. I thought I was going to be the next Wayne Gretzky, or Grant Fuhr. I mean, I loved hockey. I loved all sports, frankly. Which is funny, because I wasn't thrilled about studying, even though school came easy. (laughter). So, I end up becoming pretty good at hockey. So, if you got pretty good at hockey, the place to go to was this camp called Cooper's Sport Camp. Cooper's used to make, you know, a ton of hockey gear. And this camp was in Toronto [Ontario, Canada]. And again, I lived in Montreal. Montreal is five hours from Toronto. And so, you know, my parents are like "Well, the kids are just, you know, skating rings around all these kids here. Let's get them in the best hockey camp", and whatever. And so, it was the first time I traveled alone. Actually, I think I was eleven, eleven or twelve. And they put me on the bus. They coordinated with the people in the camp to pick me up at the bus station. So, they put me on the bus. Long story short, I get to this camp. It's a sleepover camp for one week. I get there and all these kids are calling me nigger, nigger, nigger. And I am away from my parents, I'm a little boy. I'm just mortified. And we got there in the evening. I had to sleep. Woke up the next morning--and the first thing they did--they had what was called the free skate session, where they randomly put you on teams. And it was just skate, play these games, show your skills. I skated harder than I ever skated. I stick handled better than I ever stick handled. And I end up just skating rings around them. So much so, that at the end of the first day all those kids that were calling me those nasty offensive things, wanted to be my roommate, my bunkmate, and want to be my best pals for the week. And I got to tell you. One of the highlights of my life--of my life--was at that age winning the Most Valuable Player at that camp. And what they give you is a jersey that's an orange--a bright orange hockey jersey, and it says "Cooper's Sports Camp" on it. And that was a coveted thing to get if you were a Canadian hockey player, was to get to go to that camp, first of all. And then get picked to win that jersey. And that's one story that just really, really embedded this whole racial differential, and how you got to work twice as hard, three times as hard. And you know the whole story. This is The HistoryMakers, the ScienceMakers. So, that's been said 9 million times. Story_ID: 26904 Speaker 1: So, the second story which probably hasn't been said as many times: Back to my Portuguese neighbors. Again, I loved--they were my best friends. I'm not going to pretend. I, you know, to this day, we know them really well. But they, you know, we'd go to their house, they'd go to our house. So, one day we were having a discussion. And this time, I'm like fourteen. And the neighbor Miguel, who was about sixteen, said, you know, "Your parents are racist. You guys are racist." I was horrified. I said, "What? What do you mean, we're racists?" "Well, you know, they're, they're into all this black stuff." I said, "Well, what do you mean?" And he said, "Well, look at all the pictures on the wall." So, my parents, if you grew up, if you--as a matter of fact, today if you go back to the house that we still have in Canada, and you walk through the basement, there's not a square inch of the wall that doesn't have a framed picture of a person of African descent. I mean, from political figures to sport figures, to entertainment figures to scholars, you know, it's just really-- You walk down--we've got a beautiful library downstairs in the basement, my father's library, and all of these wonderful pictures of people that look like you. So, they're like, you know, "You got all these--" And there are-- [President] John F. Kennedy would be there, you know. There are some non-black people as well. But eighty-five percent of the framed pictures, big and small, are of persons of color, right. So, they said to me, Miguel said to me, "You guys are racist." And his theory was we're racist because a: we believe in identifying with things that are of African descent. And his definitive proof was look on your wall, you've got pictures of black people. So, at fourteen, I said, "Well, Miguel, who is on your wall in your house?" He said, "What do you mean?" I said, "Let's go." I walked him over--we were next door neighbors. I just walked him over, it was thirty seconds to get there. I go in his house. I said, "Let's go look at all your pictures." And we went to all of his pictures. Every one of them was of a white person, a European person--some of them Portuguese because that's where they're from. Others were non-Portuguese, but just white people, white women and white men. And I said, "It's funny how it never occurred to you that you're racist, because you have no black people on your wall. Yet you're calling me and my family racist because we have--and we do have some white people on the wall, but we have mostly people that look like we do." And it never occurred to him. He had nothing to say. He understood what I was saying. But it never occurred to him that, "Wait a minute. That's absolutely right. What the hell am I thinking?" And so, it's just amazing. So, all this about where did I grow up? I grew up in an environment where the assumption was everything was white. And you should just be white. Your pictures should be white, your role models should be white. And so, here comes one of my good friends, who starts thinking about stuff. He's sixteen now, and he's looking at different things--politics--and he decided to think that we're racist because we have people that look like us on our walls. So, it's just--so, that's the kind of climate I grew up in. Now, for the few other persons of color that lived in this area, a lot of them struggled. A lot of them had lots of problems and insecurity, and this and that, because they didn't have that strength put in them that my parents, you know, properly-- I want to be clear on this. You know, you can beat it into somebody, or you can be logical and supportive and thoughtful about how you get people to appreciate where you came from and what you're about. And that's how my parents did it. So, I had a very comfortable sense of being black. But that's the culture and climate I grew up in. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And you know, it's much better today, but it, you know, still has a long way to go. Story_ID: 26905 Speaker 1: We always ask this question. What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Huh, easy--bake. My mother's from the Caribbean, so every Saturday morning she would make bakes. And the same Portuguese neighbors that I talked about, would run over every Saturday morning, because they were the most delicious things, it's just--it's called bake. You--some dough--I still don't know how my mother does it. You put it in the oven, you bake it, then it comes out beautifully. You spread butter on it. And that with hot cocoa is the greatest thing on the planet. So, the smell of fresh bake--bake bake, because that's what it was called-- Speaker 1: Bake bake--and is it more like a biscuit? Speaker 2: No, no, no. So, they have, they have biscuits-- So, Jamaicans will have what you call fried dumplings, which are more like biscuits. But this was--I mean she'd make a tray of it, which would be, you know, about a foot by half a foot. And then she'd make smaller, like pie size bakes. And those were actually--she would make them for me, because I was the little one. So, she'd always make a size small, pie-sized one for me. And they were, they were just delicious. And that-- Speaker 1: Did they have filling inside of them? Speaker 2: No, it's just bread. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Oh, if that's what you mean--yes, sort of tea biscuits, in that sense. It was just dough. And you'd form them and you'd spread butter on it. So, it's no filling, it's no, it's not candied in any way. But it's just delicious. And that was the hallmark of every Saturday morning. The boys next door would come over to get some of my mom's bake. So, that was one scent. And with that went the cocoa. We'd always have, you know, cocoa and bake every morning. The other interesting scent is maple syrup. We had all these maple trees. And so, even though we never managed to make great Canadian maple syrup, year in and year out, my father would try to tap the trees and try to get the syrup from it and boil it. So, but if you've experienced that, it's a very specific distinct smell that sapping maple trees have. And so, you know, really in the winter, that's a smell that resonates with me to this day. And then the third smell I want to talk about is books. I mean, we grew up around books, which is interesting, because I--as I mentioned to you earlier, I loved sports. And all I did was play, play, play. I was always playing and running around, riding, skateboarding, jumping, you name it. And I was not much of a reader. I know part of this was because I learned to read and write in French first. And so, by the time I learned to read and write in English, I wasn't a strong reader. But while I never read much growing up in my very early years, I used to thumb through pictorial books. Just the smell of books was a huge thing in my life, because we had a lot of books in our library. So, those three things would be probably the most distinctive. Speaker 1: Okay, sights and sounds? Speaker 2: Sounds, oh man--music. Our house always had music, from, you know, Calypso--I mean to this day I can sing Calypsos from heart. From Sparrow, the Mighty Sparrow, David Rudder--I mean just unbelievable relationship with music. So, there was the Caribbean music. Then later there was the suite of Bob Marley albums that my dad collected. There was a bunch of jazz. I mean, Oscar Peterson was from Montreal [Quebec, Canada], so we grew up with Oscar Peterson playing 'Pennies from Heaven' and every other wonderful piece on the keyboard. So, then you fell into jazz. My dad had records for days. He had 78s, he had 45s, and then of course 33 and 1/3 records. And we would just have music-- Speaker 1: That's true. The great Oscar Peterson, piano player, was from Montreal. Did you ever have a chance to meet him, or your parents? Speaker 2: Yeah, I didn't meet him. He was--I can't--I did say he was from Montreal. We have to check that, because he may have been from Toronto. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But he spent a lot of time in Montreal. So, he may have been--he spent a lot of time in both cities. And there was this jazz club called Bittles. And so, by the time I became an adult and was going there, Oscar Peterson wasn't doing much there. But I've never met him. My father has met him. But just--we played his music all the time. I mean, he knew my father well, because my father was prominent in the black community in Canada. But, so, yeah--so, always music. And then, and then later on--again, I'm the baby of four kids. And so, you know, my sister got into all the disco and funk movements, so then I grew up with Chic and Ohio Players and Earth, Wind and Fire. And I mean, you know--so all the soul. And Aretha Franklin, you know, Nina Washington--I mean just--Dinah Washington, sorry--and Nina Simone. I mean, I just grew up in all of that. And then after that, my other brother got into like the Beatles and the Rolling Stones. So, there was this evolution of Caribbean music, you know, and Negro spirituals. And Mahalia Jackson just--we have every record she ever made. Blues and jazz, and then funk with Parliament and George Clinton, and then, you know, the discos, like straight disco. And then into the rock, you know, which was neat. And we did have some Chubby Checker stuff in there, but we had, you know, the Rolling Stones. We had, you know, the Beatles. And then after that, I started to kind of identifying with my own music--which then started me into hip hop--and then evolved backwards to all those music examples, which was really neat. So, I came this way from all those that I mentioned. And then I start off, you know, in the early eighties getting into rap music. And you got to remember, I grew up in Canada. So, we didn't have much rap music. So, I would wait to go down to visit my aunt in New York City [New York] to tape on the recorder--WBLS, or KISS-FM or W--you know, these stations that would play rap, and then bring it back to Montreal. And I was a rap man in Montreal. But anyway, but then when you start rapping you go backwards, and you go back to blues and jazz and, you know. So, it's a very interesting thing. But yeah, the sound was music all day. There was always music. And it was like Dad--you know, he even would blast Kenny Rogers. I mean, you know, the 'Gambler', "Know when to hold them, know when to fold them. Know when to walk away, know when to run." I mean, you hear all these words. He'd play these albums over and over. So, yeah. And to this day, music is a part of my soul, without question. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I owe that that exclusively to my father, because my mother does not play much music. Story_ID: 26906 Speaker 1: So, you were born in 1970. Speaker 2: That's correct. Speaker 1: So, you start school in '75 [1975]? Or did you start earlier? Speaker 2: You know, I can't--I mean I can reverse engineer it and go back. I graduated, I graduated from high school in 1987. And so, I was seventeen years old. But what happened is, I, my birthday is in November. And so, what that meant is I would have been kind of held back. And so, after that--when I was in grade one at that French private school, my parents sent me to Toronto [Ontario, Canada] to live with my uncle, my mother's brother, who eventually moved to Montreal [Quebec, Canada]. And I stayed there for four weeks, went to school--enrolled in a school in Toronto for four weeks. And when I came back, because I was coming from a different province, they were allowed to test me. So they tested me, and I scored high on the test. And so, they allowed me to skip the rest of grade one, and they put me in grade two. So, I effectively skipped the first grade. And so then I was in grade two and-- Speaker 1: This is in '76 [1976] then, right? Speaker 2: That's correct. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Correct. Speaker 1: What was the name of your first school, the French school? Speaker 2: So, the French school is called the College--as in 'College', Sainte, S-T-E, [abbreviated], Marceline, M-A-R-C-E-L-I-N-E. And I have to tell you, these were nuns and it's interesting-- so, even though it's a French school, the Marceline Sisters are supposedly an Italian Order of nuns. And I guess, just like the Presentation Brothers, they went around building these schools. And without question, the most rigorous academic environment I--I mean, after that, as I told you, I went to public school for grade five and grade six, and a public high school. It was only by the time I got to college, where I started doing some of the stuff that I learned in kindergarten through grade four. I mean, I would--not that it's the right thing, but I was reading 'Les Miserables,' Victor Hugo's thick tome in grade two. You know, and I was doing algebra in grade four. I mean, it was ridiculous--trigonometry, geometry. I saw my grade three geometry book, and I have to tell you it's a freshman level geometry course, about basic proofs. And so, I'm not saying it's right or wrong to do this, I'm just saying I was so rigorously academically prepared when I left that school, that I coasted through everything else. But while they were nuns--and I loved some of them, some of them needed a clinic in what it means to be a Christian, because they would treat some kids really awfully. They wouldn't do that to me, because my parents were very much in the education of us. And so, they were always in the schools and making sure the teachers weren't messing around. But some of these kids had a tough time with these people who supposedly dedicated their lives to Christian values. Speaker 1: Yeah, I heard like nuns can be tough. But they were tougher than most nuns? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Story_ID: 26907 Speaker 1: Now, was church, were your parents [June Alleyne Miller and Leo Withnol Bertley], parents in the Catholic church? Speaker 2: Yes. So, that, I mean that's a big question. So my parents are Catholic, are Catholic. My father grew up being more Catholic than the Pope. I mean, he, my father is this person--anything he gets into, he does 110 percent. And so, he just immersed himself in religion. And again, remember the Presentation Brothers, that's why they meant so much to him. And so, he was really Catholic. And then, you know, he came to Canada for school. And he would--and this is a true story. As an undergraduate at McGill University [Montreal, Quebec, Canada], he didn't go to church every Sunday, he went to Mass every day. Now, remember, he was very young. He's seventeen years old from Trinidad, the south of Trinidad, which is like the bush, like really behind God's back. He flies from there to Canada to go to McGill. Cold, white, both in the snow and the population (laughter), and just different from everything. But he went to church every single day to go to Mass. That's how devoted he was to being a Catholic. And then, you know, after a period of time he realized that this is a lot of nonsense. I'm going to church day in and day out, and all these other people--they're only going on Sundays. And on Sundays, they're saying this and saying that--praise the Lord, this and that. But the rest of the week, they're just not behaving in the true tense of being a Christian. So, he said, you know, it's not about church, it's about my relationship with God. And so, that's--and that coincided with the black identity piece. And so, we found a church called Union United Church, which is still there in Montreal. And it's essentially a, you know, the equivalent here in the U.S. would be a black Baptist church. So, it had that kind of effect, you know--great Gospel choir, you know, very boisterous sermon, exciting, dynamic, which is completely different from Catholic Mass. Speaker 1: Okay. So, this church is not necessarily Baptist, but it's a black church. Speaker 2: Yes, Union, it's a United church. So, it's Union United Church. So, it's-- Speaker 1: Okay. United Church of Christ? Speaker 2: No, no, it's interesting. So, not the United Church of Christ, but it's Union United Church. It is, I think, an Anglican church. But it wasn't--it's funny. We don't have--I can't say, I've been gone too long. But we don't have the Baptist--well, the black Baptist churches in Canada. We didn't have that as a tradition. So, you know, you could go to Seventh Day Adventist and get that kind of flavor. You could go to Union United Church and get that kind of flavor. But we didn't have Baptist churches, as such. Speaker 1: So, the United Church is kind of an Anglican church? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. But it's a black church? Speaker 2: In that it's congregation was black, and-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --then the minister was black. Speaker 1: Okay. So, they have like a, like relationships with Episcopal churches here-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: The black Episcopal churches? Speaker 2: Yes, yes, exactly. Speaker 1: Alright, alright, okay. So, that was a--so this would be a place where your parents and your family can meet other African Americans. I mean, Africans or Caribbean (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Yes, but it's interesting. I mean, as much as we went to that church every Sunday-- You know, there's a big difference between being black, as you know, and being interested in the Garvey movement. And so, yeah, we found people who shared fellowship. But you know, maybe ten percent of that crowd was interested in any talk about UNIA [United Negro Improvement Association]. I mean it's, you know--so pretty much everybody who was interested in the UNIA would go to that church, or those kinds of churches, the few that there were in Montreal. But everybody who went to those churches weren't necessarily on the Black Star Line [shipping line incorporated by Marcus Garvey] ship with you, as it were. Story_ID: 26908 Speaker 1: Was the UNIA [United Negro Improvement Association] like, I mean what sort of congregation did the UNIA have? Speaker 2: So, the UNIA had a beautiful building in Montreal [Quebec, Canada] called the UNIA Building in Little Burgundy, which is near where that church was, actually. In fact, the church I'm speaking about was about three or four blocks from the UNIA Building. But you know, the UNIA was about [Marcus] Garvey's movement--self empowerment, you know, self identity, you know, do for self type of, institution that provided the skill sets, training, etc. for that purpose. The church was--like most colored folks, they look for a church to, as you said, you know, have like-minded people and worship God in that sense. Speaker 1: So, this is an active UNIA, a very active UNIA-- Speaker 2: Montreal chapter, very active. Speaker 1: Okay. And the building, you said a nice building. Describe that for me. Speaker 2: It's a big stone building, built--it must have been built in the late 1800s, early 1900s, you know, like a massive building. And you know, housed all these programs--from summer camps to the actual United meetings, to, I mean, conferences, you name it. I mean that was, that was the place. I mean, you know, my father was able to write a Ph.D. thesis literally this thick [gestures with hand] on the UNIA Garvey Movement in Montreal. That's how real it was. Speaker 1: Yeah. So, that chapter of the UNIA remained strong, even after the demise of Garvey's-- Speaker 2: (simultaneous) it remained strong-- Speaker 1: (simultaneous) properties in the United States. Speaker 2: Yeah. It remained strong into the eighties, and then started to fizzle out, and then re-surfaced in the nineties. They have a new building that's, again, near that-- That building is no longer-- I don't know if it's standing. I have to go back and find out if it's standing. But they have a much smaller, more modern building, if you will. The UNIA Building in Montreal, I don't know the presence of what they're doing. I have to go back and actually see what activities they're doing. But certainly, through the sixties and seventies and eighties, they had a strong presence, absolutely. Speaker 1: It's interesting history. I know on one of the Caribbean islands--someone I interviewed--there was a bank that was run by the UNIA, still in operation. Speaker 2: You're kidding. Speaker 1: And yeah, on one of the islands, and-- Speaker 2: You're kidding. I did not know that, wow. Speaker 1: I think it was the island they had the volcano on, at the--what's the one? Speaker 2: You mean St. Lucia? Speaker 1: No. It starts with an 'M'. Speaker 2: Martinique [Lesser Antilles]? Speaker 1: No, no, no, no. Well anyway, maybe we should move on. But still--I'll think of it. But yeah, there was a UNIA bank on that island. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And there are other properties. So, I know that Canada was a place where Garvey himself could go after he was exiled from the U.S. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: The followers who were still in the U.S. would go across some kind of medium in Canada. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So, the properties in Canada--and he had more freedom there than he certainly had here or in Jamaica, because he was banned, basically, in Jamaica and-- Speaker 2: Yeah, that's the stuff that hurts your soul. I mean, the very country you're born and weaned in, cuts you off. Speaker 1: So, were you in any UNIA projects as a kid growing up? Speaker 2: Absolutely. So, every summer I would go to the UNIA camp, and go there as a camper. My sisters and brothers would have been counselors. And then when I got older, I became a counselor for these camps. Story_ID: 26909 Speaker 1: And it's in the UNIA [United Negro Improvement Association] Building, actually, where my parents [Leo Withnol Bertley and June Alleyne Miller] started the Garvey Institute [Montreal, Quebec, Canada]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Which was the first black or Afrocentric based private school in Canada. There's one in Toronto [Ontario, Canada] now, but this was the first, started in 1981. And the purpose of this school was to provide an educational environment based on Afri- African fundamentalism, i.e., the idea of create your own capacity, the [Marcus] Garvey mentality. And so, again, in Canada, you know, if you were a person of color, you had a tough time in the regular schools. The teachers couldn't identify with you. There was definite racism where, you know, they just viewed you a certain way. And so, you get tracked in that class, and all the typical things you hear about that, that are not ideal. So, the purpose here was to start an academic institution called the Garvey Institute that would provide a support system to train black and brown kids, and give them an opportunity to get a good education. Speaker 2: So, this is a full-time school? Speaker 1: It was a full-time school. It started off--in 1981 it didn't start off as a full-time school. It started off as a tutorial program. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So, it offered tutorial programs Wednesdays and on Saturdays. And it grew from that to larger tutorial programs, and then it grew from that to kind of more everyday afterschool programs. And then it grew from that to, hey, we have enough capacity here and enough interest to actually open the school. So, we opened a bona fide kindergarten through grade six, elementary school. Speaker 2: Okay, alright. So, now you didn't attend school there, right? Speaker 1: No, because I was--I was, by the time it was a full school was after I'd finished high school. Speaker 2: Yeah, you were eleven years old. Speaker 1: I was eleven when it started-- Speaker 2: Yeah, started. Speaker 1: --as a tutorial program. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And so, I used to be one of the tutors there, in fact. Not when I was eleven, but when I was like thirteen, I started tutoring some younger kids. So I, you know, I helped out with the institution and what not. Speaker 2: So, you and your brothers and sisters--I mean, and your sister taught--I mean, tutored? Speaker 1: Yeah. I mean, definitely myself and my closest brother. And then my eldest brother helped out in the summer camps and stuff. But by the time, you know, my sister had--my sister had been married and started her family, and you know, she would definitely help out as well. It was, you know, it was without question, a Bertley enterprise. My mother and father founded it. My mother was the executive director. And then the board of trustees were essentially the colleagues of my mother and father, who were the same people, by the way, who started that black newspaper called 'The Afro Can' which later became called 'The Afro Canadian.' And this was a wonderful little newspaper that my father was the editor and founder of. And they would just really write from the perspective of black folks in the Canadian context. Speaker 2: The 'Afro Can' was first, and then the 'Afro Canadian.' Speaker 1: Yeah, it's called the Afro Can. And I have to get to the, I have to get you the year as to when it changed the name. But then it changed the name to the Afro Canadian. Speaker 2: Okay. So, your parents started the paper? Your father started-- Speaker 1: Yeah. My father started the paper. My mother essentially started the school. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Both of them were obviously into both, the both of them. Story_ID: 26910 Speaker 1: Is the school [Garvey Institute, Montreal, Quebec, Canada] still going on, or-- Speaker 2: So, interesting. So the school--in 19--my father died in 2006. And in 2006, they actually wind down the school. And that's an instance that I don't particularly want to get into it on this oral history. But on the school, as a full time school, is no longer active. What is active, is they have still have programmatic elements, kind of like where they started. So, they have tutorial programs. They have professional development programs. They have scholarships that they award every year to the high achieving, or promising, young black high school and college students. So, they have programmatic elements, but they don't have- Speaker 1: These are- Speaker 2: Pardon? Speaker 1: These are run out of the UNIA? Speaker 2: No, oh, no, no, no, no, no, no, no. The Garvey Institute-- Speaker 1: Okay, alright. Speaker 2: --yeah. So, 1981 they started the Garvey Institute. And then the Garvey Institute ran all these programs. So, these were not run out of the UNIA. And-- Speaker 1: So, they weren't--so the Garvey Institute was in actually a separate location from the UNIA? Speaker 2: It started off as a programmatic thing called the Garvey Institute, but was at the UNIA Building. It made sense. I mean, that's what, you know... And so, but as it grew and changed, it end up having its own building, which they rented for the space for TFI. And then they, my mother, who's just the most excellent financial manager, managed to save enough money to then buy a building that became the Garvey Institute proper. And so, it wasn't birthed from my mother, but the geographic space, if you will, the location, was the UNIA Building. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. So, do they still have the building? And is it still going on? Speaker 2: So, the building they bought in 2006, they sold that. It end up being--it's interesting. It end up being a five building campus. It's huge. And they sold that off and then bought a smaller building to have this presence that I'm now talking about. So, once they decided they were going to no longer have the private school and day care, they didn't need that massive campus. And so, they sold that off, and then they bought a smaller building, which now houses the programs I mentioned--the scholarship program, the professional development, the tutorial program, etc. Speaker 1: This is interesting. And what would you consider to be the legacy of the Garvey Institute today? Speaker 2: Well, it's not over. So, the good part of that is-- Speaker 1: I know-- Speaker 2: Well, the legacy of the Garvey Institute is it's--I mean you got kids now who are in medical school and engineering school and lawyer--and law school--black kids who will tell you they owe it all to their primary school education at the Garvey Institute. I mean, it just created a sense of self and camaraderie and collaboration and reflection, in a very healthy positive way, that gave these black and brown kids, you know, that veneer that, hey, they can do anything they want. And so, the legacy--and I pause--because I said it's still active because the legacy, the true legacy, is yet to be elucidated. It will come more with time. And so, why do I say that? So, as I migrated in my career--and I'm extremely excited to be here at the Franklin Institute [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]--I love what I do. But with my mother being eighty-four now, my father passing, them birthing the Garvey Institute, and me not being able to continue this in Montreal--which is one of the things I have to make a decision, early on in my career. Do I want to go back to Montreal and continue this? Or, am I going to continue my career in the U.S.? If I continue my career in the U.S.--with a promise that I'm going to continue the Garvey Institute. And so this past year we--my wife and I, launched the Garvey Institute Philadelphia Chapter. So we're developing slowly, programmatic elements like tutorials, like scholarships, like professional development, for the Philadelphia area. And I'm slowly going to grow that over time. So, as I wane my career at TFI [The Franklin Institute], the Garvey Institute in the U.S. will be a, a--will be reminiscent of the strong days when we were more than just a set of programs. We're almost a, in fact, school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, the legacy is to--I'd like to say, to be determined. Story_ID: 26911 Speaker 1: Now, now after you went to the French private school, where did you go? Speaker 2: Yes. So, I went to Kirkland Public School. Speaker 1: Kirkland-- Speaker 2: K-I-R-K-L-A-N-D, Public School, and again, in the West Island [Montreal, Quebec, Canada]. Speaker 1: Now is this where you were skipped ahead? Speaker 2: No, I skipped, you know, in the first primary class, I skipped. I started in grade one, went to Toronto [Ontario, Canada] for a month, and came back and they bumped me to grade two. Speaker 1: Okay, so this is in Montreal? Speaker 2: This is all Montreal. Speaker 1: Okay. And now, were there, did you have any sense--now you would have been in the what, fourth grade, or-- Speaker 2: So, fifth grade was when I went to this primary school. Fifth and sixth grade, that's primary at that English school. Speaker 1: Okay. Did you have any sense that you wanted to be involved in science at this point? Speaker 2: I mean, I always thought I'd be a scientist or a doctor. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Or a medical doctor. I mean, I just, you know, I loved science. I was curious as heck. I loved the idea of medicine. And I mean, I can't remember a time where I didn't think I would be a scientist or a physician, except for the-- not so much as I thought it would happen, but except for the distant dream of being a professional athlete. And I loved sports. You know, I'm short. I wasn't the fastest, although I was pretty quick. You know, I was very good at every sport I did. I was captain of my, you know, soccer teams, hockey teams, you know, the basketball teams. And I did really well through high school. But, to be competitive in the American context of NCAA [National Collegiate Athletic Association] and then possibly have a career in any of those sports--yeah, I thought I was okay, but I didn't realistically think that I would have, you know, been that great. So, while that sports thing was a kind of fun dream, since I loved playing, I loved sports--and I can't stress that enough. I mean I loved--I mean you couldn't find me in the house. You couldn't find me reading a book. I was out playing something somehow. But school came easy to me, and I always knew I'd go to college. I mean, you know the last of four kids--everyone went to McGill [University, Montreal, Canada], your parents [June Alleyne Miller and Leo Withnol Bertley] went to McGill. It was obvious that I was going to college. And only when I was in college that I think--or applying for college--in fact, did I think, "Hey wait a minute, maybe I'll do something else." And that something else was literature. So, I got into it. As I told you, I didn't read much as a kid. But by the time I was transitioning from high school to college, I fell in love with literature. I fell in love with words, of the power of writing--history and reading. So, that was the first time--so, I said "Hey, maybe there's something else." But then, you know, stayed fast with the course of science and then just continued. Speaker 1: Okay. What about the level of instruction you had. Were you, did you have memorable teachers? Were there any mentors along the way? Speaker 2: Yeah, my parents. I mean, you know, I can think of one high school English teacher that I liked. She's probably the person who along with my parents--you know, my parents were interesting, because they definitely got me interested in literature later on in life. But you know, supported me being a doctor or a scientist, not getting a degree in literature. So, it was one high school teacher who, you know, Ms. Robertson, who was, you know--people didn't like her. She was too tough, too strong. But she was really, really good. And that--she resonates with me today. All the rest of my teachers, you know, were good, I guess, were okay. But I can't point back to that one teacher that made me do physics. And you always hear that story, "I had that one physics teacher that made me--" or "That one biology teacher that I fell in love--" but I did not have that. My level of science came out of curiosity. And I had a big yard. And so, I was always digging, poking, looking at stuff and becoming a naturalist, an unofficial naturalist. And I just liked that stuff. You know, in fact, when I think back to my high school--and again, the elementary school teachers were phenomenal. But that was such a traumatic kind of--there was so much work that you weren't thinking about was this a good teacher or not. (laughter). You were just trying to get through. But by the time you start thinking about the teachers in high school--you know, when I think back at them, they're okay, you know. But they're, they weren't outstanding, that's for sure. Not to belittle my school, I enjoyed my high school time. But aside from Miss Robertson, I can't say there was that unbelievable teacher. It was more my parents were so strong at underscoring the importance of scholarship and studying and learning. And that's where that passion came from, and the topic area was just I liked science. Story_ID: 26912 Speaker 1: Now, you went to Kirkland Public School [Montreal, Quebec, Canada]. Now, what was the next one? Was it middle school, or-- Speaker 2: So, that's the--that's the--so, College of Marceline is grades kindergarten through four. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Grades five and six are Kirkland. Then high school in Montreal-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --are grades seven through eleven. Speaker 1: Okay, I've got it. Speaker 2: And that was done at Pierrespond Comprehensive High School. Speaker 1: Comprehensive High School, okay, alright. Alright, now, okay, so you're saying your parents throughout are your major encouragers? Speaker 2: Without question. I mean, the fact, it's funny when we talk about children being different. My sister, I guess I'm like my sister the most. And my sister went through and she did her thing. And then my brother, my first brother, he--you know, I always say if he was raised by wolves, he still would have been a medical doctor. Like he had singleness of focus. He was going to do it, that's what he did. My other brother, he was probably the brightest out of all of us. And he went through and, you know, he did his thing at McGill [University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada]. I wanted to play. I was just into playing. I was fooling around playing sports. I was not into studying, you know. School luckily came easy, because I was raised in an environment where just everybody just doing it. So, it came to me, but I wasn't that 'schooly' kid. I wasn't, you know--always would study on time. And so, if I didn't have my parents, I would not be where I'm at today. Like there's no--that's not up for discussion. If I didn't have the parents I have, I would have been--you know, I don't think I would have been, you know, in dire straits. But I would not have had a trajectory of, you know, the science and, you know. The trajectory I had, I would have not had that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So from the role model perspective, and the making me who I am, it is without question, Leo and June Bertley that have formed that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: With, of course, help. I mean, I've had great mentors after college and stuff, who've been very supportive in getting me to where I am today. But it's my parents, I give all the credit to my parents. Speaker 1: Okay. So, in Canada, high school is college. It's called college, right? Speaker 2: No. In the Caribbean high school, college is high school. In Canada, high school is high school, which is-- Speaker 1: Okay. So Pierrespond was actually a high school? Speaker 2: Yeah, it's a high school. Pierrespond Comprehensive High School. (simultaneous) Speaker 1: (simultaneous)--corresponding with-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, and grades seven through eleven-- (simultaneous) Speaker 1: (simultaneous). So, seventh grade through-- Speaker 2: Eleventh grade. Speaker 1: Eleventh, okay. Speaker 2: Now--it gets a little shaky. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The rest of Canada--so the province of Quebec is different from all the other provinces. The rest of Canada, high school goes to grade twelve, just like the United States of America. And then you go to college for four years, just like the United States of America. The province of Quebec [Canada], where Montreal is, high school ends in grade eleven. But you have to do--if you're going to stay in the province of Quebec, you have to do this college called Cegep, C-E-G-E-P. And that's--I guess in the U.S., you call it junior college. But the difference is you have to do this if you're going to stay in the province of Quebec. And so, your grade twelve in high school is our first year at Cegep. And your freshman year of college is our second year at Cegep. Therefore, after two years of Cegep--and I went to Cegep called Vanier College [Montreal, Quebec, Canada]--after that two years, I then went to McGill, but I only had to do three years at McGill to get my bachelor's. Story_ID: 26913 Speaker 1: Now, Vanier, V-A-N-I-E-R? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Vanier College [Montreal, Quebec, Canada], okay. Now this is, is this the school that your father [Leo Withol Bertley] taught? Speaker 2: That's correct. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: From 1971 to his retirement. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And the school opened in 1970. So, he started there one year after they, they opened. Speaker 1: Okay. So, you go there for one year. Speaker 2: Two years. Speaker 1: Two years, right. Speaker 2: The first year is like your grade twelve, in the U.S. Speaker 1: Uh huh... Speaker 2: And the second year is like your freshman year in college. And again, you have to do--you can leave the province of Quebec and go elsewhere, and then do the regular kind of American system. But if you're staying in the province of Quebec, you have to do this two years college, and then three years university. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. So, now by this time, the time you're at Vanier--you're, are you taking, have you taken most of the major sciences? Speaker 2: Yeah. So I did all the sciences coming out of high school. And then when you apply to this two-year college, Cegep, you have to pick a concentration. You can do health science, which is--you can do health science, or pure or applied science. And the only difference is you might do one more physics in pure and applied, and one more biology. As a matter of fact, that is the exact difference. You do--if you do health science, you do calculus, you do--you know, linear algebra. You do Biology I and Biology II. You do Physics I, Physics II, Physics III, and organic chemistry. If you do pure and applied science, you do the same stuff, except one less biology and one more physics. And so, basically it's the science track in college. And then after that, you can apply to the university in whatever discipline you want. Speaker 1: So, you were in the health science track? Speaker 2: I was in the health science track, because I was thinking of science and medicine. Speaker 1: Alright, alright. Now, did you want to be a doctor at this point? Speaker 2: Yeah, I was thinking about it, you know. Still, I mean I was leaning to be a doctor or a scientist, but that kind of space. Speaker 1: Alright. Now, you had like doctors--M.D.s, in the family, right? Speaker 2: Well, my father went to medical school, but then quit. My brother is a medical doctor. Speaker 1: That's right. And didn't you have an uncle that was an M.D.? Speaker 2: Oh yes, my great uncle, my mother's [June Alleyne Miller] uncle-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --was a doctor, yes. Speaker 1: Alright. So, those are some role models. Speaker 2: And then I had--well, it's funny. Now, for me they are. And I bask in the historical lineage I came from. But growing up, I didn't know them. So you know, my great uncle, of course, is dead by the time I came around. And I only started knowing those stories later on. So, well--yes, one of my role models, now, if you will. But I wasn't growing up thinking about them. I was thinking more about my parents. Story_ID: 26914 Speaker 1: Now at Vanier [College, Montreal, Quebec, Canada], were there any particular teachers that were, stood out? Speaker 2: Yeah, now Vanier was great. So, Vanier--I mean I was taught by my father, you know, throughout my life, of course. But Vanier was the first time I actually took a formal course with him. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so, you did--I had to do four semesters at Vanier, an equivalent of two years. And I took a course with my father each of the semesters. And-- Speaker 1: What was the course you took? Speaker 2: So, I took--I took four courses with him. I took Greek and Roman Mythology; I took U.S. History; I took Constitution History--Canadian constitution, that is; and I took Quebec History. So, those four classes. And I say this--I mean people say, you know, of course, "You're biased." But without question, Dr. Leo W. Bertley, my father, was the greatest professor ever. Speaker 1: Now, this is something that--you know, I don't think I've heard another person say this about their parents as a teacher. Most of them have a relationship where they love their parents, but wouldn't want them to teach them. Speaker 2: Well, I mean, you hit the nail on the head. Everyone tells me, "Oh, man, you're actually going to take a course with your dad?" I'm like "Yeah." Now, mind you, let me be clear. If I had to choose, I might not have. (laughter). I don't know. It was an absolute given that I was taking my father's course, in my father's eyes. (laughter). So, I'm not suggesting I ran to the university saying--to the college--saying, "Hey I'm going to sign up for the class." My dad was like, of course, like, it wasn't up for discussion, alright. So with that said, though, you know, not only did I enjoy the class, I mean, he was the single best professor. He's just so good. He was just so good. I mean, he brought--and you hear this, it's funny. You hear a lot about history. Sometimes you hear in science what a scientist says. But people who love history, and people who had great history teachers talk about--this brought it alive. I mean, they made it relevant to you, and they brought it. I mean it became theatre and exciting, and stuff. But you're learning and you're understanding, and you're reflecting on why these historical events happened, and what they mean for us today. I mean, just unbelievable, unbelievable. And so, now--I also though, had a great math teacher. So, my calculus teacher, his name was Ed [Edward] Over. He taught me Cal I-- Speaker 1: Ed-- Speaker 2: Ed Over. Speaker 1: Over? Speaker 2: O-V-E-R. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Calculus I, Calculus II, and Calculus III. And then the third teacher I'll mention was Pat [Patricia] Tedford, T-E-D-F-O-R-D. And she taught me the survey of English Literature. You know--so Chaucer, you know, Beowulf, and then Chaucer with the 'Canterbury Tales.' And then, you know, Sir Walter Raleigh; you know, Byron; of course, a ton of Shakespeare. Which by the way, my dad taught me Shakespeare in high school. But, Shakespeare... But the-- we did the survey of literature course. And that's when I really fell in love with literature. Like I--you know, where the words were jumping off the page, and just, almost like spoken word--the arrangement of words. So, it's, you know, you could communicate by just saying a sentence. Or you can pick absolute eloquent, powerful terms--connect them in ways that are different, that are not traditional, that just allow you to capture something in a different way that brings it out. And so, word play--I just fell in love in it. And so she, I give her--as much as my parents, you know--my dad taught me a lot of literature and so forth growing up, you know--definitely, Pat Tedford--that course was a great experience. And she was the--I mean, my parents always said, "Oh, you're a good writer. Essentially, you're a good writer." But she was the first nonparent who said, "Wow, you have a gift for writing." She actually called it the gift of gab. And you know, I was young. And you know, you start to-- So, that supported the fact that "Hey wait a minute, I really do love this reading and writing thing. And she says I'm decent at it." So, while I've never become a professional writer, downstream, I hope to spend more time writing, because to this day I love it. It's very cathartic, soothing and relaxing, enjoyable. So, while I'm not trying to necessarily have a best seller out there, just the art of writing I really appreciate. Story_ID: 26915 Speaker 1: So, going to college now, you know, a true story. I applied to two English colleges in Montreal--McGill [University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada] and Concordia [University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada]. McGill--I applied to the--physiology and mathematics. And you know, because we didn't really have pre-med in the American sense of pre-med. I mean, you can do whatever you want. So, I took physiology to give me the life sciences I need, the organics and the law. And then I did some mathematics, because I love math. I fell in love with math. But Concordia, I applied to literature. Because if you wanted to do literature--you know, even though McGill is international and Concordia is not--in the smaller environment of Montreal and Quebec, Concordia is a great school for writing, creative writing, and literature. So, I applied there. And then I got into both, luckily. And I'll never forget this. I made the decision that I was going to study literature at Concordia. My father came to me and said, "Son, I went to McGill University, your mother went to McGill University, your sister went to McGill University, your brother went--your other brother is currently at McGill University. You will not spoil this family tradition. You're going to McGill University." And that's why I went to McGill University. (laughter). True story. So, now the best part about it is, you know--when you're eighteen, nineteen, you're like--how old was I? I guess seventeen or eighteen. I was like, "What? You know, I want to go to Concordia. Why not?" But my father was right. Going to McGill University, from a professional standpoint, from a career standpoint, has opened so many doors that would not have happened otherwise. Speaker 2: Now, some people have compared McGill's reputation in Canada to the one of Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] in the United States. Is that the position-- Speaker 1: I mean, to the point where Canadians say, "Oh, Harvard's McGill in the south." You know, like literally--I mean when you talk about schools around the world they name [University of] Oxford [Oxford, England, United Kingdom], you know; [University of] Cambridge [Cambridge, England, United Kingdom]; Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut]; Harvard ; McGill; the University of Moscow [Moscow, Russia], you know. I mean, McGill is--you know, now I went there. And I don't mean to bash McGill on camera, but the undergraduate education was not impressive. Graduate school is different, great experience. But the undergraduate, you know, I don't particularly-- And the same way that Harvard's undergraduate program is just--probably is not impressive, either. And folks always talk about you want to have those grad school professors, and meet those gurus and interact with them. But when you're in massive classes in undergrad, there's not that teacher. And I had classes of six hundred students. So, you're not--you know, there's no personal professor relationship that's being--you know, you're a number, a student ID [identification] number. But yeah, from its reputation standpoint, it's one of the best schools in the world, no question. Speaker 2: Okay, alright. So, did you run for class office, or any of that kind of thing, or-- Speaker 1: No. That's interesting. So, the one regret I do have, though--and I left this out of the story-- is-- even though I was pretty sure I was going to end up going to a Canadian school, a school in Montreal [Quebec, Canada], I had this dream of going to the United States--this dream. So I finish high school at, I'm seventeen. But when I was fifteen, I wrote the SATs [Scholastic Assessment Test]. So, in my second last high school year, which was grade ten for me, I wrote the SATs and, you know, played a whole lot of basketball. At that time, I stopped playing hockey. I was playing more basketball and soccer. I said, you know what, I got to go to [United] States. I have dreams of going to either Howard [University, Washington, D.C.]--you know, an HBCU [historically black college and university]. I mean, I was just-- I had an uncle that taught at an HBCU, Uncle Gregory. He's from Trinidad as well. He's not a biological uncle, but he's a dear friend of my dad, one of my dad's best friend. So, we call him uncle. You know, we used to visit him at Howard University, you know. He used to have a Bison tee shirt growing up. So, I just had an illusion, this dream, of going to an HBCU. But I mean, wow, I could around--could be in college around people that looked like me. But that was something just that--this could happen. So, I wrote the SATs. And I did, you know, very well on the SATs. And so, but I didn't get much offers, or any offers, I thought. And so it turned out later that I had a bunch of offers--some full scholarships, just based on the SAT performance--for certain schools. Prairie View A and M [University, Prairie View, Texas] was one of them. But my dad [Leo Withnol Bertley] and mom [June Alleyne Miller] had opened the letters and had not given me the letters until I applied to the Canadian universities. And they were right in the end. Their rationale was "You're too young, and you're very immature." Not in a childish way, just immature, not in the--, you know. And they thought if I were to go away to a U.S. school, you know, that I would wipe out. Remember, I told you that it's because of my parents that I made it here. With my other brother by contrast, he could have been raised by wolves, he still would have gone to medical school. So, they were right. Like, if I had gone to an American school at seventeen or eighteen, you know, (laughter) the bird--the hawk could have left the proverbial nest. And you know, I would be in a different situation, I'm sure. So they definitely, again, made the right decision. But as a kid, you know, "What are you doing, you're hiding my letters? Are you kidding me?" Story_ID: 26916 Speaker 1: You started McGill [University, Montreal, Canada] in 1990? Speaker 2: Nineteen Eighty-Nine [1989]. Speaker 1: Nineteen Eighty-Nine [1989], okay. Ninety Eighty-Nine [1989]. Now, you were in--I don't know where this starts, but at some point you start working with a project at McGill that takes you to Haiti and the Sudan? Speaker 2: Sure. So, let me talk you through those. Speaker 1: Tell us about-- Speaker 2: Yeah. So, I'm an undergrad--physiology, mathematics--thinking about medicine. But each summer in my years at McGill, I was lucky and I got these lab research internships, in particular with an immunology lab with someone named Dr. Wayne Lapp. So, remember I mentioned that I did have several mentors in post-college that were helpful? This is one of them. So, Dr. Wayne Lapp. My first time doing immunology, doing research in the lab, I fell in love with research. I fell in love with science, and I said "That's what I'm going to do." So, I did that research over the summer. And then I was taking this--they have these mixed graduate courses when you're a senior in college at McGill, where you have some people doing their master's or Ph.D. But if you've done a lot of pre-requisites as an undergrad, you can try to take the course. So, I took this course. And you have a bunch of different professors that rotate through the course. And one of them was Brian Ward. He later became my Ph.D. thesis supervisor. Brian Ward, in one of the seminar classes said, "Hey, John Hopkins University [Baltimore, Maryland] is doing this research program in Haiti. And they're looking for someone who has certain skills." Now, they wanted a graduate student to do it. But because of the experience I had in the few summers with this research under Dr. Lapp's lab, I actually had the physical skills. I knew how to do the different things that they needed done in the lab for this study. So, Dr. Ward encouraged me to apply. And so, a long story--interesting--I applied. And in 1993, John Hopkins selected me to go to Haiti to work on this vaccine follow-up study. And that was my first international experience. Speaker 1: Okay. So, this is--now what's the--this is the International Development Research Council? Is that what that-- Speaker 2: Yeah, so--that's no. So, that's the Sudan experience. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. Speaker 2: The Haiti experience is John Hopkins University School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine. Speaker 1: Okay. School of Hygiene-- Speaker 2: And Tropical Medicine. They had a program in Haiti where they were, they were working with the WHO [World Health Organization] in following up on some vaccine efficacy stuff. Speaker 1: Okay, so you were basically a research assistant in the lab? Speaker 2: Basically. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But it grew very quickly into kind of managing the research aspects of the project. So, I was hired to be the research assistant. Meaning, you know, handle all the processing, all the samples and all that. But by time I got there, I became the kind of research manager for this part of the project. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, was Brian Ward there, too? Speaker 2: So, Brian Ward came for the first--just a little bit, just to get me down there and have me settle in. Then he left, and I stayed there. Speaker 1: Now, this is your first trip outside of--well, you had been outside of Canada, too. Speaker 2: I traveled a lot, because my parents took us around. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, we went to Europe, we went all over the Caribbean, you know, across Canada, we came down to the U.S. I mean, there again, as I mentioned, they were very good at exposing us to the world. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I've not gone to Africa, but I have gone to Caribbean and Europe. Story_ID: 26917 Speaker 1: Is this your first time in Haiti? Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I mean, again, true story. I land in Haiti. Now, this is right after Aristide--right after there was a coup and they ousted Aristide the first time. And so, General Franco, General of the military, was essentially running the country. And here I am, this bright-eyed bushy tailed kid who, you know, raised in Canada--plummeted, not just in Haiti, but in Pichon Ville-- and not just in Pichon Ville. The hospital I was working in was called Hopital Saint Catherine in Cite Soleil. Now, Cite Soleil is French for City of the Sun. And this area had these homes that were called 'maisons des carton', which means cardboard houses. So, this is the poor--Cite Soleil is the poorest place--at least in 1993--it was the poorest place in all of Haiti. And Haiti was the poorest country in the Western Hemisphere. So, I come from Canada, playing hockey, basketball, skateboarding, you know, at McGill--a Canadian kid with some, you know, Afrocentric kind of core, but still just a kid--dropped into what's essentially developing world carnage. And for the first three days, I'm in Haiti thinking, "What the hell did I get myself into?" I didn't--like the first day I was like, "Well, what was I thinking?" The second day, it was like, "Oh, my--." The third day, I was--you know, I went home the third day thinking--I went home to where I was staying--and the third day in Haiti thinking, "This is crazy." The fourth day, I was taken to a house--kind of house--kind of like in a university club type of atmosphere, the professor's club type of atmosphere. And I go there. And this is where the journalists would hang out. And so, you got American journalists and European journalists, you have Caribbean journalists. This is like a hangout, kind of trendy spot. If you're into journalism, you know, you share stories, this and that. And it was my first experience being in that kind of interesting mix. And so, but I talked to a lot of people. And they were just talking about, you know, "Haiti's just the most remarkable country. When you come here, you get bitten by the Haitian bug. And you a: don't want to leave. And if you leave, you fight to come back." And I said, these people are crazy. The fifth day, I go to work. By the time I finish work at Hopital Saint Catherine--I, it was like a light switch. I just decided this was an amazing place to be. And from that point, for the next several months when I lived there, greatest experience of my life, hands down. I learned about people in a way that I-- As much as I'm a very human, you know-- So, I learned about people in a way that I never learned about. I learned about culture, I learned about politics, I learned about history, I learned about the love of a culture, I learned about kindness. I made friends that I have to this day. I mean, it was, you know--living in the poorest country in the Western Hemisphere seeing some ungodly stuff, just reoriented my perspective on life and what it's worth, and what means things to people and to myself. That, that--I mean that was, you know--there were certain transformative goal posts in my life. That one was, you know, 'Manchild in the Promised Land,' you know--from a boy to a man. The Haitian experience was that for me. And since then, I've been seeking it ever since. Speaker 1: What was it about Haiti, I mean-- Speaker 2: You know, I wrote a lot about Haiti. Haiti is one place where I used to write a lot of letters. I wrote letters to my parents, and I wrote letters to my friends. I wrote letters to my old PI [Principal Investigator], Dr. [Wayne] Lapp. I just, I, this is my first foray at really writing to communicate exposition and narratives and stuff. What it allowed it me to do, was answer your question. You know, just really reflect on, what is it about Haiti that I'm loving? Story_ID: 26918 Speaker 1: And it's very simple. I grew up in Canada. So, what I'm getting media-wise from Haiti is, oh, a bunch of poor, really poor black people--you know, nothing there. But you go there, and you meet the Haitian people. First of all, the most beautiful--when I say beautiful, I'm talking about physical. The most beautiful people on the planet. From you know--light, light, light--so, super mixed through slavery and whatever--to midnight black. I mean, just a beauty about them that's, it's stunning. Kind of like Senegal would be a close second for me. When I'm in Senegal--whoa, you know, just very attractive looking people. But the thing about Haiti was, despite the fact that it was poor, the people who had nothing were the most kind and have the biggest hearts. And it sounds like a gratuitous kind of Hallmark card statement. But I got to tell you, those people who have been through, you know, Europe's decimation-- I mean, for me--just by the way--my personal opinion is because it's the only country to ever have a successful slave revolution, under a slave revolt under Dessalines and Toussaint Louverture. Because of that, Europe has made it a mission--and other allies, Europe and others--made it a mission to crush that nation. Because it's the only nation that ever stood up to challenge slavery and were victorious. And since then, has been hounded by European nations--sanctions, and this and that and the other. Anyway, so despite the fact that physically they don't have anything--their courage, their kindness, their warmth, was overwhelming. You know, I'm coming from Canada where everything I have is at my fingertips. And you know, like America, you know, there are kind people in Canada and kind people in America. But it's all about I want to collect more, and I want to kind of get more for me. Haiti--they have nothing, and they just, you know, they just want to ensure that you're happy. And it was, it was really my first time understanding that, you know, that Gandhi type ethos. That--there's certain people and populations that are really interested in your character and in your soul, and how they can help you. You know, and one real example for that is, so, here I am in this poor area, Cite Soleil. The hospital is closing up, there are no doctors there. This woman comes completely pregnant, about to give birth. Now I've never, obviously I'm not a physician at this point of time, or at all. I have no experience delivering babies. I'm at--the road stopped immediately. Nobody else there. This woman is about to deliver. And I'd learned a lot--that a lot of times when they deliver, they, you know, they'll take a little rusty can and they use that to cut the umbilical cord. Of course, it's very dangerous because of the rusty can, and tetanus, and all of this. And so, I'm like, this woman's about to give birth. And there are all these, you know, local Haitians, you know. And a lot of them are naked or half naked, and this and that. You're looking around, you know--and a lot of debris and garbage and stuff in there, and bad-smelling, foul--and there's not--there's no running water. And this woman is delivering. You know, the baby is starting to cry. It's coming out. So, I'm there. I helped--there were a bunch of other people helping, you know. And they're all shouting in French, "Push", or in Creole, "Push, push, push," and all that stuff. And so when the baby came out, I actually tied the umbilical cord, because I heard about this as well. What you could do, is if you don't have the proper sterile scissors or a scalpel, you can just tie a knot in the umbilical cord, kind of those loop knots that we do with a shoelace. And that would--and can hold it there for long enough, and then get the mother and child somewhere. So the mother holds baby, and we got them somewhere safe where they were able to do the proper procedures. But so, I went through that process with her, as a woman who had nothing. So I'm working--and about a month later she comes to where I'm working--in this Hopital Saint Catherine, and she brings a pig. That's all she had to her name. But she was offering me that pig, because I helped her deliver a healthy child. Story_ID: 26919 Speaker 1: So, this experience in Haiti--now you were there like this first summer. Did you go back? Speaker 2: Well, I came back once just for a week to be in Canada. And then I went back for a few more months. But I have not returned since then, which is--I will get there again. It's just, you know, life intervenes, as they say. But--just the most remarkable experience-- The most--it is--as I said earlier, it is one of the transformative experiences of my life. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. And you also--did you go the Sudan, too, before you left? Speaker 2: So, the year after that, well--this is where the IDRC came in, which is the International Development Research Council of Canada. They were doing a similar vaccine follow-up study, and they needed a similar set of skill sets. And so, again, I found this out through my mentor, Brian Ward. And so, that got me to the Sudan, which, you know--back to back transformational experiences. Speaker 1: So, where you in the Sudan? Speaker 2: So, I stayed in Khartoum. And the lab I was working out of was the University of Khartoum Medical School. They had a lab there. But I would travel daily to one of fourteen villages around Khartoum, to meet with the kids and meet with the things--and to do the project that we were doing. And that was--you know, Sudan--Sharia runs the land. So, the law of the Koran runs the land. It's the first time I lived in a place that actually the law was the law of the Koran. Speaker 1: This could be very different from any laws you encounter in Canada (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (simultaneous). Absolutely. Too, it's just, you know, it's a different side of the world. I mean, it's the first time I ate food that didn't resonate with me. You know, that I had a steep learning curve to be able to tolerate the food. And I love food. But it's just the first time out of the West, in a major way. Speaker 1: So, what kind of cuisine--I mean, could you get anything you were used to in Sudan? Speaker 2: Yeah, well, finally you get used to it, absolutely. You know--now, there are so many funny stories. So, their staple is this thing called sorghum, which is kind of a 'wheaty' based product. What it is--is if you've ever had okras--and you know okras can get slimy. And if you imagine putting like wheaty, wheat textured stuff in okras-- And so, you end up getting this slimy, porridge type thing. Then they add vegetable oil to it. And then they add a kind of yogurt thing. And then they add a lot of beans. The number one staple are these beans. And they stir it all around. And the bottom line is this very slimy, gooey, soupy type structure--consistency. Now, the thing about the Sudan is you have communal eating. Now, if you've never eaten communally, it's a different kind of experience. You sit down, and there's this big bowl that's for everybody. You can be five, seven, ten, twelve. Bread comes around, and you're eating the staple food with your hands. And you dip your hand in it. And remember, it's very slimy. So you slime this up, and you push the stuff in your mouth. And you lick your fingers, that are completely slimy, and you go back with that hand in that bowl. Now, if you're raised in Canada or the U.S., and you're used to your plate and your stuff on your plate, you're not getting down with that. And so, you know, at the same time, I'm trying to be culturally sensitive. I'm not trying to insult anybody. But ah, man, it was tough. And then on top of it, the texture and flavors of that thing called sorghum are completely foreign to everything you've ever eaten. So, not only are you grossed out because it's just straight gross--that means people are licking their hands, going in a bowl, and going back and forth. On top of it, it taste isn't good. And so, you know, so I ate a lot of bread, you know. And when--you know, I'd get away by dipping the bread in it, you know, occasionally to show that I was trying. And then finally after several weeks, I found a place. So, I was eating bread. I found a small little tiny, tiny store. And it was like a shack that sold like sweet cookies that were wrapped--and bottled Sprite, or bottled Pepsi. So, my diet was the bread that would come around, bottled Sprite, bottled Pepsi and these cookies. And day in and day out, I would eat them. And then finally after a couple of weeks, I found this place that did really cool meats, kind of like shawarma--and just all of these things you see in Lebanese restaurants here in the U.S. You see the original versions of that. And so, it was really good--nice meat, sliced up, or chicken sliced up. Speaker 1: And I would guess they would have falafels and that kind of stuff. Speaker 2: And then falafels, exactly. But it's not like--there's no falafel store. There's no convenience store where you pop in and you get a falafel. This is the desert. So, you know, you have to start finding where to go. But, finally I did, and-- Speaker 1: So it's the double dipping and the-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --other. Story_ID: 26920 Speaker 1: But I had, I had some very--so, Haiti was wonderful. And Sudan ended up being wonderful, too. But there were some really seminal things that impacted me. One was going to Khartoum and seeing where the Blue Nile meets the White Nile. And you know, I mean you grow up as someone with Afrocentric values. And so, you talk about civilizations, you know, great civilizations on the planet. And of course, you got to talk about Kemet, and you know, the Pyramids, and the Valley of the Kings, and all that good stuff. And you just get enamored with it. I mean, anybody, white or black--if you don't enamored with ancient Egypt, then there's something wrong with you. So, you get into that. So the Nile, of course, the Nile River, is you know, that's the mothership that produced all that, you know, that stuff. And I never went to Egypt at that point in time. But to be in Khartoum and see where the Niles meet was--for lack of a better way of putting it--a very spiritual experience. You know, first of all, you actually can see two colored rivers, which are phenomenal. One looks blue and the other looks--they call it the White Nile, but it looks like brownish. And it's because that one is carrying a lot of the soot from underneath the water, and so, dirties, dirties or browns the water. But then they connect. And you see right where they connect. And it's remarkable to see nature be that black and white, literally. You would think, okay, they would blend and-- No, it's a White Nile-- And seeing that, and knowing that that river goes up to Egypt was just, you know, a powerful thing. A second powerful experience was--I was staying in this hotel and it was about twelve stories. And it was, you know, by our standards would have been like a one-star, maybe two-star hotel. By their standards it was, you know, a place where you go for your honeymoon, and then you get married, there, etc. etc. And so, so they had running water, for example. And so, you had running water. You had a little sink with one notch and you could flush your toilet every now and then. And they had electricity. And so, I'm--so again, first time living in a Muslim country. You know, two in the morning, "Waaaaaaaaa", you know, it's the call for prayer. But not ever experiencing that, I'm like, you know, "What the heck is that noise?" You know, it sounds like cows being slaughtered. I'm not trying to be disrespectful, but it sounds--the sounds are very different. And then you learn quickly. Okay, those are the calls for prayer, and it happens, you know, five times a day, blah, blah, blah. Well, the other sound that was--it's burned in my brain like it heard it today. There was one night where I heard this woman wailing--like just screaming at the top of her lungs. And I was convinced she was being beaten. You know, you're not sure--how do I react? Do I go up there to find out what's going on? So, it's clearly coming from inside the hotel, one room. So, I run all the way downstairs to speak to one of the security guys. And when I say security guys--I mean this is no jacket and a badge. You know--some guy who's supposedly the security guy. And I said, "You know, what's going on? It's a lot of noise." And he's like, "Oh, you know, don't worry, my brother. Don't worry, my brother." So, I'm like, alright. I go back up--still going on. I come back down. He's like, "I told you, don't worry." So, I go back up. Finally, the next morning I come out. And it turns out that it was a newlywed couple. And the woman--and this is a practice that happens in Sudan--and I'm not judging it, I'm just reciting it. The woman went through female circumcision. And what they do after they cut off parts of your vaginal region, they then sew you shut to ensure you do not have sex. And when you then have sex for the first time, it is a traumatic painful experience, because they literally have to rip you open. And so here I am again, this little Canadian boy who, you know, read about female circumcision and heard stuff here and there, you know--there's some stories here. But obviously, I've never experienced it. I experienced at an absolute visceral and literal level. And then to see the woman and man a few days later and have to point out that that's the couple, you know, that is burned on my brain forever. And so, you know, Sudan was different, you know. But again, like Haiti, you know, you go to poor places, and the poorest people are the nicest people. And so, there's so many wonderful, positive stories and friendships that I built up through that. But those are some things that-- You know, you can't go through that and be the same person, and come back to Canada and say you're going to go to your class and study for an exam. I mean, it changes you. And if it doesn't change you, you know--hey, that's interesting. So you know, Haiti was a seminal experience, transformative. Sudan was a similar experience, further transformative. And both of them just made me understand that I got to be involved where I can, in international projects. I got to be involved and try my best to contribute to other people's lives, especially those who don't have much. And just really the ethos that my parents taught me started to jump forward as to a priority in my life. And you know, and so-- And also, those also cemented my love for research. And I said okay, I've got to go into the research, because there's not enough people that look like me doing this stuff, and I want to add and contribute and try to work in those areas. Story_ID: 26921 Speaker 1: You graduated [from McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada] in '94 [1994], right? With a-- Speaker 2: That's correct. Speaker 1: --Bachelor's of Science? Speaker 2: Yeah. Because I took some time off, because I went to Haiti. Then I came back and finished my bachelor's, and immediately started my Ph.D. with Brian Ward, the same person who got me to go to Haiti and got me to go to Sudan. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So does this mean, I mean that they don't--you don't have to pursue a master's in-- Speaker 2: You start off--sorry--you start off as a master's. But if you show promise, you can transfer. They can recommend that you--you do what's called the special oral examination, to transfer into the doctoral program. So, essentially skip the master's. Speaker 1: Okay. I know a lot of people in the sciences do-- in engineering--do that here, really. They don't time to savor a master's degree. They go right-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, exactly. Speaker 1: They get it--there's some certificate or something they just keep, you know. Speaker 2: Yeah, well, so, exactly. Some schools will give you the master's properly, but you just continue. Other schools will give you like a certificate of some kind. Other schools, you don't even get anything, but you're in the doctoral program. So-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: McGill is one of those where if you transfer, you will not get a master's, but you're on the track to get the doctoral. Speaker 1: So, your intent from the beginning was to get the Ph.D. So, it wasn't-- Speaker 2: Yeah, absolutely. Speaker 1: --a concern about whether you got a master's or not. Speaker 2: Yeah, no, absolutely. I was in it to get the doctorate. Speaker 1: So, Brian Ward was your advisor? Speaker 2: He was my thesis advisor, and definitely a mentor. Speaker 1: And so, what was your dissertation about? Speaker 2: So, my dissertation was about the immunopathogenesis of measles virus infection. And so, let me just give some background. Measles is a virus. Viruses cause immunopathogenesis, meaning they make you sick and they make sick via your immune system. And so, so what's interesting is--if you, if you get measles--we don't have too much measles here in Canada and the U.S., because we vaccinate our kids. The vaccines work very well. If you do not vaccinate for measles, and you get measles, you can die. Which, factually in this country, today, we still have people who will die from measles because their parents chose not to vaccinate the kids, alright. Now, the other neat thing about measles--is it's called an immunosuppressive virus. Meaning, if you get measles, just like if you get HIV, it suppresses your immune system a little bit. Now, HIV of course is very bad. It suppresses you to the point where you-- But measles suppresses you slightly, but can make you prone to other infectious diseases. And so the study here was to look at, well, how--what is it about the measles virus that tickles your immune system just enough to make it slightly suppressed, that will let you get other infections? And so, looking at the molecular biology and the immunology behind that. And so that's what my thesis was about. Story_ID: 26922 Speaker 1: And so, you know--so there's all these neat studies of how viral infections in general--but specifically, viruses like the measles virus can actually lead you to be susceptible to other things. Speaker 2: Okay. That, was that the finding that you-- Speaker 1: Well, so, so more germane to my actual thesis, is--and now let me step back and set the stage here. Why did I go to Haiti? Why did I go to Sudan? It was the measles vaccine follow-up study. And in Canada or the U.S., you get your first measles vaccine at twelve months of age. And then you get boosters--and anywhere from eighteen months, two years, etc., okay. We can afford to wait 'til twelve months of age, because in Canada and the U.S. and the West, we have, we have a health care infrastructure, and enough general measles vaccination, that you probably won't get sick. You probably won't catch measles until twelve months. So, we can wait twelve months to vaccinate. One of the reasons why we wait, and don't vaccinate earlier, is because we have these things called maternal antibodies. Meaning, you get these antibodies from your mother. They come through the placenta at birth, and they come through breast milk, which is one of the reasons why it's very important for women to breast feed their young. Those maternal antibodies hang around for awhile. If you give the measles vaccine at three months of age, the maternal antibodies will cover up the vaccine. The vaccine will not be able to have its impact. So in the West, or in Canada or the U.S., we wait 'til twelve months, because the maternal antibodies that you have in your body as a baby, slowly wane over time. And twelve months is kind of the sweet spot, where they're low enough where you give the measles vaccine--boom, you get a good immune response, and the baby will be protected from measles. That's fine in Canada and in the U.S. You can't do that in the developing worlds, because measles is endemic. Measles is everywhere. And so, you can't afford to wait twelve months. That kid's going to get infected with measles before that. So, we compromise, and we try to vaccinate at nine months of age in the developing world, alright. But you still get a lot of the maternal antibodies, so the vaccine isn't so effective. So, they came up, the World Health Organization, came up with something called high-titer measles vaccine. Meaning, using the same dose of the vaccine--I'm sorry, the same make of the vaccine, if you will--say, the mechanics of the vaccine. But instead of giving two or three viral particles for the vaccine, they give thirty or forty. They give a higher dose. So, it's the same vaccine, they just give more of it. And so, if you can just imagine you have five maternal antibodies, right? And you have five viral particles, as your vaccine. Well, the five maternal antibodies is going to cover up the five viral particles. You're not going to get a vaccine response. But imagine you have five maternal antibodies, but fifty viral particles for your vaccine. So, a higher-titer--a higher dose. The five maternal antibodies will cover five, but you'll have forty-five or some extra that can stimulate immune response. So, the World Health Organization said, "Ha, ha, we're going to test this, because this is how we think we can significantly protect more kids around the world." And sure enough, it worked. You can give a higher dose earlier, six months of age. And boom, you get a great immune response and the kids are protected. Well, the reason why you follow-up these studies, is because there's immediate effects and then there's long term effects. Well, it turns out that three years after, four years after, five years after--there were these blips of mortality happening in these kids that received the high titer dose. Now, let's be clear. It saved millions and millions of kids, because they gave it at six months, and millions and millions of kids didn't get measles. But, you did have kids here and there popping up dying from other things at the age of four years and five years. So, the World Health Organization, "Errrrrrrr", put the brakes--"Let's study what happened." And those are the studies I did in '80 [1980] in Sudan. And that led into my thesis dissertation. And it turns out that while the high-titer vaccine worked great at protecting you from measles, because measles is a slightly, just very slightly immunosuppressive virus--not as bad as HIV--but it slowly suppresses you. So that when you're three years old and four years old, you got a little sicker more. And then eventually, you caught something that killed you. And so, it's very interesting. So, if you do a straight number comparison, you know--the vaccine, the high-titer vaccine--saved millions and millions. Whereas, you know, a few hundred, you know died from it. But from an ethical--the World Health Organization--you cannot give something if you know you're going to get some death from it. You can't do it. And so that was kind of the findings of the study. So, the good news is that that window stopped after like four or five years, which was part of my study. So, there was that little suppressing thing, but then it stopped. And the longer term--in fact, there is no more mortality happening because of that. And so that, my study involved looking at all of that, and then looking at the specific molecule mechanisms--that measles suppresses you. So-- Speaker 2: Okay. So, they had to adjust the dose? Speaker 1: Yeah. So, that's, so they don't use that dose anymore. They're using the regular dose. And they've worked that out. But it's very interesting, you know. The vaccine worked great at protecting millions of kids, but downstream, you know, that's why you got to follow-up. Story_ID: 26923 Speaker 1: How long did it take you to get your Ph.D. [from McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada]? Speaker 2: Four and a half years. Speaker 1: Okay, so-- Speaker 2: So I started in '94 [1994], and I finished in '99 [1999]. Speaker 1: Okay, Ph.D. in 1999. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And now, in the interim, though, you had a trip to Baffin Island, too, right? Speaker 2: So, along with this immunosuppressive thing that I mentioned, there are other viruses that do this, too. So, it turns out Inuit babies--what Americans would call Eskimo, which is not a polite term for them. But Inuit babies got sicker more than southern babies. And by southern babies, they meant babies from Canada, Toronto [Ontario, Canada], Halifax [Nova Scotia, Canada]. So, not the southern United States, but southern Canada compared to the Northwest territories and, you know, northern and Canadian arctic. So, the question is why? Well, it turns out that we all get this virus called Epstein-Barr virus. The Epstein-Barr virus is a herpes virus. There's Herpes simplex 1; Herpes simplex 2; CMV that causes cytomegalovirus; EBV, Epstein Barr virus. So, there's a bunch of different viruses that belong to the Herpes family. Epstein-Barr virus, for example, is a virus that causes mono, otherwise known as the kissing disease. Speaker 1: Yeah, mononucleosis? Speaker 2: Mononucleosis, exactly, known as the kissing disease. Teenagers usually get it. Well, it turns out that Herpes virus are ubiquitous, meaning everywhere. Epstein virus, EBV is everywhere. And so, most kids get that--get infected with EBV around two or three years old. And if you get infected with EBV at two or three years old, then you won't get mono. But if you're one of the unlucky kids who does not get infected with EBV--because almost everybody else has it. The first time you're going to get it, is your first bodily fluid exchange, i.e., a kiss. And that's why it's called the kissing disease. So, if you're a kid and you somehow tripped and fell and managed to not be infected with the Epstein-Barr virus--which is very, very rare. I mean 99 percent of us get it at--between 95 and 99 percent of us get at, you know, like I said--at two, three, four years old. So, by the time you're a teenager and you get your first kiss, and you already have it, you're fine. If you somehow didn't get infected but you get it as a teenager, it's much more dangerous and leads to mononucleosis, which is a terrible infection. Some people can actually die from it. But either way, you're hurting for a month, etc. Now, in the Canadian Arctic, for whatever reason, the babies get exposed to EBV even earlier, at the age of between six months and a year, year and a half. And just like measles, it's slightly suppressive. And so, it turns out that because these babies were getting Epstein-Barr virus earlier, they were getting sicker earlier. And that was the study. So, we analyzed babies from the North; compared them to babies in places like Montreal, Toronto and Halifax; did a comparison and looked at the viral lows and different titers. And we figured out, ah, that's what's going on. That they're getting EB virus, Epstein-Barr virus, before the rest of us in Canada, and that's making them more susceptible to being sick. And so that got me to the Canadian Arctic twice, which was a great experience, because I got to see the aurora borealis in real life. And it's just stunningly pretty. Story_ID: 26924 Speaker 1: Point out that you received a Bristol-Myers scholarship, I think-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: --at McGill [University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada]. And so you graduated in 1999. And now, what did you--what were your goals immediately after graduation? Speaker 2: So, I always knew that at point that I didn't want to be bench scientist forever. But I loved the research. And I said you know what? I want to get just a little more training. You know, I got this Ph.D., it's great. I know some stuff. I'm supposed to be an expert in the field, to be determined. But I want to get some more training. And so, I decided to accept the postdoctoral fellowship position at Harvard Medical School [Cambridge, Massachusetts], working in HIV vaccine development. And so, that's what led me from Canada to move to the United States of America. So, I moved there, started in January 2000, and did a postdoc for three years. I enjoyed it, learned a ton, and became passionate about HIV and AIDS from a research standpoint, from a vaccine development standpoint, and from a social and public health issue standpoint. Speaker 1: So, what did you, what was your research, really on? Speaker 2: So, what we were trying to do, we were trying to make vaccines for HIV, like a whole bunch of people are. And there are many approaches to making vaccines. You can use--for example, if you're making a vaccine for a virus, you can use what's called whole virus, so the actual viral particles. You can weaken them, which means to attenuate them--make them a little weak--but then you use those. You can take bits of the virus, like some protein, some different parts of the virus. You could have certain carriers--they're called vaccine carriers, or vectors--you can use that. We're on a cutting edge platform of actually using the genetic material of the pathogen--so the DNA of the virus. So, what does that mean? We're all coded in our DNA. The DNA is the thing inside your nucleus, inside the brain or your cell that allows you to go from DNA to produce RNA, to produce protein that makes everything that's in your body. And so, because DNA codes for everything, just like in a virus, the DNA is going to code for the protein structure of the virus. It's going to code for the little knobby things that stick out the virus. It's going to code for all the things that make the virus. So, instead of actually using the whole virus--or using bits of the virus to stimulate an immune response--which is what you do for a vaccine-- And if you think of the vaccine as a military, you might have ten soldiers. And while you can't fight a war with ten soldiers, you want to boost that up. And so, you train those ten soldiers with two really sophisticated soldiers. And you train those ten and allow them to grow into twenty, forty, eighty, and you build up that military arsenal. So, that's what the vaccine does. Vaccine essentially--you give the exposure of vaccine, it trains the few defense soldiers you have for that bug in your body, and it expands them, so you have many, many more. In case you get that exposure in real life out there, you have a much bigger arsenal. So, that's the vaccine theory. Alright. Story_ID: 26925 Speaker 1: So you can give--to train the soldier, if you will, to train these vaccine, these immunological responses, you can use a whole virus. You can break it up, use part of a virus. You can kill the virus. You can use the vectors I mentioned. But ultimately, what it boils down to is the immune system recognizes a piece of something. It knows that that piece of something is different from your body, and mounts an immune response to it. So, it's very simple on the manual level. And so, that piece of something--if you give it the whole virus, is a piece of the whole virus. If you chop up the whole virus and use a piece of the virus, it's that piece of the virus. If you use a vector, the vector will show a piece of the virus. So, the strategy in our laboratories at Harvard, were to start from the basic molecule of actual DNA. Because if you inject that DNA, that DNA is going to do what it's supposed to do, which is to produce the given protein that you want. So, you circumvent a whole process by just directly injecting the DNA, which sounds futuristic and crazy, but it works. You inject the DNA in humans, in mice, in animals. And that DNA produces the protein you want. And then what happens? Your immune system responds to that protein. And so, instead of injecting a piece of the protein, or instead of injecting the whole virus, inject the formative bit, the DNA, that's going to make that piece of protein. Now, why do you want to do that? Well, the reason why you want to do that is if you inject the DNA into your body, and your body produces the proteins, everything else about the protein expression is going to be perfect, because it was done by you, which means your immune cells are going to respond in the best possible way, because all the other bits are you. And if you think of a door, for example, a door with two locks. If you want to go into the house, well, you put in one key that will get you almost there. But if you don't have the other key, you know, you're out of luck. But if you have both keys, if it's your house, and you're maneuvering the keys, you know how to maneuver those keys way quicker than someone who hasn't used those keys. Because you have experience with it, you know how to tickle the lock. You know, you go in--boom, boom, boom, you're in your house. Whereas if you give the keys to your colleague, they're going to take their time; they're going to scramble around and try to figure out to do it. Well, it's the same thing with the immune system. If you provide the ideal environment for the immune system, then it's going to showcase that protein in the best possible way, and you get the strongest immune response. So, that's the rationale behind that. And that's what we did. And the short of the story is it worked fantastic in macaques. When you're dealing with vaccines, you start off with doing it in the test tube, to see if your concept can work. If it works then you start off with small animal models, mouse models, which I have to say it's really tough to work on animals. It ends up being very challenging, just because if, you know, the humanitarian piece-- But you work in mice, if it works in mice, then you get clinical approval to go to mammals. And so, you go in monkeys, usually rhesus macaques. And then if it works in that, you go and do you phase one trials and clinical trials and blah, blah, blah, and you go through the whole clinical trial process. And so, real briefly--it worked fantastic in monkeys, but it hasn't worked well in humans yet. And that's one of the big hurdles for HIV vaccine development. In general, we have a lot of good vaccine candidates that work pretty well in monkey models, which is very close to human models. But we've had a tough time finding these vaccines for humans. Story_ID: 26926 Speaker 1: I was asking you if you part of the HIV Vaccine Trials Network. Speaker 2: Yeah, so we're not officially part of that network. That's a group of kind of clinical trial networks. We were a basic vaccine development lab. We worked with a bigger group that also supported various clinical trials for HIV vaccines. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. Now, you went to work for Northeastern University [Boston, Massachusetts] as an adjunct professor of biology, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. So while I was a postdoctoral fellow, and because of kind of my parents worked in education, I've always been interested in education. And so, all along the way in my career, I always tried to teach somewhere. So, while I was postdoc at Harvard Medical School [Cambridge, Massachusetts], and at Children's Hospital in Boston [Massachusetts], I actually taught both at Roxbury Community College [University, Boston, Massachusetts] and Northeastern as adjunct faculty. And it was, and I also taught some special kind of elective sessions of certain immunology or basic research methods at Harvard. And you know it was really interesting because, you know, Harvard Medical School, you got the kids who got in Harvard Medical School, they're fine. Northeastern is a very large college. And I was working with a subset of students, and actually STEM [science, technology, engineering, mathematics] disciplines, overall. It was not just biology, but I did some physics and some calculus. But then you've got the Roxbury Community College students. And so, there are community colleges, and there are community colleges. And Roxbury Community College is one of the toughest urban community colleges in the country, I would imagine. I mean, you know, they have an 'accept everybody' policy. And it's basically two sets of populations--kids who didn't make it out of the Boston public school system, or made it out by the hair on their chin--but just really have no capacity to go to any other college. And you know, recently immigrants who want to try to get that education piece and then integrate it into a possible professional track somewhere. And so, you know, those students need you. And you know, and at the time, I had dreadlocks. And you know, I'd wear jeans and Timberlands or sneakers--and I can't stress how being a scientist but looking a certain way--having dreadlocks. You know, you got the Timberlands on. You walk into an anatomy or physiology course, or a microbiology course at Roxbury Community College, and the students just gravitate towards you. You speak their language, you can kick it in Ebonics, if you have to with them. But then you capture them and then you get them to see the wonders and beauty of science, and how to think like a scientist and learn. And so, while I enjoyed teaching everywhere I've taught, my most memorable and fulfilling experiences are really working in those tougher, more urban, you know quote unquote, "Oh, they can't cut it" environments. And so, absolutely, you know, the Northeastern-- back to your original question, the Northeastern piece was just a piece of the bigger puzzle of my collection of interests in teaching in different environments. Story_ID: 26927 Speaker 1: So, you were really involved in the Boston [Massachusetts] area. Now, were you involved with the Dudley Street Neighborhood Initiative? Speaker 2: Yes. So, that's a very interesting group. So the Dudley Street Neighborhood Initiative, which is of course, named after the Dudley Street neighborhood which is a famous street in Boston. And as a matter of fact, Malcolm X used to parade up and down that street because he lived very close there when he was living with his aunt. But anyway, what's neat about the DSNI, the Dudley Street Neighborhood Initiative, is it's a community organization that's made by the community for the community. So, the entire process, from the election of the board--and I was on the Board of Trustees. From the election of the board to the--what projects are going to get worked on. In terms of projects, they have an educational component working with K [kindergarten] through twelve schools. They have an agricultural component working with greenhouses. They have a clean neighborhood component. So, just really neighborhood and community components. And they're all run by the people for the people, in the true sense. So, everyone's elected by regular folks. It's not you're somebody special, and you got in on a card. It's the, you know, the people pick who their representatives are going to be. The people decide what projects are going to get worked on. The people decide who's going to do them, and then they get done in a very effective, inclusive way. And what's interesting about that organization is when you have people part of solving problems as opposed to, "Hey, we're coming in--" like a consulting group--want to drop in and solve your problems. That can work sometimes. But when you have people part of solving their own problems in a microscopic way, the gains are infinitely more. Because there's of course, the automatic buy-in. There's a sense of responsibility, there's a sense of I'm my brother's and my sister's keeper, and they're married to the transformation because that's the community they actually live in. And so, it's a really wonderful experience for me to be part of that. And I, you know, I still touch base with them every so often, especially if I go back to Boston. I will, you know, bump into--you know, step into their place. But that's the Dudley Street Neighborhood Initiative. And so, I was on their board for a couple of years, and then I became the Chair of the Educational Committee to the board of trustees for the Dudley Street Neighborhood Initiative. Story_ID: 26928 Speaker 1: Now you were part of a--okay, a DNA study in 2004, right? Speaker 2: Uh huh. Speaker 1: Was this another HIV-- Speaker 2: Yeah. So, between 2000--so I started my postdoc in 2000. And from about 2001 to 2004, there are a bunch of papers that came out on capturing the work. So, all of them are themed around using HIV DNA as the focal point for generating effective vaccines that can hopefully protect from infection of HIV, and therefore protection from AIDS. And so, they're variance of papers that came out that looked at different aspects of that model. Speaker 1: Okay. This would involve the rhesus monkeys? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And mucus membranes of-- Speaker 2: Okay. So, that's interesting. So HIV is a virus, as we all know. It affects the immune system, primarily one set of cells. But it's a disease that's transmitted by body fluids. So, what does that mean? That means you can get it through the blood, or you can get it through other body fluids. Well, as a sexual transmitted disease, the sexual body fluids are part of what's called the mucosal system. So, the vaginal and penile and anus areas are part of your mucosal system, which is really from the area of your mouth, all the way down your throat. For example, all the wet linings of your body, is the most simplest way of looking at it. There is an actual immune system that's different from the rest of your body's immune system that specifically line those areas. Because, as you can imagine, if you're breathing in or swallowing stuff everyday, you can get exposed to pathogens. And so, you've developed a mucosal system, sometimes referred to as MALT, mucosal ancillary lymphoid tissue. But we have a mucosal system that can protect us from infection. So, the rationale for vaccine developers--myself and our team included--was that if HIV infects you primarily through the mucosal system, which is you know, about 85 percent or whatever the number is--I'd have to like check. But it's, around 85 percent of HIV infection happens at mucosal surfaces. So the rationale was well, instead of injecting in an arm so it gets in your blood system, or injecting in your muscle for the vaccine, let's introduce the vaccine via that mucosal surface. Speaker 1: Yeah, just for the record. The other way you could be infected would be through an open cut, or something like that. Speaker 2: Through an open cut, exactly. But again, that's a very--very few people get HIV--well, in combination with certain sexual practices, you can have open lesions. But again, those lesions are at mucosal surfaces. So, you're absolutely right. If you have an open wound on your hand, and you get exposed, you could get infected. Just like if you have an HIV--so, if you have a blood transfusion with contaminated blood, like Arthur Ashe, you can get HIV. But, but the bulk of the HIV infection through sexual transmission happens at a mucosal sight. So, if you stimulate the immune reaction there, and load the vaccine there, the rationale is you would get a stronger immune response there, and maybe get better protected. And that's what that paper really looks at. And indeed, it works. When you vaccinate the monkeys at the mucosal sites, they are better protected than when you vaccinate the monkeys through intravenous injection. So, again, in the monkey models, it worked really well. Human models, you know, HIV vaccine is still remaining elusive. Speaker 1: Okay. So, what is the difference between the response of the Rhesus monkeys and humans? I mean in terms of--why is there a difference? Speaker 2: So, what is the difference? If we knew that, you know, I would not be sitting on this chair. We would be curing HIV all around the world, and be thrilled about it. Speaker 1: So we're still trying to figure that out? Speaker 2: Yeah. So, the term they use in immunology is 'correlates of immunity.' Meaning what's responsible, if you will, for a specific kind of immunity that you're looking for. And so, you know, you start in mice--you see the model working. You go to monkeys, you know, that's really close to humans. They're not just mammals, they're primates. And so, you know, they're as close--they're our closest cousins, if you will. And so, the correlates of immunity should be tighter, but there are things that just aren't fully understood. I mean, the bottom line is we don't fully know why a vaccine can work perfectly well in a monkey, and why it doesn't work in a human. Now, there's a gazillion hypotheses out there, but there's no smoking bullet yet. And so that's--as you know, we don't have an HIV vaccine yet. And we have candidate after candidate after candidate vaccine, but we are not there yet. Speaker 1: Okay. So, who were some of your significant, I guess, colleagues or mentors at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]? Speaker 2: Sure. So, my direct PI [Principal Investigator] was Anna Alvalini, a wonderful research scientist. She's Italian born, and trained as an M.D. Then she moved to the United States to the National Institute of Health where she got trained, and then came to MIT's Whitehead Institute [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. And then, of course came to, to Harvard, where she set up her lab. So, she was my direct PI. But we worked with a bunch of other very influential researchers, including Norm [Norman] Letvin from Harvard, Dan Barouch from Harvard. You know, there were several interesting scientists who were working--it's part of a bigger group, towards this HIV piece. Story_ID: 26929 Speaker 1: So, you left Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] in 2004. And you went to work with Wilmer Hale, LL-- and Dorr, LLP, right? Speaker 2: Sure. So the firm, when I started there was called Hale and Dorr, one of the oldest most prestigious firms in the country, law firms. They're a general practice law firm, meaning they do everything from litigation to corporate to merge and acquisition, as well as intellectual property. And I worked in intellectual property. Now, a: why would I leave a research environment to jump ship and now work in a law firm? So, a few things. One, until you develop that vaccine or until you come up with that drug, or until you create that unbelievable, incredible therapy--you know, you're a struggling postdoc, financially. You're just not--you know, it's a long haul before you get stable to be able to buy homes and take care of this and that and the other. So, as I mentioned earlier, I knew I didn't want to run my own lab. But I loved getting a differentiated set of skill sets. So, my trajectory now gave me some international exposure. I'm a trained immunologist, went through Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] system, learned a lot--really appreciated and grew during my postdoctoral fellowship there at the Children's Hospital in Boston [Massachusetts] and Harvard Medical School. And then, I knew I didn't want to run my own lab. I had no interest in that, for several reasons. And we can get into that, if you're interested. But I had no business sense. I wasn't earning a ton of money, because you don't, as a postdoc. And if you're an accomplished scientist or accomplished engineer, or a computer scientist, there's this wonderful field called intellectual property that needs your skills. What do I mean by that? Intellectual property covers three things: patents, copyrights and trademarks. Well, for patents, those are legal documents that give you intellectual protection against 'X'. The problem is, there are legal documents that usually govern scientific things, like vaccines that were developed, medical devices, you know, engineering designs. I mean, things that people create usually come from a science technology and engineering and mathematics background. The lawyers don't know the science. They understand the law and they know how to prosecute a patent--and what are the steps to get personally patented--but they can't tell you if this breast cancer drug really is going to cure breast cancer. They can't tell you if this computer software, or this engineer thing, is really that good. So what they used to do is, they used to hire consultants. And these were engineers or scientists who had that expertise. Well, intellectual property became such a lucrative legal profession, that instead of hiring folks as consultants, they would hire you for--as a person--and put you in their building and you'd work with them. And that field is called a technology specialist. So, I was hired by Hale and Dorr to be a technology specialist. And what do you do in that? Well, you learn to patent, you learn to prosecute patents, meaning you work with the scientists and the attorney to be the bridge between the scientist and the attorney, so that you can explain to the scientist the legal aspects around your patent and you can explain to the lawyer, the scientific aspects around the patent. And you can together forge forward and get that patent to issue. For me it was great, because I had no business skill sets before. So, I learned about venture capital investment. Because when you're, you know--you're trying to figure out should you even go for a patent, you want to know is this something you could, you know, chase down funding for it, to ultimately go to scale with. So, I learned about venture capital, I learned about freedom to operate studies. I learned of course how to prosecute a patent. And it really was an interesting experience, going from bench site scientist to corporate America--suit and tie, wearing--just a whole different ethos and whole different way of thinking about mission and margin, and just a very, very, very useful and great experience for me. Now, during my time at Hale and Dorr--and I was there for three years--Hale and Dorr merged with a firm called Wilmer Cutler Pickering, which is a D.C.-- very successful [Washington] D.C. based firm. And so, they merged their names--calling it Wilmer Cutler Pickering Hale and Dorr. But it's known as WilmerHale for short. So, I went there. I was a Hale and Dorr employee. I left there as a WilmerHale employee. But it's all the same firm. Story_ID: 26930 Speaker 1: Now, were you married by this time? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Can you tell us how you met your wife? Speaker 2: Sure. Do we have to? (laughter). Speaker 1: Huh? Speaker 2: Happy to. Met her--and it depends whose story you believe. But I met her on the bus right outside where I, where I grew up in, in Montreal, Canada. So, as I mentioned, I went to McGill University [Montreal, Quebec, Canada], but I didn't live on campus. I commuted from home. And so, we take this bus home. And you know, on the bus I met this young lady. And my version of the story, which of course is the accurate version of the story, says that she saw me and she approached me for discussion. And you know, her version of the story is that I disturbed her to get her attention and then started a conversation. Either version of the story led to me--and I have to confess--I got off one stop earlier from my stop, because that's where she got off. And we just continued the conversation. I ended up walking her home, which turns out she didn't live too far from where my parents' lived anyway. So, I walked her home and we exchanged phone numbers, and started phone conversations which led to dating, and, and absolutely, you know, one of the other best greatest experiences of my life. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, was she a student at-- Speaker 2: She was a student as well. She was at Concordia University, the, the other English university I mentioned earlier, in Montreal. And you know, but we didn't-- So, this would have been 19--, so this would have been 1993, I want to say, when I first met her. But we only got married in 2002. And one of the reasons is, you know, you go from being a student--you know, finishing grad school, postdoc, and never in that place where I could be stable enough to, you know--at least that's how I tell it. And so we got married in 2002, and have been married ever since. Speaker 1: Okay, alright, alright. And her name? Speaker 2: Heather, sorry. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Heather. Absolutely. Story_ID: 26931 Speaker 1: You went over to MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] in 2006, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. So, while I was--while I was postdoc at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], I started to collaborate with a gentleman named Herman Eisen, just a wonderful research scientist. I mean he was in his eighties by the time I was collaborating with his lab. And he was coming in everyday doing research. And so, we collaborated with them. And then--so I maintained a kind of little collaborative allegiance with him. But then, when I was leaving the law firm Hale and Dorr, I actually worked at the Roxbury Community College [Boston, Massachusetts], because I loved that experience so much. I worked at Roxbury Community College for about a year or so, but wanted to continue my relationships with places like MIT and Harvard. And so, I worked with a professor there, Michael Rudener, to work with them on their REU program, which is a Research Experience for Undergraduates. And so that's how I stayed tethered as a research affiliate with MIT while I was teaching at Roxbury Community College. So, my official title at MIT, which I still hold, frankly, is research affiliate. Speaker 1: Okay. So, research experience or undergraduate experience? Speaker 2: Yeah, REU. It's an NSF funded program, National Science Foundation funded program. Speaker 1: Alright, through NSF, alright. So, now is the Louis Stokes Alliance-- Speaker 2: Okay. So, while I was at RCC, Roxbury Community College, I worked with MIT on their REU Program. I worked with Boston--which is the University of Massachusetts at Boston [Boston, Massachusetts]--on their Louis Stokes, their LSAMP [Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Populations] Program--Louis Stokes Minority Science Advancement Program, as well as the NIH [National Institute of Health] Bridges Program. So these are three programs that look at undergraduates. In the case of the REU, it's proper undergraduates, meaning four year college. And in the case of the Bridges Program and LSAMP programs--those at RCC, Roxbury Community College--were looking at getting those community college students access to science and engaged in science. And so, those three programs were kind of programs that we all worked on together to impact kids and get them interested in science, with the goal of getting them to finish bachelor's and then go on to master's or doctoral programs. Story_ID: 26932 Speaker 1: You said there's a story behind this--as to why you didn't want to, you know, start a research laboratory or to do that kind of work. Speaker 2: Yeah. So, I wanted to get--the reason why I continued to do the postdoc, because I wanted to get enough skill set to really feel like okay, I've mastered something here. Like, I know enough, I feel competent as a research scientist. I've published, done some really cool projects, you know, okay I've got it. The thing about a research career is there's a lot of boring time. I mean, a lot of the mechanics of doing research is day in, day out, you're doing the same procedural bits--trying to get one little piece of data that when you get it, it can be seminal and transformational. But it's not everyday, it's not every week, it's not every month. Sometimes it's not once a year. And it takes a person who is wired a certain way--who can feel comfortable doing that day in, day out for a year--sometimes a few years, sometimes five-- I mean you see it. Sometimes people spend twenty years and then, boom, they get it. Sometimes people spend thirty years and don't ever get it. But either way, they're still fulfilled in that process, based on their personality. Then there are other people that, you know, love the experience, but want to do other things. And so, I loved the experience, and I loved the challenge of--and meticulousness of vigorous research--and making sure you're doing good stuff that can contribute. But I knew that wasn't for me, longer term. I had other aspirations. And I'm going to talk about that in a minute. The other interesting thing about doing basic science research, is you have to be funded. It's a publish or perish atmosphere. And you have to be grant funded. Universities don't give you a job and pay your salary and say "Oh, also, if you get some grants, that's cool." No, no, no. They'll give you startup money to start the lab or whatever. But you have to get grants to pay for your salary and to sustain your lab. The problem with that is you're not in elementary, middle, or high school anymore. You're not even an undergrad. You're talking about Ph.D. scientists who are all, you know--if not all--almost all really, really smart men and women who write really, really, good grant proposals. And that's who you're competing with. And the NSF [National Science Foundation] funds that--is it 10 or 12 percent, maybe 8 to 12 percent of the grants you receive-NIH [National Institute of Health], 6 to 10 percent. You know, whatever they. I mean, I don't want to parse terms, because they're around ten percent. That means out of a hundred people that you're competing with grants to pay your mortgage, to feed your family, to survive and live a decent life in the American dream context-- Out of a hundred people, only ten are going to get it. And it's not a gaussian distribution or a normal distribution for the hundred people. It's all over to the right, meaning all hundred people are really smart men and women, all hundred proposals are probably darn good proposals that should be funded. But because of resources, we can't fund them all. Story_ID: 26933 Speaker 1: So, it becomes a very uncomfortable and stressful way to live a life. And most jobs, if you work hard enough are stressful. But this is really stressful where, you know, you might not have funding for two years. You know, it's not--you know, you get on a tenure track--okay, it starts to get a little more comfortable. You still need to bring in your funds. And if you can't fund yourself, you can't do your research. So the combination of a: I want to do other things, b: how this country, and in fact, the world funds research, we need to figure out a better system. Because these smart men and women are contributing in major ways to impact our planet for the better. We have to fund more of them, so that they can live decent lives. And the third piece is, as a research scientist--and I was working on HIV vaccine development. As you know--HIV, you know, has impacted--there about 30, 35 million, 33 million people in the world that have AIDS, infected with HIV. The bulk of those--and by bulk, I mean that 75 percent of them, you know, certainly 66 to 75 percent of them, are in the continent of Africa. And the rest are primarily poor populations around the rest of the world. And when you look at places like North America, the fastest growing rate of HIV infection is African American women. And so, I would go to these conferences as an HIV immunologist scientist. The conference can have five thousand people, ten thousand people. Some of them have fifteen thousand. These are massive--from regional to national, to international conferences. And I can count the number of people at these research conferences for HIV AIDS on either one, or at most, two of my hands. And that's a problem for me. Because you need, or you should, have a better representation from the people who are being impacted by this terrible viral infectious disease that kills. You want to have that representation at some level, on the great men and women who are doing research and finding out about how to cure it, or how to treat it, or how to-- And so I realized that, you know what? We got to increase the number of black and brown scientists here. And one of the reasons why I appreciate HistoryMakers so much, is that it's a significant contribution. The ScienceMakers component is a serious set of resources to help support this initiative to get more black and brown kids interested and passionate about learning about science. Why is it important? When you look at the American population, we're roughly 330 million, whatever the population is, in total numbers. But when you take the African American population, around 15 percent; the growing Hispanic population, around 17, 18 percent; the Native American population, Pacific Islander--you're talking about that famous number that haunted a certain presidential candidate. You're talking about 47 percent of the American population is black and brown. Well, you want to have representation across the job spectrum, based on what your population looks like. Well, if you look at the African American and Hispanic population of basic scientists, it's less than one percent in this country. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's-- Speaker 1: So, or, and if you go on different fields-- if you do life sciences, okay, it might bump up to two percent. But the point is we are not even close to where we should be in terms of contributing to this great American fabric of scientific enterprise. So, while I love doing basic science research, I knew I didn't want to do it forever. I didn't like the model of how things get funded. I love doing other things. And then I really decided I want to work in a space that allows me to contribute, to try to spread the word, get more people excited, break down barriers for scientific achievement, and just try to stimulate a population of really, really smart kids toward a direction of, hey you can be a scientist or engineer, or mathematician, or a technologically savvy person and enter the job market, do well, take care of your family, take care of your neighborhood--contribute positively to the citizenry of this country. Story_ID: 26934 Speaker 1: So, your current position here at Franklin Institute [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] is senior vice president. Now, you joined the Franklin Institute in 2008? Speaker 2: That's correct. Speaker 1: And how did that take place? Speaker 2: Well, so that's a great follow-up to the story I was just saying. So, in trying to figure out where I want to be, what I want to do--mainly I love education, I love science literacy, I love communicating science. And I want to try to get the message out to more than one person at a time. And so, while I was at--so when I was back at Roxbury Community College and at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] doing this REU [Research Experience for Undergraduates] work, one of my colleagues said, "Hey, there's a position at this place called the Franklin Institute", which I knew about as a science museum in Philadelphia. "They're looking for an executive." At the time, it was a vice-president--"to oversee a lot of their educational programs", and blah, blah, blah. "You know, Frederic, I know you. You, know. You love science, but you also love kind of the, the public face of science and communicating science to laypersons. You love education. You know, this might be interesting. Do you mind if I--" And the person from MIT knew the headhunter at the firm. He said, "Do you mind if I circulate your resume?" So, I'm like, "Okay, no problem." So, I let that happen. And I immediately went online and, you know, Googled the heck out of the Franklin Institute to learn more details, refresh my memory about them. I learned a lot more. And sure enough, to make a long story short, the headhunter decided it would be a good match. Brought me down here for an interview, for a suite of interviews, and what was interesting was the Franklin Institute, which is the oldest science center in this country--it started in 1824--we do a lot of things. We have a science museum with state of the art science exhibits. We have a huge suite of educational programming--from girls in science, to families in science, to minority outreach, to magnet high school, to international programs, to local programs, to neighborhood programs. I mean, it's really a robust science center. And the third component of it is we have a wonderful collections department including, for example, Benjamin Franklin's lightning rod--which is just actually not really impressive because it's just a charred piece of metal--but we have it. We have the Wright Brothers' collection, for example, a lot of notable collections. We have the 'Journal of the Franklin Institute,' which is the second oldest continuously reviewed--sorry, it's the second oldest continuously published scientific journal in this country, starting in 1824. And then we have an awards program which is, which is the oldest comprehensive awards program in the world. And we can come back to that. But the point is, Franklin Institute has this really nice collection of things that I was interested in. And what I offered the Franklin Institute was I was a basic scientist. So, I had that Ph.D. and that postdoctoral research experience. I had a history with education, taught at several levels. Loved kind of the public science communication. And then I had this intellectual property business experience. So, I understood a little bit about entrepreneurialship, and that whole thing, which kind of made me a little different than all the other candidates. And what the Franklin Institute offered me resonated perfectly with what I was able to contribute back. And so, in my last interview here--I had several interviews. I started with the president of Franklin Institute. And then my last one was with Dr. Dennis Wint, the president of the Franklin institute. And I'll never forget it. He said, "Frederic, is there anything else you'd like to tell me?" And I said, "Dr. Wint, I love what I've seen so far. I appreciate that you all think I'm a great candidate. Here's what I bring. You know, the three things I mentioned. I'm a basic scientist, entrepreneurial skills, education. And I think I'm, I think I would do well here. But I want you to know one thing. Philadelphia is 48 percent African American. This building is the national memorial for Benjamin Franklin. It's on our beautiful Benjamin Franklin Parkway. It's a wonderful Greek revival building. If you hire me, know that I want to make sure more people who look like me access the building and the programs we do." And he looked me in my eye, and he said, "Dr. Bertley, that's why you're the perfect position, the perfect person for this job." Which was, I was stunned that he said it. But I wanted to be honest. And I wanted to say, "I carry my, you know, what my parents instilled in me. I carry this idea of equity. I carry this idea of hey, science and education in general is for all, and not just a sub-set of elite rich--one looking people." And you know, so I just wanted to be transparent with him. I had no idea that would be his response. And when he looked at me and said, "Dr. Bertley, that's why you're the perfect person for this position," I said, I knew I was finding my happy home. And so that was 2008, and I came here to oversee a suite of programs, primarily their educational technology. So, a lot of our research is there on our web. Our professional development working, with teachers--not just in the school district of Philadelphia, but outside, helping them be stronger teachers in the classroom, our minority outreach program, our magnet high school. Story_ID: 26935 Speaker 1: Is there a magnet high school? In the City of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], there's a science-- Speaker 2: Yeah, we [Franklin Institute, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] started a school in 2006. It's called Science Solution Academy. In fact, yesterday was their graduation, right down by Big Ben the statue. Speaker 1: Okay, so, this is magnet school located in the Franklin Institute? Speaker 2: It's not in the building. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It's two blocks away. Speaker 1: Alright. Speaker 2: 'Cause we didn't have the space to put it in, so it's two blocks away. But we created it in 2006. It's based on the hands-on project based learning. It's based on the inquiry model. And we, again, as I mentioned, we just graduated our fourth cohort last night in this building. And the students are doing incredibly well. So, that's one of the things that I came to oversee. And then through that time, I grew my portfolio. I added on the collections and curatorial department; I added on the library oversee; I added on the awards program which I mentioned is the oldest comprehensive awards program in the world. We give medals in physics, chemistry, life sciences, earth and environmental sciences, computer science, mechanical engineering, and electrical engineering. And I oversee the Journal. I'm the Executive Editor of the Journal ['Journal of the Franklin Institute']. And then I later--on other programs, like the Color of Science, which is working with the Garvey Institute, which is that institution my parents started. We co-created the Color of Science program, which we launched here and elsewhere throughout the country, and even in Canada, we've done that. And then--now, there's an Egypt project supported by USAID [United States Agency for International Development], where we're helping the Egyptian government start some science platform schools over there in Cairo and outside of Cairo. And so, I've grown what I've overseen to include a whole lot of other areas. And with that, I transitioned from vice president to senior vice president for science here at the Franklin Institute. Speaker 1: So, you started in 2008. Now, it's been, what? Five-- Speaker 2: Five years. Speaker 1: Five years. Speaker 2: That's correct. Speaker 1: Who were some of the awardees? Who have been some of the awardees of the-- Speaker 2: So, interesting. So, we're eighty years older than the Noble [Prize]. Every scientist who's--that's a who's who, has won our award. From Madame Curie and her husband, to Albert Einstein to Jane Goodall, to the Wright Brothers, to Steven Hawking. I mean, you go through the who's who of scientists, they've won our award. One hundred and fifteen of the winners of the Benjamin Franklin Medal have gone on, have won the Noble Prize in their field. Of that, about half of those are recent, meaning we won't give you the medal if you've won the Noble, right. So, in the 1800s, or when the Noble started in 190-- in 190-- they started in 190-- I believe it's '08 [1908]. When the Noble started, you know, they were giving some Nobles, and you know, some of our folks had won the medal, and vice versa. Because the Noble wasn't big. But by the time the Noble got very big--and we won't give you the medal if you have the Noble. But one hundred and fifteen of our winners have won the Noble. One of the tougher things is there's not a ton of women, and not a ton of minorities. We're working to change that. Our most recent minority was Jim [James] West, who I know he's part of the ScienceMakers. Speaker 1: Yeah, the inventor of the electret microphone. Speaker 2: The electret microphone, that's right. A dear friend of mine,a wonderful scientist, amazing inventor and engineer. So, he won our medal in 2010, which was fantastic. But the medal is really remarkable. It's selected by a group that meets in this boardroom actually, called the Committee on Science and the Arts. And they were called in 1824, the Committee on Science and Invention. Ten years later, so 1834, they changed their name to Committee on Science and the Arts. They've maintained that name to today. They're a group of scientists from around the regional universities and firms--and engineering firms here. And they've been selecting these men and women through a very exhaustive two-year case prosecution process. But they pick these amazing people who've contributed in so many cool ways. So, I mean if you go through a rolodex of the top scientists in the last one hundred and fifty years, those are the ones who've won the medal. Speaker 1: Okay. And the Journal, now the Journal is a professional journal? Speaker 2: Yeah, so the Journal--it's interesting. The Journal, again, started in 1824 like our medaling system program. It used to be the 'Who's Who Book of Publications.' So, you know, by virtue of being so old, so you know. Alexander Graham Bell published in it; Thomas Edison; Max Planck; Harry Rosen; Albert Einstein published in it. And so, it was the best scientists in the late 1800's, early 1900's, were published in the 'Journal of Franklin Institute.' Since you know, a proliferation of journals, like 'Science and Nature,' the Journal of Franklin Institute has focused on applied mathematics. It's got a tighter field, but it's doing very well. And again, it's the second oldest continuous published journal in this country. The first is something called 'Silliman's Science Journal,' which started in 1818. And ours started six years later in 1824. Story_ID: 26936 Speaker 1: Now you're one of, is it six vice presidents, you know? Speaker 2: Yes. We have--so there's two senior vice presidents--myself and Troy Collins, who's Senior Vice President for Programs, Marketing and Business Development. There's the Chief Operating Officer Larry Dubinski; and our President Dennis Wint. Then underneath are Human Resource Vice President Rich Reid Styles; Operations Vice President Rich Rabena; Development and External Affairs Vice President Merissa Wigglesworth; and Finance Vice President Travont Keith. So, you have a total of six vice presidents--two of them being senior, four of them being non-senior, one chief operating officer, and a CEO [chief executive officer. Speaker 1: Okay. And how's the--how are minorities or women represented here at Franklin institute? Speaker 2: It's interesting. And so, there's one of the senior vice presidents, along with me. There's one at the vice president's level, that's Reed Styles. There are--there's one, there are two women at the vice president's level. And then at the director level, there are more women than men, probably a two to one ratio, if not even greater. Maybe a three to one ratio. And there are a handful of African American, you know--maybe two South Asian. You know, so at the director level, we're very well diversified, if not heavy on the female side. We could certainly up the African American, Hispanic and the South Asian population, for example. At the management level, we've got a nice mix across the board of gender and racial distribution. And then kind of part-time employees as well. It's a nice mix. So, we're certainly not bad. We have, what's great is we have representation on every level. And when you have a president that says, "That's why you're the man, because you want to make sure you're the right man for the job, but you want to make sure you're bringing in more people that look like you--" So, there's a nice ethos and consciousness. But you know, we are two hundred years old. And so, there's always room for improvement. But as one of the executives on the part of what's called the Leadership Team--the vice presidents and senior vice presidents--I have to say we do a great job at trying to ensure opportunities for all. And one of the best places we do that, is we do a lot of contractual work. And there's certain city and state obligations that if you're doing contractual work, you have to have 'X' percentage of minority and 'Y' percentages of women. And we blast that out that to-- We're one of the best institutions for that. We always recruit minority owned business to do our stuff, whether it's building a new building--which is going on right now--to keeping our building clean, to do all of our operational stuff. So, it's great for me. I feel very positive in this environment. You know, we can always recruit more, but certainly things can be, you know, completely different than that, in a negative space. So, I'm very happy here. Story_ID: 26937 Speaker 1: Have you been able to impact African American participation in the building-- Speaker 2: Oh, without a doubt. First of all, the Franklin Institute has been able to that in general. We have a program called Community Night, where we got Target to underwrite it. And what we do is we open our building for free, one night a month. And we figured out, working with an African American owned media outreach marketing firm, how to target certain neighborhoods to get those populations. Say, "Hey, you can come to Franklin Institute for free." And so with that, we've significantly increased-- you know, so when you come on a Community Night, you'll see, you know, families--single moms, single dads, strollers. You know, you'll see poor white people, you know--Hispanic folks, African Americans, you name it. It's really nice, like a rich culture of folks coming in here enjoying our wonderful exhibits and learning about science. That's one. Two, through the program called the Color of Science, we've created a brand with the Garvey Institute, a brand that really has this building flooded with persons of color from the adult perspective as well as the student perspective. And then we have a suite of outreach programs-PACTS [Partnerships for Achieving Careers in Technology and Science], STEM [science, technology, engineering, mathematics] Scholars, our high school--where it's not a cross sectional career day where you come once and see something and no one else helps you out. These are programs where the students come every Saturday. For not one year, for not two years--but three years of middle school, four years of high school and really infused in science enrichment. And by the time they're ready to go to college, a: they either go into STEM and, you know, they have the courage and confidence like any other student would have. So, we've definitely made a dent in public consumption, if you will, for persons of color to come into the building--and especially in programmatic delivery, in showing that they're sustainable programs, because that's what makes the difference. Again, you know, one-touches are fine, but they're not ideal. The ideal is to have a sustainable program. And I want to emphasize that they're made possible two ways. One, we do write competitive grants to support this. But there's a mandate from our board of trustees that says we, no matter what, have to underwrite programs that increase accessibility to students of color, adults of color, and underserved populations in general. And so, we've been very, very good here. We have, our visitorship is approximately anywhere between eight hundred and nine hundred thousand, so almost a million. Of that, we do about two hundred fifty thousand school groups. And of that, fifty thousand are free. So, if you are a Title One school or a lower income school or a high free and reduced lunch rate, you can come to the Franklin Institute for free. So we have school groups that are here, you know, en masse, absolutely with free admission because of the programs, again, mandated by our board of trustees. So, without question, "pre me," the Franklin Institute has been doing some good stuff. I am very happy and proud that I've been able to contribute and elevate some of that excitement and interest and provision of accessibility for these kinds of programs, because the Franklin Institute takes that stuff very, very seriously. Story_ID: 26938 Speaker 1: Today, what would you say is your professional legacy? I know you're still young, but-- Speaker 2: Twofold. Science is beautiful, and we as a human species, you know, while we did at one point and time--at least the conventional definition of science--in the twentieth and twenty-first century, we are defined by all the technologies and all the, you know--from the camera lenses to the lighting; to the medicines to the GPS [global positioning system]; to the cellphones; to the satellites; to the, you know, to the fabrics in your clothes; to the food you eat is genetically modified-- We are impacted on a visceral level, because of science, or by science. And so, for me I think it's beautiful and it's ubiquitous. And so, part of my legacy is getting folks to see the beauty in it and appreciate the ubiquitousness in it. The other part of my legacy is to ensure that as many people as possible, especially those who we categorize as under-served, can access the rich educational resources that this great nation offers. And specifically, target the science and technology and engineering areas to the underserved populations. Because let's face it. The human family isn't a galaxy distribution. It's a normal distribution. You have some people that are meant to sing opera. There are some people that are meant to run a football down the field. And you have some people that are meant to rip apart a computer and write code. And some people will be the greatest physicians. Some people will build the best buildings. It's a mixed population. It's not by race, it's by normal or galaxy distribution, at whatever level your combination of DNA and micro-environment made you interested in 'X'. So with that, African American, Hispanic, and Native Americans are no less able to science, are no less able to master mathematics, are no less able to contribute to medical fields than any other culture. It's about accessibility and support. And so, my legacy stems around making sure, or trying my best, to work with others to get people to see the beauty and wonder and majesty of science. And if you believe in God, it comes through God. And if you don't believe in God, it'll make you believe in God. (laughter). And so you know, my mission is, or my legacy is, to support that piece, but also to make sure it's accessible. So that if you do want to study it--if you do want to become the next cutting edge roboticist; the next cutting edge, you know, Jim [James] West, the next cutting edge Sharon Haney, the next cutting edge--you name it. You have the opportunity to do that. So, it's not that I think everybody should become a Ph.D. scientist. That's not it at all. It's that everybody should have some literacy around science. And should they want to have the opportunity to explore it, they can access it. Story_ID: 26939 Speaker 1: And the way I like to sum it up, is we're all expected to read and write. There's nobody on the planet who will tell you reading and writing is not important. I'm not talking from a racial perspective. I'm just talking about from the human perspective. We all think it's important to be able to be literate, to read and write. Nobody's putting any pressure on you to be William Shakespeare, Maya Angelou, or Countee Cullen, or Richard Wright. But you're still expected to read and write. We're all expected to count, right. You've got to know your timetables, you've got to know basic math. Nobody's expecting you to be Albert Einstein. Nobody's expecting you to be Arlie Petters or Benjamin Banneker. But you're still supposed to be able to count. Yet, science, somewhere maybe in the '40s [1940s], '30s [1930s], '50s [1950s], I don't know. I'd have to really dig down and do some research. But somewhere--America, Canada, and you know, western society--and in some places in eastern society, have decided that science isn't for everyone--it's for a small group of usually older white men with thick glasses and pocket protectors. And those are the people who are geniuses and are supposed to learn science. Well, in the same way you should learn to read and write, but not necessarily have expectations of being Shakespeare or Maya Angelou, you should be literate in science. You should know what an antibiotic is. You should have some understanding of what probability means. If we had a better understanding of that, we might have avoided the subprime, you know, mess that has put so many people out on the streets and has made the U.S. economy really tough, right. If we understood a little bit about genetics, we might have a better understanding of things that revolve around DNA. If we had a better understanding of genetics, we might understand genetically modified foods, and think more about was that the right thing to do? Is this a good thing? Is it a bad thing? You're not going to be an expert. But if you're eating genetically modified foods day in and day out because you're not going to Whole Foods or Trader Joe's, or whatever other places keep those non-genetically modified foods, you know, you should know about that. So, my concept is, hey, just like reading and writing and just like arithmetic, I believe society should have some level of appreciation and literacy around science. So, when you choose not to vaccinate your child for measles--if it's for religious reasons, I will respect your religion. That is a religious choice, and that's up to you as an individual. But if you're doing that because you don't have confidence in what the measles vaccine is going to do, then understand that those children who died this year and last year and the year before because their parents--and not for religious reasons--chose not to vaccinate their child, that's a problem. And just like when you get sick and--sorry, just like when your car is broken, you take it to a mechanic. And if your plumbing or toilet doesn't work, you call a plumber. If you want to learn about vaccines, you know, develop some literacy around vaccines. Don't go off to Jenny McCarthy or somebody who is not trained in that field to get your wisdom, or mold your ideas around what vaccines are. And so, I think the fact that we have this apathy towards learning science--or it's for a small group over there--allows people who don't have a skill set to opine on it, which impacts other people who don't take their time to learn a skill set. And you get some problems that can happen. So, again, it's not making everyone a scientist, it's just about appreciating, like other topics, there should be an expectation that, you know, people should care to learn something about the very world that is moving us forward at warp speed. Story_ID: 26940 Speaker 1: Now, do you see yourself becoming a director of an institute like this at some point? Speaker 2: Well, definitely. There's the Garvey Institute [Montreal, Quebec, Canada], which of course started here in Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], and will eventually grow. And you know, so in general, as a concept, I see myself in the place as a director of this kind of institution. I also see myself in the place of a provost or president of an academic institution. My heart is buried--while we're talking science in this context, in a bigger picture, it's buried in science and arts. I mean, education for me, you know, is indeed that crutch that people can lean on. You know, education really is that liberating modality. Education really is the transportation to the Promised Land, as it were. I really believe that. And so, however I navigate in the future, whether it's in a science center proper; whether it's in the ivory towers of academia; whether it's in an other non-for-profit, like an educational institution like the Garvey Institute--but certainly seeing myself working with other people, okay. This is not about trying to be solo as a director, but working with other people to try to increase educational opportunities, which ultimately, downstream, will lead to a more harmonious society because of the economic stability which leads to a harmonious society. Speaker 1: Okay. What are the plans for the Garvey Institute? Speaker 2: So, from a programmatic standpoint, we're working on a few programs. One is professional development. So, things like, just simple things like how do you write a resume? How do you write a CV [curriculum vitae]? Interview skills. All those things for populations that don't really access those--give them the skill set and training there. Other programs, like kind of kindergarten to grade four programs. What we're calling for now Civics-- Civics and Humanities through Museum Studies. The idea is, look at a suite of museums--from science museums to zoos to art museums. Those can be wonderful curriculum in humanities--learning about different cultures, learning about species. And so, creating a clever suite of programs around that, with that age group of K [kindergarten] through four, to get them at that early age to understand the beauty of the human family you know--the cultural institutions, the cultural creations from Africa to Asia to North America, South America--but using the lens of museums to get kids excited, to see that at that young age, will we think have downstream impacts. And this is for all kids. It will have downstream impacts on their capacity to have a better sensitivity to their human compatriots. And so, that's another aspect. A third aspect, they're just basic tutorials. And so while it will not be an operational school--basic tools for middle school and high school sciences and civics. And the fourth thing is a scholarship program. There are so many wonderful diamonds in the rough, as, as they like to call them. Kids who have a natural appetite and have a natural capacity for learning, but aren't in the right milieu--don't have parents who can get them access to college; don't have aunts or uncles who can bring them into industry. So, kids who just have that capacity, but don't have--sorry, have the skill set per se, or the raw material--but don't have access to getting those kids scholarships so that they can fund little trips or little experiences to different places to get some of those experiences. So, it's really a kind of--and I know a bunch of others--but a kind of umbrella suite of programs where you can impact kids in the K to three, K to four region, middle and high school kids, as well as adults who are seeking to re-- reinsert themselves in, in job markets, etc., helping them find jobs. Story_ID: 26941 Speaker 1: So, in terms of the Garvey Institute, are you, are you talking about doing those programs in Canada, or here in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], or-- Speaker 2: Yeah, so the Garvey Institute will have two footprints for the next five years or so. There'll always be a footprint in Montreal [Quebec, Canada], because that's where it was started, and there'll be a growing footprint here in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. So, as it is a non-for-profit and smallish, we're starting very slow. The concept is to really build sustainable programs. So it's not about, you know, being a Franklin Institute or being a University of Pennsylvania, Temple [University], or Drexel [University] [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. It's about starting to build small programs that are sustainable and can make small and then medium, and hopefully, large impacts. So, as that happens, you know, they may proliferate. And you might have one in Chicago [Illinois], one in New York [New York], you know, one in Boston [Massachusetts], one in Toronto [Ontario, Canada]. But for now, we're looking at those two notable points, Montreal and Philadelphia. Speaker 1: And when you say we, are talking about--are your other family members involved, or are-- Speaker 2: Sure. So my mother [June Alleyne Miller], bless her, at eighty-four years old is still the direct-- the official directress of the Institute. I've been brought on the board, and so I'm a board member of the Garvey Institute. There's, you know, a few of other board members in the Canadian context. And they're, you know, a few people here in Philadelphia who are not board members, but are what we're calling strategic volunteers, that are very smart around how do you build things in a sustainable way? So, at some point, we'll start creating a separate board of trustees for the Philadelphia chapter, and then try to populate it with some part-time staff, and then ultimately full time staff. Speaker 1: Okay. I know Philadelphia at one time was the home of Thomas Harvey who was the president general of the UNIA [Universal Negro Improvement Association]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: He must have passed in the '80s [1980s], I guess. Speaker 2: That's right, that's right. That's right, it's funny. And when my mother visited me here in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], this would ha-we're in 2013--this would have been about 2010. I took her over to Cecil B. Moore Avenue, which is where the UNIA building was. And it was actually open, a little rundown, but it was open. And so we walked in and there were two gentleman in there. And you know, they're not very active. It's pointless, you know, that building was not very active. But they had all these wonderful artifacts and photographs there. And there were photographs of, I mean there were several photographs which I have the identical photographs in my home--in my parents' home in Montreal-of, you know, President James [Stewart] and a bunch of other colleagues. And so, for my mother it was really nice for her to come to Philadelphia, walk through this and to see all the stuff that, you know, she was part of in Montreal and spawned her to create the Garvey Institute. And then to come over to Philadelphia and see that there are at least some artifacts here showing you that-- So, it was very nice, and it would be nice to see the UNIA get a third wind, if possible. But you know, it's a different, it's just a different time. I mean, the digital media and the information, I mean it's not about chapters in any cities, as much as it is about global penetration. And so, you know, the people who have the legs behind the UNIA, you need to get a different generation of kids who understand the whole multimedia--get information out there and have--that's why I'm calling it a third generation, or a third revival of the UNIA. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But that was a special experience, going through there with my mom. Story_ID: 26942 Speaker 1: What, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: Well, my hopes and--let me answer from a fifty mile up. My hopes and consideration for humanity would be that those kind of titles are meaningless. From a accessibility standpoint, they have to always be meaningful, because there's beauty in our differences. So, there are certain African traditions you should not want to lose. It's part of the beautiful fabric of humanity, just like certain Chinese and Japanese, certain South Americans, certain Europeans. So, there's, there's--for me, my hopes would be a wonderful appreciation for the beauty, of the diversity of the human family--but zero, zero measure of worth based on the diversity. So, to draw that back to the immediacy of your question, what are my hopes for African Americans? Well, you know, I mean Marcus Garvey started his trips around the world in, I guess the early 1900s. And his whole reason why he started the Universal Negro Improvement Association [UNIA] was because he realized everywhere he went in the planet, persons who looked like him--so, Africans or people of African descent--were at the bottom of every societal rung, or every societal ladder, or echelon. It's not about beating people down and being at the top. It's about being equitous. And so, that was true at the turn of the twentieth century. Not only is that true today, it's even more amplified because of the access of global everything. So, you can be on the other side of Moscow [Russia], and you'd immediately know how black folk are doing in Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. And so, you know, my hopes for that--I don't want to use the words like close the gap. I mean, I don't want to talk about obliterating a gap. I mean, closing the gap, it's not going to happen. The gap is too big. So, you know, so my hopes would be that somehow through programs like The HistoryMakers, through programs like the Color of Science, through the dozens if not hundreds, of other great programs out there that are trying to help give people opportunity--that saying someone is African American is as meaningful as saying-- now again, with the caveat of keeping the cultural aspects that are neat and interesting and historical, but is as meaningful as saying someone wore in a blue shirt versus wearing a white shirt. And so, my hopes and aspirations is that, you know, persons of color will have chances to, in the context of ScienceMakers and in the context of the Franklin Institute [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], have chances to pursue literacy around science. And for those who want to pursue careers in that, that they do that from a bigger perspective, have access to the exact same things that other populations have access to, without feeling ashamed for it, ashamed by it, without it feeling like it was a handout; without it feeling like they had to work twice as hard for it, that they had an equitous capacity to access the resources that this great planet offers. Story_ID: 26943 Speaker 1: Can you tell us something about your family? Do you have children? Speaker 2: I have a daughter, a stepdaughter. When I met Heather she had a, a, I guess a one and a half year old at the time. And so, a wonderful family. She has now graduated from university, trying to figure out what her next steps are. And we are thrilled that she is out of the nest. We're thrilled that she's a very well-adjusted young lady, and you know, we look forward what path she is going to blaze. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: Stuck at one. There was a point and time where we were--the Misses came up to me a few years ago, and said, "I think I'd like to have another child." I said, "Are you kidding me? She is in a university, she is doing it. We are not starting over." (laughter). So, we're happy there. From an extended family, I mean I have tons of cousins and aunts and uncles, and I'm very close to some, not close to enough. That's always a work in progress. But you know, family and friends are te-- the human extension. It's really what matters most. Story_ID: 26944 Speaker 1: Reflecting back a bit, is there anything that you would do differently, if you could? Speaker 2: That's a great question. And I the way I'll answer it is this. No, because I'm really happy what my family's been able to achieve. I'm really happy what I've been able to achieve. I'm in a very good place. And the danger of saying, "Oh, I would do something different," could lead to the chaos effect that through non-linear dynamics--of just straight luck or missed luck--could lead to me being in a much worse off position that I am now. So, I'm very careful to say, "Oh, I wish I did this, I wish I did it that way." I mean, you know, sure I got a parking ticket because I didn't put enough money in the meter. So, those kind of things, yeah, I'd want to do different. But on a bigger picture, you know, I'm lucky to have been blessed by what I think, regard as the best parents on the planet. I'm blessed to have a wonderful suite of friends and mentors, especially in my adult life, who have been able to support--you know, I have so many things I'm so appreciative about. I'm very cautious to say, "Well, I wish I had done this differently." So, that's how I'll answer that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It doesn't mean that I don't regret anything. I mean, we all have regrets. I think that's a good question. And please don't ask me what I regret. (laughter). But, but not that I wish, no--yeah, yeah. So, I'll stop there with that. I think that's a good place for me to stop that question. Story_ID: 26945 Speaker 1: Is there anything we haven't discussed that we need to talk about before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: I mean, I've mentioned already The HistoryMakers. But I want to underscore the tremendous, voluminous work--and important work--that Julieanna Richardson and all the people who contribute to HistoryMakers have undertaken. I mean, the idea of capturing the stories while people are alive in a massive way, as opposed to--in a comprehensive way as opposed to a one-off way-- not only distinguishes the work of the HistoryMakers and the ScienceMakers, but provides without question, a tool and resource that all of my hopes that we talked about in this conversation have a place to rest on, to possibly be actualized. Because when kids are growing up and looking for heroes, you know, yeah, we have, we have to build our future on our past. We all know that. Everybody understands the importance appreciating the past and those who come before us. But if we can't identify people today and celebrate people today, who are contributing in a major way--not just for our children, but for all people, all races, as it were--to see that, "Oh my gosh, there is this breadth of black and brown folks that are doing some really important things. And maybe I'll think differently when I stereotype. Maybe I'll think differently the next time I see a person of color." And I just want to underscore that this work, which is in my understanding and my review, unpara-- unparalled. This work-- just, keep being recognized and thank you for having the courage to build this bank of wonderful material. Story_ID: 26946 Speaker 1: The last question is similar to legacy, but a little bit different. Sir, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: I'm going to ask a question that might seem silly. But it will help in my response. When you say how would I like to be remembered, do you mean by people of my generation, or do you mean--you know, in a Shakespearean, you know, Countee Cullen-- Speaker 1: Uh-- Speaker 2: Because that's very interesting. At the end of the day, three generations--if you're famous, you're forgotten after three generations. So, I want to know--do you just mean like next year, if I were to leave, or-- (laughter). Can you qualify that a little more, in terms of timeline. (simultaneous) Speaker 1: (simultaneous) Well, it's a general question. But yeah, we can start with, I guess with--I guess, yeah, we could talk about yeah, this generation. How would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: So, this generation. So, people will say "Oh, yeah, who is Frederic Bertley?" It would be to be remembered as someone who put the character of man and the character of woman first. And you know, I can expand on that if you wish. But it, for me it drills down to not what you're wearing, and not what's in your pocket. But what is your character? And have I, in this case me, has Frederic contributed something to the character and development of people? That's how I would like to be remembered by my peers. On the bigger picture, like I said, I mean I don't expect any history books to necessarily have my name in it, (laughter), as it were. And what I would love is, whether my name is remembered, that my philosophical ideals would be remembered. So, in the same way that sometimes you don't know who came up with something, but you know that something exists, that's a wonderful thing. So, sometimes taking the name brand off of something is great. So, you know, so in the case of, in the case of Jim [James] West and the electret microphone. So, I tell everybody that an African American person and his German colleague, Gerry Sessler, were responsible for developing that. Because I want young black kids to go, "Hey, you know, you use a cellphone everyday. A brother came up with that." So, on one level that's cool. But on the other level, it's wonderful that there are--I don't know how many cellphones in use around the world, that are dependent on Jim West's electret microphone, and nobody knows that's him. So, his products are remembered and used, but he's not. So, there's a little duality there that's interesting for me...