 Story_ID: 16557 Speaker 1: My name is Leo Branton, B-R-A-N-T-O-N Junior. I was born on February 17, 1922, in Pine Bluff, Arkansas. Today's date is July 27, 2001. Speaker 2: And give us your location. You know, where we are. We're at your home but can you give the address? Speaker 1: We are at my residence at 1818 Wellington Road, in Los Angeles, California. Speaker 2: Okay. And I'd like to have your profession? Speaker 1: I am a retired attorney. Story_ID: 16558 Speaker 1: I'd like to know what your favorite food is? Speaker 2: Hmm. I suppose--I don't have a favorite food. I like almost all foods. I like gumbo, which I make myself. I like all kinds of seafood. And believe it or not, I like chitterlings. Speaker 1: [Laughing] Okay. Speaker 2: [Simultaneously laughing] Speaker 1: There is black in you. Okay! Speaker 2: But I don't like pig feet. Speaker 1: Okay, [chuckling]. And I'd like to know what your favorite time of year is? Speaker 2: Well, I really don't have any favorite time of year. I have lived in places where the seasons changed. Like, I lived in Chicago [Illinois] for a number of years. And the seasons change there. Seasons change here in California but not dramatically. And so I've gotten so accustomed to living in a place where's there not much variation between the seasons--I think I'd kind of lost track of what a favorite season was. Do you want to cut that off. Speaker 1: Okay. I want to know what your--'cause you were saying, you didn't have a favorite time of year so. Well, you would say summer sort of. Or warm weather. Speaker 2: Not really, really hot weather. For example, I don't like going to places like Palm Springs [California] where it's very hot. I don't like to go to Las Vegas [Nevada] when it's hot in the summertime. I suppose if I had a favorite--had to select one--I would say the spring. Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Blue. Speaker 1: And favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: I like Mexico. And I like Europe. But my favorite place in Europe is the island of Mallorca. Which is a Spanish island off the coast of Spain. That's my favorite place in the world. Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: No. Story_ID: 16559 Speaker 1: I want to first start out by asking about your mother, Pauline. And her background and her, you know, her--what do you know about that? You know her background, her parents? Speaker 2: All right. My mother was Pauline Wiley before she married my father [Leo Branton, Sr.] in 1921. She was one of seven children. And she was a college graduate. She graduated from Tuskegee Institute [Tuskegee, Alabama]. And when she married my father she--and she was a schoolteacher. When she married my father she had to give up school teaching because in Arkansas, in those days, they did not allow married women to teach. I suppose because they wanted to have, men to have the jobs, so they could support their families. I come from a rather amazing family on my mother's side. There were seven children and four of them were college graduates. All of them are now deceased including my mother, with the exception of her youngest sister, Julia. Julia Hazard (ph.), who now lives in Jacksonville, Florida. And who graduated from Talladega [College, Talladega, Alabama] And that's the extent of it. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) How old is she? How old is she. That's your aunt? Speaker 2: Yes. She's eleven years older than I am. So I'm seventy-nine. That would mean that she's about eighty-one. Speaker 1: Now did your mother share with you any stories about her growing up? Speaker 2: I don't recall any. Story_ID: 16560 Speaker 1: I know that as we were growing up, in Pine Bluff [Arkansas], my grandparents, my mother's mother [Effie Wiley] and father had one of the largest houses in the city of Pine Bluff--black or white. As a matter of fact, Pine Bluff had a population of--at that time--of about 30,000 people. And, almost half of them were Negroes. And the city was divided into portions of the east side and the west side. And all of the streets on the east side were named after states. The first street east of Main Street was--Main Street was the dividing street. It was called State Street. Then there was Alabama, Georgia, Texas, Tennessee, Louisiana and so forth on. We lived on Alabama Street, which was only two blocks off of Main Street. Alabama was the first paved street in the town, on that side of town. All other streets when you got beyond the street we lived on, Alabama, was a--either a dirt street or a gravel street. On the other hand--and that's where most of the Negro people lived on that side of town. On the other side of Main Street, all of the streets were named after trees. Pine, Chestnut, Walnut, Olive, Laurel, Beach, Oak, Elm, Poplar, Cherry, Lemon, Mulberry, etc. Now you ask me, how do I--can remember the names of those streets in order? That's because my father [Leo Branton, Sr.] had a taxicab company and I used to drive a taxi. And as a result of driving taxi I was familiar with the--all of the streets in the city. The street that we lived on at 1303 Alabama Street was a very large house. And, my mother [Pauline Wiley] and father lived there in a room of that house where I was born. In those days there were no--there was no Negro hospital. And almost all Negro people were born at home with the help of a midwife. However, we had a family physician as well as a midwife, who attended my birth. My grandparents owned the entire block between 13th and 14th and between Alabama and Georgia. All of the people on the opposite side of the street where we lived were white people. And they were very small homes. Very modest in comparison to my grandfather's house. My grandfather [James Wiley] had this tremendous piece of property there. And eventually my father built his house right next to my grandparents' house there. And the rest of the property was used for play. We had a tennis court out there. We had a miniature golf course at one time. And all of the white kids across the street used to come over and we used to shoot marbles in--on the lot, next, next to our home. And the kids, the white kids and the Negro kids got along famously. It was only when they got to be maybe twelve, thirteen years old that they started moving away. That place now--and I went back there last year--my grandparents' home has been torn down. My--the house that my father built is still there. And about four other homes have been built on this land where we used to have the playground and the tennis court and so forth. The ones across the street are still occupied by white people. So actually, that was really the only part of Pine Bluff that we could say was an integrated neighborhood--when I was living there. Story_ID: 16561 Speaker 1: Now you said your mother [Pauline Wiley] had Indian in her background. Right? Did you say that or? Or you're not sure? Or? Speaker 2: Yes, my mother's father was the child, of a Cherokee Indian. You want me to move to my--to my father [Leo Branton, Sr.]? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: My father's mother was a Choctaw Indian. And, I have tried to find out where the Negro aspect of our family came in. And looking at my mother's parents, I suspect that one of the parents of my maternal grandmother [Effie Wiley] was Negro. I don't--not know where the Negro aspect on my father's side came from. Because my grandfather which I knew very little about and none of us ever learned too much about him. He looked like an Indian because he had a very red, ruddy complexion. And I know that my father's mother was Choctaw. Obviously there must have been some Negro aspect of my grandfather's going back. But I don't know where it came from. Because they always considered themselves Negro. When--they were from Mississippi. And when my grandfather and my dad moved to Pine Bluff [Arkansas] from Mississippi, people always asked me, "Where are your parents from?" I said, "Well, my parents were--my father was from Mississippi but he decided that he wanted to go north, so he went to Arkansas." And we've--it is said that the--my father's mother was related to one of the founders of Leflore County in Mississippi. [Greenwood LeFlore] Whose--who happened to have been a Choctaw Indian [and French]. I don't know whether that's true or not but this is what I've heard. Speaker 1: In your family discussion was there ever anything about the mixed heritage? The Indian heritage? Was it ever--I mean, talked about at all? Or? Okay. Speaker 2: No. We never talked about it. Everything that I have learned about--I don't really know--never was interested in heritage at any time. Everything that I have learned, I have learned it secondhand from my brother Wiley [Austin Branton], who we called the family historian who researched everything. And my surviving brother, Sterling [Branton], who is--who also has gone through the county records, in Arkansas and has gone to Mississippi to try to find records of this. But we've just been unable to document where the Negro aspect of our family came in. But both--all of my family, both my mother's family, as well as, my dad, we always considered ourselves Negro. Story_ID: 16562 Speaker 1: Did your father [Leo Branton, Sr.] talk any about growing up, his growing up? Speaker 2: No. He--I knew this--that my father--my father's mother died either at childbirth or shortly thereafter. And he was raised entirely by his father, my grandfather. He never went any higher than the fourth or fifth grade. And he married my mother [Pauline Wiley], of course, who was a college graduate [from Tuskegee Institute, Tuskegee, Alabama]. But we always--in my family considered going to--we had to go to college. I mean, it was a given that we would all go to college. And we all did go to college. There were five children in my family. I had three brothers [Wiley, Sterling and Paul Laurence Branton] and one sister. And all of us are college graduates. And four of us have higher degrees. And I can say this, that in Pine Bluff [Arkansas], I had in my class, even though I went to a segregated high school that I had very, very few facilities there. I can tell you how pitiful it was. For example, the library at my school was not as large as the library that my grandparents had in their house. Some of the teachers used to sometimes come from the high school and borrow books from my grandparent's home. You know we had a complete set of 'Encyclopedia Britannicas' and all kinds of books--the classics. And, in our science department for example, we had one microscope that everybody had to use. Our football team for example, only had eleven jerseys for the first team. And the second team had to wear the leftover jerseys from the year before. And that's the way it went. All the time that I was there. Speaker 1: Now do you remember your earliest--some of your earlier memories of growing up? Speaker 2: Well, I remember my first day in school. I was only four years old, and I went to a place called Branch Normal [College, later University of Arkansas, Pine Bluff] which was a [teachers'] training school for Arkansas State College--Arkansas State College for Negroes. And I left there and went to a private school, Miss Hattie Benson School [Pine Bluff, Arkansas]. And then, I left there and went to Missouri Street School [34th and Missouri Street School, Pine Bluff, Arkansas]. And I was always ahead of my age group--because I started school, started school so young--I started school only when I was four. And actually, when I graduated from high school I was the youngest person not only in my class but who had ever graduated from Merrill High School [Pine Bluff, Arkansas]. And consequently everybody who was in my class was always two or three years older than I was. Story_ID: 16563 Speaker 1: Growing up, I know that the theaters were segregated. We could--when we went to the theater we had to go to--around to the stairway there. They had a special window where they would sell us tickets--and we could only sit in the balcony. We were not allowed to go into any of the drugstores or restaurants or sit at a soda fountain. And at a very early age, I really became incensed at how white people would treat black people in Pine Bluff [Arkansas]. And especially, my family. My grandmother, my mother's mother was named Effie. Effie Wiley. And I remember one day--they had a Metropolitan Life [Insurance Company] insurance policy. And--well I don't know how old I was. I couldn't have been over eleven or twelve years old. The white agent came around, knocked on the door and asked, "Is Effie here?" And I said, "Who wants to know?" He said, "Well, I came to collect the insurance." I said, "We don't have an Effie here. We have a Mrs. Effie Wiley. Is that who you want?" And he said, "No, I just asked for Effie." And my parents told me that, "You know you have to learn where you are. You can't really talk to white people like that." Now my mother was also sensitive to it. All of this--black people in Arkansas at that time, if they went into a store, a women's store, they couldn't try on a hat or--or try on--they could try on shoes. But all of the clerks--and incidentally, most of the stores there were Jewish-owned. And my mother would never tell any of them her first name. Because she knew that they would call her Pauline. So she was always P.A. Wiley. "P" for Pauline and "A" for Angela. Pauline A. Wiley is what she--and so they would, they called her P.A. Story_ID: 16564 Speaker 1: Let's go over your siblings though. You have--you're the oldest? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And there--who--What are the others name in order? Speaker 2: Wiley [Branton], is two years younger than I am. Wiley died and I don't remember the year he died. It was about ten years ago. But Wiley was the second black graduate from the University of Arkansas law school [University of Arkansas School of Law, Fayetteville, Arkansas]. When I went to law school right after World War II, Arkansas was not admitting any Negroes to the higher education program. But Arkansas had a policy. If you wanted to go somewhere else they would pay your tuition to Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut], or to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] or to any of the schools. Just to keep you from polluting the University of Arkansas system. But by the time my brother Wiley went to law school, he--they were beginning to admit Negroes to the law school. And he--as I said, he became the second black graduate to ever graduate from the University of Arkansas law school. And interestingly enough when the Little Rock [Arkansas] school segregation case took place in Arkansas and Governor [Orval] Faubus was saying that we will never have integration--that case was being handled by my brother Wiley, who was himself a graduate of the University of Arkansas. Where previously they had said that it would never happen. My next brother is Sterling [Branton]. Sterling--incidentally both Wiley, Sterling and I--all three of us served in the Armed Forces during World War II. I was in the infantry, in the 92nd Infantry Division. My brother Wiley was in the Air Corps. And my brother Sterling was in the Navy and he was on--on submarines. He was a submariner. When he got out of service, he came to Chicago [Illinois] where I, where I lived. And while I was in Northwestern University's law school [Northwestern University School of Law, Chicago, Illinois], he was attending Roosevelt College [Roosevelt University, Chicago, Illinois] there. And when I decided to come to California he came out here with me and went to UCLA [University of California at Los Angeles] and he graduated from UCLA. He for years was an--a engineer at Lockheed Aircraft [Company] and he worked at Lockheed Aircraft as an engineer until the day--until he retired about three years ago. My baby brother was Paul. Paul Laurence [Branton], who incidentally was named after Paul Laurence Dunbar. Who was one of my mother's favorites. And Paul graduated from Arkansas State College [now Arkansas State University, Jonesboro, Arkansas]. And then he got a Ph.D. Very frankly; I don't know where he got his Ph.D. from. But he became the principal of a high school in Chicago [Illinois]. And was principal of that high school until he passed away, which was about three years before my brother Wiley died. Speaker 1: What's the high school? Do you know? Speaker 2: I don't know the name of the high school. Speaker 1: Okay. Now. Then your sisters? Speaker 2: But it was a high school where they had real troubled young tough kids. And he was sent to that school because he knew how to handle kids. He was an athlete. And had played football during his college days and he had a way with--knowing how to handle young tough kids. And that's why he was sent to that school. And he did a great job at that school, I understand. Speaker 1: And now your sisters? Speaker 2: My sister, who's the baby. Who is, maybe twelve years younger than I am. I knew very little about her--because I had left town when she grew up. But I know that she graduated from Talladega [College, Talladega, Alabama]. And she went to Talladega because her aunt--my Aunt Julia [Hazzard] that I told you about also had gone to Talladega. She married the head of the school system in--what is the name of the all-Negro town in Mississippi? I can't think of it. Speaker 1: Mound Bayou? Speaker 2: Mound Bayou. Right. Speaker 1: In Mound Bayou. She married him and they had three girls and a boy. And my brother Paul had three children. And my brother Wiley had six. And my brother Sterling had one. And I have one. I really have three because I raised my wife's two children by an earlier marriage. But I have one who is our common child. Story_ID: 16565 Speaker 1: Just in terms of getting an idea of, you know family life there in Pine Bluff [Arkansas]. Pine Bluff you've already, you know, described it as a black/white town, sort of evenly divided. But the blacks appeared to be doing well, generally. Was that-- Speaker 2: (simultaneously) No. That's, no, no, no-- Speaker 1: Well, was that with you--was your family doing well? Speaker 2: Well, that's not true. Blacks were not doing well there. There were a certain number of blacks there that you would call upper middle income families that were very close to us. I mean, our family did well. And of course, there was the Parker family. That he was--Dr. Parker was a dentist, he did well. He had a nice home also on Alabama Street. And they had three children; two of them became professionals. One is a surgeon who lives in New York now. The other is a--became a dentist. They both went to Meharry Medical College [Nashville, Tennessee]. Then right down the street from us there was the Moore family. Mr. Moore was a tailor, who had a tailor shop. He used to make all of our--tailor all our clothes. Their son Melvin. They had one son. He also went to Tuskegee [University, Tuskegee, Alabama]. And Mr. Moore went to Tuskegee also. And Melvin went to Tuskegee and graduated from Tuskegee. And he went further and got a Ph.D. And became president of an institution in Illinois. I don't remember the name of the institution now. And then there were letter carriers that we considered in a higher group. As a matter of fact, there were--there were about oh, twelve or thirteen letter carriers. All of whom did quite well. They were all black, with the exception of one. There was one white mail carrier. And I remember that they used to have a women's auxiliary to the mail carriers. And they used to have this meeting at my grandmother's [Effie Wiley] house. And here were all of these black women and one white woman, who would come over to the women's auxiliary. Story_ID: 16566 Speaker 1: I don't think there was any family black or white who had any better home life than we had. My father [Leo Branton, Sr.] was one of the few black people in town who had his own automobile. The--and our home was a--my grandparents' home as I told you was a fabulous house. And we lived--while we lived a segregated life it was still a good life. I remember that during the days of the [Great] Depression in the '30s [1930s]. My father was doing quite well. He had $10,000 in the bank. And there was a rumor going around that the banks were going to fail. $10,000 was a lot of money, in those days. And so, having heard that rumor he went and drew all of his money out of the bank. And people later on said, "Well, you know the banks are not going to fail. Put your money back in the bank." So, he put his money back in the bank. And the next day after he put it back in the bank, they failed--on his $10,000. And I remember that over a period of years, he got back a little bit at a time. And I think he eventually got back 50 cents on the dollar. But that just shows you how comparatively well off he was, to have $10,000, in the bank, in those days, in the 1930s. And I also remember that during the Depression years, my father had a taxicab company. And before the Depression he used to haul both white and Negro passengers. And there were three white cab companies in town. Yellow Cab was there. And then there was a Four-Four Cab Company. And I don't remember the names of the other cab companies. And before the Depression he used to get 50 cents per person for hauling these people throughout the city. And when the Depression came, one of the cab companies cut their--cut their fee to ten cents per person. So my dad, in order to meet the competition, changed his to ten cents per person. And when he did that they drove one of the cab companies out of business. Then the same cab company that was cutting prices decided to change prices again. And it was one or four passengers for ten cents. So my dad lowered his to one or four. They drove the other cab company out of business. So that left only one cab company--a white cab company and my dad's cab company. They then came to my dad and suggested that, "I'll tell you what. Why don't you--we have an agreement that--I will only haul white passengers and you'll only haul Negro passengers and then we can charge whatever we want." And so my dad agreed to that. And that's--up until that time the taxi cab business was integrated but it became segregated as a matter of economics--in order to survive. And so my dad again, you know, he did quite, quite well. At the time they had two car--two cabs and by the time he passed away he, they, he had about fifteen cabs in his cab company. Story_ID: 16567 Speaker 1: How did your parents [Leo Branton, Sr. and Pauline Wiley] meet? Do you know how they met? Speaker 2: I have no idea. Speaker 1: But your mother had gone to Tuskegee [University, Tuskegee, Alabama]. And she-- Speaker 2: (simultaneously) And she was teaching school in Pine Bluff [Arkansas]. And most of her students were older than she was. And my father was in Pine Bluff as a taxicab--operating his taxicab. Story_ID: 16568 Speaker 1: I wanted to ask you what schools you went to? You know what were the names of the schools? Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Well I went to Branch Normal Training School, first [a black teachers' training school, later part of Arkansas Agricultural, Mechanical and Normal College which itself later became the University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff]. Then I went to Hattie Benson School, which is a private school. I went from there--I went to grammar school to Missouri Street School. [34th and Missouri Street School, Pine Bluff, Arkansas] And from there I went to Merrill High School [Pine Bluff, Arkansas] where I graduated from high school in 1938. I graduated as a--with the second highest grade in my class. And the only reason I wasn't--didn't have the highest grade was because in those days they marked--conduct as a grade. And my conduct was not the greatest in school and so I was ousted by someone, who had a lower academic grade than I did. But had a higher conduct grade and so I became the number two. I delivered the-- Speaker 1: (simultaneously) The salutatorian-- Speaker 2: --the salutatorian address at the high school. And I was only sixteen years old. As a matter of fact, I had really finished all my work when I was fifteen. But they only had one graduating class. And I had to wait until I was sixteen to march with my class. My last two years in high school, I was a reporter. Writing--traveling with the football team and writing stories about the football team, which was published in the local newspaper. At that time, it was my--I wanted to study journalism. And at Arkansas State College [informal name for Arkansas Agricultural, Mechanical and Normal College] they always gave a four-year scholarship to the valedictorian and the salutatorian of Merrill High School. And so I had a 4-year scholarship at Arkansas State College. Arkansas State College for Negroes, it was. And I went to Arkansas State. But while I was there, I decided that I wanted to study journalism and they didn't offer journalism at Arkansas State College. And so I applied to the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], to go--to enter the University of Chicago. They sent me a test. I guess it's the equivalent of the SAT test [Scholastic Aptitiude Test] now. But I didn't know about what SAT was at that time. I took--the test was administered to me by one of the professors at Arkansas State. And Arkansas State had been going on--had started maybe 2 or 3 weeks by that time. But University of Chicago's semester didn't start until a little later. And so I was accepted in the University of Chicago. I got to Chicago and found out that the University of Chicago did not offer a major in journalism. So I left there without even matriculating and went back to Pine Bluff and finished my first year, at Arkansas State College. And then finished my second year at Arkansas State College. And it was at the end of my second year and I was getting ready for my third year, that I got into some legal difficulties which I'll tell you about later when we get to that point. And I left Arkansas and I went to Tennessee A&I State College [originally Tennessee State Agricultural and Industrial Normal School for Negroes, now Tennessee State University] in Nashville, Tennessee. Spent my last two years there. I majored in theater arts and speech. And during that period of time I acted in a little theater group that--where we traveled throughout the South. Going to various high schools in the South as well as various colleges like Tuskegee [University, Tuskegee, Alabama] and Talladega [Talladega College, Talladega, Alabama] and Dillard [University, New Orleans, Louisiana] and Wiley College [Marshall, Texas] and places like that. Story_ID: 16569 Speaker 1: What were you like? Were you quiet? Were you shy? Were you brash? Were you, you know-- Speaker 2: I've never been quiet. I've never been shy. I wouldn't say I was brash but I've always been very confident. I always knew what I could do and that I could do it most likely better than anybody else. I was a good athlete when I was growing up but I was unable to play on any of the athletic teams because I was too young. Everybody else was older than I was--and my size was such--however, in sand lot football and baseball and everything else I was always outstanding. Speaker 1: Now you--Did you dream of what you wanted to be? You know how you find when you-- Speaker 2: Not really. The first time I decided that I wanted to do something is I was so enamored with--as a sportswriter writing--when I was in high school. I decided at that time that I wanted to be a writer. And I wanted to be a reporter. But then after I got to--oh--and incidentally, I--I was in the theater group at Arkansas State College [also known as Arkansas Agricultural, Mechanical and Normal College, now University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff, Pine Bluff, Arkansas] and several plays. And I began to like the theater and like acting and--When I went to Tennessee State [University, Nashville, Tennessee] that's what I decided to major in. And I became--at that time I wanted to be an actor. That was my--my--life's dream to be an actor. But World War II came along. And I was drafted and spent three years in service. And when I got out I found that, that there were no openings for people of my complexion and attitudes toward life. And so I decided--I abandoned the idea of acting. However I did act professionally as a radio actor on WBBM [Chicago radio station] while I was living in Chicago [Illinois] and while I was in law school. Story_ID: 16570 Speaker 1: My house was a very structured household. There were four boys in the house--and we always had weekend chores every weekend. My--I would have to--we had hardwood floors on, that, on all the floors in the house. I would have to mop the hardwood floors. And my brother Wiley [Branton] would have to do the dusting of all the furniture. The next week I did the dusting and he did the--that. We had to clean the yard. My father [Leo Branton, Sr.] used to raise chickens in the backyard. And every Sunday we would have chicken for dinner. And he would say, "Leo, go out in the back and kill two chickens and bring them in." And I had to learn to wring a chicken's neck and learn how to feather them--dip them in hot water and pluck the feathers off. Someone had to clean out the hen house where they would lay the eggs. But all of the hens would leave their droppings on the floor. My brother Sterling [Branton] would have to do that and he hated that job--He just hated it. We also raised geese in the backyard. We had all kinds of fruit trees. We had fig trees and a mulberry tree and blackberry bushes and had a family garden. At one time when I was very, very young I remember that we used to have a cow. And my mother [Pauline Wiley] used to milk the cow. I never learned to milk the cow. We got rid of the cows when I got to be large enough to be able to do this. So it's difficult for me to say that any particular thing structured my life other than the fact that we always had to do things. And we were always told, "Do that." And I was an avid reader. I used to read everything. As a matter of fact my father-- sometimes he'd get angry with me when he--when he wanted me to do something and I wouldn't do it. He would say, "You always got your head stuck in a book!" And you'd hear him say I always had my head stuck in a book, you would think he was anti-education. But he wasn't. He had wanted--he wanted one of his children--desperately wanted one of his children to be a doctor. He thought being a doctor was the highest form of--of life in a civilization. And none of his children ever became doctors--or even wanted to become doctors. I also know that I told you earlier about how I--and I wasn't taught anything about being proud to be a Negro or resisting white people. It was just an innate thing within me. Like I told you how when I was very, very young I resented the white Metropolitan [Life Insurance Company] agent coming around and calling my grandmother [Effie Wiley] by her first name. I resented that deeply. And I also remember that also when I was very young. Maybe I was maybe fifteen at this time. My dad used to have--buy all of his cars from the F.T. Smart Chevrolet Company [Pine Bluff, Arkansas]. And he used to have all of his cars repaired there. And there was a head mechanic there that they called Slim. And I would go with my dad to have some work done on the car. And my dad would say, "Mr. Slim, such and such a thing." And he would say, "Well Leo, such and such a thing." So I asked him, I said, "Dad, you are a businessman giving business to these people. This man is a common ordinary little mechanic. And you're calling him Mr. Slim? Slim is a nickname and you're calling him Mr. Slim. And he calls you Leo. How do you tolerate that, dad?" And he said, "Well that's just the way you got--we have to live with it, son. That's just the way it is." My dad accepted his segregated way of life. But I even at that age I rebelled against it. And nobody taught me that. It was just that I became furious about that kind of thing. Speaker 2: Now what teachers were forming you? I mean were there teachers that you looked up--or they had an influence on you? Speaker 1: All of my teachers in high school--and that's one of the reasons why I feel that I had as good an education as the white kids that went to the white high school. Because I had dedicated teachers. All of whom were excellent--who spent time and effort trying to teach us. Even though they sometimes had little to work with. But I didn't have any particular teacher who I looked up to or who guided me in any way. Speaker 2: Now you--you said that when you got--Well, let me ask you are there--I'll ask this question. You know, are there any sounds or smells you associate with childhood and growing up? Speaker 1: No. Not really. I--only I hated the smell of that henhouse when it needed cleaning, Story_ID: 16571 Speaker 1: I told you about the Great Depression years. There were a lot of people during the Depression years who went hungry. We always had people coming to our back door asking for handouts of food. And they were always white people. We didn't have any black people coming to our back door. We had white people who'd come to the back door. And we always--always fed them. But my family never suffered in that regard because even during the Depression years our lifestyle didn't change too much. Other than I remember that when I first wanted a bicycle. My best friend Frank Bryant who later became a doctor, graduated from Meharry Medical College [Nashville, Tennessee] He had a--His dad gave him a bicycle and I asked my dad [Leo Branton, Sr.] for a bicycle for Christmas. And he said, "No. I can't afford to give you a bicycle." I said, "Well, Frank has a bicycle." He said, "Yes, but Dr. Bryant has one son. I have 4. And so I have to--my money has to go around between 4 children." But he finally broke down and after Christmas he bought me a bicycle. Story_ID: 16572 Speaker 1: I had attended Arkansas State College [Arkansas State College for Negroes, also known as Arkansas Agricultural, Mechanical and Normal College, now University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff, Pine Bluff, Arkansas] for two years when this happened. Speaker 2: Okay. Okay. Speaker 1: My-- Speaker 2: Now when you went off to college what were you studying? What were you wanting to be or do at the time? You didn't really-- Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] General, just general. Speaker 2: General. Oh. Okay. Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] General education. Speaker 2: Okay, okay. Speaker 1: My first two years at Arkansas State. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I took--you know, I took French and--science and various subjects at Arkansas State. No. I was preparing to go to--we were buying clothes to get ready to go back to school in the fall. My brother Wiley [Branton] and I were in the Henry Marx clothing store. Which is a Jewish-owned store. It was the most exclusive men's clothing store in town. They had maybe six or seven stores--men's clothing stores. But this was the exclusive store. And we were in there buying things and my brother Wiley looked at a--had put on a suit. And he came over and he asked me, "Leo, how do you like this suit?" And I said, "Well, I don't like it Wiley." I said, "In the first place it's out of style. It has a bi-swing--in the back. And besides that you've already got one gray suit. Why get another one?" So the salesman became incensed that I was talking my brother out of buying the suit. He says, "What the hell you gotta do with it nigger?" And I said, "Well he's my brother. I got a right to advise him." He said, "If you don't shut up nigger, I'll hit you in your mouth." So I said, "Ha. No, you won't either!" And bam! He hit me in my mouth. I threw my hand up to my mouth and saw blood on my hand. And I lit into him. And I hit him and knocked him up against the wall. And when he bounced off the wall, I hit him again. And he fell to the floor and I jumped on his--and he weighed about 200 pounds--had a big fat gut--I remember that. And I weighed about 130 pounds soaking wet. And I started pounding his head from left to right. And I said, "You son of a bitch! I'll kill you! I'll kill you!" And--and so finally the owner of the store and the other people came around and I said--and I kept saying, "Somebody come hold him so I can get up off of him." I was afraid to lose my advantage. I said, "Somebody come hold him so I can get up off of him." So I got up off of him. And he staggered back and the blood running all down the side of his face and went into the back of the store. And then I heard somebody say--oh, the owner of the store said, "Well what happened?" I said, "Well he struck me and I hit him back." He said, "Well you better get out of the store." So I heard somebody say, "No Carl! No Carl don't do that!" And I looked up and this guy was running out of the back of the store with a gun. So I ran behind one of those revolving racks of clothes. And when he came around behind me, I pushed the rack of clothes up on him. And I hit the side door of that store running like crazy. I ran to my dad's [Leo Branton, Sr.] office, which was about four blocks away. And my Uncle Frank [Wiley], my mother's [Pauline Wiley] youngest brother was driving taxi for my father at the time. And he asked me what--and I told him. He said, "Come on. I'll take you home." So he took me out to their house. Not my house but the big house. Which was next door where he lived. And so the chief of police went around to the store. 'Cause I could hear the sirens from the police car going around as I was running to my dad's office. And I got to--he took me home. But I found out later that the chief of police went over and asked what happened. And the clerk says, "Well there was a nigger in the store and I slapped him and he hit me back." He said, "Who was he?" He says, "He's one of those Branton boys." And so--they all knew us. You know 'cause it was--we'd been shopping there for years--And he says, "Oh, well I'll have--I'll send his dad around here to talk to him--to you." He said, "Well no I don't want anybody to talk. I want you to arrest him." And he said, "Well you've already told me that you hit him first. How can I arrest him?" He said, "Oh, okay. You're not gonna arrest him?" So then he called the county sheriff. The city police and the county sheriff had joint jurisdiction over the city at that time. Pine Bluff was the, was the county seat for Jefferson County. And consequently they had dual jurisdiction. And he sent the sheriff around. Well, Frank and I went back to the house. And I said, "Frank, they're gonna come out here to try to arrest me." And so Frank went and got--my Uncle Frank was a great gun collector. So he went and got three or four rifles and two or three pistols and put them all by the front door--and gave me a shotgun. I stood by the front door. A guy came and knocked on the door and he said, "Is Leo Branton here?" He said--my Uncle Frank says--and I'm standing behind the door holding a shotgun--and he said, "What do you--what do you want with him?" He said, "I came to arrest him for assault and battery." And so he said, "You got a warrant?" And he says, "I don't need a warrant." So my uncle cocked that gun and said, "You need a warrant to come in here." So the guy backed off--and went back. The sheriff then called my dad and said, "Listen, your son would not allow himself to be arrested." He says, "If one of my deputies arrest him there might be some violence in connection with it. I tell you what you do. If you bring him down and surrender him, I will let sit--I'll let him out on bail. I won't even lock him up." So I said--my dad said, "Okay." So that night I went out to Arkansas State College and stayed in one of the bungalows where the teachers were at. 'Cause my Aunt Julia [Hazard] was married to the head of the science department, out there at that time. I spent the night out there. The next day they decided to take me down and surrender me and. Are you interested in all this detail? So they took--they sent my grandfather, who was highly respected in the town. You know--to take me down to the jail. And so they took me down to the jail and the guy started--first they fingerprinted me. Then they put a number around my neck. And said, "I'm gonna take your picture." So they took my picture and the guy said, "Smile." I said, "I don't have anything to smile about." And so they said--started asking me questions and said--One of the questions they asked is, "Have you got any aliases?" I said, "Yeah. They call me One-Punch Johnny for short." And so he said, "You're a smart nigger, huh?" I said, "Well you asked me if I had any aliases and that's the only alias I have." So then he says, "What's your name, uncle?" to my grandfather. So I said, "Grandpa, I didn't know that you were his mammy's brother?" So, anyhow. I had to put up a four hundred dollar bail. I was a defiant young man, you know. And so I left. Story_ID: 16573 Speaker 1: Then two days later, I was to go to court. My dad's [Leo Branton, Sr.] lawyer was Jewish. And my dad's lawyer called on the morning of--that I was to go to trial and told my dad, "I can't go to court with your son." He said, "Why not?" He said, "Well there's too much social pressure." He said, "What do you mean too much social pressure?" He said, "After all your son did hit a white man. And I can't represent him 'cause he hit a white man." And my dad said, "Well--but he's to go to court." And he said, "Well just ask the judge if--to give you a continuance. I'm sure he'll give you a continuance." So I had to go to court by myself. I asked the judge to give me a continuance. He said, "You had two days already. That's enough time." And he put me on trial. All by myself, so I defended myself at the trial. I told what happened--this other guy that I hit, he told what happened with the exception of the fact that he says that I hit him with a knife. That I hit him upside the head with the--he said it was the closed butt end of a knife. It wasn't open. It was what they call a fish knife that they use to have things where you scale fish on the end of it. That I hit him with that. And they called in a nurse who testified that she took eight or nine stitches on the side of his head. And it was true. He did have them. But I did that with my fists, not with any knife. So the postmaster of the town, was--happened to be in the store. And he was called to the stand. And he testified that he didn't see what happened. He said when he looked around, when he first saw me, I was on this man's stomach pummeling his head. That's all he saw. My brother [Wiley Branton] told what happened. And at the end of the case, the judge--I went there charged with disturbing the peace. And by the time I got there he had me charged with disturbing the peace, with assault, with assult by means--about five counts. And he found me guilty of all of the counts and sentenced me to ninety days on the county farm. Now, in the meantime, when I--when we had someone to send for the only Negro lawyer in town. We used to call him Lawyer Jones. But the Negro lawyers in the town at that time, they never represented anybody in a criminal matter. As a matter of fact, they would give a man extra time if he had nerve enough to come in there with a Negro lawyer. All he did was to handle divorces between Negro couples and to handle the changing of property deeds and things like that. So we sent for him. And just before they were getting ready to haul me away to the County Jail, he came and said, "I filed a notice of appeal." And he filed a notice of appeal and my bail at that time was $200. So they raised it to $400 'cause I was on appeal. And I was advised that the feeling in the community was so heavy that I should not stay around there and go to school--and--so therefore I started looking for other schools to go to. And I sent away for catalogues to--I wanted to go to a school where I could have some fun. And I had heard that--that Tennessee State [University, Nashville, Tennessee, was known as Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial Normal School for Negroes] was a great fun school. And Virginia State [University, Petersburg, Virginia] was and West Virginia State [College, Institute, West Virginia] was. So I sent out for catalogues to all those--three schools. And I decided to go to Tennessee State. And that's how I went to Tennessee State. I came back--after--for a second trial because in Arkansas the first trial was--before was called a Justice Court. And when you're tried before a Justice Court and you file an appeal, you get a trial de novo, at which time you can have a trial before a jury. And so I automatically got a trial de novo. I went back the s--about two or three months later and had a second trial. This time it was before a jury--an all white jury. And--I could tell you what the argument of the prosecutor was. It was fantastic. His argument was--When I took the stand he only asked me a couple of questions. He said, "Where are you now Branton?" I said, "What do you mean? Where am I now?" "Just answer. It's a plain question. Where are you?" I said, "Well I'm sitting in this chair." He said, "Where were you before you came here?" I said, "I was at 1307 Alabama Street." "Where were you before you came back to Pine Bluff?" I said, "I was away in school." "What kind of school?" I said, "College." He said, "Where?" I said, "Nashville, Tennessee." "That's all." Now in those days a jury in a criminal case not only found guilt or innocence but they recommended what the sentence was that you'd get within certain guidelines. So, the prosecutor's final argument is this. "If this was an ordinary corn field Negro, I'd tell you just to fine him and let him go. Because fining him would be punishment for him. But here's a Negro that's got money. Got enough money to go away to college and to another state. So fining this nigger wouldn't be no punishment to him; he'd just pay the fine. I want to see him spend some time on the county farm." That was his argument. Jury went out, stayed 15 minutes and came back and sentenced me to thirty days on the County Farm. We appealed that to the appellate court. And I went back to school. And the judge came and told my dad that it was too much feeling at the time about this. And if I went away and while the appeal was pending if he could find some reason for him to defer the sentence--to give me probation, he would do it. But he couldn't do it right now because it was too much social pressure. So we got the dean of Meharry Medical College [Nashville, Tennessee]--to write a letter saying that I had x-rays of my lungs--looked very suspicious. And that if I was incarcerated or away where I could not get fresh air and sunshine that it would be detrimental to my health. We took that letter back, and gave it to the judge and the judge then--What's the word I want? He didn't dismiss the case. He vacated the sentence. And so I never had to spend the time. Speaker 2: Oh. So that was your start in sort of the legal arena. Speaker 1: (simultaneously) That's my first start representing myself. Story_ID: 16574 Speaker 1: Oh yeah. We didn't want to--we didn't want to go and--and as Cassius Clay [Muhammad Ali] so clearly put it, "Why should we go overseas and fight the white man's war?" You know? Speaker 2: But wasn't there--wasn't there at that time--wasn't there an excitement in the black population? Okay let's go--You know wanting to become part--be a part-- Speaker 1: (simultaneously) No. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: (simultaneously) No. Not in that part of the black population that I was associated with. None of us wanted to go. Speaker 2: So you go--you're inducted. You--you serve where? Speaker 1: In Italy. Speaker 2: In Italy. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. And you're in the Army, right? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Okay. And what detail? What were you assigned to? Speaker 1: 92nd Infantry Division. Speaker 2: Okay so but I mean what--'cause that, that's a lot of the story too. 'Cause people said you know, "I was mopping floors." You know-- Speaker 1: (simultaneously) Oh no. That was--You see the 92nd Infantry Division was the only combat unit that fought in Europe as a division. You see the division had--three infantry rifle companies, two artillery companies, a reconnaissance company--ten thousand men made up--makes a up a division. Story_ID: 16575 Speaker 1: Well--after I graduated from college, I went back to Chicago [Illinois]. And I was living in Chicago from the time I got into this fight. I never lived back in Pine Bluff [Arkansas] anymore. Speaker 2: How did you choose Chicago, sir? I'm just wondering. Speaker 1: I had relatives who lived in Chicago. My uncle and his wife lived there. We had a--we used to go to Chicago from Arkansas every summer from Pine Bluff. We used to ride the train. And we would get on the train in Pine Bluff in the segregated car. And when we got to St. Louis [Missouri], we had to change trains. And then we could move into an integrated car. And we lived in Chicago during the summer months. And so I went back there and I went out to the Dodge Chrysler [now Chrysler Corporation automobile] plant. They were just building the plant at that time. And I got a job working out there. Thinking that I was in the defense industry and that I would get a--what do you call it? Speaker 2: A waiver, or whatever. Speaker 1: Yeah, the word's not waiver, but I can't think of what it's called. Story_ID: 16576 Speaker 1: I got drafted. As a matter of fact I went in the service on my 21st birthday. And when I was drafted in the service, I was drafted along with about 1500 other young Negro boys. They had--by this time they had lowered the draft age to eighteen. And when I was in college, all of my classmates my senior year of college--you know, the war [World War II] took place December the 7th, 1941 [attack on Pearl Harbor]. And I was a senior. And all of my friends who were classmates had went down to sign up for the draft. And they said, "Come on Leo let's go sign up for the draft." I said, "I'm not old enough."" They said, "Oh come on. You--sure you're old enough." Again you know I was a couple years younger than everybody else. So I didn't have to sign up for the draft. But I only signed up after they lowered the draft to eighteen. The draft was twenty-one at that time. And when they lowered the draft to eighteen, I had to sign up for the draft. So I got drafted. But I didn't get called until I was twenty-one years old. And I got sent down to Fort Leonard Wood, Missouri. To the Army Engineers, which was a completely segregated unit. And when you went into army service, if you made an intelligence score, I think they called it an AGCT test [Army General Classification Test,] that you took, of at least 110, you were a candidate for Officer's Candidate School [OCS, Officer Candidates School]. You could go to Officer's Candidate School. So I--my score was 129. So after I graduated, there were about fifteen--in that whole group of fifteen soldiers, who went down there, who had--who had a score of 110. They could go to officer's candidate school. They then told us that they were gonna put us through a prep course to see if we really were officer's candidate material. So they put us through a very rigorous course of shooting mortars and rifle shot. Hikes, overnight hikes and fifteen-mile hikes and going through obstacle courses and every other thing. And as a result of that course, they washed out ten of the fifteen. Said they were--they couldn't make it. I remained as one of the five. So now then they decided that the rules had changed. And they were only taking college graduates to officer's candidate school. So I was the only one who was already a college graduate. All the rest of the people got washed out. So then that left me. So then they said, "Leo, you have to take another physical examination." And I went over and they take another physical examination. And the doctor told me that, "I'm sorry, but you can't go to Officer's Candidate School." I said, "Why not?" He said, "You have albuminuria." I said,"Albuminuria, what is that?" He says, "Your piss is too yellow." I said, "Well, what's the cause of that?" He says, "I don't know. Its most of the time its due to diet." I said, "Fine. Discharge me from service." He says, "Oh no we can't discharge you." I said, "Oh! My piss is too yellow to go to candidate--Officer's Candidate School but it's not too yellow for me to be an enlisted man?" He said, "Well I'm gonna tell you the truth. The Negro quota has now been filled. But I'll tell you what we're gonna do. There's a new program open called Army Specialized Training [Program]--ASTP. And we are training people for the army of occupation." And we hadn't even invaded Europe at that--by that time. He says, "We're sending people back to college to study German and Italian and Russian and French." And he says, "Have you--do you have any language ability?" I said, "Well I had two years of college French." And he said, "Well you probably can pass the exam." So then they shipped me to the University of Wyoming. To Laramie, Wyoming, which was what was called a star unit. Where people came in from all over the country who had qualified and they--for possible qualified for Army. And incidentally--the intelligence score was higher to get into that than it was to go to officer's candidate school. But I met that qualification also. So that's the first and only time I ever got to any part of the Army that was integrated. I was one of about three Negro soldiers there among about 3,000 people who were there. So they gave us a written examination in French. And there was a white guy sitting on my left who kept copying off of my paper. And I didn't mind his copying off my paper. So we both passed the French examination. And then after you pass the examination. A couple days later, you had to go before a board comprised of three army officers and two language--professors in the language department at the University of Wyoming. And so he went before the board first. And he came back out and he said, "Leo! I'm going to Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut] to study French." I said, Great!" So then I went in. And when I went in, I saluted and I sat down. And they said, "We're sorry Private Branton." He says, "But the language program has now been closed." I said, "Well they closed it rather suddenly sir, in light of the fact that the man who just preceded me was accepted in the program. You mean they closed it in between his acceptance and my coming in?" And they said, "Well we'll be honest with you. The Negro quota has been filled." So I said, "How do you think those thousands of Negro soldiers who are giving their life's blood in North Africa today--" That's when we were in North Africa before we ever--"would feel if they knew that this was the kind of democracy that they were dying for?" They said, "I tell you what we're gonna do. We're gonna recommend you to Officer's Candidate School." I said, "Pardon my French sir. But how the fuck do you think I got here?" He said, "Don't talk to us like that." I said, "I'll talk to you any way I want to." I said, "This is outrageous! That you tell me that the quota--the Negro quota has been filled!" I said, "May I be excused from this meeting?" He said, "Yeah you can be excused." So I left. And I went down to Western Union. And I sent three telegrams. All saying the same thing. "After passing all qualifying examinations for the army specialized training program and languages, have been rejected solely on the basis of the fact that I'm a Negro. I suggest that you investigate this un-American activity." I sent one to Walter White who was head of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] at that time. I sent one to my congressman in Illinois. And I sent one to Eleanor Roosevelt. I went back to the dormitory where I was staying. 'Cause we were staying in the dormitories then. And about a week later, maybe it was two weeks later, a sergeant came in. He says, "Branton, get your stuff packed." I said, "Where am I going?" He said, "You're going to the University of Iowa [Iowa City, Iowa] to study French." I'm put on a troop train and they sent me to the University of Iowa to study French. I was supposed to be there--I never learned who--why I got in. But I knew this: I never heard from my congressman. After I had been in the program for about two months, I get a letter from Walter White saying they were investigating it. It was Eleanor Roosevelt. The telegram to Eleanor Roosevelt who got me in that program. You know she was responsible for the Tuskegee Airmen. Okay? So anyhow I went to the University of Iowa. And there were about 1500 students in the language program there. I got there and found out they didn't even offer French as a part of the program. But they said that, "Since you're here, you can take a choice of either German or Italian or Russian." I selected German. And I stayed there in the program for eight months. In one more month I would have graduated from the program. But by this time we were losing soldiers right and left in Europe. And they had to break up the unit. And they sent us to--everybody there down to the 44th infantry division to go overseas and--with the 44th Infantry Division. [Earlier he mentions being in the African American 92nd Infantry Division.] Speaker 2: Now did you like the time you sp--was being in Italy was that a new experience for you? Speaker 1: Oh yeah. I had never been to Europe before. And I still fought as part of a segregated unit. And we had a lot of problems with the white soldiers telling all the Italian girls that we all had tails and that they shouldn't fool around with any of us. I had a couple of girlfriends in Italy. Great (laughing). Story_ID: 16577 Speaker 1: Now when you come back [from Europe], that's when you decide you want to go to law school. Is that? Speaker 2: (simultaneously) I came back--and at that time I still wanted to be an actor. Speaker 1: That's right. Okay so that's the same. Speaker 2: And I tried out for--You remember the play 'Anna Lucasta'? Okay. I tried out for that and I couldn't get it. And then I bummed around for a while trying to decide what I wanted to do with my life. And I finally came to realize that I was never gonna make it as an actor, as good as I was. And so I decided I'd go to law school. Because one of my college roommates at Tennessee State [University, Nashville, Tennessee, formerly Tennessee Agricultural, Industrial and Normal College for Negroes] and I both came back to--it was a fellow by the name of Cecil Partee. Do you know Cecil Partee? Speaker 1: Yeah--Well you know that's why--Yeah I mean I knew of him in Chicago [Illinois]. And I knew him before he passed away--But he also--he's from Arkansas. Speaker 2: Right. He's from Blytheville [Arkansas]. Speaker 1: Right. So the same thing. He set off the [unclear]. Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] He and I are both from Arkansas. He's from Blytheville and I'm from Pine Bluff. We both attended Tennessee State. We both went to Chicago and we both tried to get a job in the defense industry to avoid the draft. He got a job working in the steel mill in Gary, Indiana. And he was unlucky enough, or maybe lucky enough to drive a hot piece of steel through his leg and he got medically disqualified for going to--for going into service. So I got drafted. And while I was in service for three years, he was at Northwestern University's law school [Northwestern University School of Law, Chicago, Illinois]. And he was the only black in the whole law school. Okay? When I got there, I became the second black in the law school. And I am positive that Northwestern had a quota at that time. I think they not only had a black quota, I think they had a Jewish quota. Because you see Northwestern is the only private school in the Big Ten. Every other school is a state institution--so they could not reject people on account of race. But they did reject people there. I got to Northwestern and I found that several of the teachers were racists. You know? They--for example my first semester, when I took criminal law--and incidentally I was very good in criminal law. And my best course was trial technique, which I took. And the professor gave me a textbook in which he said, "My best student in trial technique." And I was in--took criminal law. So when the grades came out, all my classmates said, "Leo, what did you get? What did you get?" I said, "Well I got a C." They said, "Oh come on! You didn't get a C, Leo!" I said, "Of course I did." They said, "You're kidding! How could you get only a C?" So I said, "I don't know but that's what I got." So I decided to go and see Fred Inbau, who was the head of the Criminal Law Department, and who incidentally is one of the men who pioneered the polygraph exam. So when I got to--when I went to see him and I said, "I want to know why I only got a C." He said, "That's a good grade." I said, "You think so?" He said, "Yeah I think it's a good grade." I said, "Well thank you very much." So I left. So I went and told Partee about it. And I said, "Partee. Here's what he said." He said, "Leo, you don't understand. What he meant it was a good grade for a Negro. That's what he meant." I said, "Oh. Okay I get it." Well I became so disillusioned with Northwestern, I stopped going to class. And what I would do is--I used to have a photographic memory. Not anymore but I did. I would sit--I would--when the [Brooklyn] Dodgers [baseball team, now Los Angeles Dodgers] would come to town and Jackie Robinson was playing, I would go out and root for the Dodgers to beat the [Chicago] Cubs. And I'd go to the racetrack and everything. Because we weren't required to go to class. And so when the time came to take an exam, I would just take Prosser on torts [William L. Prosser, 'Prosser and Keeton's Hornbook on Torts'] and read it through like a novel. And I'd take Wigmore on evidence [John Henry Wigmore, 'Students' Textbook of Evidence'] and I'd read it through like a novel and go in and take the exam. And that's how I got through law school. And I didn't realize until I came out here and started studying for the bar that I wasn't shortchanging anybody but myself. Because I really didn't know much law when I got out of law school. I learned more law in the three months that I took this bar review course than I did in the three years I was in law school. Story_ID: 16578 Speaker 1: Did you take to the law at that point? I mean even though the experience--were you, were you--when you came out here, were you wanting to really practice? Speaker 2: [simultaneously] Oh yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I wanted to be a trial lawyer. Speaker 1: And what made you choose California? Speaker 2: Well because I was--didn't want to stay--I knew Chicago [Illinois] was very corrupt from the judicial system down through the lawyers and everything else. And I didn't want to be a part of that corrupt system. But California was a burgeoning area where people hadn't been here long enough to--for corruption to take place in the legal system. Also I knew there were very few Negro lawyers out here. And that it would be easier for me to open a practice and get the practice. And that's why I decided to come to California. Speaker 1: And you hadn't been here at all. Ever? Speaker 2: Well I--at the end of my first year of law school--yeah my first--I think it was the end of my second quarter of law school, I came out here on a vacation. And I went to UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles]. I went to Boalt Hall [School of Law] up in San Francisco [sic, located at University of California, Berkeley]. I went to Stanford [University, Stanford, California]. And it just happened that the deans of all of these schools were Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois] graduates. And so I got a letter from the people at Northwestern. And all of them wanted me to start all over again. They said, "Well you know you have to start all over again if you transfer out here. We don't give any credit for less than a year." And I said, "Well I'm not gonna start all over again. What I'll do is I'll go back and I'll finish law school. And then I'll come out here." And so I did. And I came out here. I never took the Illinois Bar. What happened is I paid my fee. I went in and sat down, took out my pen and got ready to take the bar exam. And I said, "Why am I taking this exam? I know I'll never practice law in Illinois." And I folded up my paper, took my pen, came and got in my car. Told my brother Sterling [Branton] that I was going to go to California. And he said, "I'll go with you." And I came to California. Now at that time you see--Incidentally Justice [John Paul] Stevens on the Supreme Court was either in my class or in the class ahead of me at Northwestern. I don't remember his being there. But I bet you he remembers me. And the reason he remembers me is because number one, I was one of two black students who were there and secondly, I had the most visible thing. Not because of my complexion, but my lifestyle. I had a brand new Buick convertible automobile that I used to park right in front. I dressed immaculately. I had three or four suits of clothes. I had two overcoats instead of one overcoat that I wore. And so--everybody knew, "There's that Leo Branton." You know? So they knew who I was. Anyhow so I stayed there and I graduated and I came to California. Story_ID: 16579 Speaker 1: In order to be a--to practice law in California, you have to have been a resident for at least three months. But that's fine because the bar review course is three months long. I came out here really with the intention of living in northern California. Because I had an uncle who lived in Berkeley and I wanted to go to practice in that San Francisco area--and I loved San Francisco. But I found out that the bar review course--they did not have a bar review course in northern California that you take under the GI Bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act , also known as the GI Bill of Rights]. You see I went to law school on the GI Bill, supplemented by income which I had been able to make as an actor. And I still had some time left on the GI Bill because you got one year--one month for every month you were in the service. And then you had some extra time. And I had all these hours. And as a matter of fact one of the things that I had contemplated while I was in law school was going to medical school. After I finished law school. I--the only reason I wanted to go to medical school was because my dad [Leo Branton, Sr.] always wanted a doctor in the family. And I said, "I got this time on the GI Bill. I'll go ahead and I'll go to medical school." But the medical school, the law school and the dental school [of Northwestern University] are all right together on Chicago Avenue in downtown Chicago [Illinois]. And the medical school is right next door to it. So I went over to--I used to go over to the medical school and go into the amphitheater and watch the people operate. And one day I was in there with a friend of mine and I was watching an operation they were doing on a guy's hands. And the next thing I know he's holding my head out the window. And I said, "What happened?" He says, "You fainted." I says, "Oh come on!" He says, "Yeah you fainted Leo! I had to pick you up off the floor." And I said--he said, "Are you alright now?" I said, "Yeah I'm alright." I took two steps and bam! I flopped again. So I decided that there's no way I could go to medical school if I can't stand to see blood. And the funny thing about it is I had seen a lot of gore. You know during the time that I was overseas. And you know I saw people with their heads blown off and everything. But that never upset me. But just watching that operation it did. Story_ID: 16580 Speaker 1: I took the bar review exam. And when the man announced the results, he stated "Larry Sperber made the highest grade in the class." And everybody applauded and Larry stood up. We had so many people in there. There were people on the first floor. This was in a theater. There were people sitting in the balcony and everything. And then a few minutes later he said, "Hey just a minute. I'm sorry Mr. Sperber I made a mistake." He said, "Leo Branton made the highest grade in the class." And then the people applauded for me. Now interestingly enough I went to an affair about a month ago for Walter Gordon Jr. who is the oldest practicing lawyer here in Los Angeles [California]. He's 93 years old and he's practiced for over sixty-some years. He is the first lawyer that I did some work for making appearances for him after I got my license. And I was sitting at a table at this affair and a fellow introduced himself to me. And he says, "Mr. Branton? I remember you took Forrest Kuhl's bar review course. And I remember that you made the highest grade in the class." I said, "How in the world could you remember that?" He says, "I just do. I remember his making that announcement." And that's the first time I have seen him since then. Now that was fifty, fifty-three years ago. Fifty-two years ago that, that happened. Anyhow, I came to California and I couldn't get a job. So I opened my own office over on Central Avenue right off--on Vernon right off of Central Avenue and started practicing on my own. I worked for somebody. I made appearances for other lawyers who had--black lawyers who had some--pretty good volume practice. Story_ID: 16581 Speaker 1: Then after that I read in the newspaper about a young black fellow who was charged with a double murder in Riverside County [California]. And I kept reading about it in the paper everyday. And he kept protesting his innocence. And somehow I didn't believe this kid was guilty. So I decided I was gonna represent him. Not only because I knew that Riverside County was a very prejudiced county, but I figured I could do some good. And so I went over and saw the head of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] there and asked him if they would sponsor me to go in to see this kid. And they said, "We don't have any money to pay you." I said, "It's all right. I don't need any pay." So I went in and I talked to the kid. And I asked him if he would--he was twenty years old, a veteran of the Korean War. And he was charged with a double murder of a white couple, a man and his wife. And I went back to--I came back to Los--he said he would be happy if I would represent him. So I came back to Los Angeles [California]. I asked several of the well-established lawyers here if they would go and help me try this case. 'Cause you know, I had taken over a murder case and a death penalty case at that. With no experience of having had a trial in any major case! I had tried a couple of minor cases but not a major case. And none of 'em wanted to go because they didn't want to make the contribution. But finally a lawyer by the name of Chris Wright told me that he would go over and help me try the case if I would go over and do the investigation and do all of the pretrial work. So I said, "Well okay that'll give me--It gives me a lot of confidence to know that I have some one whose gonna come over." So I went over there and I investigated the case. I found out that--this was in 1950. I found out that they had never had a Negro to sit on a jury in Riverside County. So I--the first thing I did was to make a motion to quash the jury panel because of the systematic exclusion of Negroes from the jury system. And I only filed this motion--I didn't want to win that motion. I only filed it so that I would have a point on appeal in case the kid was convicted. But they kept no records on account of race--and I had to put in some evidence on it. So I served a subpoena on all of the municipal court judges, superior court judges, the court clerks--It must be my son--the court clerks--and-- Speaker 2: Here, I'll get it. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So I file this--I subpoenaed all of the court clerks past and present and all the judges past and present and started calling them to the stand. "Did you ever see a Negro on the jury here?" "No." "Did you ever see a Negro on the jury?" After two days of those hearings the judge says, "Okay I'm convinced." He said, "I find that there is an exclusion of Negroes from the jury. I order the jury commission to go out and bring back a jury with a representative number of Negroes on the jury." And I said to myself, "Darn! I overplayed my hand. I really didn't want to win that case. Of course, I don't think having one Negro on the jury is gonna make any difference. But anyhow I had to live with it. So I tried the case and he was convicted. We ended up with one Negro woman on the jury. And you should hear the stories that she has to tell about what took place in the jury room. She consistently voted for not guilty, not guilty. And what happened was that when the jury first went out to deliberate, the foreman fell down on his knees and said, "Dear God show us the way to help us protect our women from these mongrels." And she looked at him astounded. And from then on they said, "Guilty, guilty, guilty, guilty." And we put on a very good case. I mean he should not have been found guilty. And finally after about two or three days of jury deliberation, and in those days juries didn't stay out that long--you know. They would always declare a mistrial if--or a hung jury if a jury stayed out even a whole day. Story_ID: 16582 [Note: Leo Branton's story of the murder trial of 'Bucky' Walker in Riverside County, California, 1950, is continued from previous videotape.] So here, you know, the jury has been out and they come back. You said they convicted him. Speaker 2: They convicted him. Speaker 1: But you were telling about the juror. Speaker 2: Yes. The woman--we ended up with one black woman on the jury and that's--for the first time in the history of Riverside County [California] a black person sat on a jury. And I had made this motion because the Scottsboro Case, which happened in the '30's [1930s], had established the fact that you couldn't have an all-white jury. And I knew I could have any conviction reversed. But when the judge granted my motion [to include an African American on the jury] that took that [appeal option] away from me. Well after he was convicted--and I don't believe until this day that that kid was guilty--now you asked me how my mother [Pauline Wiley] and father [Leo Branton, Sr.] met. I met my wife [Jerri] at that trial. The trial received all kinds of publicity in southern California. And people came over from Los Angeles [California] to watch the trial. And she was over there and I saw her there. And that's when I met her at that trial. And the next time I met her--I saw her--it was at a Paul Robeson concert here. And so anyhow I-- Speaker 1: (simultaneously) Let me ask-- Speaker 2: I didn't handle the appeal. The appeal was handled by--there was a Judge [John S.] Preston, P-R-E-S-T-O-N. He had been a former [California] Supreme Court justice who also believed that this kid was guilty [sic] and he volunteered to handle the appeal. And-- Speaker 1: [simultaneously] He believe that he was not guilty. Speaker 2: Yes. Did I say he believed he was guilty? Speaker 1: Yeah, um-hmm. Speaker 2: I'm sorry. He believed he was not guilty. And so he handled the appeal again without fee. Now, the reason I didn't handle the appeal was because not only am I not an appellate lawyer, and didn't consider myself an appellate lawyer. Story_ID: 16583 Speaker 1: I got called to represent members of the Communist Party, who were charged with conspiracy to advocate the violent overthrow of the government under the Smith Act. The--the Communist Party leaders in New York [New York] had been convicted. And all of them got the maximum of five years in prison. And all of the lawyers went to jail. There's one black lawyer who was a member of that team--a George Crockett, who later became a judge in Detroit [Michigan] and also became a state legislator. George Crockett went to jail because of contempt of court because this judge was about as right-winged as they come. And every time the lawyers would say something that he didn't like, he would hold 'em in contempt of court. And unfortunately the appellate court--we were right in the midst of the McCarthy era at that time. And the courts also were very biased. Not only against the Communists but against their lawyers as well. So when they--flush from their victory, in--in New York, they decided to come out and indicted all of the California leaders of the Communist Party for violation of the Smith Act. And they then--Ben Margolis, who was the--the lawyer for the Communist Party, went to--the entire membership of the Criminal Courts Bar here asking them to join the defense team to represent these Communist Party leaders. And they all turned them down and said, "No. We're not gonna represent any Communists. We don't want to lose our practice. And we don't want to go to jail. And our clients would give up on us if we represented a Communist." So they then came to all of the outstanding long practicing black lawyers in town, which was about five or six--and asked them if they would represent--come in. And none of them would come in. They all refused. So there was a reporter who had covered the [1950] trial of the Smith Act. I mean of Bucky Walker, which was the name of the case in Riverside [County, California]--who had covered that for a newspaper. And so he told them--told Ben he said, "Why don't you go and see Leo Branton. I saw him try the Walker case. And he did a fantastic job on the Walker case." So they came and asked me if I would represent members of the Communist Party. And I said, "Of course I will." So I got a lot of criticism in the Negro community for representing Communist Party members. Because the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] for example, had become so afraid of being called pinko and Communist that they became as anti-Communist as anybody was. So anyhow I felt it necessary to hold a press conference and issue a statement. And so I issued a statement. I said, "People wonder why I'm representing members of the Communist Party. I'm representing members of the Communist Party because I find that the same people who didn't--have always denied me my rights under the fourteenth amendment to the Constitution are the people who are denying these Communists their rights under the first amendment. And therefore I must--I must help." And I went through that trial. And as a result of going through that trial, they were all convicted. We appealed it to the United States Supreme Court. And along with it went a contempt case for one of the Communist Party Leaders who refused to name other people while on the stand. And so I--I appeared on both of those cases before the United States Supreme Court. And both cases were successful. And the convictions were reversed and we did away with the Smith Act. Speaker 2: You know, now that--this is pretty heady time for you in many ways when you think about it. You have this great publicity coming out of the Riverside [County, California] case, and you go--now what year is this sir? That's what I'm wondering. You know was this--what year was this the case for the Communist Party that went? Do you remember? It was 1950-what? Speaker 1: Fifty---'52 [1952] I think. Speaker 2: So [Senator Joseph] McCarthy hadn't gotten really, really--was he like in his prime? I thought it was more like-- Speaker 1: Well I call everything the McCarthy Era because the [House] Un-American Activities Committee [HUAC] was in full bloom. Speaker 2: Okay it was-- Speaker 1: You see when I was in law school, and [Harry] Truman was President of the United States, Truman made the statement that the most un-American committee in the United States is the Un-American Activities Committee. He was, you know--Truman was fantastic. And I wrote an article criticizing the Un-American Activities Committee while I was in law school but they wouldn't print it. Because they said I wasn't on the law review--and that's why they wouldn't print it. But the real reason is that they--that Northwestern [University School of Law, Chicago, Illinois] being a conservative school such as it was at that time just didn't want to print any article that was critical of the Un-American Activities Committee. In spite of the fact that the president of the United States had criticized them. So no it was--We have a tendency of calling that whole era of the witch-hunts the McCarthy Era. But there was the Un-American Activities Committee. There was the McCarran [House] Immigration Committee. There was, you know, the McCarthy hearings and all of these things tied in together. It was just a general anti-Communist feeling that went throughout the country. Story_ID: 16584 Speaker 1: Was there any decision about who would actually argue the case before the U.S. Supreme Court? And then I'm just wondering-- Speaker 2: Yes. What happened was that there were five trial lawyers--and we all wrote briefs on behalf of our respective clients--and I wrote a brief on behalf of the three clients that I represented. Then time--The United States Supreme Court indicated that they would only allow two lawyers to argue the case before the court. And obviously Ben [Benjamin] Margolis would have been one of the lawyers. Because of the fact that he was chief counsel of the Communist Party. And the brightest one of all the lawyers. I think Ben is the brightest lawyer I've ever known. And then--the other argument came down to who else is gonna argue it. And so Leo was very quickly put aside--because of the fact that he was a relatively new lawyer. And one of the lawyers, trial lawyers was Al Wirin, who had been head of the [southern California] ACLU [American Civil Liberties Union] for years and was one of the trial counsel. Another one was a fellow by the name of Norman Leonard from up in San Francisco [California], who also had practiced for a number of years. But then it was decided that we should get somebody to argue the case that had some connections with the court. And so Judge [Robert Walker] Kenny, who was in private practice now--I can't think of Kenny's first name. I'll think of it in a minute. But Judge Kenny had been attorney general of the state of California at a time when Earl Warren was the governor. Now Earl Warren is now Chief Justice of the United States Supreme Court. So we decided that we would get Bob Kenny to come and argue the case before the Supreme Court personally along with Ben Margolis. When at the same time, there was a contempt case where Oleta Yates had taken a stand to testify. She's the only defendant that testified. Instead of asking her anything, they asked her "What--Was so and so a member of the Communist Party?" She would say, "I'll tell you anything about myself. But don't ask me about anybody else. I'm not gonna identify anybody else who's been a member of the Communist Party. Because it means they might lose their job. They might cause problems in their family. They might even lose their lives. So I'm not gonna name anybody else." The judge says, "Answer the question." She wouldn't answer the question. She was held in contempt. So he compounded this by asking about thirty-five different names. And her answer was always the same. And he gave her thirty-five different--well first he put her in jail--'cause the defendants were out on bail. He put her in jail until she answered the questions. And she didn't answer the questions. So she stayed in jail for the rest of the trial. And then when the trial was over, he held her in criminal contempt. He was holding her in civil contempt before. And he gave her umpteen-thousand years in jail as a result of those contempts. And gave her no bail. We had to go to appellate court to get bail for her. And we got her out on bail. Well that case came up for argument. The appeal on that case came up for argument at the same time as the main Smith Act case. So they all decided that I would argue the case--the contempt case. And this drove Al Wirin out of his mind. Because he felt that as the ACLU [American Civil Liberties Union] lawyer of long standing, they shouldn't turn this--lawyer over to a young whippersnapper like Leo Branton. With the exception of the fact that all of the lawyers and the clients realized that I would probably make a better argument because in the final argument for--before the jury, I made the finest argument of all the lawyers who were there. You see that's what I am known for as a trial lawyer. My final argument to the jury. I have my final argument in the Angela Davis case marked off--I want you to read it. And anyhow--so I argued the contempt case personally. And at that time, Hubert Delaney, a black judge from New York, who was one of the few black judges in New York was--I had met--who--he had been out here and he had spoken before the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] out here and he moved my admission to practice before the court. And I argued the case. Now the jury--rather the court for some reason did not decide the Oleta Yates case. Even though it had been argued--had been briefed and argued. And they said, "We want the case reargued next year." So I went back the next year and reargued the case. Now here I'm by myself. The other time I was there in the presence of all the lawyers who argued the main case and when you know I argued the contempt case also. So I went back and argued that. And then what happened is at the end of the first contempt case--no, when they--when we reargued the second time, the court stated that there is no question but that the defendant was in contempt for failing to answer a lawful question. However, the judge had no right to compound the offense by asking a lot of names. He--she--they could have asked 5,000 names. And there would have been 5,000 different contempts. It is one contempt. And therefore we'll send it back to the trial judge and order the trial judge to resentence her and keep in mind the following: that her contempt did not effect the administration of justice--because she was convicted anyhow. Secondly, that she refused to answer the question, not being defiant of the court but as a matter of principal. And thirdly, she's already spent months in jail while she was incarcerated during--during the time. So I asked the court to take into consideration those. We came back before Judge [William C.] Mathes, the trial judge. And he says, "Well I read the Supreme Court decision and I don't know what they want. But I--" And he sentenced her exactly the same sentence as he gave her before. We go back to the 9th Circuit Court of Appeals. They upheld the conviction. We go back to the United States Supreme Court. I file a new petition for cert [writ of certiorari] before the United States Supreme Court. And then the Supreme Court did something which I have never before known them to have done before or since. Usually when you file a petition for writ of certiorari they tell you your writ is granted. And we will have a hearing. And you are given so many days in which to file your opening brief and so and so and so and so and so and so. So your first petition is just a petition asking them to hear the case. Then you have to file a subsequent briefs after that. So we file a petition asking them to hear the case. The Supreme Court said, "The petition for certiorari has been received in this case. It is granted and the conviction is vacated." So that's the end of the case. Now the Supreme Court did that even without a hearing and without having us to brief it. They--so Judge Clark, Tom [Thomas Campbell] Clark was on the court at that time. And--oh incidentally when the case was argued, and we had Judge Kenny there, when Judge Kenny got up and said, "May it please the court?" Justice Warren says, "Judge Kenny?" --you know and bowed in recognition of who he was. He was--the Warren Court was a great court--so anyhow, getting back to the case--when the court--after the court vacated the sentence, because I ran into Tom Clark who had been a member of the court but who resigned from the court when his son, Ramsey Clark, became Attorney General of the United States. So he felt that it was a conflict of interest and so he resigned from the court. Tom Clark came and spoke to the California Bar Association meeting in San Francisco. And I walked up to him in the lobby and I introduced myself. And I said, "I had the honor and pleasure of appearing before you when you were in the court." He said, "Oh you did? What case was that?" I said, "It was the Oleta Yates contempt case." He said, "Oh yes!" He says, "I don't know what got into my friend Bill." Now Bill Mathes was from Texas. And so was Tom Clark. And they were good friends. The only picture that Bill Mathes had in his chambers was a picture of Tom Clark. So he said, "I don't know what got into my friend Tom Clark." --he said but--I mean Bill Mathes. "But he went too far and we felt we had to slap him down a little bit." Story_ID: 16585 Speaker 1: You become part of Ben [Benjamin] Margolis's firm. Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Well when the trial was over, the Smith Act [Alien Registation Act of 1940] trial had--you got to move over a little bit. The Smith Act trial was the longest federal court trial in the history of the court at that time. It was several months long. When the case was over, Ben Margolis asked me, "Leo, what are you gonna do?" I says, "I'm gonna go and try to pick up the threads of my practice again." He said, "Well I've had a talk with my partner John." They had a law firm, it was Margolis and McTernan at that time. Margolis is Jewish and McTernan is Irish. And they had three lawyers who were with the firm but they were not partners. So there was a five lawyer firm. And he said, "Leo, I've talked to John McTernan and we would like for you to join our firm--and we want you to join our firm as an equal partner." I said, "Ben, how can I say no?" And so I joined the firm. The firm then became Margolis, McTernan and Branton. And here we had a Jewish lawyer, an Irish lawyer and a black lawyer. And this for the first time we had an integrated law firm west of Chicago [Illinois]. There was nobody in--no Negroes in any law firms. And I stayed--and when I went into that firm, I began to handle criminal law cases and plaintiff's personal injury cases. And I handled some maritime law cases. Ben's office represented a left union, the longshoremen, International Workers' Longshoremen Workers' Union [The International Longshore and Warehouse Union]--and whatever the name of the shipping unit was down there. And every--once a week, Ben used to send a lawyer down--he would go down some times to spend a day with the union, advising them on any legal problems they had and taking any cases where they had been hurt aboard ship or a boat or something like that--and so Ben announced to the head of the union that I would be coming down. And so they said--well they didn't think it was a good idea. Now this union was a fisherman's union, is what it was. This union was composed of mostly Yugoslavians and all of their names ended in like Sokolich and Yankovich and things like that. So anyhow they suggested that would be a bad idea. They didn't think that these Yugoslavians would take to a Negro lawyer coming down. So Ben said, "Well we're gonna send him down anyhow." So they sent me down. And I was, started representing that lawyer--I mean that union and it was only after about three or four months that they not only accepted me but they told people, "That Leo Branton's got eyes in the back of his head." And they started calling me "Brantonovich." (laughing) So that I would be considered a Yugoslavian. Not Branton, "Brantonovich." So I represented that union and--I stayed in that firm until 1958. At which time--that's the time I decided I wanted to break into the entertainment industry. Story_ID: 16586 Speaker 1: What made you decide that [to pursue entertainment law]? Now was it because you had married your wife [Jerri Branton]? You know and that exposure got you sort of going? Was it--you know because you had never lost the theater inside of you? I mean was it because the industry was burgeoning? What was that? Speaker 2: It was because of the fact that I was incensed that all of the famous black entertainers we had, that no black lawyer was getting any of their business. And I said, "It's time that--for these black entertainers to hire black lawyers." And I--that's why I decided to do it. And especially considering the fact that some of our closest friends were entertainers. Like as I told you my wife was--maid-of-honor was Dorothy Dandridge. She had been Dorothy Dandridge's former sister-in-law. The reception was at Nat King Cole's house. We knew personally a lot of the actors and--and singers and people around here--and so therefore we--I decided that a black lawyer should be involved. That's why I broke into that. Speaker 1: Now Dorothy Dandridge was married to one of the-- Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Dorothy Dandridge was married to Harold [Nicholas] the youngest--Dorothy and Jerri were married to the Nicholas Brothers [Fayard and Harold] at the same time. So anyway okay. So you decide to break in. So tell us that story. Speaker 1: Well I said to my wife, I said, "You know I don't think there's any black lawyer anywhere in the country that's representing any of these people who are in the entertainment industry. You know like a Nat King Cole, Sammy Davis, Harry Belafonte, and Sidney Poitier and singing groups like the Platters and orchestra leaders like Duke Ellington and Count Basie and all of the black actors and actresses that we had." And I said, "Its time that somebody got involved in that. And I'm gonna get involved in it." She discouraged me in the beginning because she thought that these people were under control of white managers and agents and that they would not allow me to break in. And so what I did is I started out representing Nat and Dorothy Dandridge. And as a result of this, word kind of got around and so about my being--doing a good job--and other people began to come to me. Story_ID: 16587 Speaker 1: There was another period of my life that had a lot to do with my ultimate practice and that was the [House] Un-American Activities Committee began to run rampant. And they subpoenaed almost--thirty or forty lawyers from Los Angeles [California] to testify before the committee--in o- --just in order to ask them if they had ever been a member of the Communist Party. Now, most of them had been members of the Communist Party. But a lot of them had belonged to organizations that they claimed was a Communist front organization. They didn't have any evidence that they were coming to the Communist Party but they called them anyhow. Almost all of those people, with the exception of one or two, decided to defy the committee and tell the committee that they have no right to question them about their political affiliations. And they all had to have counsel when they went before the committee. And so as a former member of the Republican Party, which I was when I was in Chicago [Illinois], I was called to represent most of these people. So I made many appearances before the Un-American Activities Committee, the McCarran Immigration Committee--and eventually you know there was--I'm sure you heard of the case of the Hollywood Ten. That was where ten people were sent away to prison for refusing to answer questions about Communist Party affiliation but those people all claimed rights under the first amendment and they--and Ben [Benjamin] Margolis was chief counsel for them in that case--now that was before I joined the firm but--and they all did their time in prison and--but they all were blacklisted. And some of them went to Europe, some went to Mexico and so forth--well I began to represent some of those people when they came back, when they were lifted from the black list like Dalton Trumbo was one of the greatest of all of the screenwriters. And he won the Academy Award as a matter of fact--under an assumed name [Robert Rich] while he was blacklisted. And when they called his name--to come forward for the Academy Award, nobody came forward. He didn't go forward. And so it was only years after the blacklist had died down and everything and they were again accepted in good grace in the industry, that he they--that he was able to claim his Academy Award for this--for the writing of the screenplay ['The Brave One']. I--for the moment I can't remember what name he used and I can't remember the name of the screen play. But he did win an Academy Award. Story_ID: 16588 Speaker 1: Which is the forerunner of the 'Enquirer' called 'Confidential' magazine. And 'Confidential' magazine was published in New York [New York]. And Confidential would print stories about people in the industry. They didn't care how brazen they were about publishing complete lies about them. And the people would file a lawsuit here in California. And every time they'd file a lawsuit in California the lawsuit would get dismissed because in those days, you could only sue a magazine where--or a newspaper where its office was. And in New York, at that time, you had five years to wait to try to get to court. And so people would file these lawsuits like Errol Flynn and--and a lot of the stars would file these lawsuits and they all got dismissed. So 'Confidential' magazine came and published--published a story about Dorothy Dandridge. And the title of it is 'What Dorothy Dandridge Did in the Woods.' And they told a story about Dorothy supposedly had a sexual tryst with some white bandleader when she was playing up at Lake Tahoe [California], out from Lake Tahoe. And Dorothy came to me and asked me would I sue the magazine for libel. And I said, "Of course, I will." So I filed--I realized that filing a lawsuit, they were always being dismissed. So I decided that he who publishes a libel and who circulates a libel is just as guilty as the person who published it in the first instance. And so in addition to naming 'Confidential' magazine, I named all of their local distributors as party defendants. And I named about five or six of the main drug stores where they sold 'Confidential' magazine. And I served all of them. Well, about three days after I made service on them, 'Confidential's' lawyer came and said, "Look, you're driving me out of business. My distributors are not gonna handle my product anymore if they figure they're gonna be sued. Can't we settle the case?" So I said, "Yes, we can settle the case." And they said, "Well, on what basis can you settle it?" And I said, "What I want you to do is, I want you to print a public apology to Dorothy Dandridge. I want you to put it in the centerfold of your next issue of 'Confidential' magazine. I want it bordered in red around the sides. And I want to write the apology. And you're gonna pay her attorney's fees." They said, "You got it." So, the next issue, they published it in the centerfold of 'Confidential' magazine with an apology, in which they expressed sorrow about what they had said about her and that none of it was true. And they paid her attorney's fees. They paid me $5,000. That was her attorney's fees, which was a lot of money then. And, that's--that was my first thing for Dorothy Dandridge. Then, later on, there was a magazine that--called 'Sepia', that was owned by a Jewish fella out of--out of Dallas, Texas, that was competition to 'Ebony' [magazine]--and it was on the same thing as 'Ebony'. He printed a story about Dorothy Dandridge, which was libelous. I filed a lawsuit against them. And the owner came out here and he settled the case with me on the same basis that I settled it with 'Confidential'. And then I became known as somewhat of a libel expert because we had a--there was a young lady here--who sued 'Jet' magazine, and that's why you never see anything in 'Jet' or 'Ebony' that's favorable of me because I sued 'Jet' magazine for libeling her. And they got a--Loren Miller, who was the dean of all the black lawyers here in town at the time to represent them in the trial. I won the trial, got a judgment against them and a judgment for punitive damages. So they then hired the biggest white appellate law firm in California. And they took it up on appeal and I won the appeal. So that case stated some law that's even quoted today about libel. And as a result of this, of course, you know, word got around about Leo Branton. Story_ID: 16589 Speaker 1: What was she like? How would you describe Dorothy Dandridge? She's such a--I mean she was beautiful, I know. But I think your wife [Jerri Branton] was probably more-- Speaker 2: (simultaneously) My wife is more beautiful than Dorothy. And I keep telling her that. And I don't say that just because she's my wife. But there's no question about it. Dorothy was a result of tremendous makeup and personal appearance--personal--personality. My wife's beauty was a natural beauty. If you see pictures of my wife in those days and see pictures of Dorothy, you would agree with me that she's more beautiful than Dorothy was. Dorothy was a very insecure person. She was--very, very close to Jerri. Did you see the movie with--what's her name? Speaker 1: With Halle Berry. Speaker 2: Halle Berry, see I couldn't think of Halle's name as well as I know it. Well, Jerri helped them with that movie ['Introducing Dorothy Dandridge']. Halle came over and spent many hours discussing with Jerri the kind of person that Dorothy was. So that she could get inside of the character when she played it. I-- Speaker 1: I thought she did a good job. I mean, I was afraid-- Speaker 2: (simultaneously) She did. I think the movie was a terrible movie-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: But she did a good job. As a matter of fact, the only good thing about it--it was a bad script, and it was a bad direction. It was bad--everything was bad about it with the exception of her acting. She did a great job acting. I tried to tell--you see, the--Let me tell you this. After Dorothy won her libel case, the state attorney general contacted me and said that they were considering filing a criminal libel case against 'Confidential' [magazine]. Because they thought what 'Confidential' was doing was a crime to deliberately and willfully and falsely defame people. And they wanted to prosecute them. But they needed witnesses and would Dorothy Dandridge be willing to testify? And so they went to a lot of these people. The only two people who agreed that they would testify was Dorothy Dandridge and Maureen O'Hara. They both agreed to testify. And so I took Dorothy down to the court. She testified against--in the case. They got the biggest lawyer that they could get to defend them. The case ended in a hung jury, and they were gonna try the case a second time, and then 'Confidential' magazine made a deal with the attorney general that they would go out of business, and--if they didn't try the case a second time. And so they folded, and went out of business. So Dorothy Dandridge is a person who drove 'Confidential' magazine out of business. Now to me that is such a socially redeeming phase of Dottie's life that it should have been in the movie. And I tried to tell them to put it in the movie. And they said, "Well, we don't have enough time to put that in the movie." I said, "Yeah, but make this woman's life meaningful." I said, "Don't just be putting in there the fact that she had an affair with Otto Preminger and that--you know." So actually, I did not represent Dorothy at the time of her death because I had withdrawn as her attorney because she made a contract with a guy who was--in which she was going to tell all about her life. And I told her that she had not--she was having a rough time financially and I said, "You don't want to tell these private, personal, secret things about your life." And I said, "This guy is just gonna plant dirt all over everything." I said, "He's known for this. This is the kind of work that he does." And she said, "But I, you know, but I need the money." I said, "Well, I'll tell you. You want to do that. Get somebody else to advise you on the contract. I will not advise you on the contract." So I refused to advise her on the contract. Speaker 1: Was her lack of money due to the fact that, you know, of her lifestyle? Or was it due to-- Speaker 2: No she--her lack of money was due to the fact that she had a very bad marriage to this guy from Las Vegas [Nevada]--who ruined her career, who got her to perform in a nightclub that he bought and that she put up money to buy and everything, and it had lowered her prestige. And she began to just have physical problems with drinking and pills--and she--her career just went down the tubes. She had to go into bankruptcy, lost her home and everything. She--she was--I do not believe that she committed suicide. My wife does. She believes it. And the reason I don't believe that she committed suicide is because--and incidentally, I had a psychiatrist, a black psychiatrist, to do what's called a psychological autopsy, in which he looked at the facts concerning her life and what--various things and everything and he came to the conclusion that she did not commit suicide because of the fact that her--if she was ever gonna commit suicide, it would have been several months before when she was at the bottom. But she was on her way up. She had job offers, two or three different places and was full of life again. And he believes that it was an accidental dying. Story_ID: 16590 Speaker 1: Nat King Cole. How did you come to know him? Speaker 2: Well, he was a friend of Jerri's [Branton]. Speaker 1: He was a friend of Jerri's. Speaker 2: Jerri and Nat and Maria [Cole] were all friends. Because, you know, when Jerri was married to the--to one of the Nicholas Brothers, you know, that's the circle that she traveled in. And so naturally when I started taking her out, I mean, I met Nat. And by the time Nat died on February 15, 1965, I had represented him since '58 [1958]. And I found him to be one of the greatest people I've ever known--in the entertainment industry. Most people in the entertainment industry are, pardon my expression, shitheads. But Nat was a sweetheart. He really was. He was great--and I was so sorry to see him die. Speaker 1: Now, what is--what are the things that you're proud--I'm sorry-- Speaker 2: [simultaneously] And when I came--when I started representing him--you see, I began to head his entire organization. I supervised his personal manager, his business manager, his production company and everything. Story_ID: 16591 Speaker 1: I told you about ['The] Amen Corner'. Here's how I got involved with 'Amen Corner'. Nat [King Cole] and I went to see a local production of 'The Amen Corner' here in at the Ebony Showcase Theater here in Los Angeles [California]. And he liked it very much. And so I said, "Nat, why don't you take this show to Broadway [New York, New York]?" And he said, "That's a good idea." So he agreed. And Frank Silvera was the producer and director of 'The Amen Corner'. Do you know the name Frank Silvera? Speaker 2: No. Frank Silvera was very fair. And was unable to work in the industry other than playing the part of a Mexican. And he was very talented, great actor, great voice and everything. And he wanted to take 'Amen Corner' to Broadway. So, this was in 1960--late '64 [1964]. And I raised all of the money and Nat put up a great part of the money and I had other people to put up money--and I put up some of my own money for it. But then, Nat died on February 15, 1965 before it got to Broadway. And we talked Maria [Cole], his wife, into letting it go forward anyhow. And so she put up the balance of the money that was needed, and we went forward with it. And it was produced under the banner of Kell-Cole Productions. Which was a corporation that I had set up. And it was named after his son Kelly, Kell, K-E-L-L, and Cole--dash Cole--Productions. I set up this corporation and I was president of the corporation. But I was also the executive director on the film. And we went to Broadway with it--and it was an artistic success, but a financial failure. And Beah Richards got nominated for a--what is it you get from Broadway? Not an Emmy. Speaker 1: Not a-- Speaker 2: A Tony [Antoinette Perry Awards]. Speaker 1: (simultaneously) a Tony right. Speaker 2: She got nominated for a Tony. And we were just about to close. Because we had run out of money. And the proceeds weren't that good. So, I figured that if she would get a Tony--win a Tony from it, it would give the box office a boost--and we would be able to make it. So I put $5,000 of my own money into it, to keep it alive until after the Tony Awards. And when the Tony Awards--she didn't win it. But, we had to close anyhow. And Beah Richards, Isabel Sanford, Whitman Mayo, Frank Silvera, they are all gone now. Speaker 1: That must've been an amazing experience for you, 'cause that's--was that your first foray into mounting something for Broadway? Speaker 2: Um-hmm, um-hmm. Yeah. Speaker 1: I mean--and it brought you back to your sort of theater roots. You know, the-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I had produced--you know, in college, I had produced for my senior project in high school--I produced, directed and acted in a three-act play. And also, when I was in the Army, at the University of Iowa [Iowa City, Iowa], we gave a show there. The Army gave a show there. And there was a skit that I wrote and acted in as a part of that. It was a skit about a black airman who had fought in Europe. And he came back to this country and was discriminated against when he came back. And it was told in a letter to his wife. Then the letter would have kind of flashbacks to show what was being said in the letter. Story_ID: 16592 Speaker 1: Well, the way I got to representing Nat [King] Cole was that I--my wife [Jerri Branton] and I were friends of a lot of black people in the entertainment industry. Very close to Dorothy Dandridge who was the maid of honor when we got married, and Nat King Cole, who had the reception at his house. He and Maria [Cole] had the reception at their house. And I began to realize that with all of the famous black entertainers that we had, actors, actresses, musicians, band leaders, singers, dancers, that there wasn't a single Negro lawyer anywhere in the United States who represented any of those people. And I told my wife about that. And she told me that it was no need of me trying because all of these people were under the control of their white managers and agents and business managers and so forth. And I said, "Well, I think I can. I think I can break into it." So, I took some courses at SC [University of Southern California Law School, Los Angeles, California] in entertainment law to familiarize myself at least with some basic elements of entertainment law and then I approached Nat Cole, and asked him if he would let me represent him. His first response to me was, "Leo, you haven't had any experience." and so I said, "But Nat, if people like you don't give me an opportunity to represent them, how will I ever get any experience? Somebody's got to give me an opportunity. I'll tell you what I'll do, Nat. I'll represent you for a year. Do all of the legal work that you need to have done--for one year and I won't charge you a fee. If at the end of that year, you don't like what I have done for you, forget it. I've donated a year of service to you. If you like what I have done, then I want you to pay me for the year that I have already done. And give me a contract to hire me--to pay me from now on." So at the end of the year, he said, "Leo, you've done a good job and here's your money for that year. And you'll be my lawyer until the day I die." And I was. I was his lawyer until he died. Speaker 2: So who was representing him at that time? And wasn't it--we're talking about--your practice had not been transactional at that, you know, at that point before. Speaker 1: No, well he was repented by a couple of the big law firms here. No one in particular. In other words, he didn't have a--a general counselor that was assigned to him. He was--if he had something, he would go to Gangtyre [& Brown law firm], which was one law firm. He went to--as well as I know the fellow, I can't think of the other name. Pacht firm, P-A-C-H-T, Jerry Pacht was in that firm. 'Cause Jerry very often after that accused me of stealing his client. He became a very good friend of mine, you know. So he was kidding me. Speaker 2: And so, when did you migrate from being just his counsel to actually supervising everyone? What was the event that sort of made that happen? Speaker 1: Oh no--as I began to represent him, then he decided that he--at that time you see, all he was doing was having performances as Nat King Cole trio and--with his orchestral group. But he always wanted to go to Broadway [New York, New York]. And he wanted to start a production company. So I helped to set up his production company. Where he had in addition to just--the trio playing, he would have dancers and singers and he had a script to it--you know--so I hired writers and directors and everything. And--so he had a show that would go out. Now that was just a show that he would take on the road. And he also later decided that he wanted to go to Broadway. So he had somebody to write a script to take it to Broadway. Story_ID: 16593 Speaker 1: Here's another thing that happened with Nat Cole that most people don't realize. You know, a lot of people called Nat King Cole an Uncle Tom because of the fact that he played in the South to segregated audiences. But during the civil rights days, there was great competition between the various civil rights groups. There was SNCC, Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee, there was CORE, Congress of Racial Equality, there's NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] There was-- Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference]? Speaker 1: No, SCLC didn't exist at that time [sic, SCLC was founded in 1957]. Speaker 2: Okay, oh. Speaker 1: This was early--early on. I can't think of what--Well, maybe it was. Who--Is that the organization-- Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] The Southern leadership. That was the old--that was the ministers. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. All right. Anyhow, so Nat said, "I'll tell you what I want to do, Leo. I don't like the fact that these organizations are all fighting among themselves. So I wanna put on a show--and charge a lot of money and give all of the proceeds--divide it equally in between all of these black organizations and I want you to organize it." So I did. I organized a thing to have at the Shrine Auditorium [Los Angeles, California]--that place where they always hold the Academy [of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences] Awards every year. I charged--like $100 for a gold circle and $50 for a silver circle and so forth and--all the way down to, you know, to $10 for the seats, and I invited the heads of all of the organizations to come out here. [James] Forman [of SNCC] came--and as a matter of fact, it was black tie for all of the people who were in the gold circle in the performance. And Forman came out here and he didn't have a tuxedo. So I rented him a tuxedo, and bought him a shirt. So that he would look--instead of looking like a SNCC fighter, he would look just like an NAACP fighter. And they all came out here. And that raised money and--for all of them. And I divided the proceeds and sent all of their organizations a check. So, you know, that story hasn't been told. But that's a credit to Nat, for having done something like that. Story_ID: 16594 Speaker 1: What other things that--were you proud of that you guys accomplished together? That you, you know, did on his [Nat King Cole's] behalf? Speaker 2: Well, I think that's probably the thing I'm proudest of that I did on his behalf. He also was involved in another project, which never came to fruition during his life. But I represented, for a number of years, a fellow who was on death row in California, by the name of Wesley Robert Wells. He's one of the most famous inmates ever in California prison. But he was a rebel. He would get into fights with the prison guards, with other inmates. 'Cause he didn't take any crap off of anybody. And he was on death row. And it's a long story and I won't go into de--tell you, why he was on death row. But he never killed anybody. He got the death penalty under a quirk of California law. And I worked with a lawyer up north by the name of Charles Gary. And we had a campaign to save him from execution. And we finally got the governor, Goodwin Knight, to commute his sentence to life without possibility of parole. But when the Angela Davis case was going on, and the [U.S.] Supreme Court decided to--oh--prior to that time, I told Nat, I said, "Nat, the only way we're gonna get this man out of prison is we're gonna have to do a movie about his life--because his story is a much more compelling story than 'The Birdman of Alcatraz.'" You know that story don't you? I said, "So Nat--." He said, "Fine. We'll do it. Do it, Leo." And he hired a screenwriter who wrote a play, a movie script on Wesley Robert Wells. And it was never produced because Nat was supposed to put up the money even to produce it. You know. Because Nat died. And so the place went by--the thing went by the board. But when I was trying the Angela Davis case, the Supreme Court of the United States and the Supreme Court of California declared the death penalty to be unconstitutional. And all of the people, who were then on death row were--had their sentence changed to life. Not life without the possibility of parole, but just straight life. So, I looked at the situation and I said, now here is Wesley Wells, who never killed anybody and he's doing life without possibility of parole. That's a denial of equal protection of the laws--that he doesn't have his sentence, even though it's not a death penalty sentence, changed to life. So, I filed a petition for a writ of habeas corpus up in Contra Costa County [California] where this appeared and--to order his release. And after his being in prison, and he was about sixty-five years old now--he was in prison about forty-five of his sixty-five years of life and ten or fifteen of those, he was on death row--I got that man out of prison. Now, that is my proudest accomplishment as a lawyer. Everybody asked me, "Is the Angela Davis case your proudest accomplishment?" I said, "No. The Angela Davis case I'm proud of but that was my proudest accomplishment--getting that man out of jail, out of prison." Story_ID: 16595 Speaker 1: Were there things that you found different? You know. 'Cause you were really a litigator by-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You know, by soul and temperament? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Did you find you enjoyed the transactional part of the...? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I enjoyed the litigation more. But because I was a litigator, I think it made me more capable of drafting contracts and things because I knew where the loopholes would be, or wouldn't be. Story_ID: 16596 Speaker 1: The Platters [doo wop group] in a lawsuit against Mercury Records, that was cheating them out of a lot of royalties. And I--in my career, I caused a lot of record companies to be audited. And I found out that almost every record company cheated their artists. And I never conducted an audit that did not result in a recovery for the clients because of the way that they kept their books and records. And so--that's the spirit in which I represented the Platters; however, the Platters, when I represented them, four of the five subsequently became defendants that I sued. Because the--I had a contingency contract with the Platters against Mercury Records. And Mercury Records, without my knowledge and behind my back, went to four of the five Platters and made a settlement privately with them. And gave them the money, paid them outside and then they instructed me to dismiss the lawsuit. I thereupon--everyone but Herbert Reed did this. Herbert Reed was the bass singer. All the others sold out behind my back. So I then filed a lawsuit against my ex-clients and against Mercury Records and their lawyers for interfering with my right of contract. And I got a settlement on the case in which I was paid something in excess of what my contingency would have been with them because of their wrongdoing. And Mercury paid off the settlement to me, and Herbert Reed remained my client thereafter so I represented Herbert Reed thereafter and continued to represent him for a number of years in a lot of things. Speaker 2: Did they feel any--? Did the group--? They didn't stay together? Did they? Speaker 1: (simultaneously) No, they broke up. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: They broke up shortly after I filed this lawsuit. And there was a fellow by the name of Buck Ram who owned a twenty percent interest in--actually, there were only four Platters. The reason I said five was because of the fact that Buck Ram owns twenty percent of the Platters group. And he supposedly owned the rights to all of the music. When they broke up, he then started a new group called the Platters. And then the individual Platters went out and started new groups. So there are four or five Platters running around all over the world. And then whenever they would form a new group, Buck Ram would sue them, saying that he had the right to use the name the Platters because they had given the right to the name to him in their contracts. They were really cutthroat contracts. Story_ID: 16597 Speaker 1: What about Ingrid [sic, Inger] Stevens? Speaker 2: That's an interesting situation. Ingrid [sic, Inger] was, as you know, a very beautiful Swedish girl. She started going with Ike Jones who was a black person who was a classmate of my brother Sterling [Branton] when he was at UCLA [University of California at Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California]. And Ike Jones had majored in theater arts at UCLA. But the only role that he could get was being an African jungle native or something of the kind. And so he started going with Inger. And eventually--and he brought her around for me to represent her. So I represented her, and negotiated her contract, television contract, for 'The Farmer's Daughter' which was a big [television] series. And I put her contract through a tax-saving foreign corporation so that she could save more money from it. Eventually, Ike and Inger wanted to get married, but the studios told her that if she ever married Ike that she could forget about Hollywood. She was through in the business. So, they got secretly married. They went down to Mexico, and got married and then they wanted to buy a house. And so, they bought a house in my name up on Mulholland Drive and I had the utilities turned on in my name. And the gas, telephone, the electricity and everything. And then I thought about it later, I said, "You know what? If my--" And I didn't tell my wife [Jerri Branton] about it. You know, it was confidential with the clients. I don't tell her things that are confidential with the clients. So I said, "You know, If my wife ever discovers that I'm paying a gas bill and a tax bill then she'll think I'm having an affair up here, and this is the second house." But, of course, that wasn't true. So, anyhow, when Inger died [1970], and she and Ike had broken up--they were separated but they were still married and when she died, I opened an estate in Inger's name with Ike as the administrator of the estate. And I turned her remains over to Angela's Funeral Home, which is a black-owned funeral home here. And they handled it. And she was cremated. And they scattered her ashes at sea. So I rode out on the plane with the person who scattered the ashes to be sure that her ashes were scattered at sea. And they were scattered at sea. After I filed a lawsuit, the public administrator came in and asked that he be appointed administrator because Ike Jones was not married to Inger Stevens. They could find no proof that he was married to Inger Stevens, and that he was an interloper. And we had a court contest over whether Ike should be the administrator and the--or whether it should be the public administrator. And I almost got into a fist fight with the public administrator. I accused him of being a prejudiced bigot who couldn't conceive of a beautiful white woman like this being married to a black man. And that's the only reason he was in here. They couldn't forgive that. And--anyhow, we beat him and he ended up remained as administrator of that estate. Speaker 1: That's an amazing story. So they stayed--they got--she--They successfully married without anyone knowing. And they were-- Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Yeah, well, they got married down in Mexico. Speaker 1: Right, Mexico, right, right. Yeah, 'cause I had heard that that was someone I should interview actually. Speaker 2: Ike? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Well, I can tell you another story. Ike and I--I did a lot for Ike. I got him his job with Harry Belafonte. And I got him his job with Nat [King] Cole. And before that, Ike wanted to produce a movie and I--He got a screenwriter to write a play, a screenplay rather. And he got Dennis Weaver--Do you remember who Dennis Weaver--? Dennis Weaver was the guy who played Chester on 'Gunsmoke' [CBS, 1955-1975]. The guy who was crippled. Well, he was gonna play the lead in it. And I set up a group at my house. We lived over on Crenshaw [Boulevard] at that time. This must have been as early as 1960, '61 [1961] at the latest. And I got a group of people together, mostly black, who were gonna put up so much money to shoot this movie. And then Ike met Harry Belafonte and decided he would take the project to Harry because it's better for Harry--a fellow like Harry to do it than for this young, independent group to do it. Then, I got involved in a business of owning convalescent hospitals here in town with Nat Cole as a partner, Ike Jones, as a partner, his brother [Dr. James L. Jones], who was a psychiatrist as a partner, a white couple that--who had experience in owning and operating convalescent hospitals. And Harry Margolis, who was a tax planning lawyer. And we built about three new hospitals here in Los Angeles. And it's a long story and it's a sad story. But we finally got involved in a litigation with Ike. He sued all of his partners on a bogus claim. And we went to court and went through a legal proceeding as well as appeals and everything. We finally won our point. But in the mean time the relationship with Ike Jones went down the tubes. So I haven't seen Ike in years. Story_ID: 16598 Speaker 1: He [Ike Jones] was in charge of putting together all of Nat's productions, including the Broadway play that Nat [King Cole] was going on. Nat had put together a play ['I'm With You'] that he was gonna take to Broadway [New York, New York]. And he hired the best directors and musical directors and various people. And it was put together here and they were gonna go on the road to--they opened in San Francisco [California] and then they were going from there to Omaha, Nebraska and then some other place in the South. And they were gonna finally end up on Broadway. And before the play went to--left here, I told Nat not to, not for him to take this play to Broadway. I said "This play is gonna flop. It's not good enough. Your people you have are really not doing a good job." And he said, "Oh, Leo, you're a lawyer. Don't try to be an artist." I said, "Nat, you forget two things, my background was in arts. And I'm also an ex-actor. And I also am a consumer. And if I don't like it, your public's not gonna like it. There's two things wrong. This play is not ready and you should not open in San Francisco. San Francisco is a very sophisticated theater town." I said, "People who go to Broadway, don't ever open on Broadway. They go up to New Haven, Connecticut and open in places like that--smaller venues, instead of trying to go to Broadway. And they polish it, and then they finally take it to Broadway. Well, you going to San Francisco is just like opening on Broadway." So he insisted that that's what they do. So we opened in San Francisco and got panned, got really panned by all of the critics. Every newspaper panned us. And so he told me that next day, he said, "Leo, I want you to fire the director, and I want you to fire this person, fire the person. Get me some new people." So I fired them and got new people to come in. We got a play doctor to come in and try to change it. And they went to Omaha--they still didn't do well. And they made one other stop. I've forgotten where it was now. And they finally folded because it was obvious that it wasn't gonna make it. So Nat's life's dream of going to Broadway died. He always wanted to do that. And I always wondered why do singers wanna be actors, actors wanna be dancers, dancers wanna be something else? Why don't they play on their strengths? Story_ID: 16599 Speaker 1: Now, did you ever have any dealings yourself with Harry Belafonte? Speaker 2: Yes, two, two dealings. At the time I represented Nat [King Cole], Nat Cole and Harry Belafonte were the two strongest black entertainers in the country. So I told Nat, I said, "You know, Nat, with you and Harry joining forces, you could form a very strong production team and make your own movies. You know, make your own movies." So he thought it was a good idea, and I contacted Harry and talked to him about it. And at that time, I was a black lawyer representing Nat. Everybody who represented Harry was white. His personal manager, his lawyer, everybody was white. And so Nat went to New York, and I went to New York. And we were forming this corporation. And they couldn't decide, because both of them had tremendous egos, especially Harry. And they couldn't decide whether it would be called Cole-Belafonte Productions or Belafonte-Cole Productions. So I said, "Well look, why don't we do this? Let's flip a coin. And if your representative, Harry, wins, it's called Belafonte-Cole Productions. But Cole would be the chairman of the board. If I win, it'll be Cole-Belafonte Productions, but you'll be chairman of the board." He said, "That's fair enough." So we had the coin flipping at the Hotel Pierre in New York--upscale hotel, and flipped a coin, and I won. And later on that day, we were all having a meeting. And when we got to the meeting--we were talking about things. And Harry says, "Oh, how did the coin flip go?" And Harry's lawyer said, "You lost." He said--like that. And I said, "Well, don't worry Harry, about it. It's Cole-Belafonte Productions, but you're the chairman of the board." So anyhow, he was very unhappy about it being Cole-Belafonte Productions. He really was. And every project that we would suggest--Harry would turn it down. We suggested several projects, but they turned it down. They turned it down. So finally Harry said, "Well, it's no need of us keeping this production company alive so let's dissolve it." So we dissolved it. We never got anywhere with it. Now, I came into Harry's life on another occasion, when he was still married to Marguerite Belafonte. And I came in representing Marguerite. I never got to court on it, but I did represent her in connection with some negotiations about child support. And we, we still remained friends thereafter. I see him and he sees me. As a matter of fact, I had an accident--not an accident but, I was out in the [San Fernando] Valley, and I got stabbed and robbed. I got stabbed in the back by a couple of young guys. And I was taken to the hospital. And Harry heard about it. And I picked up the phone and he said, "Leo, how are you doing?" I said, "Harry Belafonte." You know, you can't miss his voice. And so I said, "How in the world did you know I was here?" He said, "Well I have my sources." He called to find out how I was and wished me well. And I've only seen him once since then. And that was when the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] gave a testimonial, joint testimonial for Harry and Sidney [Poitier], out here in Los Angeles [California]. So I attended that affair. Speaker 1: Did you ever see him around the Civil Rights Movement and with [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.]? Speaker 2: (simultaneously) No, never saw him. No. Speaker 1: Okay, what about Sidney Poitier? Have you had any dealings with him in your, sort of, this whole LA [Los Angeles, California] thing? Speaker 2: Well, I know Sidney quite well. But I've never had anything to do with Sidney. I almost had something to do with Sidney. There's a black actor here in town, by the name of Brock Peters, who is very well known and is a great actor, and very close to us. And Brock and Sidney considered a joint company at one time. And Brock got me to represent the company, but that never really got off the ground. Story_ID: 16600 Speaker 1: The Jewish lawyer component [Nat King Cole's former legal advisors]--did you find people were trying to, you know, to sabotage you, and to-- Speaker 2: Well, there was nothing that they could do once Nat [King Cole] told them that "This is my lawyer." They were very offended, and didn't like the idea of somebody else being brought in and especially a black lawyer being brought in. Because there were never even any black people at all around Nat. But nobody ever tried to sabotage me that I know of. 'Cause I had too much power. You know. And it is said that I got rid of--you see, it was not long after that, that Carlos Gastel, who was his personal manager, was discharged by Nat. And the word got around that I had caused him to be fired. I really didn't cause him to be fired. In talking to Nat, I just told him that he was throwing away fifteen percent that he didn't need to. He didn't need a personal manager. He had a business manager already. And he finally let him go. And Carlos was not doing a good job for Nat. He was only doing jobs that could make a commission for him. He would, for example, schedule Nat to do a concert in New York [New York]. And the next day, maybe do one in Denver [Colorado]. And then two days later, do one back in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania]. You know, instead of doing all of them in one area, and then moving to another area. And cut down on the wear-and-tear on the artist, as well as the expense of it. So, as far as I'm concerned, there was no great loss when he got rid of him. Speaker 1: Did you like that role that you played though with him? I mean, because it's atypical--I mean it's a client--It was a client relationship, which lawyers are good at. But this was even--You know, this was more business-oriented. Did you enjoy or, you know, like it better or more than, you know, with work with the courtroom? Did you like it as equally? Speaker 2: No, no, I liked it because as far as being in that work is concerned. But my heart was always with being a trial lawyer. And I still tried cases during that time. You know, this was not a full time job representing him. I still tried personal injury cases, and criminal cases and everything else during this period of time. So it didn't take anything away from what I was doing otherwise. Story_ID: 16601 Speaker 1: What attracted you to get involved in the Civil Rights Movement of the '60s [1960s]? And work-- Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Oh, that's easy. I had come from Arkansas. I had been discriminated against all my life. I was discriminated against when I was in Pine Bluff [Arkansas]. I was discriminated against when I was in college [Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee]. I discriminated against when I was in the Army. And I was discriminated against when I was in law school [Northwestern University School of Law, Chicago, Illinois]. And I was still discriminated in society, when I got out. So, I come to California, where I have relative freedom. And I say relative, because everything wasn't free here either. And it's only natural that I see all these people fighting, giving up their lives and their liberty to bring about a change in the South. And I felt I had to be a part of it. And so, I said, "Look I'm going down and see what I can do." And that's how I became active in it. It was only natural. It would have been--It would have been--I can't imagine it being otherwise. Speaker 1: Now, how many years did you spend--Or was it [unclear]? Speaker 2: Oh, I went down periodically. I mean, during the entire time that it was going on. I'd go down, stay a week. I'd go down, stay two weeks. And then I'd go down, maybe a few months later, and stay again. Story_ID: 16602 Speaker 1: What were the things that you were doing and working on? Speaker 2: Well, I tried some cases. I tried a case--a very important case in my hometown, for example, in Pine Bluff, Arkansas, along with my brother Wiley [Branton]. We--There was a young fella who was taking his daughter--not his daughter, but his niece, to the only integrated school that they had down there then. And one day, a bunch of white toughs decided to attack them. And he pulled out a knife, and told them not to come up on him. And one of them was braver than the others and came up on him. And he stabbed him with his knife, two or three times. And he was charged with attempted murder. And my brother Wiley, who at that time had his office in Atlanta [Georgia], I believe, was called to represent him. So, he called me and asked me would I come down and help him to try the case? And so, I said, "Sure. I'll come down, Wiley, and help you try the case." So, I went down. And it was only the second time I'd ever been back to Arkansas since I was involved in that fight that I told you about. And I go to trial, in the same courtroom that I was convicted in. But now the prosecutor [from Leo Branton's trial for assault at age eighteen] , who had argued that I was a Negro who had money, and fining me wouldn't be punishment to him, is now the judge. And so we walk in and, you know, you can't practice from state to state. But you can get permission to handle one case in a state. My brother took me into chambers and said, "Judge--" Whatever his name was--I've forgotten now. "You remember my brother Leo, don't you?" He said, "Oh, yes, I remember your brother Leo." So, he said, "I move his admission to practice in this courtroom in this case." And he said, "Permission granted." I said, "Thank you, Your Honor." I said, "Now, I have a motion I wanna make." "What is that motion?" "I wanna make a motion to quash this jury panel on the grounds of systematic inclusion of Negroes on it." And he said, "What do you mean systematic inclusion of Negroes? For years, you Negroes have been arguing about systematic exclusion. And now you--You wanna--You're talking about systematic inclusion." I said, "It means just what I said." I said, "You systematically include just enough Negroes to give us the semblance of having Negroes on the jury. But they're always below the number that can be dismissed by peremptive challenge. And so you finally end up with an all white jury." He said, "Motion denied." Okay, and we go out and we try the case. And incidentally, when that thing happened to me in Arkansas, the president of Arkansas State College [now the University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff, Pine Bluff, Arkansas], where I was a student at that time, a fellow by the name of Dr. J. B. [John Brown] Watson, came before the student body the next day and said, "One of our students was assaulted in the store at Henry Marx yesterday. And he fought back, and he's now facing a trial." He said, "If I hear of any student ever going into Henry Marx clothing store, after this date, he will be expelled. If I hear of any teacher going into Henry Marx clothing store, all I want from them is to tell me where I should mail them their last check." And then there became the first boycott, racial boycott, that I know of that existed in the South. This is before the [1950s-1960s] boycott and sit-in strike. This is 1939 or '40 [1940]. Okay. Negroes boycotted that store for years and years. And they almost drove them into bankruptcy. But, the only thing about it, it was an upscale store and not that many Negroes went in there in the first place. But they did boycott the store. Now, compare that to the guy who later became president of Arkansas State College by the name of [Lawrence A.] Davis. Davis, when the sit-in started, and students of Pine Bluff were sitting in at the restaurants and the soda fountains in Pine Bluff, he expelled the students for sitting in. Now here's a man, who in 1940, was more courageous and more of an activist, civil rights activist, than the guy in the 1960s, who you would think would have been more active. So anyhow, at the time of this trial, Negroes, sharecroppers and farmers came from miles around to watch this case. They came around in their coveralls and everything. Came around and said, "Oh man! That, that older Branton boy is back in town." And then when we would make some points in the court, they would say, "Yes, yes, yes, yes Lord." And the judge would tell them to be quiet. And then at a recess, they would all be standing out and they'd say, "Oh, did you see that! This is a great day. First, that young Branton would hit him with the left and then that older Branton would hit him with a right. And then they'd go left, right, left, right, left right." They said, "Oh, this is a great day." So anyhow, when the trial was over, the jury hung. And I've forgotten what the count was now. But I think it was--major part of it was--I think it was like eight to four for acquittal. And so the judge dismissed the case. And my brother and I came out of the courtroom. And we were standing out there receiving the congratulations of the people. And all of a sudden, everybody got quiet. And the reason they got quiet, I looked up and here comes the judge walking down. And the people parted like the parting of the river. And walked down to me and held out his hand and said, "Leo, you're welcome to come back to my court at anytime." I said, "Thank you, judge." Now this is the same guy who said that I should go to jail because I was a Negro who had money. So that shows you how things had changed by then. And incidentally in my trial, you know, it was a segregated audience. But at this trial, you could sit anywhere you wanted to. And the courtroom was overfilled with Negro people. Story_ID: 16603 Speaker 1: And I went to Mississippi and I helped to get people out of jail. And I attended a couple of court hearings that I did not take part in. I went to Virginia. And that's where I stayed and brought in lawyers from around the country to try civil rights cases. I went to Maryland. I went to Alabama. I just--actually, there was only one case that I really tried to its conclusion. I made appearances on petition for writ of habeas corpus and got people out of jail. Got them released, you know, from jail 'til somebody else took over, but I couldn't stay down there and try the cases. Story_ID: 16604 Speaker 1: Did you choose SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] or did SNCC choose you? Speaker 2: SNCC effectively chose me. They had chapters of SNCC all over the country. The purpose of these chapters was to put on fundraisers and raise money. And somebody approached me. I don't remember who it was, that asked me if I would work with SNCC, and put on some fund-raisers. And, I said I would. And I had two or three SNCC workers that came out here and stayed here at the house while they were here. And we put on these fundraisers and raised money. And on one of those trips, young [James] Forman came out. And so Jim asked me. He said, "Leo, would you be willing to come back sometime and help us out on a legal basis?" I said, "Absolutely." And that's how I got to going. As a matter of fact, when I went to Danville, Virginia, I was with Jim Forman. He and I flew in together. We flew to--And I told you that the fellow who came out, drove us out to the car was Julian Bond. Drove us rather to the airport was Julian Bond. Well, we flew into some town in North Carolina. I don't remember the name of the town now but it's just across the border from Virginia. 'Cause Danville is just across the border in the southern part of Virginia. And we drove in. And we got there around midnight. And we first went to the Negro hospital. And we found it--it looked like a war zone. There were people in there with bandages around their heads and limping around. And some were on crutches, where their legs had been broken. And it really looked a mess. So we went in there. And they said, "Don't worry about us. Go and check on those people who are in jail. Because some of them are wounded worse than we are." So we went down to the jail that night. And I walked in, and the guy let me in jail. And I talked to some of the people. And all of them said that they were alright. "See what you can do for such and such." Everyone was saying, "See what you can do for so and so. 'Cause he's been wounded." So, the next day, I went in to see the judge about setting bail on all of these people. And, I went in with the D.A. [District Attorney]. And as I went into chambers to see the judge, the D.A. said, "Judge, this is Mr. Branton. He's here and he wants to see you, see about setting bail on those people who were arrested last night for violence outside the jail." And what had happened was, the jail was in a cul-de-sac. And they were--people were--somebody had been arrested. And they were parading around and around in the cul-de-sac. The police came up, cordoned off the end of the cul-de-sac. The only way that you could get in there. And then turned high-powered hoses on the people. And as they would try to run out of the cul-de-sac, and run through those hoses, they were washing them down into the street under cars. They had deputized a lot of the garbage truck drivers who had baseball bats, that had been cut off at the end. And the people were beating them with the baseball bats. And the next day, after going in to see the judge, I went outside the courtroom and there were about a hundred people. Some on crutches, some with bandages around their heads, walking around the courthouse singing, 'We Shall Overcome.' And I said, "These crazy people." I said, "These people ought to be out of their mind." See, I didn't believe in nonviolence. I wasn't [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.]. And I always felt that the only way you were gonna get your rights was to use violence. Of course, as it turned out, I was wrong. His nonviolent way proved correct. But that was not my way. And I thought these people were crazy for walking around singing 'We Shall Overcome'. I thought it was foolish. I said, "They're you know--They're insane!" But there they were. And I don't know how they could do it. Even after being beaten half to death the night before. They were around there peacefully marching and singing 'We Shall Overcome'. Speaker 1: So were you--were you identifying then more with either the [Black] Muslims or were you--I'm just saying were you identifying with the Muslims? Were you identifying more with the Black Panthers? Speaker 2: (simultaneously) I didn't know anything about the Muslims or the Black Panthers then. I got involved with the Muslims and the Black Panthers after that. I was involved with them, and identified them as civil rights activists who were trying to gain rights that they should have had for 150 years. Speaker 1: And with Jim Forman, did you--What did you think of him? Or, you know-- Speaker 2: Jim was a--you know, I knew Jim's history. Jim was a very courageous activist. He got his--beaten over the head so many times it left him a little bit deranged. Speaker 1: Now, the other-- Speaker 2: (simultaneously) I also went to Fannie Lee [sic, Fannie Lou] Hamer's house with Jim. You remember Fannie Lee Hamer? Yeah, I went by her house with Jim. Jim and I went by to see her--talk about one of her up coming cases. Story_ID: 16605 Speaker 1: Let's talk about your, you know, your defense of Angela Davis. Can you--How did that case come about? And, you know-- Speaker 2: Well, I had been [1950-1957] trial counsel to three members of the Communist Party [of the United States of America]. A case which resulted in their acquittal by the United States Supreme Court. And, of course, the Communist Party was aware of that. Angela was a member of the Communist Party. She was supported very heavily by the Communist Party. The head of the--after she was arrested in New York, and before she got extradited to California, the chief lawyer for the Communist Party in New York came out here to see me. And said, "Leo, we know that you have had experience fighting on behalf of Communists in the Smith Act case. You have some knowledge of Marxism, Leninism and of communism. We want you to represent Angela Davis. However, we want you to be a part of a team. We want to have a black lawyer, a white lawyer, a woman lawyer, a communist lawyer, and we want Angela to represent herself." I said, "Well, if you want me to represent Angela Davis, because you think that I can do the best job for her, I'm willing to do that. But I am not gonna be your black delegate to a team." I said, "You can't try a case by committee. Somebody's got to be captain of the ship." And so, I turned it down. He left and went back to New York. I took my wife [Jerri Branton] and two sons to Europe on a six-week vacation. We rented a car and drove it up to Denmark. And when we left Denmark and came back to Europe, I wanted to stop in East Germany, rather than West Germany 'cause I wanted to see what East Germany was like. So, I put my car on a ferry, and landed in East Germany. And, as I landed there, and the ferry was coming into the dock, there was a gigantic billboard that had a great big picture of Angela Davis in her afro that said, "Free Angela Davis"--in East Germany. And so, I was really impressed that Angela had worldwide support. And certainly worldwide support from Communists. And, then when I came back, Doris [Brin] Walker, who was a part of Angela's defense team, came down here to see me. And said, "Leo, we need an experienced trial lawyer. We got several lawyers on the case now. But we don't have an experienced trial lawyer. And we know you've had a lot of experience trying cases. Angela would still like for you to represent her." And I said, "Yeah, but I turned this down." She said, "Well will you go up and talk to Angela?" I said, "Yeah, I'll go up and talk to her." So, I went up to talk to her. And I told her that if she wanted me to come aboard--I said, "There's only two conditions that I make." I said, "One, while I'm willing to work with all the other lawyers on your team, I have to have the final word. Because you can only have one captain of the ship. And you must inform your other lawyers that I have the final word if there's any disagreement about the way we're going." I said, "And secondly, I can acquit Angela Davis, black militant. But I cannot acquit Angela Davis, the communist. So communism must not come into this case at all. The only--" And I said, "I never want to bring communism into this case. And I will only--and I'll fight it if the prosecution tries to bring it in." And I said, "Is that okay?" And she said, "Yeah, that's okay." So that's how I came aboard, as one of four trial lawyers. Story_ID: 16606 Speaker 1: Was she [Angela Davis] more of an ideologue, you know of, you know, a very fervent believer? Or do you think she just got caught up and was scared at the point, you know. When she realizes what has happened? I mean she's--You know, she's being tried. You knows the conseq--It's like Patty Hearst-- Speaker 2: (simultaneously) She knows what she did. Speaker 1: I know she knows. But let's say Patty Hearst came back with this-- Speaker 2: And there was every reason for her to be tried [for purchasing weapons used in a prison escape attempt]. I mean this is--This was, you know--This was not a made up case. I mean-- Speaker 1: No, no, I know. But I'm saying-- Speaker 2: (simultaneously) When you stop to think that all of the guns that were brought into the courtroom were bought and purchased by Angela Davis. They had--she and Jonathan Jackson had become very close. George Jackson's younger brother. And they had been seen together near the courthouse the day before. And within hours of the shoot-out [August 7, 1970] and the time that these people were killed and wounded, she took flight. So there was every reason to believe that she might be guilty of this crime, and every reason to charge her. The only thing about it is, we established that, sure, she bought these guns. But she bought them in her own name. She didn't try to hide her identity or anything of the kind. And she bought them to protect the house that they lived in which had--which was in Oakland [California] or San Francisco [California]. I don't remember which now. And Jonathan Jackson stole those guns and took them in to free his brother without her knowledge. And she fled; because she knew that they would try to blame her. Speaker 1: What I--what I was wondering--what...? Speaker 2: (simultaneously) But she was, she was an ironclad, dyed-in-the-wool member of the Communist Party at that time. Speaker 1: She didn't waver is what I'm saying. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: No. Okay, that's what I'm trying to -- Speaker 2: (simultaneously) No, no, no. As a matter of fact, after she was acquitted--And this is one of the things I've criticized Angela for. After she was acquitted, I don't find any place where she ever thanked her lawyers for what they did for her. But she thanked the Communist Party. And Angela, at the time of that acquittal, could have been the most important black woman in America. If she had just not aligned herself so closely with the Communist Party thereafter. She should have said to the Communist Party, "Thank you for your services, but sayonara. I'm going my own way." And you see, I--she was very heavily pursued to write her book. And that book of hers that I have up there, I negotiated that book for her, after the acquittal. And it--I spoke to a lot of publishing companies. We were getting offers right and left. And she got the largest advance than anybody had ever received who had never written a book before, for that book. And it's a very intelligent book. But it's not--doesn't make exciting reading. Speaker 1: Did she--The other question, did you interact any with--much with her family during the trial? Speaker 2: Yeah, I saw her brother Ben [Davis], who at that time was a professional football player with--for the Cleveland Rams. I mean not Cleveland Rams, the Cleveland Browns. And spent a lot of time talking with him. I met his mother. And her sister--Fania. And, as a matter of fact, the whole family came down to my house. And spent several days down there at my house in Mexico. Speaker 1: I bet they were very, very-- Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Lovely people. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: The reason I--You know, I just wondered. 'Cause a lot of times in the black community, you know, there's a lot of shame amongst them. But they tended to rally. Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Oh, yeah. They were highly supportive of Angela. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, especially a middle class background. Is there anything else about that trial that people don't know that, you know, that, you know. You would talk about or-- Speaker 1: Well, it was a lot of things in that trial, which are of interest to people in the law. We established a lot of firsts in that case. I mean I don't know whether it's worth talking about here or not. For example, everybody now has jury consultants, who sit in the courtroom and tell you their idea about what juror you should select. Well, we started that. In the Angela Davis case, we had people, psychiatrists, and psychologists sitting in the court room, and--who would advise us on what was their opinion about whether that person would be a good person for the defense or not. And as a matter of fact, a lot of those psychologists got together and wrote either a book or a paper thereafter. And they take complete credit for the Angela Davis case. We did a lot of research on the jurors before it was called--the jury was called. You know, you don't get the jury list until you go into court. So you have--you can't--no way of investigating them. But we had a way of investigating them. And the way we had it was, we made a motion to quash the jury panel on the grounds of systematic exclusion of blacks and Mexicans. And so we told them that we had to have a copy of the jury list so that our experts would tell us which one of those people were Mexicans by their names that they had on there. And the only way we could do it was if we saw the list. So we took the list, and started an investigation of everybody. You know, we went by to see the kind of neighborhood they lived in. Whether they lived in an integrated neighborhood or not. We watched for bumper stickers on their car. At that time, a lot of people had bumper stickers that said, "America, love it or leave it." You ever see any of those? And, we found out whether or not people were members of unions. We found out whether they were Democrats or Republicans. So we had a full knowledge about those jurors before the case started. That's why we ended up with such a good jury. But we still ended up with an all-white jury. Speaker 2: Is that how methodic you usually were with your cases? Or do you think this was a unique set of circumstances? Speaker 1: (simultaneously) Well, look I had a case where Angela was under a death penalty--the threat of the death penalty. I mean so you do whatever you have the funds or the talent to do. Of course! I did that for all of my cases where there was a serious offense. Story_ID: 16607 Speaker 1: What since that period of time are you most proud of doing? And did those types of cases continue to sort of come into you? Speaker 2: Well, I never tried any case that was as high profile as the Black Panther cases and the Angela Davis case. You know, I've tried a couple of murder cases since then. Successfully. And I tried numerous personal injury cases. I began to represent some people in the sports industry, Like Johnny Roseboro. He used to be a catcher for the [Los Angeles] Dodgers. I represented him in a P.I. [personal injury] case against Juan Marichal, who was a pitcher for the San Francisco Giants, who hit him over the head with a bat during the game. I represented a couple of baseball--basketball players--and a lot of personal injury cases. Story_ID: 16608 Speaker 1: Mr. Branton, did you have your own sort of code of ethics in dealing? I mean, a lot of times they say criminal lawyers, you know. Once dealing in criminal--become more like the criminals themselves. Speaker 2: Yes, I did have a code of ethics as a lawyer. Number one, I would represent almost anybody who would--I only made one exception. I absolutely refused to represent anybody who was charged with the failure to provide for their children. A failure to provide case, or anybody who was charged with molesting their children. I just didn't have the stomach to do that. And I turned down those kind of cases. I represented people in adoption proceedings without fee. Because I felt that if there was a couple of people who wanted to give a child a home as a mother and father, then I should make a contribution to that. So I never charged a fee for any of these adoption cases. As far as criminal cases are concerned, I never would put my client on the stand to testify, if my client told me that he was guilty. If he told me that he was not guilty, even though all of the evidence appeared to me to point to his guilt, as long as he insisted that he was not guilty, he had a constitutional right to testify in his behalf. And I would not deny him that right. And I warned him sometimes that, you know, you might be hanging yourself. It might be better off if you don't testify. But if they insisted on testifying, I'd put them on. So my code of ethics on criminal cases was just never to put anybody on the stand that I felt was not telling the truth. Story_ID: 16609 Speaker 1: And you had never--even with your high profile cases, you didn't have concern about the safety of your family or, you know. The impact that handling these cases had? Speaker 2: No. And my greatest fear was being set up by the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation]. All the time that I was involved in the Angela Davis case, there were always two FBI agents outside my house, sitting out there in cars. When I was in--San Jose [California]--and, I think one day my wife [Jerri Branton] walked out there with a pot of coffee and said, "I know you guys must want some coffee. You been sitting out here for so long." She says, "Here, have a cup of coffee." And also, when I was trying the Black Panther cases, the police were so gung-ho to get the Black Panthers. See, they really wanted to kill them, to murder them all. I couldn't talk on the phone, 'cause I knew my phone was tapped. And I had to talk in code to the people who would call me on the phone. But I never have felt any concern about personal safety. Story_ID: 16610 Speaker 1: When you look back over your legal career, are you happy with what you accomplished? Are there things that you would have done differently or wished for in a different way? Speaker 2: I am very pleased with my professional career. I think it has been very exciting and it's been very productive. And I'm proud of it. I don't know anything, of anything, that I would have done differently. I just wish that I had, at some stage, become a sports agent. So I could be considered in that field. You see I, I was the first black, in a lot of ways in California. You know, for example, I caused the first integrated jury in Riverside County [California]. I was the first black lawyer to be on the State Bar Disciplinary Board that is in charge of the discipline of all wayward lawyers. I became the first black lawyer to be a part of an integrated law firm. There are others too. And I received many commendations for my contributions to civil rights and civil liberties from organizations including the ACLU [American Civil Liberties Union] and the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and bar associations. I've been able to go and lecture to the criminal law departments at University of Michigan's Law School [Ann Arbor, Michigan]. I taught a seminar in trial technique at Texas Southern [University], down in Houston [Texas]. I lectured at Santa Clara College [sic, Santa Clara University, Santa Clara, California] up in northern California. I was a member of a criminal law college in Atlanta [Georgia]. So, you know, I've done as much as I wanted to do. Speaker 1: So, it was probably a blessing that you didn't have--you know, they said that, you know, the day on the radio, where you got replaced. Do you think-- Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Not necessarily. I might have ended up being greater than Sidney Poitier, [laughs]. I don't know. Story_ID: 16611 Speaker 1: Now in terms of the black, you know, being an African American in this country, you--I mean clearly as I look at you, I keep thinking, "You know, he could have passed as Jewish. He could have been Italian, he could have been Hispanic." (Laughs). And I--you know. And yet, you've been so squarely in the middle of everything. You know, and representing consistently, you know, our, our race. Speaker 2: Well there's no question about that. My mother [Pauline Wiley], my father [Leo Branton, Sr.] and my grandfather, they could have passed for white. My mother and dad, they could have passed for white. And, at least a couple of my brothers and I could have passed for white. But we never gave it a, never--I never had any thought, or notion or idea about doing that. And I have used my appearance to advantage on many occasions. Especially when I was in the South. I was able to go into places that black lawyers couldn't get into. For example, when I first went to Parchman [State] Prison [Mississippi] to see someone who was in there. There were four or five black lawyers outside the prison that couldn't get in. I said, "Why won't they let you in?" They said, "Well, because they don't let any Negro lawyers in here." But they let me in. I went in. I didn't get to see the client because they said that he was there for conspiracy to advocate the violent overthrow of the sovereign state of Mississippi. Story_ID: 16612 Speaker 1: Your life speaks of a profound love for the black race. Speaker 2: Well it just so happens that the black race has been the most despised, the most persecuted, the most harassed, the most demeaned of all other racial groups. And that's why I do--and I'm one of them. That's why I do that. But I have the same feeling of compassion for other minority groups. For example, for years I was on the board of the Mexican-American Legal Defense Fund. Where I--which is the counterpart of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] Legal Defense Fund. And that's because I knew what was happening to Mexicans. I have a feeling of compassion for the foreign-born, who are here in this country. And believe me, I am a great believer in [Fidel] Castro and what he's doing for Cuba. And I've been to--my wife [Jerri Branton] and I both have been to Cuba, before the revolution, during the revolution and since the revolution. And I know what Cuba was like before the revolution. And I know what it's been like since. You know. For example, there's now universal suffrage there. Even seventy and eighty year old people can read and write now and couldn't read before. They have the best education system in the world. They've trained more doctors in their little island than the United States trains. They have so many doctors, qualified doctors--they import doctors to all the Third World countries. And there's never a disaster anywhere in a Third World country that Cuba doesn't send volunteer doctors over to help out. They've done away with prostitution. I mean it's just amazing what Castro has done. But this country is still boycotting them. And the reason this country boycotts them is because they can never forgive the fact that the Cubans kicked our butt, at the Bay of Pigs [Invasion, 1961]. You know. They can't forgive that. And I don't suppose they ever will--unfortunately. Story_ID: 16613 Speaker 1: Now with the legal community and, you know--are there trends that you see that disturb you? Or there's progress that you see that pleases you? What, either one way or the other? Speaker 2: Well, I think--you know, there was a time when we wanted to have black people on the highest courts both federal and state. And I am greatly disturbed about a Clarence Thomas being on the Supreme Court. He's a disgrace to the legal profession. He's a liar. And he's incompetent. And we have a black woman [Janice Rogers Brown], who has just been appointed to the California Supreme Court recently. She's another Clarence Thomas. And that's because the conservative Republicans only will appoint those kind of Negroes. And with people like [George W.] Bush in the presidency, if he appoints another black person or a Mexican person they're gonna be the same type of person as Clarence Thomas. He's already said that his idea of a great Supreme Court Justice is [Antonin] Scalia and Thomas. And Scalia is just horrible. And Thomas always does what Scalia tells him to do. Well, that's disappointing. Things aren't getting any better. As a matter of fact the court--the California Supreme Court used to be a very liberal supreme court, it's now just as conservative as it can be-- Story_ID: 16614 Speaker 1: Do you have concerns about the progress or lack of progress as it relates to the African American community? Then--I mean just--you know, you've lived a lot--you know you were raised in the South [Pine Bluff, Arkansas]. And, you know, in segregated area. You fought--you know, you fought in the Civil Rights Movement. You broke the barriers here in Hollywood [Los Angeles, California]. But I'm just saying when you look over this span of sixty years, are you pleased with what you see? Speaker 2: Well I have to be pleased because things have--are so considerably better than they were to begin with. They haven't gone far enough. For example, when I first came to California the Los Angeles County Bar Association had a Caucasians only clause in it. And Negro lawyers couldn't join. Now, the president of the Los Angeles County Bar Association is a Negro. We had Tom Bradley as a mayor. One of the best mayors we've ever had. When I first came to California I couldn't imagine that we would have a black mayor. The Chief of Police, [Bernard C.] Parks is black. And we always had terrible chiefs of police here. And so under Parks, you know, we have a better thing going. We had more members--we had one member of the legislature when I first came here. And now the legislature--state legislature has dozens of people, in both the senate and in the assembly. We have black people who are now on some of the boards. Like the Metropolitan Transit Authority, like the Board of Public Works. And the various commissions that run the city. That's encouraging to see that take place. But we still have--as I say, in that respect I couldn't expect any more. We used to have--and things are getting worse in the legal profession. Because--we used to have a lot of black judges. Now we only have three or four black judges. And they are all worse than the white judges. Because they were appointed by Republicans. Story_ID: 16615 Speaker 1: What about Hollywood? What are your feelings about the entertainment industry? Speaker 2: (simultaneously) I don't-- Speaker 1: And (unclear) over that time? I mean I'm just--You have to have thoughts. Speaker 2: I--well. I think Hollywood has further to go than anything I can imagine. Because they don't make enough pictures or do enough TV shows with--profiling black actors and actresses. They don't have enough. You know. There's no such thing as 'The Cosby Show' anymore. That's gone. And I never thought much of--what is it? 'The [Fresh] Prince of Bel-Air'. Never thought much of that. And I never thought much of 'The Redd Foxx Show'. But we don't even have anything like that anymore. Or 'The Jeffersons'. We don't even have that anymore. Things are dying down. The Negro people are having a less important role in Hollywood now than they had ten years ago--fifteen years ago. But greater than they had forty years ago. We've reached that stage and I don't know what the cause of it is. Speaker 1: You don't. Okay. But it has all to do with these portrayal of images. The images--when you look at it. Have the images changed that much over--? I mean except Cosby--I'll put aside, and there's a movie or two here. But do you--why have the images not changed? Speaker 2: I don't know. They haven't. But some of the things that I see in this show--depict black people under--it's shameful. Shameful the way they depict some of them. Story_ID: 16616 Speaker 1: And do you have hopes for the black community--I mean what do you think is necessary to sort of move forward? I mean--You know--Some people would say, "We're our own worst enemy, right now." Other people would say, you know, "We're, still it's--" Speaker 2: (simultaneously) I think that--I'm very pleased with the way that the black community has moved forward politically. I can't quarrel with that. I think the real--or the next thing for us to do is to move forward economically. In business and in all things involving economics. We don't have enough participation by black architects, black contractors and builders and things like that. And there're no black manufacturing companies. And the shocking thing is that the Koreans have come here. And show in their short span that they have been in this country--show a much greater advancement economically and business-wise than the blacks do. This whole area back over this way is now almost become completely Korean. This used to be completely black. And the Koreans--you go up and down Eighth Street and Seventh Street [Los Angeles California] and you see all the signs are in Korean. And they're buying up houses all along Crenshaw Boulevard. This shopping center right over here. You know, where you went to mail a letter? Speaker 1: I saw it when I drove out. Speaker 2: Korean. Yeah. Story_ID: 16617 Speaker 1: There are people that I admire greatly. For example, I admire Paul Robeson. And I think that Paul Robeson made a great contribution to American society and is very little appreciated because of it. I admire my deceased law partner Ben [Benjamin] Margolis. Who was always a fighter for the little man, black, white or any other color and for the poor. I--of course, I--you know, I admire the work that [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] did. I admire a lot of athletes. Not--and some of them I dislike intensely. I did not like Wilt Chamberlain. Even though he was one of the greatest basketball players of all time. I didn't like Wilt Chamberlain 'cause Wilt Chamberlain never considered that he could do anything--that black people could do anything for him. He had a white architect. He had a white builder to build his house. He had a white dentist, white doctor. And that's the one thing that I don't like about black people. Sometimes when they--and a lot of times, as a matter of fact most of the time. When they get big enough that the black professional is not good enough for them. They have to go and get the white man to represent them. And that, that disturbs me. Story_ID: 16618 Speaker 1: Is there something that people don't know about you--many people don't know about you? Speaker 2: Well there's a lot of things people don't know about me. But it's not because I didn't let it be known. 'Cause I never kept any part of me a secret. Lawyers, judges, friends, enemies when I didn't like anybody, I let them know too. I never did pussyfoot about anything. Speaker 1: Okay. Well then my last question is just what would you want your legacy to be? Or what do you want--? Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Oh God. I don't really know. I never thought about it. I don't think I'm gonna die (laughs). Of course I will. But I don't know. I'll leave that to somebody else to decide what my legacy is. Story_ID: 16619 Speaker 1: I think I was about four when this picture was taken. I used to be a very dandy dresser when I was young. As a matter of fact my first day in school I didn't want to go back to school anymore because the teacher wanted me to come in after recess and I wanted to stay out and play, and I refused to go back to school--my dad [Leo Branton, Sr.] said "If you go back to school I'll buy you a new set of clothes for every day of the week." And he took me down and bought me five new suits. So I went back to school. Speaker 2: [Leo Branton as as child, Pine Bluff, Arkansas, ca. 1926. From the collection of Leo Branton.] Story_ID: 16620 Speaker 1: This is a picture of me and my deceased brother Wiley's widow. Taken in Washington DC, when we were both dressing to go to [President William J. 'Bill'] Clinton's first Inaugural Ball. Speaker 2: In 1992. Speaker 1: Yes. As a matter of fact Clinton was a very close friend of my brother Wiley [Branton] and if he--my brother Wiley had been living when he was elected president, I'm sure he would have been the attorney general instead of Janet Reno. He was that close to Wiley, and thought that much of him--and he was certainly qualified. Speaker 2: [Leo Branton with the widow of his brother, Wiley Branton, Washington, D.C., 1992. From the collection of Leo Branton.] Story_ID: 16621 Speaker 1: Around me, on each side of me, and I frankly do not recall when this picture was taken. Or where it was taken. But I obviously had some love and affection for children because I have my arms around two of the kids and there's another one sitting in front of me. But I can't tell you when this was taken--or where. Speaker 2: [Leo Branton with children, n.d. From the collection of Leo Branton.] Story_ID: 16622 Speaker 1: A civil rights fighter in the South, whose name I cannot recall, who came out here to an affair. There's some writing down at the bottom that I can't read. Speaker 2: It says, "Leo pondering." Speaker 1: Well this--that's not me speaking. I'm here in the picture where he says, "Leo pondering," with my hand up to my chin. And the fellow on my left is a very dear friend of mine, Jack Tenner, who is a lawyer and whom I tried cases with in Tennessee. And also he eventually became a judge until he retired from the bench about three years ago. And I think this--no this was not taken in my house but it was taken at somebody's home. And this fellow was a civil rights fighter in the South. Speaker 2: [Leo Branton (standing, far left) and Jack Tenner (standing, second from left) observing a civil rights speaker, n.d. From the collection of Leo Branton.] Story_ID: 16623 Speaker 1: This is a picture of my mother. Taken I think about a year before she passed away. She died in 1970, at the age of seventy-two. And she was about seventy-one when this picture was taken. She's Pauline Wiley, W-I-L-E-Y, Branton. Speaker 2: [Leo Branton's mother, Pauline Wiley Branton, ca. 1969. From the collection of Leo Branton.] Story_ID: 16624 Speaker 1: That's a picture of me in my days when I was heavier. I have lost--in the last two years--I have lost--I've lost about thirty-five pounds. But this was when I had a full face and a full body. The loss of this weight is undiagnosed--I don't know why I've lost weight but I have. I've become very thin. But this was taken about three years ago. Speaker 2: [Leo Branton, ca. 1998. From the collection of Leo Branton.] Story_ID: 16625 Speaker 1: This is a picture of my mother [Pauline Wiley] and father [Leo Branton, Sr.], taken in Pine Bluff, Arkansas just after they got married and before I was born. I assume this picture was taken sometime in 1920 or 1921, since I was born in 1922. Speaker 2: [Leo Branton's parents, Leo Branton, Sr. and Pauline Wiley Branton at their home in Pine Bluff, Arkansas, ca. 1920. From the collection of Leo Branton.] Story_ID: 16626 Speaker 1: This is a house of mine in Rosarito, Mexico. Which is about thirty miles below the border. It is in a development called, Rosamar, R-O-S-A M-A-R, that I developed. Clients of mine put up the money. And I supervised the whole development of the project. And I ended up with two houses in the development. This one and another one. Speaker 2: [Leo Branton's vacation house in Rosarito, Mexico, n.d. From the collection of Leo Branton.] Story_ID: 16627 Speaker 1: [Rosa Parks] With I think the president of Soka University [Hachioji-city, Japan]--some one of the Buddhists the Soka University has honored her many times and brought her and her entire board of directors of her foundation [Rosa L. Parks Scholarship Foundation] on a trip to see Soka University in Japan in Tokyo [sic, Hachioji-city] at his expense. And I have spoken at the Soka University [of America] here in Los Angeles [sic, Calabasas, California] which out on the other side of Malibu [California] on the Pacific Ocean, a beautiful piece of land. I was asked to introduce--what's [Dr.] Martin Luther King's [Jr.] wife's name? Coretta [Scott] King who was the principal speaker and I introduced her at this affair. Speaker 2: [Rosa Parks with the president of Soka University, Hachioji-city, Japan, n.d. From the collection of Leo Branton.] Story_ID: 16628 Speaker 1: This is a courtroom drawing of me. Done by Bill Lignante, L-I-G-N-A-N-T-E. Who was the courtroom artist for ABC [American Broadcasting Company] for many, many years. He covered almost all major criminal trials in the United States, throughout the country. He covered the Angela Davis case. And that's when I got to know him. And he heard that I was trying a murder case. This was after the Angela Davis case, in Los Angeles [California] and he came and did this drawing of me while I was in the courtroom. Now, you will notice that in this picture there are--there's a piece of paper with a pencil on it and no writing on the paper. And a stack of files in front of me. And I had my hand up to my chin in a thoughtful position. And Bill Lignante got that and covered that because he knew that I never took notes during a trial. And he wanted to show that. Speaker 2: [Courtroom sketch of Leo Branton, Los Angeles, California, n.d. From the collection of Leo Branton.] Story_ID: 16629 Speaker 1: This is a picture of my darling wife [Geraldine Pate Branton]. Taken not on an occasion but I think it was posed for a photographer. And it looks like it might be as long--as much as ten years old. Speaker 2: [Leo Branton's wife, Geraldine Pate Branton, n.d. From the collection of Leo Branton.] Story_ID: 16630 Speaker 1: [No narration.] Speaker 2: [Leo Branton with his wife, Geraldine Pate Branton, upon his graduation from Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee, 1960. From the collection of Leo Branton.]..