 Story_ID: 23208 Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: My first name is Diola, written D-I-O-L-A, and my last name is Bagayoko, which is spelled B-A-G-A-Y-O-K-O. Speaker 1: Okay, can you tell us where your name comes from and what's the significance of your name is? Speaker 2: The folklore we, our family lived with has it that we descend from, the Bagayoko are descendants of the famous general named Fakoli Bagayoko who is credited for making the establishment of the empire of Mali possible in 1236 to be precise, and additionally, we are told that we descend from the most celebrated of the professors of the University of--former University of Timbuktu, Ahmed Bagayoko who lived in the 16th century. So besides that, we are certainly from the Manden, no question about that, which is a part of Africa where we speak of Mandingo or Bambara or, the same language has several other names, Malinke is another name people will utilize for the same language. Speaker 1: Right, and it takes a while to figure this out too, when you're reading African history that it's all, you know,-- Speaker 2: Correct. Speaker 1: --and eventually, you start figuring it out. Oh, it's (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: And Bambara, as a matter of fact, is the most common name for the language these days, Bambara, B-A-M-B-A-R-A-- Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: --which is spoken all over West Africa, this is Francophone West Africa. Speaker 1: Okay, so the scholar, Ahmed Bago, right? Speaker 2: Who? Speaker 1: Ahmed Bago. Am I saying that right? That's the scholar that you're descended from? Speaker 2: Ahmed Baba, what do you-- Speaker 1: You said the scholar that you're descended from is-- Speaker 2: Oh, Ahmed Bagayoko, Ahmed, A-H-M-E-D, Bagayoko. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Same last name. Speaker 2: Ahmed Baga--well, this name, his, some would say Mahmood. Again, some will say Mohammed, some will Ahmed, so the same name is called, but the most common is Ahmed, so that's what I use even in my own dissertation when I recognize my family origin in the preface of my dissertation. Speaker 1: Okay, well, we'll get back to the family history in a minute. But what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: December 12, 1948. Speaker 1: And where? Speaker 2: In Bamako, Mali, the capital City of Mali. Speaker 1: All right, now, and what is your title and occupation? Speaker 2: Right now, I am called a Southern University System Distinguished Professor of Physics, director of the Timbuktu Academy. These are my permanent titles for the moment, but I'm also called director of some projects, but those are not that important. Speaker 1: All right, and what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today is the 18th of August, 2012. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We are on the campus of Southern University and A and M College in Baton Rouge, Louisiana, and precisely in the GS Clark Administration Building on the fourth floor in the conference room of the President of the Southern University system on the bank of the mighty Mississippi. Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, that's good. Story_ID: 23209 Speaker 1: All right, now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we ask as a warm up. And the first one is, do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: I would have to say peanut butter stew because that's what I grew up liking most, but I have, I tell people I'm a true omnivore. So I really love many other kind of dishes particularly, the one I found in Louisiana here, seafood gumbo, you name it, and fish. So, but the favorite I have to say peanut butter stew-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --which we generally eat over rice with some meat or fish in it. Speaker 1: Okay, now do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: The blue, blue is my favorite color. Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: It has to be the fall in Louisiana. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes, where it is neither hot nor cold. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Not at all. Not--I don't. Speaker 1: Okay, and the last question here is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: I have to refer to the one I always told my students when I taught high school way back, which is, in Mandingo, the sentence is "speaking Mandingo". But let me translate it in English. That will be, "A youngster should be very studious". Speaker 1: Okay, "A youngster should be studious". Story_ID: 23210 Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna ask about your family history-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side. We're gonna--separately, and then we'll put 'em together. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Her full name is Nagnouma, that is N-A-G-N-O-U-M-A, meaning kind mother. And Keita is her last name, which is K-E-I-T-A. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: I don't know because as I said, we--my family, my parents and grandparents lived in a village called Kamale in the Manden and written records starts basically with my generation. So I don't really know. Speaker 1: Okay, well, would you think that she was probably in her twenties when you were born or earlier or younger? Speaker 2: When I was born, she should have been perhaps--let me try to find, put it another way. Even though I don't know the exact date, but traditionally in Mali young lady get married around 18 age, or latest 19 or 20. And I am the fourth child, and we are spaced two years. So my guess will be 20, plus eight, something like 28, 30. Speaker 1: Okay, that's a good guess. That'll work, you know. So about 28 years old, give or take a couple years. Speaker 2: Correct. Speaker 1: Okay, and where was she born? Speaker 2: She was born in a village called Sakorodaba, which is in Mali, again in the Manden. Speaker 1: Okay, how do you spell that? Speaker 2: S-A-K-O-R-O-D-A-B-A, Sakorodaba. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now, what can you tell us about the ancestors on your mother's side? How far back can you trace them, I mean--well, what are the stories about what they were doing and-- Speaker 2: My mother is it. I don't know any of her parents and mother or father or other ancestors. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Unfortunately. Speaker 1: Well, did she talk about growing up and all? Speaker 2: No, not to me because, again, my family lived in this village and as soon as I was at school age, I moved to the capital to go to school. So because of that, the growing up conversation and so forth, I didn't have much of those with her. So I don't really know. Speaker 1: Okay, so did you move to Bamako [Mali] to go to school-- Speaker 2: Correct. Speaker 1: --by yourself, I mean were you-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I moved to Bamako to go to school by myself in a sense, yes, but I went into a family who, which is a friend with my family, yes. That's where I grew up. Speaker 1: Okay, so the family of the family friends, like raised you, basically? Speaker 2: Definitely. Speaker 1: And during school. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay. So, there're no stories about--so do you think your mother's people were farmers or did they have a trade or-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, they were all farmers. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: No question about it, all farmers. In the Manden, they were all farmers. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They didn't go to school either. They were all farmers. Speaker 1: Okay, so what kind of crops were people raising on farms? Speaker 2: Generally, corn, millet, peanut and these are the staples, the key ones for nutrition-- and, of course, grow also vegetable and other thing like that, but these are the three main ones-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --because we don't cultivate rice that much because we have, the village is somewhat, the altitude of 600 meter. We don't have swamp or water for rice cultivation. Speaker 1: Okay. All right, so, did your mother live, I mean, does she--has she spent her whole life in the village of Sakorodaba [Mali]? Speaker 2: Correct. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The village where she spent her life is, with my father is Kamale, K-A-M-A-L-E with the French accent going from right to left on top of the "e", Kamale. Story_ID: 23211 Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: The first name is Djigui. That's spelled D-J-I-G-U-I. And that means it is lion, the one who can, one can count on. And is name is, of course, mine, B-A-G-A-Y-O-K-O, Bagayoko. Speaker 1: And once again, so we have the same kind of thing with your father. We don't know the date. We have to kind of guess or what do you think? Speaker 2: Same, correct. Speaker 1: What would you think about your father's date of birth? Speaker 2: My estimation would be that he was probably between 40 and 50 or--40 or so when I was born. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So he was probably born around 1908? Speaker 2: He was older, certainly, than my mother. Speaker 1: So say about 1908, I guess. Speaker 2: That would be a very good guess, yes, yes, indeed, correct. Speaker 1: And I'm thinking, my mother [Nagnouma Keita] was born about 1928. Speaker 2: Yes, that's it. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and where was your father born? Speaker 2: In the same village where we lived. Speaker 1: Okay, that's Kamale? Speaker 2: Kamale, yes. Speaker 1: All right, now what do you know about your father's side of the family and what stories about them, and what were they doing? Were they farmers too? Speaker 2: He's a farmer, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And a hunter. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He was a farmer and a hunter. Speaker 1: Okay, does he have any, are there any stories passed down from that side of the family about politics in the country or natural disasters or any, you know, anything that-- Speaker 2: No, the only stories the descendants from Ahmed Bagayoko and from Fakooli Bagayoko from the Ahmed Bagayoko side, we had to be knowledgeable, and from the Fakoli side, we can't afford to be coward. We have to be brave and that's what I was told since I was very, very, very young and, which is, by the way, what I told my own children. Speaker 1: Okay, now, did your father go to school? Did he have a chance to go to school? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay, could he read? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now, this is a question that comes to mind is that, if he's--he says he's descended from a scholar, was not reading passed along or, you know, 'cause (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yes, because in his case, even though he couldn't read, he couldn't write, he had, according to all the people I know, according to the people who told me something about him, he had an encyclopedic knowledge of medicinal plants. He was known across the country for that. So that's where the knowledge was. And he was a hunter. That's where the bravery was. So, but then that's one of the reasons I went to school because it was determined that by going to school, I may be able to have knowledge in another form, much more established, much more permanent that can be passed more easier from one generation to the next in writing as opposed to the kind he had had, yes. Story_ID: 23212 Speaker 1: Is there a story--now, they grew up in the same village so they probably knew each other, but is there a story about how your parents were betroughed or (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: No, if there is, they didn't tell me (laughter) because, remember, my mother [Nagnouma Keita] was born in a different city, Sakorodaba [Mali] while my father [Djigui Bagayoko] was in Kamale [Mali]. So, and to be actually exact, I should note that my mother was the wife of the older brother of my father. When that one passed away, the tradition has it that she has to become the, the younger brother has to have that lady, the widow as a wife to care for the children, to care for her and so on. So, the, when I told you that I was the fourth child, the first one was from the older brother of my father. The other, the two others that came before me are from my father and then I follow and the other follow me. So that's the full story. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay. Now, I understand. Now, when you, now, well, tell about the people that raised you. What were their names? Speaker 2: In Bamako [Mali]? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Well, that, the--I grew up in the Keita family in Bamako, and the patriarch of the family is called, was called Namory. N-, the first name is N-A-M-O-R-Y, and this was a large family, still is, and he was a veteran, and he also worked in the civil service after leaving the Army and took very good care of his whole family, including, of course, including me. And his older son whose name is Mohammed Keita, was the role model, particularly, I followed. He was, by the time I finished high school, he was a lieutenant in the army. So, that's, we were, of course, in the capital city of Bamako. And there was no street between the school where I went and the house where I lived. So I literally walked from the house to the street, across just one--that was not even a street, across an alley and got into the school. Speaker 1: Yes, you were close by, very close by. Speaker 2: Correct. Speaker 1: So, now, the Keita family, now, did, so in the household you were raised up in, it would be Namory Keita and his-- Speaker 2: Correct, the patriarch. Speaker 1: Well, his wife and-- Speaker 2: His wives. Speaker 1: Wives, okay, all right. Speaker 2: Yes, four. Speaker 1: And wives, four wives. Speaker 2: Um-hum, yes. Speaker 1: Him, four wives and the children that they had? Speaker 2: Correct. Speaker 1: So now how many people were in the household, would you say? Speaker 2: Oh, we are, you are talking about a huge household here. So I don't really know how many, but let me try to guess. Each wife had about five children or more, so that's 20 children, and--20 children, the wives themselves, 24, and plus me is 25 and some other people were there. I would say 30. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: This is a huge compound. House like there are not like here. We have, it's really a compound with several buildings inside, yes. Speaker 1: With an enclosure on the outside? Speaker 2: Correct, an enclosure around it, yes. Story_ID: 23213 Speaker 1: So when you consider, when you think about your father [Djigui Bagayoko] and mother's [Nagnouma Keita] personality, their looks, their dispositions, their habits, their--and the same for the Keita family, you know, who do you think you take after the most? This is a question we ask people over that usually have only one person or a couple of people. But-- Speaker 2: Well, in fact, interestingly enough, I take after all of them because throughout my youth, before I went to school, my father had a great influence on me because he told me about hunting story and played the kora [a 21 string bag pipe used in West Africa] for me, and I was the first son after three daughters in the row. So, and, and people always told me that my father is very kind. My father is very brave. My father is very knowledgeable, and I can't do any less as a first child. So those are the, that is the social conditioning I had. So in that sense, therefore, my father, I took after my father because I always had that pride to be able to follow him. As for my mother, she lived up to her name, which she's a kind mother. So her kindness, her magnanimity and so forth were legendary. And from that I concluded that, in fact, it is a form of failure to be vicious and do things like that. It is when one actually can't do constructive things that one engages in those things. That's what I grew up believing. So I took that after my mother. And then in the Keita family, the first son, Mohammed, who was grown up and the older patriarch was there, of course, in all his wisdom and so forth, taking care of everybody. So he was, mightily, perhaps influenced me greatly in my own behavior as a loving and responsible father and head of a family here in the U.S. And the son for influencing me in making the best I can possibly make out of myself in working and so on. So in a sense, I took actually after all of them. It's, it's a combination of, of those features. Speaker 1: It makes sense (laughter). It does make sense. Story_ID: 23214 Speaker 1: So, now, the Keita family Bamako [Mali], are they related to your mother's [Nagnouma Keita] people at all? Speaker 2: Not really. Speaker 1: Okay, just-- Speaker 2: They come from another village called Kenieba, but are related to our family in two ways. One member of their family was married--a male, was married to one of my aunts, and another member of their family was married one of my sisters. The first sister, by the way, who was from the, whose father is the older brother of my father. So it was a marriage common--how do I say that? Speaker 1: They were related through-- Speaker 2: --who are linked by marriage, marriage, yes. Speaker 1: Now, it wasn't a blood tie, but a marriage-- Speaker 2: Yeah, we were linked, and in Africa, that is almost as solid as, as bloodline because we tend to believe that marriage is actually mapped between two individuals--well, we used to. I don't know how things are evolving now. Let me be careful (laughter). We used to, the marriage was not between the two individuals being married, between the two families being married, of those individuals. So, yes. Story_ID: 23215 Speaker 1: So, do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: Oh, yes (laughter), one I'm really fond of which is--and I'm still surprised why I wasn't spoiled because there were times when my father [Djigui Bagayoko], the great hunter, was doing things in such a fashion that there were days where I was fed only with bone marrow, which was considered to be delicatessen, kind of great food, of course, well cooked. But, and then, of course, I was breast fed, and I still remember wanting to go play around, and whenever I feel hungry, I run back to find my mother [Nagnouma Keita] and-- Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: --breast feed, and run back to go play. So those two things, I can't forget because I, just fond memories, among many others. Story_ID: 23216 Speaker 1: Okay, now, do you have brothers and sisters? Speaker 2: Yes, indeed. Speaker 1: Can you name them all and tell us where you fit in the lineup? Speaker 2: Well, my oldest brother--sister, rather who is in American terminology, half-sister, is Nayira Bagayoko, and she's followed by Sayon (ph.), who is my sister, same father, same mother. Then that one is followed by Diegue who is also my sister, and then I come. After me, we have another boy called Bobo Bagayoko, naturally, and he's followed by a girl, Koubafing (ph.) and, whose name mean "the black Kouba". Kouba is a name. Fing, means black in Mandingo. And then the last one of Tenin who's also a girl. So I'm literally right in the middle. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: Three before me, three after me. But I'm the first boy. Story_ID: 23217 Speaker 1: What are some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Growing up? I would have to say what you will hear, what you will see or you will feel in the countryside. That's where my earliest childhood was, in the countryside. And I can still remember the reason blue is my preferred color is that when I was three, four--remember, we didn't have any electricity out there, and at night when the sky is clear, when you look up, when you looked up at those days, you will see this fabulously blue star shining and twinkling. I could spend minutes, I would not say hour, but certainly minutes admiring this. Of course, asking myself how far are we from this and what are they made of, you come, all those other questions that come to my mind. So that is the sight which is still basically in my mind. And as for the rest, it's the countryside, the animals around, the sheep or cattle and so even though we were not in the compound, but I saw them and passed them and heard them and the rain. So it was a typical thing one would hear in the country. And let's not forget the singing of the birds, yeah, because I did hear birds or sometimes very many different varieties. It varied with the seasons, but that's again, something else I remember fondly. And, yep, that's about it. Story_ID: 23218 Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, when you were referring to your father [Djigui Bagayoko] hunting, what kind of animals did he hunt? Speaker 2: Well, he hunted very many different kind of game animal, and the way that--I know the names only in Mandingo. But to have an idea, let me simply state generally--well, the three major ones he hunted are bigger than the Wildebeasts in size. And one of them, the biggest one was called Minaja (ph.) (unclear) is, was probably the preferred one for him because with one of those, you could feed almost a village for some time, yes. Speaker 1: So did he have to go very far away to find live game? Speaker 2: Not really, those days, no, because, well, of course, he had to walk quite a bit, but he didn't have to go that far away. That's another thing I learned when I was a very young kid. People told me this when I was in high school. I didn't know, but I used to tell them how you track animals, that if you are in the summertime, don't be running around. You go find the waterholes and (laughter), you sit and rest and wait that they are going to come, and things of that type. And then you have to control, find out in what direction the wind is blowing because you don't want them to smell you and whatever, and then run away, things of that type. So I learned a little bit in that fashion as to how--for those years, he didn't have to go far really or walk too much, yes. Story_ID: 23219 Speaker 1: So you grew up in the late-'40's [1940s], early '50's [1950s], I guess. You were in the country I guess in the early '50's [1950s]. Speaker 2: Correct, in the country up to fifty--late '50's [1950s]-- Speaker 1: Well,-- Speaker 2: --up to the late '50's [1950s]. Speaker 1: Were you near the Niger River or-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: I was not, but I was near another river, but it's not the Niger River, but the capital city [Bamako, Mali], when I moved the capital city, that is on the Niger River, yes. Speaker 1: Okay, so in the 1970s, it's a lot of press here in the country about the drying up of the Western--of the West African plains-- Speaker 2: Correct. Speaker 1: --and so I suppose they were greener when you were coming up than they are today. Speaker 2: They were, much, much, much greener, and you had much more game animal, almost everywhere, I will say. And, but now, things have changed seriously. To give you an example, in 2005, I believe it was five [2005], somewhere, because from 2001 to present, I went almost went there every year, sometimes twice a year. In 2005, I had to go to spend time in that village to work with them to put a total end to one practice they had started which was to sell the trees to some logger for some pittance, and then were not aware of the deforestation, but were not aware how, what impact this is going to have on the, the fauna and so on and so forth. But I succeeded in stopping that. After a lot of explanation and, of course, even providing some support here and there because we were doing it for the schools, in fact, for a year or so I supported the schools with my personal money just to make sure they don't touch these, the trees any longer. And I'm delighted that a younger deputy in our, from our region--I mean official, elected member of the Parliament succeeded in actually having the government build the school now and take care of it so that definitively, we will not continue to devastate the area with those, that deforestation. Speaker 1: Yeah, in the '70's [1970s], I know there was a campaign to raise money to buy trees-- Speaker 2: Absolutely I was there at that time, '71' [1971], '72' [1972], '73' [1973], I was there. It was catastrophic, no question about it. And I'm-- Speaker 1: And major-- Speaker 2: --aware of the American assistance at that time by the way because in 1972 I got a fellowship for the summer called, from a program called Crossroad Africa, to just come, crisscross the United States during the entire summer. So from that day on in '72' [1972], I was always in contact with the American Embassy. So I knew how much the Americans were doing through the embassy because I was asking about it and were telling me about it, and so on. And so that's how I actually happened to know the scope of the problem. Otherwise, I was not quite aware of it, yeah. Story_ID: 23220 Speaker 1: Okay, so when you were growing up, then what did the landscape look like and what kinds of animals were out there that we might know today or what kind of things were growing there? Speaker 2: Oh, we have, we have lions in Mali. We still have them. Luckily, we have pantheres, we call them pantheres, but they are the same group as the little panthere or whatever. But the panthere is much, I guess much more, it's stronger. Speaker 1: You mean a lot like a leopard? Speaker 2: Yes, leopard, that's what it is. Yeah, yeah, I was saying, thank you. I was saying it in French, little panthere (laughter), thank you. Yes, it is the leopard. Yes, we have--we don't have cheetahs that I recall, but we have small antelope, very many different kinds of small antelopes. Some beautiful ones, color, some colorful ones, as a matter of fact. And then we have these large, we had these large game animals, and, of course, we had the wild pig, how do you call it, boar? Speaker 1: Boar. Speaker 2: Yes, we have those and in the river, we have all sorts of fish and then crocodile, plentifully and, oh, let me not forget for the Niger River, we have hippopotamus because those animals by the way, hippopotamus, are the most, the deadliest of the river things in Mali and most other parts of the world, by the way because they're the ones who do the most damage, surprisingly. Speaker 1: Yeah, they don't--I think we have a mistaken notion of their temperament, you know, here in this country. But they are pretty mean. Speaker 2: They are the, they are the worst ones. Not only do they walk and then devastate the rice fields and whatever field that may be close to the river at night, but also attack bulls, attack (unclear), attack, and we only need, with their feet long, foot long or two feet or whatever long-- Speaker 1: Teeth. Speaker 2: --teeth, they can inflict deadly damage, yes. So we have, and have birds of very many kinds, including Eagles and very many different kinds and those ones that build the nest over the water, yellowish and make a lot of noise and so it's, it's a wonderful--we had a wonderful fauna actually in Mali, and we still have some of it, yes, still have some of it. Speaker 1: Okay, but would you say that it's, I mean has it really changed drastically from when you were growing up? Speaker 2: It has changed. No question about that. Yes, it did because, for instance, nowadays, they tell me that it's very difficult to go hunting and be successful because you can't find an animal anywhere. I said, well, that's not an accident in light of all the things you have been doing. And so, but it has changed, but the hope is that given, at least we, in the path of the Mandan where my native village is, given that we have stopped this, the deforestation so, and the hope is it may recuperate, the fauna may recuperate over maybe decades. But that we have to see. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, I know Africare in Washington, D.C. was an African American group that was founded to try to plant trees, I think at one time. Speaker 2: Yeah, Africare is quite active in Mali, I know. Story_ID: 23221 Speaker 1: Okay, now, when you were growing up, what kind of things did you like to do in the country and in, before you moved to Bamako [Mali]? Speaker 2: I didn't have any occupation when I was growing up (laughter). What I had to do was play around (laughter), eat, literally, and then be spoiled by some people. I'm serious. That's why I say sometimes I'm surprised I was not a spoiled brat (laughter). So that's, but when I moved in the city, well, things changed. Speaker 1: Now, how did that take place? Now, they, what did they tell you when you were little, and were you afraid to go or did you, were you excited about going or what? Speaker 2: Oh, well, right now, I don't even remember quite what my feelings were, but I do, I guess it was a kind of strange situation. On the one hand, I did not leave, want to leave my childhood paradise, literally. On the other hand, I couldn't afford to go without acquiring knowledge, as I was told because the schooling and the future of schooling and so on and so forth, that is so. So, I guess that is what made me bear the leaving, and once I got there, the notion of homesick, I, I know I didn't experience that because once I got there, I was full in my studies. When I was, elementary, I was fully in my studies, most of the time. Speaker 1: Now, how old were you when you-- Speaker 2: Probably, eight, nine. Of course, we don't go to school there at the age of six (laughter). That's too much luxury. Speaker 1: Okay, so this is like '56' [1956] and '57' [1957]. Speaker 2: Fifty-seven [1957], '58' [1958], '59' [1959]. Speaker 1: Fifty-seven [1957], '58' [1958], okay. Speaker 2: Somewhere between '58' [1958] and '59' [1959], yep. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: About, I was nine, eight--between eight and ten. I'm not quite sure which one it was, between eight and ten, between eight and nine or so by the time I started. Speaker 1: Now, had you had any schooling in the village? Speaker 2: Not really because we had, we had--we tried to start one, and I went there for, what? One month, and then it fizzled out. It didn't go anywhere, and then so, the solution was for me to come to the capital city [Bamako]. Otherwise, I was probably going to stay in my village if we had the one well established, which was one of the reasons I did contribute--in fact, even earlier when I was a graduate student, to establishing the school in my village and particularly, telling all my uncles and all my brothers and so on to make certain all his these children go to school, yep. Speaker 1: Okay, now were you, did your--how was it decided that you would go? Did someone like think, oh, he's a smart child. He needs to go or did your parents [Nagnouma Keita and Djigui Bagayoko] decide that they were gonna send you or how did that happen 'cause did all your brothers and sister go to school or-- Speaker 2: As a matter of fact, I'm the only one. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Now, my younger brother was sent, but he didn't like it. He said he wanted to go back, and, of course, they said okay, if you want to come back, fine. (Laughter) So he went back (laughter). He, he went all the way maybe to third grade or something, and then he returned home. Speaker 1: He just-- Speaker 2: So I'm the only one in the family who has gone to school. Speaker 1: So do you think your father and mother, I mean your parents decided that you were, to send you because you're-- Speaker 2: It has probably to do more with the fact that I was the first male than anything else, not necessarily that I was the brightest because they may not have any particular perimeter to determine that. But the first male is supposed in our tradition at that time, to set the standard and set it very well. And, therefore, they also knew at that time that in the capital city because we went to the capital, those who are educated are the ones in the positions, in government and so forth. So that gave them an indication that it may not be a bad idea to have one of your own, if not all of them, but one, to partci--to partake into this enterprise. I'm just speculating here because they didn't actually tell me what, but my guess is-- Speaker 1: I understand it 'cause a lot of, I mean in this country, a lot of times parents do not explain to children why they're doing one thing or another, and you just-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --it's done and then you just, (laughter) you know, but I imagine it could be the same there too. Story_ID: 23222 Speaker 1: Now, do you remember, now, you grew up, and before you went to school, Mali was still like a, part of the Francophone West Africa. It was still controlled by the French. Speaker 2: Correct. Speaker 1: Independence didn't come until what, about sixty-- Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty [1960]. Speaker 1: Sixty [1960], okay. Speaker 2: Correct. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so do you remember, do you have any sense of that? I mean as a kid? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: None whatsoever. I only started understanding it when I was in the fifth grade because by then the, we had, how do you call it? We had this cultural youth organization to promote the culture, and we'd do theater, dancing and so on and so forth. And I was a member, most children or high--or school children were a member of one form of those things or another. And there were annual or bi-annual national competitions for a variety of things. So I, that's when I participated, and then so, of course, some of the songs and so forth were on the patriotic side. So that's when I started to realize what the independence and all that, yes, what it meant, yeah. Story_ID: 23223 Speaker 1: So, when you're about ten, you say, when you--about '58' [1958], '59' [1959] when you moved to Bamako [Mali]. Speaker 2: Correct, yes. Speaker 1: And, now, was there a-- Speaker 2: In fact, it is possibly '60' [1960]. Speaker 1: Okay, so what was the name of your school? Speaker 2: The name is long. The school is named after the, the city--no, no, the district, the part of the city where it was, N'tomikorobougou which is spelled in, as N apostrophe,-T-O-M-I-K-O-R-O-B-O-U-G-O-U, N'tomikorobougou. So it was simply called The School of N'tomikorobougou [Bamako, Mali]. Some would call it a fundamental school of N'tomikorobougou, fundamental to mean that it goes from first to ninth grade, as opposed to a high school. That's where I started. Speaker 1: Okay, so you went first to ninth grade? Speaker 2: Correct. Speaker 1: And the grades are about equivalent to the English system? Speaker 2: Correct, (unclear) um-hum. Speaker 1: Now, was this, is this like a school designed in the French education system? Speaker 2: You bet, yes, indeed. Speaker 1: Okay, well, can you give us kind of like an outline of what the French system is and how it differs from the American system? Speaker 2: Well, the major difference I actually see comes only after the ninth grade because up to the ninth grade, the courses one has to take are well known, are the same for all the students. But from the ninth grade onward, students are split, can follow three or more different tracks in high school. So the last three years are the ones we call high school. That's tenth, eleventh and twelfth. Now, there that is a huge difference because then I went to the mathematic, physics and chemistry track, that's what I followed. So most of them will go biological track and some of them will go language, yeah, language and literature track. These were the three main tracks. Speaker 1: Language and literature. Speaker 2: Language and literature. Speaker 1: Okay,-- Speaker 2: And these tracks are very real because, for instance, the exam in my track, if you don't do very well in mathematics, in physics and chemistry, you are not going to graduate from high school. You won't get a diploma. However, someone who is in the language literature track, could get a dismal grade in math, physics, chemistry, but still get a little bit of those things, but not much of anything. But the bulk of their grade will be in language and literature and geography and things of that type. So the tracks are real, for biological, so that's where the great difference. That's one big difference. The second big difference is that in the French system high school I followed, the exams are constructed so that they are not out of old speed exams and that are complex, meaning you have a, one or two or three long problems. And some of these problems are such that if you miss the first part, you can't do any of the other, while in your typical American exam, as I know it, you have a comprehensive coverage of the subject. However, this coverage is in very many different things which are separate from each other. And that is, and speed is of relevance. Now, these are the key as well as I can, I can tell, the key differences. In fact, some of the differences persist at the university level to the point that when I was a graduate student here at LSU [Louisiana State University] we formed a group to begin to train all the new students who come to have a workshop with them to, now that we know what it is, to let them know this. The exam will be comprehensive. It will be a speed exam, and so on and so forth so that they can understand. Otherwise, they're not going to get it, yes. Speaker 1: So under the French system, speed is not an issue. It doesn't matter how fast you do it. Speaker 2: No, no. They give you a few questions, and you can sit there and meditate, (laughter) literally meditate or scribble on this, search this word, try this part, try that part, and it's really not an issue, yep, not an issue. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So there is some difference, yeah, so there are some real differences. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, there are, yeah. Speaker 1: Well, what do you prefer, I mean just-- Speaker 2: Oh, that is a big question. You see my preference is actually something different from either (laughter), from the American system and different from the French system (laughter). In the French, I don't like the tracking because the tracking leads to self-fulfilling prophecy. And those who were in the literature, what has happened, particularly in the case of Mali, is, guess what? Eighty-plus percent of the high school students, as I told the government in 2008, 80-plus percent were going language-literature track. And once you spend three years in that track, it's over. You cannot go science, technology, engineering, mathematics [STEM]. Why? Because you missed totally the mathematics background. It's not that they don't have the brain. Every single one of them can go up to the Nobel Prize in physics, if they follow the (unclear). But they may not know that. If you tell them, they may not even believe you. But I know so from my studies. So that is the problem I have with the tracking. And in the American system, the speed, I have a problem with it. But I do like one thing about the American system, which is that it gives several exams, several tests or homework and so on which is a much more valid evaluation of what someone learns over the years. While in the French system, do you know, sometimes you may only have, depending on the school or depending on the professor, you may only have two exams in the whole year, which is not a good way of measuring because somebody could be sick on that day, and, or it's not a good way of measuring whether that person knows that subject or not or they're capable of learning. So that's, I would prefer something where I take the best of both and drop the worst part. Story_ID: 23224 Speaker 1: Alright, so at [The School of] N'tomikorobougou [Bamako, Mali]-- Speaker 2: N'tomikorobougou, yes. Speaker 1: N'tomikorobougou? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, I'm getting (laughter). Speaker 2: Yes, you got it. Speaker 1: All right, well, what was it like? Who, so you're starting school at ten years old-- Speaker 2: Yeah, nine, ten, yep. Speaker 1: But you've got to learn how the fundamental, you've got to learn the alphabet-- Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: --to read and all that. Speaker 2: I had no problem learning any of those maybe because, given that I was not a, quite a toddler, so you give it to me, I learned it the same day, basically, the same day I knew it. That's why, well-- Speaker 1: Did they-- Speaker 2: --how can I put it? Speaker 1: Oh, well, I was just gonna ask if they, did they--were you able to determine your own pace in some ways in terms of-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I set the pace-- Speaker 1: Yeah, (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --from the first grade to whatever, I set it, totally, to the point where beginning the fifth grade, my teacher, actually, when he was absent would give me the class (laughter) to teach it in his absence when he had to do something. That's right. And that happened in math, it happened in French. It happened in, I don't know what else because I, as I said, when I went there with this Bagayoko thing in my mind, I mean there'd be my age and so forth. And guess what, I came from far away to come do this. So I couldn't possibly be fumbling around for any reason. So, it's not--some people, of course, will tell you, oh, this gentleman is very brilliant, oh, he's so intelligent. As far as I'm concerned, it has a lot more to do with I'm studying systematically, methodically and comprehensively, it has more to do with that any anything else. Yep. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So were you allowed to skip grades? I mean how do they, for-- Speaker 2: The mechanism doesn't exist in Mali, unfortunately, (laughter), otherwise, I would have. I would have jumped (laughter), yes, I would have. But we don't have the mechanism. The concept does not even exist. Speaker 1: So when you were in the fifth grade, you were then, what, fifteen? Is that what you're saying? Speaker 2: I don't know what grade, what age I had, I don't know. Speaker 1: I mean if you have to go a grade a year, right, is that how it worked, like a grade a year or, and did you go to school-- Speaker 2: Yeah, we go a grade a year, yes, a grade a year. But what I'm not too sure of, whether I entered at eight or nine or whatever. That's where I'm not sure. But I could be fifteen, yeah, yeah, I could be fifteen because remember, we don't have, we didn't have the luxury of going to school earlier, I mean, it just didn't exist. There were only very, very--before independence, the number of schools were so limited, only very few got a chance to go to school. So I was one of the fortunate. Speaker 1: Right, I just wondered because here, I know the school and especially, particularly in the school where they didn't have a lot of schools, sometimes people would, if they learned fast, they would skip 'em ahead. Speaker 2: Correct, yes, yes. Speaker 1: But I didn't know if they-- Speaker 2: We don't, we, we--that concept did not exist there. Otherwise, yeah, I know that we do that here, which is good, and for those who can do it. But I would have been able to do probably not once, but twice or three times, literally. But we didn't have it. Story_ID: 23225 Speaker 1: Okay, now, here you are in Mali, you know, taking, at a school. You know, African Americans in those days were lamenting the fact that we didn't get taught any black history. Did they teach any black history in schools in Mali and the school that you were in? Did you get any of the history of your own people? Speaker 2: Yes, I did. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I definitely did. And I did, we also studied World History, by the way. And we also studied World Geography. And we do all of these studies from mid-school all the way to high school. But beyond high school, unless somebody is majoring in history and other things at the university, you wouldn't have them. That's another difference between the systems. Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: We don't have general education at the university level. We only have specialized courses. Speaker 1: Okay, at the university level-- Speaker 2: Correct. Speaker 1: The high school, you do study-- Speaker 2: High school, we split, yeah, we have general, yeah, we have general education, and the specialization. But once you go to the university, I only had four subjects, mathematics, physics, chemistry and education. Speaker 1: Okay. So, did you have a, is there--now, how long were you at the first school, the N'tomikorobougou--were you there through ninth-- Speaker 2: Nine years. Speaker 1: --through ninth, okay, through ninth grade. Speaker 2: Through the ninth grade. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: After ninth grade, I went to Lycee Prosper Kamara [Bamako, Mali]. That is the name, Les se, means a high school in French, and our high schools are tenth, eleventh, twelfth. We don't include the ninth. Speaker 1: Okay, so how do you spell that? That's-- Speaker 2: Prosper is, Les se is L-Y-C-E, with an accent on top of that "E", the accent going from right to left and another "E" after that. That's the high school, Prosper is P-R-O-S--P-R--P-E-R-E, Prosper, Kamara. Kamara is K-A-M-A-R-A. Lyce Prosper Kamara. Speaker 1: The "C" is like lyceum or something, I guess-- Speaker 2: Hum? Speaker 1: --the "c" (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, correct, exactly, yes, exactly. Speaker 1: Okay, so, all right. Speaker 2: Lycee . Speaker 1: So it's almost like school of success for--or is that what it sort of translates into? Speaker 2: No, it's, literally, it means high school. Speaker 1: High school. Speaker 2: When we use that term Mali, it means strictly high school, Lycee . Speaker 1: Kamara High School is basically what the-- Speaker 2: Yeah, correct, Kamara high school, Lyce Prosper Kamara, yes. The first name of the person is Prosper, Prosper Kamara High School. That's exactly what it means. Speaker 1: Oh, Prosper Kamara, okay, all right, all right. Speaker 2: Prosper Kamara High School. Speaker 1: All right, and Kamara is a, is a popular name in Mali-- Speaker 2: It is, yes. Speaker 1: --lots of people with (unclear) 9simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: It's another one of those names from the origin of the Manden Empire, yes. Speaker 1: Okay, so who is Prosper Kamara? Do you know who he was? Speaker 2: Not really. All I know is that he was a, I believe, well, even that I'm not sure, but I believe he was a Catholic clergy person because this was a Catholic private school, the Lycee Prosper Kamara. Speaker 1: Okay. All right, so, now, one thing I did not ask, now, did you have to pay tuition for your first school? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay, it sounds like a public school. Speaker 2: Totally public. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The second, I didn't have to pay any--Prosper Kamara, I didn't have to pay either because it was a private school all right. But I was government sponsored to go to the private school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, this is, you started in high school then in, what, nineteen-- Speaker 2: I believe around '66' [1966], around '66' [1966], '67' [1967], yeah, '66' [1966], if I'm not mistaken. Speaker 1: Now, who was, just for the sake of those over here that don't have any understanding of it, who was the president of Mali then? Speaker 2: Modibo Keita at that time. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, Modibo Keita. Speaker 1: Can you spell that for us? Speaker 2: The first president. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Modibo Keita. Speaker 1: Okay, K-E-I-T-A. Speaker 2: Correct. Story_ID: 23226 Speaker 1: Okay, so before we leave grade school, were there any special teachers there or mentors that you were particularly close to in school? Speaker 2: Yes, indeed. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: First, the school principal. He was actually instrumental in seeing to it that I continue my studies because, ironically, even though I was at top of my classes, every single exam, number one, no if's, and's and but's about it. However, there were some colonial, literally colonial rules saying that if you don't, if you are under a certain age by the time you go to the middle school-level, which was the seventh, eighth, nine, then that you should not go. So it is that, the director, who managed to overcome that colonial rule for me to go, to continue my studies. Otherwise, I would have been stopped right there. So this is one example, again, I call a mentor, which I can't forget because you see, that's all it would have taken to take me out of the game completely. And then after him, when I went to seventh, eighth, nine grade, I met a French teacher whose name was Robert Verdier, Verdier, V-E-R-D-I-E-R--Robert is like Robert in the American spelling, who liked my work so much that when he, the first year he had me as a student, when he went to France, he literally bought all the books I know that were written by the most famous or all the French writers, Victor Hugo, and brought them to me. Well, then at the time, I said, thank you, all right. But I said, I told myself, the only way I can thank this man appropriately will be to read every single one of these books as I tell myself, forward and backward, okay. Well, as a way of saying, reading them very, very well. And I did. By the end of that, my vocabulary ballooned in a way where I was almost going to be arrogant (laughter) because at the time, I knew--until now, I just knew a new phrase, no doubt about it. And I didn't hesitate to tell anybody that I knew a phrase, period. And, but again, Verdier, Robert Verdier, didn't have to give me those books and these cost money, serious money. By doing so, this encouragement was so stimulating and inspiring for me that I tried to thank him the best I know how by learning the material. And as a result, that has played a crucial role in my education, because, guess what? Because in the high school and so on, of course, I was, in my own terms, shining like the rising sun in French in addition to my metaphysics and chemistry, of course, which was my (unclear) area, and in philosophy and so on because of my (unclear) of the language. And, but also I come to, I came to the realization that many of my colleagues who have problems with physics and mathematics, and who I was tutoring, had more problem with French than they had physics or mathematics. Now, that was a discovery for me. They were not understanding the questions. So, and then, again, to make a long story short, when I left high school and left, after I left Mali, from '75' [1975] to eighty--'78' [1978] or so, I didn't have any contact with French. But when I still took the French graduate--it comes out of Princeton somewhere, the French graduate language exam, my score was still a perfect one. I credit all of that to that gentleman's work. Speaker 1: And also, there's another aspect to this too is that, the works of Hugo [Victor Hugo]-- Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: --you know, speak to French history on some level. Speaker 2: It does. Speaker 1: And a look at the world where you look at the problems of the common person-- Speaker 2: Correct. Speaker 1: --as they confront power. Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely. And some of the, because he wrote some poems too, and I recited some of his very long poems that were also exercises by the way for, mental exercises. So it, it--those were my two famous, the two that jump, whose names just jump at me when you posed that question at N'tomikorobougou, yes. Speaker 1: All right, what was the principal's name? Do you remember? Speaker 2: Oh, Ousmane Maiga, O-U-S-M-A-N-E. That is his first name. Maiga is M-A-I--with two dots on top, G-A. In fact, I have it, if I'm not mistaken, yeah, I have this noted on that document I gave you. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I have it written there. Story_ID: 23227 Speaker 1: Now, to raise a question here that I wondered the people from your part of the world, Senegal and Mali, often, I've seen the named juxtaposed-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --like the filmmaker, Ousmane Sem-- Speaker 2: Ousmane Sembe-- Speaker 1: Is it Sembani (ph.)? Speaker 2: Sembane, Ousmane Sembene [Senegalese film maker]. Speaker 1: Is it Semben or Sembane, do you know? Speaker 2: Sembene, Ousmane Sembene. Speaker 1: Okay, Ousmane Sembene, and sometimes you'll see it Sembene Ousmane. Speaker 2: Yeah, correct, but the first is Ousmane. That's the first name, in his case. Speaker 1: So what is the--(unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: But in Mali, we have this habit some time of flipping them around or in Sempati, West Africa, it's not Mali alone, of flipping names around. Sometimes when we write them, we write the last one first, and then the first or we do the first and the last, where in a coma, and so forth. Speaker 1: Do you speak them that way? Do you speak them with the last name first and the-- Speaker 2: Generally, I certainly don't. I always go first and last. And most people tend to go first and last, unless they want to be formal. And the formal condition, we may not say the first name, but we say, Mr. Sembene or Mr. Diola or Mr. Bagayoko or something of that type or Ms. or Mrs. Bagayoko or Ms. Bagayoko. Speaker 1: Okay, I thought I'd ask because I, and you see it at the end of his films, you know-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --Sembene Ousmane-- Speaker 2: Yeah, correct. Speaker 1: --you know, and so (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Guess what, though. Interestingly enough, even though in his books and so forth, I read is, Sembene his last name, but there are situations in Mali to where the first, a common first name is a last name. The typical one I know, for instance, is Sadu. Sadu is generally a first name, very common. But I have several, two or three colleagues I do know. One of them is Fad Sadu (ph.). His last name is Sadu. And in that case, it's not an error. It's not a flip around, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, it happens. Story_ID: 23228 Speaker 1: Now, why did you decide to go the math and physics track? Did you consider that your strength in grade school [The School of N'tomikorobougou]? Speaker 2: Not really. In grade school, I was very comfortable in all the disciplines, including physical education. So, but even though I didn't think about that very much at the time, I suppose, I don't recall what kind of decision, what led me to it, but I suppose it was simply because I knew by doing mathematics, physics and chemistry, I will have options available for me, and also have the possibility later to go do literature, if I so choose or anything else. But I did know at the time, that if I go language, literature and philosophy, then mathematics, physics and chemistry will be closed for me for the university. Now, that I knew. So that was the reason. That was the key, the key reason. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, I needed the background at the high school level to be able to have the option available to me when I leave high school. Speaker 1: Now, tell me this now, and this just occurred to me too, just now, just, with so much of the literature, the traditional literature of the country being written in classical Arabic-- Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: --did you study Arabic when you were coming along? Speaker 2: I did a little bit. In fact, when I was, before I entered the formal school, in fact, I would read and write Arabic fluently. But now I've forgot all of it (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, so when you were back in the village, you could read and write Arabic? Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Fluently. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Because we had some, I don't know whether they were, coming and passing or only came from season to season, but we had these people who knew how to speak it, and who had their own little school there. It was not a religious school. It was purely Arabic (laughter) language school (laughter). Okay, so you learn to read and write and so forth. So I learned it, and was, actually, quite good at it. But after I started the formal school, I forgot. Story_ID: 23229 Speaker 1: So what about in high school? Who were the teachers in high school that really-- Speaker 2: Well, in high school, I may not have had a particular mentor so to speak, but I had phenomenally excellent teachers who therefore, served as inspirational role model. I had one called Michelle Marcellin, who was a mathematics teacher. I had another one in physics, whose name I don't even remember, and I, so I had three or four of them. But Marcellin is the one I still-- Speaker 1: Marcellin, now do you-- Speaker 2: Yeah, he was from the island. He was not from Mali. Marcellin is written M-A-R-C-E-L-L-I-N, Marcellin. Speaker 1: Okay-- Speaker 2: Yeah, he was from one of the island--which island was it? Martinique [Lesser Antilles]. Speaker 1: Martinique. Speaker 2: He was from Martinique. Speaker 1: Yeah, it seems to be a strong connection between Martinique and West Africa, the writers and-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I won't be surprised if there is, indeed, yes. Yes, indeed. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and so he taught at the Lycee Prosper Kamara? Speaker 2: Correct. Speaker 1: So, any--now, this is a time, you know, of social, over here, it's a big social time for teenagers, you know, to be in high school. And what did you like to do as a teenager and were you allowed to do it in high school? Speaker 2: A teenager, well, besides studying, I played a little bit of soccer, but I have never been particularly good at soccer. But I played defense and sometimes, and, of course, I played reasonably well, but I didn't play in that serious fashion because I knew my prime directive to quote "Star Trek" was to master every single one of my lessons (laughter). Everything else was secondary (laughter), including having fun. Story_ID: 23230 Speaker 1: Now, were you influenced in those days by the media and all? I know the United States was (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh, I'm glad you brought that up. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That was 24-7. And in an interesting fashion now. Twenty-four, seven because of the music, the traditional music. It was rare to have a day go by without hearing Janjo [phonetic]. Janjo is the most famous of the songs I know in Mali, Janjo. And that one is the song dedicated to Fakoli Bagayoko, the famous general. So Janjo is for the song for all the Bamako to lift their head up and do great things, period. So that was therefore, a constant reminder. And there were, of course, in fact, as I said in one of my short autobiographical writing in a book chapter, the same thing is true for almost any other Malian because the traditional music at the time, those who are, for instance, Keita, we say are descendant of the emperor, of the Manden Empires, the first emperor, Sundiata Keita, and those who are traveling will say, well, we are descendant of another one of those famous generals, which is Tinnamala Towery (ph.) of the time of the Empire of Mali and so on. Everyone had a sort of inspiration. Now, it actually occurred to me a long, some time back, that this is one of the things we don't have in America. It just hit me like a rock because that, it is constant. So it's not necessarily by design or anything, but it's just, this is the music, these musics are all the time. Speaker 1: Now, help me understand this. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Now, this is, this song was played in the compound you grew up or-- Speaker 2: This played on the radio-- Speaker 1: Radio. Speaker 2: --all the time. It's played at wedding ceremonies. It's played at almost every occasion. You name it, there is an occasion and it was played. And, of course, the, the Agrill (unclear), well, she's a group of individuals in Mali, and who are still there today, who make a living simply telling stories and, resolving disputes and flattering powerful and rich individuals, okay, literally, flattering them. And where also every chance you meet them and so forth, of course, there will be singing so to the point of embarrassing you. So it is constant,-- Speaker 1: So, they knew-- Speaker 2: --you can't escape it. Speaker 1: --they know you're a Bagayoko? Speaker 2: Oh, they know that. Speaker 1: And they will play the song (laughter). Speaker 2: Yes, they know that, and oh, some have gotten professionalized in it because they would have scouts around or go to the ceremony, the scouts are running around to know who is who, who got what name, who is who. And, or who may have some deep pockets and so forth. The thing you know, your name is (laughter), is fascinating. That's a universe (laughter), is a distinct, cultural phenomena we have in Mali, yes, indeed. Speaker 1: That's interesting. Speaker 2: And it's still there today. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Today. That hasn't changed. Speaker 1: That is something that-- Speaker 2: Yes, indeed. Speaker 1: --yeah, that we do not have here. I don't, there are certain--it's funny now. The, you're probably aware that most of the groups here, the cultural arts groups that do African dance-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --do Guinea coast rhythms. They do, you know, songs of Mali, and those-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --of the Manden, what's the one to the Agrill, [Singing]-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --[singing]. I probably butchered it. Speaker 2: I'm familiar, I'm familiar. I'm getting it. Speaker 1: [Still singing], you know, where they, it's a tribute to Ajali-- Speaker 2: Correct. Speaker 1: --or what the French call Agrill. Speaker 2: Correct, yes, indeed. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yes, indeed. Speaker 1: [Singing]. Speaker 2: Yes, indeed. Speaker 1: Alambin (ph.), yeah, that's the name of it. Speaker 2: Yes, indeed. Speaker 1: [Singing the drum beat]. Speaker 2: Yes, indeed. Yes. Speaker 1: [Singing drum beat]. Speaker 2: Yes. Indeed. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: It's still there and doing well. Speaker 1: But when I hear that, I light up because I know the African Americans that play it, I mean I know all of them all over the country-- Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: --pretty much, I know a lot of them, and if they know the song, that means that they're focused on this too, on some of (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I see. Speaker 1: So we get excited about that. But-- Speaker 2: Interesting. Speaker 1: --that must be a similar feeling if you you're a member of-- Speaker 2: Correct, correct. Speaker 1: --a family-- Speaker 2: Correct, correct, correct. Speaker 1: --to hear that, hear your family's song. Speaker 2: Yes, indeed. Story_ID: 23231 Speaker 1: Can you hum a little bit of your family song for us? Speaker 2: Well, which one? Speaker 1: Oh, they have more than one (laughter), the Bagayoko song that you were talking about-- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Well, Janjo is more instrumental than it is, it is-- Speaker 1: Lyrical. Speaker 2: --than it is lyrical. So, without an instrument, it's difficult for me to sing that one. But there are other, other forms--let me see. Which one could I--all right. Let me try to give you an introduction of a family song I grew up with, which is not Janjo, but which goes like this [Singing]. And you have these drums of various frequency in that background and so forth. Speaker 1: I recognize it--(unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Now, what we're just saying, we were saying, I don't want the gold--no, no, I don't want gold (unclear); I don't want money or silver, okay. Mali is my fatherland is what I want, is what I like. [Singing] That's what I like. Mali [singing], Malians do not engage in frivolous undertakings. [Singing] Have you heard of the man of men, meaning the reliable, the strong, the responsible man, Crusity (ph.). Crusity, literally translated, simply means someone who's wearing the pants. But when you say, when we pair with the kind of pants we wear in Mali, when you say that it means though, the meaning, the connotation is someone who has the character of a man, a real one and so on and so forth, yeah. So that's one song I, I love the singing. In fact, I still sing to myself very often (laughter). Speaker 1: I've heard that here in performances by-- Speaker 2: Oh, really? Speaker 1: --Muntu Dance Theater. Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: Kofi Dance Company in Milwaukee [Wisconsin]-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --they do those. There have been Raymond Cela and other people (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh, you are right. Speaker 1: -- from the, have come over and taught (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So that opening, that's the opening for a lot of song and dance (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes, correct. Speaker 1: So. Speaker 2: Ah, interesting. Speaker 1: Yeah, so it spread, but it's funny how that has, the music and drumming from that part of Africa dominates just about all the-- Speaker 2: It does. Speaker 1: --cultural expressions over here. Speaker 2: It does. I think it may be that, well, my speculation is from the time of the Empire of Mali, that music spread all over West Africa because you have it in Senegal, you have it in Guinea, you have it in another part of the Ivory Coast. Of course, you have it Sierra Leone and you name it, and we can (unclear) and so on and so forth. So, as a result, therefore, I wouldn't be surprised if it made it to the, across the ocean to the Diaspora and beyond, yep. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And then the artists who also go around, generally, the most famous ones like Saleb (ph.) Keita and even the Dejoel (ph.) and others, generally will sing some of these songs, yeah. Speaker 1: Right, I think popular music from Mali today is strongly linked to traditional music. It's-- Speaker 2: That's my preference, yes, indeed. Speaker 1: Bob Mall (ph.) and some of the others. Speaker 2: Yeah, we have some modern ones out there, but my preference is still these--those are the ones I know, in fact, (laughter). Yes, indeed. Story_ID: 23232 Speaker 1: So in high school, now what do you--how would you compare the math and science instruction that you had in high school with what you've seen here in this country in terms of-- Speaker 2: The difference actually came out starkly, in an international study, which is called, used to be called, the acronym is TIMS. It used to be called "Turn International Math and Science Study". But now, now, it's no longer the Turn, but where they changed it to make, I believe the "T" now means Trans International Mathematics and Science Study. If you still type TIMS, you will find it, TIMS. It came out starkly meaning the American textbooks and curriculum is a mile wide and an inch deep. That's exactly the title of the book which resulted from that study (laughter), by one of the leaders. "A Mile Wide and Inch Deep", while ours are generally a mile deep and an inch wide. And literally, my physics textbooks in high school, here is the width, more or less. It is this much, about, and that's not an exaggeration. While here, it is that. So here is a mile wide, and while ours is simply an inch wide, but a mile deep. In other words, the emphasis is on profound understanding and grasp of concepts, the ability of interpreting it and using it in different contexts to solve interrelated problems. Remember what I told you about the kind of problems we get. If you miss this part and that part, you can forget about it. So that, that's what--it is reflected in the instruction. While in the American system, in general, you have this multitude of topics, one, two, three, four; teacher have to run through them, if obligated to, as it is run (unclear), however, to do so, as it is run however. We, we don't have time, unfortunately, to go do the in-depth kind of examination which will anchor the knowledge properly and ensure that it is integrated knowledge base. Story_ID: 23233 Speaker 1: Yes, tell us, now, off camera we were talking about, I think Professor Keith Jackson was saying something similar, that there's certain basic concepts, that if you get those, the rest of it kind of fall into place. Speaker 2: He has it as perfectly as one can get it because, indeed, when I was saying that we have this mile wide and inch deep, according to the title of the book, that situation is the opposite of what the professor is talking about. But the system I have known in my high school [Lycee Prosper Kamara] in Mali is exactly those key concepts we are taught, that we examine, that we apply and with those, we can solve almost any kind of problem you bring to us. And, again, in fact, one of those studies that came out of that same TIMS [Trans International Math and Science Study] Report, was a detailed study of the content of the middle school mathematic topics in Japan and in the U.S. Well, guess what? In the U.S., we have counted seventy-five topics for the middle school math. In Japan, the number was twenty-five, and guess what? We have the same, basically, the same number of days and the Japanese actually spend many more hours in a day on studying than we do because not only do they do the same, study the same hours we have our school, but after school, some go to the after-school work that are called (unclear) [Jacoos?]. So everything we've said and done, they have only twenty-five topics in the mathematics area to master, while we have seventy-five to spread our effort and energy over. And a result, of course, we do not do well in, past middle school or high school in those exams. But the U.S. actually runs very well, at the elementary level. But that's it. Speaker 1: So, I guess the upshot of this is that if you're studying in the United States, if you are, your mind is boggled by these seventy-five topics swimming around in your head, you're not gonna get the key things that you need-- Speaker 2: Unfortunately, unfortunately-- Speaker 1: --to allow (unclear) (simultaneous) fall away from-- Speaker 2: Unfortunately, one will not. And what makes this situation a particularly difficult one is that your average teacher is bound to follow the seventy-five. Only if you, now, there are a few private schools that will not have followed these. They are the best ones out there, by the way. It's not by accident that a few private schools, where they do not have these seventy-five, kind of, this plethora of topics to fly over as opposed to examining in depth. So it is a very serious problem indeed and the teachers are between, as we say, the "rock and the hard place". And the student (laughter) are in worst position than the teacher. Speaker 1: So, you're saying that certain private schools over here teach-- Speaker 2: Yeah, certain private schools. Speaker 1: --teach the--(unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: They do exactly that way. And one of them that I know in particular is right here in the city, is called Episcopal High School. Even though they call it high school, but go from first grade to twelfth grade, Episcopal High. Speaker 1: And it's been said that, especially that the sixth grade is the crucial time for, especially students in the black community to decide they want to stay in school. And they say if you lose 'em at age eleven, you're not gonna get 'em back. They're not gonna come back. Speaker 2: Well, because the many, many different reasons for that have to do with the fact that if they do not have, develop the feeling, don't have the background or the perception they can follow and they don't have the encouragement or no one telling them, in fact, even if you are behind in this and that, we can make up, provided we deploy this and that effort, well, then they are left with no options as far as they are concerned. There are options, but they don't know that. At their level, the only remedy is quitting, unfortunately, and generally, parents and counselors and so forth may not quite understand either. I'm not blaming them, not so much that's it's our fault. It is simply that they may not quite grasp what is our play time at the time and do what needs to happen in order for these kids to stay in school. And this is one of the reasons we established the Timbuktu Academy, by the way, and because when we--when a student who passes through our elementary, middle or high school program, does not quit. And some come with very low, very, very minimal preparation. But we demystify the learning process once and for all for them, so making them understand, you may not know anything about this 'cause you don't have this background. Don't confuse, not knowing these, and not knowing--having the mental intellectual capability to do it, the two have nothing--one has nothing to do with the other. And these are the two generally confused by many students and even by some parents and some teachers. We confuse the level of preparation at a given time of a student with the total intellectual potential and capability of that student. Well, that capability is patently unlimited. While the knowledge, the preparation the student had, may have gaps of all kinds. But if we know what we are doing, we can fill those gaps and in no time, begin to shine like the rising sun. And that is one of the things I believe we did here at Southern [Southern University] and one of the, I dare say, essentially, I don't have any accomplishments second to that one. Story_ID: 23234 Speaker 1: Now, high school, you know, you did well in high school, I would take it? And you-- Speaker 2: Clear. Speaker 1: So when did you graduate from high school from-- Speaker 2: Sixty-nine [1969]. Speaker 1: Okay, 1969. Speaker 2: Went straight to-- Speaker 1: And so, there was no doubt you were gonna go to college at this point? Speaker 2: That's a given. Speaker 1: All right, so-- Speaker 2: The question now was, what college? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: That was a big question because I had a scholarship, government scholarship to go to (unclear) Geology in the Soviet Union. I had another one to go somewhere in France. I don't remember, to do what. And I didn't want any of those. So I decided that I'm going to stay in Mali and go to, Ecole Normale Superieure [de Bamako], which is the school where you train high school teachers. I knew I would go beyond high school teaching position, but that was to get my undergraduate education, yes. Speaker 1: Okay, so this is--the name of the school again is? What is it? Speaker 2: Ecole Normale Superieure de Bamako. You always have to add De Bamako, D-E- for De, Bamako is B-A-M-A-K-O, B-A-M-A-K-O. Why is it important? Because to add that because if you don't add that, if you only say Ecole Normale Superieure, people will think the one in Paris [France], if you don't add the de Bamako, yes. But it is more or less built on that model, but it's not the one in Paris, yes. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So,-- Speaker 2: In France. Speaker 1: Bamako, okay, so, you're only studying math and science? Speaker 2: Four subjects, mathematics, at the university level, mathematics, physics, chemistry and education. Education (unclear) and practice. Education, psychology, development and psychology and so forth, the practical teaching and so on and so forth which are the background I credited with what I did, it was mentoring and (unclear) academy. Speaker 1: Okay, so does it take the same amount of time to finish college as it does here? Speaker 2: Four. Speaker 1: Four years? Okay. Speaker 2: It's a Bachelor degree, four years. Speaker 1: Yeah, it would seem though it would be really a lot deeper in the sciences? Speaker 2: That's exactly what it is because we don't have any other general education out there. And that's why also, basically, I graduated with two degrees, plus one because my degree is actually physics and mathematics. I could have gone PhD in chemistry, could have done PhD in physics. I chose physics. But at the same time, I was totally certified to teach at the college level. So for all practical purposes, I have a degree in elementary education--I mean secondary education, certified, certification and the appropriate education in psychology and practical knowledge. That's it. Story_ID: 23235 Speaker 1: Now, you're a young man in college [Ecole Normale Superieure de Bamako] and all that. So, what kind of social life did you have in Bamako [Mali]? Speaker 2: Well, what kind did I have? Well, of course, on weekends, given that I'm in a huge family and relatives all over the place, on weekends I visit the family and so forth, my aunts and brothers and sisters. But beyond that, I studied. I found that was my pastime. And, because in college, even the soccer I played sometimes when I was in high school, I didn't do that in college. I just studied. I loved studying. Speaker 1: Okay, who were some of the teachers there that you remember? Speaker 2: Oh, there are two in particular, the one who taught me mathematics at the university level, whose name is Moussa, M-O-U-S-S-A, Maiga, that is M-A-I--the "i" with the double dot on top, G-A. And he was a teacher and a mentor because he basically, he recruited me from high school. And the second one was Younous Dicko. Younous is Y-O-U-N-O-U-S. Dicko is D-I-C-K-O. He was my physics teacher, and the director of my BS thesis because we had to have one. Speaker 1: Okay, so you had to-- Speaker 2: So these were my two main mentors, teachers and mentors at the undergraduate level. Story_ID: 23236 Speaker 1: So you went on to get your Masters degree-- Speaker 2: Correct, I wanted to get-- Speaker 1: --and here (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --I got my Masters degree at Lehigh University. Speaker 1: How did you, how was that--now, you taught first before you went to Lehigh? Speaker 2: Correct, I taught for two years at-- Speaker 1: Sikasso [Mali] (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, correct, high school, The City of Sikasso, yes, and then I got the African American Institute, we call it AAI, African American Institute. Now, the name has changed. The name is, it has a new name now. It's still AAI, but it means something else. I believe it says now, Africa America Institute instead of African American. It's say Africa America Institute, whatever. Yeah, it is in, my fellowship was from that organization. Speaker 1: Now, is that organization here in the United States? Speaker 2: (Unclear) yeah, located in New York, yes. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: Um-hum, the other one who supported me to come do my doctoral studies. So when I came, I was first admitted to Brandeis University [Waltham, Massachusetts], by the way, to do purely theoretical physics dealing with (unclear) of gravity, a lot of things of that type, quite esoteric. So, unfortunately or fortunately, maybe both, Brandeis calculated that I will need one full year of English before I--so I came in October, around October, arrived around October, I believe, yeah. And December I finished my English TOEFL and I could not sit until September or August. That's where Brandeis said we don't have any room until August. So because of that, the fellowship organization, AAI, helped me find another university which was Lehigh [University] in Bethlehem, Pennsylvania which is an excellent school, engineering school, all the way in the top five, among the engineering schools in this country. So I went there, again, fully funded this time, most likely by Lehigh and the AAI to do my Masters in solid-state physics. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes, and there again, I had one of those, how do you call it, one of those situations where, when I reflect on them, they make me do what I do in the sense that when I completed my Masters, and remember, I'm coming from Mali. Half of Mali is the Sahara Desert. Timbuktu [Mali] is actually in the Sahara, okay (laughter). But I landed in Bethlehem [Philadelphia] in December with the snow coming to my knee. I didn't even know how to protect myself, all right. So, it was a miserable kind of condition as far as I'm concerned. But the university, the department and so forth, the people were absolutely wonderful. And so when I completed my, okay--let me go slowly. When I finished the first winter, the summer came along. I felt great, played even soccer, started playing soccer, and the winter hit again. Oh, no, I said, now, I can't take it. So as a result, when I completed my MS, MS requirements, in early December, I told my chairman, Professor McClendon, that I'm going to Florida or California or just to the South or I'm going to Mali, one of these three. Now, in order for you to understand this, you need to know that I had not applied to any school, didn't even know what that meant because that's not the system we had. So basically, my career was over at that point because I know I didn't want to stay in this climate any longer. That much was certain, so I was going to go back home. But Professor Redding, my guardian, advisor, Professor Kim, who was one of my statistical mechanics teacher and McClendon, these three were--and, of course, others (unclear) jumped into action in two or three, in a few days to get me admission at Louisiana State University. Now, remember, they didn't have to do this, as far as I'm concerned. I mean somebody you supported fellowship wise and (unclear) suffered to get his degree, if he jumps up in the middle December, now, he wants to go home, well fine. Good-bye. They didn't have to do it at all, but they did it. And that's what landed me a new job at Louisiana State University in January of '78' [1978]. Speaker 1: Okay, 1978, all right. Speaker 2: Correct. Story_ID: 23237 Speaker 1: So, all right, so you're here to get your Ph.D.? Speaker 2: Ph.D. in the solid state, condensed matter theory, yes. Speaker 1: Now, what is the difference between--what is, what distinguishes solid-state physics, I guess, from some other-- Speaker 2: Well, okay, solid-state physics as the name says is our branch of physics that studies matter in the solid state as compared to the gas state or the liquid state. That's it. But now, we, sometimes did, the modern terminology we use is condensed matter theory, condensed matter physics, which is no longer quite solid state alone because liquid is also condensed in some way (laughter). And gas can be considered under pressure to be condensed too. I don't know, but certainly liquid and all kind of solid polymers and so forth can all fall in condensed matter, however, may not fall in solid state. That's the reason we shift the name to include more things to shift to condensed matter as opposed to solid state. That's it. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Nobody's ever explained that (laughter). But that's, all right, so, okay, so you're at Louisiana State University, now, how did you like Louisiana? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Oh, when I first arrived at the airport, I was doing like this to the lady who was talking to me because she was talking in my view so slowly, I felt like sleeping before she can answer one word 'cause I was talking like this. Well, okay, I just spent two years in the Northeast and the ladies, I said, could you, whatever. So that, that shocked me. It certainly did (laughter). I will never forget it, and then when I went on campus and I was angry, one time I went to the cafeteria, I saw something white somewhere. I looked at it again, and I, no, I saw something liquid. I came back, I said, what is this? They told me rice. I said, this is the grain people eat, rice, right? Yes, rice 'cause I haven't seen it in Pennsylvania or potato all the time. So those two things there were the first thing that caught my attention in Louisiana, and then when I started tasting the food, oh, wait a minute. This is like I'm in Mali as far as the food is concerned. So the brother has arrived at home (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: As far as I'm concerned, okay (laughter). Speaker 1: Now, you're in Baton Rouge [Louisiana], where we're at now. Southern University is very close-- Speaker 2: To LSU [Louisiana State University]. Speaker 1: Yeah, to LSU. Speaker 2: Ten miles apart. Speaker 1: So did you tend to spend more time or a lot of time over here? Speaker 2: Nope, I was 24-7 at LSU. Why? Well, again, this was the time of my graduate studies. Now, I came to Southern only a few times when NSBP, the National Society of Black Physicists met. That was, in fact, my first time to come to Southern. But I met, yeah, one time when I was at LSU. So that was my first time here, and then I was always studying at LSU and so was my wife-to-be. She was in biochemistry, studying. That's where we met and so on and so forth. But at LSU, the other thing that jolted me was that I was as, I won't say spoiled, but I was in such a condition there, the only thing it comes close to is the condition I was in during my earliest childhood in Mali, in the village. Why? Well, because I had the Boyd Professor, which is the highest academic title in the LSU system, a very, international authority in solid-state physics, the late, Boyd Professor Joseph Callaway as my advisor. Well, and that's the whole story now because I walked through that, I knew of his fame. I saw, I studied his book when I was at Lehigh. So one day I walked to his office, I said, well, Professor Callaway, given that you are my advisor, I thought we should get to know each other. He slowly turned like this and looked at me and said, "Who told you that?" I said, I did. He smiled and says, sit down, who are you? (Laughter) That was the beginning of it. So I told who I am, yes, so forth and so on. So, I'd been after him to be my dissertational advisor. That's what I'm trying to tell you. I drafted him. Well, ever since I did that, I mean the man put the entire campus at my disposal. In order for you to understand that, you've got to--you need to know that the LSU computer system, where five or more people were working on weekends. There were--at the time, there were holidays, Christmas, and other days where they were to close. And I would simply go to him, I said, oh, no, Professor, 'cause I have to do calculations. Well, phone call, Diola has to do calculations, so I need the center open. So, you name it, I had it, anything I needed to do my work. It was that kind of spoiling. So with that kind of condition, if I don't do my work, well, who would I have to blame (laughter)? It was absolutely fabulous. Yes, totally supported, didn't have any problem whatsoever. In fact, when I went to meet the, went to see the chancellor about something, he asked me who is your major professor? I said, Professor Callaway. He said, Callaway? I said, yes. Well, everybody's afraid of Callaway. I am among them (laughter). That's the chancellor talking (laughter), indeed. When I told my colleagues I wanted, I am going to him as my advisor, oh, they told me not to do that because he's tough, he's tough, he'll do so and so. But they didn't understand. They didn't understand that I wanted exactly someone who is brilliant, hardworking and will be demanding so that I can try to go above whatever it is that he might demand. And it made my day because there was not circumstance where he told me that I needed to do work. In fact, most of the time, he was begging me, Diola, could you please give me some time, let me not read this draft article now? Could you give me until next week, four days? I said, okay, professor (laughter). So that's why I went on there. So it was a great time, a wonderful one. By the time, I finished, I had eight publications so how could I complain? No, no way to complain. It was great. Story_ID: 23238 Speaker 1: Now, when you, this occurred to me too, now, your preparation before you came to the United States, was it such that, I mean did you learn a lot when you came over here, you know, beyond what you were preparing to do when you were-- Speaker 2: Tremendously. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Tremendously. In fact, let me back track a little bit to go back to Lehigh. When I got there, that is again, another reason why I got into mentoring and I do it the way I do it. Professor Redding, the advisor, the graduate advisor, spent an hour or an hour and a half talking with me, going over all the things I have studied and know and so on. And that's how he arrived at the conclusion that there are areas of mathematics where I seem to know as much as somebody doing their PhD in mathematics. But there are other practical areas of mathematics, like a typical example is advanced calculus or differential equations. But I don't know much of any, particularly, complex variables. Well, I have not almost been exposed at all. Here this was a serious mish mosh, because physics needs particularly the differential equations, the complex variables as opposed to the fancy topology I was doing, the fancy analysis I did and which was much higher, more complicated mathematics, but not directly usable in the physics I was doing. So this is where the critical importance of advisement is. He was successful in finding this out and putting me in those courses, which I had to learn, which I learned, complex variables and all that. And that's what allowed me from then on to follow everything I had to follow. But had it not be, had I not been in those classes, I was heading for serious problems, despite the fact that I think that I'm bright, according to--I tell everybody, that everybody, we are all bright. The question is, what is one to do about brightness? Okay, that's one of my sayings (laughter), okay. So, but I was going to get in trouble because lack of adequate background for what I was about to begin studying. I get excited when I talk about this, sorry, but (laughter). Speaker 1: No, that's great, that's great. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Story_ID: 23239 Speaker 1: Okay, so, now what was your dissertation about? Speaker 2: The electronic properties of iron in the face centered cubic structure. That's what I did in my, did some heavy calculations on, and-- Speaker 1: Electronic Properties of Iron-- Speaker 2: Yes, Electronic Properties of Iron in the FCC [face centered cubic] Structure. Speaker 1: In the FCC structure? Speaker 2: Structure, yes. Speaker 1: Now, can you explain that in layman's terms? We--(unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Okay, iron is the same typical iron we know, as in metal, typical medal. The FCC's structure is simply a crystal structure, meaning where atoms are arranged in such a fashion that if you have like a cube, the FCC face center is such that for every face, you have one atom in the middle. And, of course, one atom as opposed to the other structure that do not have the atom in the middle of faces. So you have atom at each corner of each face, and one in the middle. The FCC--that's one of the characteristics of FCC, Face centered cubic, yes. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: There are other which is (unclear). There is one that they call simple cubic, and there are other crystals. Fortunately, (unclear) we know of 14 regular ones. This is just one of them. Story_ID: 23240 Speaker 1: Okay, can you tell us how you met your wife [Ella Kelley]? Speaker 2: Well, we met in apartment, around an apartment complex. I was in the apartment complex where I lived, close to LSU [Louisiana State University], and she was in another house on the other side. And I was on the second floor, so I could see her. And, of course, a young man, not married and so forth, seeing a girl, I said, hello and so forth. So it started a conversation. And I jokingly, she tells me later that, well, she learned that I'm graduate student, PhD student in physics, that she was impressed by that. I said, well (laughter), so from that first conversation, we decided to meet. And we met, and then went to a concert given by one of the musicians at Southern [University] by the way, and that's how we--it evolved very quickly. And we got married, didn't take long at all after that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She got her PhD in chemistry, in biochemistry the same year, same ceremony where I got mine in physics. Story_ID: 23241 Speaker 1: So in '83' [1983], you were hired as a physics lecturer at the University of Benghazi [Libya]-- Speaker 2: Correct. Speaker 1: In Benghazi, Libya. Speaker 2: Correct. Speaker 1: Now, how did you hear about this job and what made you decide to go? Speaker 2: Oh, I simply distributed my application everywhere when I knew I was going to finish and including, Mali, itself (laughter). But, and I wanted really to go to a developing country (unclear) and go back (unclear) of course, (unclear) in a developing country, particularly in Africa if I could get it. So the only African countries that answered my question, my request, Libya. So I said, okay, I'm going to Libya. So now, well, of course, I left my family behind because I wanted to go do the prospection, spend one year there, study the terrain and so forth and see if things would evolve, how things would evolve, and then decide later to bring the rest of my family. Well, the relationship between the U.S. and Libya didn't get any better, so I couldn't bring my American family there. And therefore, at the end of the year, that was the end of it. And I also did some other things. I didn't, I didn't like because in the middle of my contract, they told me, as they've told other people, that they could only send out half of their salary. I said, what am I going to do with the other half? I'm house, I'm friend, I have my clothes, I have nothing to spend the other half on. And my family is in the U.S. how many days of money? My contract did not say the rule, it did not (unclear) well, contract, at least the one who talked to me. So with that, I decided at the end of the day, I'm leaving. That's clear because I say breach of contract, clear. So-- Story_ID: 23242 Speaker 1: You came back to Louisiana and-- Speaker 2: Yep, came back to LSU [Louisiana State University] and spent a few months working with my former dissertation professor, advisor, before getting employed at Southern University. Speaker 1: Now, this is 1984, right? Speaker 2: Correct, in August. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so, well, you spent a lot of time at LSU before, but were you very familiar with Southern [University]? Did you, what was your impression? Speaker 2: No, I was not very familiar with Southern. Speaker 1: What was your impression of Southern? Speaker 2: Oh, my impression of Southern was an absolutely formidable one, and I got it from whom? Professor Joseph Callaway, who told me that, well, it is really terrible that Southern had this phenomenally brilliant, highly-productive young physicist and (unclear) chair and others. And somehow, Southern managed to chase them all away. Now, he does not know what is the suggestion now, but he knows one thing. This department used to be an absolutely excellent one. Now, coming from Callaway, (laughter), because this man is very, how do you say, stingy, when it comes to compliments, okay. So coming from him, it meant the world to me. Now, that was before I came to Southern. So that's, other people didn't talk to me. I didn't talk to other people about it. So I, and I've never forgot it. And he was making reference to Joe Johnson, who was the chair, and there were many, many brilliant, young black physicists in that department. And they were highly active in all areas, you name it, fluid anatomy, quantum mechanics, nuclear, you name it. But following some incident and so forth in '72' [1972] and so on, Southern, I guess let go of or fired some of them and so Joe Johnson left and the others, one by one ended up leaving. So, but that was my impression, that's the only impression I know. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's the only impression I had of Southern. Speaker 1: Well, what is the incident in '72' [1972] that you were referring to? Speaker 2: It was a student, I won't call it riot, a manifestation by students who imposing certain situation in this state here and they marched because the government, the state was imposing something on the university and the other--this was '72' [1972], okay. So we were not all that, everything was not as now, of course, and they called in the, either the police or the, how do you call it? National Guard, and they ended up fighting and two students got killed. Speaker 1: Oh, that's right. Speaker 2: Yeah, two. And the Smith Brown Memorial Union is actually named after them. The student union. The last name of one was Brown. The last name of the other was Smith, Smith and Brown. Speaker 1: Yeah, I remember, that was (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Of course, some people have tried to say a physics, Joe Johnson or other people incited the students. Well, in my opinion, of course, that's as close as reality as a fabrication can be, but anyway, I wasn't there. The bottom line is there were things being done that students just could not bear, but manifested and they marched and so forth and it was terrible. Yeah, that's what happened. Speaker 1: But Dr. Callaway knew about this, and-- Speaker 2: Yeah, he knew of the fighting of these people following that incident. Yes, he knew about it. But in his view, these people were not responsible for the student march. They had to do with it as far as he was concerned. And they didn't give (unclear) but as far as he was concerned, because he would not have told me Southern managed to, without, with everything to chase them away or whatever. He would not have said that if he had any conviction that they had done anything illicit or illegal or improper. That's my view. Speaker 1: Okay, so you were initially hired as an assistant professor of physics-- Speaker 2: Correct. Speaker 1: --but then you became an associate which means you're on a tenure track. Speaker 2: Correct. Story_ID: 23243 Speaker 1: Now, the Timbuktu Academy was organized in 1990, is that true? Speaker 2: Nineteen-ninety [1990], '91' [1991], yes. We established it in 1991 at the end of the year. Speaker 1: With funding from the National Science Foundation? Speaker 2: Correct, and the Louisiana Board of Regions at the beginning and then later, massively funded by the Department of the Navy, Office of Naval Research. I did two, $600,000 per year for ten years in a row. Speaker 1: Okay, so tell us how you go the initial idea for Timbuktu Academy and what is the nature of Timbuktu Academy? Speaker 2: Well, the idea actually came from my wife, not the name, but we were driving from home, and we got to a light. And right on that street, Scenic Highway, and we were passing some youth, youngsters who were not looking as if they were going to school or up to something they shouldn't be doing. And she commented that I should really put my energy and my intelligence to work to help the African American youth. And later she actually didn't remember this (laughter), but anyway, when she said this, well, of course, I felt not only flattered to (unclear), because that means she thinks I have some of a capability I can bring to bear on the problem or the dimension. All right, well, fine, I hear you. So I didn't forget it. About less than a year after that, the academy was established. We, I started preparing the proposal. And, but we still didn't have a name. So I came to this building here to get the final signature before I had a name. When I got out, I saw the Mississippi [River]--you saw it, right? It's coming like this and turning like that, meaning turning like this. So, and guess what? Timbuktu [Mali] is also located in such a way that the majestic Niger River comes like this and turns like that. So as soon as I came out, given that this is a learning thing we were are establishing, it hit me like a rock. We are going to call it "Timbuktu Academy". And then I said, I got my colleagues together. I said, well, now, I got news for you. It's good and it is very bad. The good part is we've got a name, the Timbuktu Academy. The potential, possibly bad part is, we are going to work as no one we know has ever done because we can't carry the name Timbuktu Academy and be second to any other program of our type. The reasons are simple. For four centuries, no, let me see. Thirteen, 14, 15, 16, yeah, well, three solid centuries, so for three solid centuries, the University of Timbuktu of which the one at Sankore was the most family, was second to none. Well, we are not going to be second to any other. (Unclear) They agreed. So there we go. The rest is history, with a little bit of arrogance (laughter), okay, I couldn't deny arrogance, you know, (laughter). Speaker 1: Well, here in this country, as you probably well know, the name Timbuktu to just designate some remote outpost somewhere that nobody knows where it is. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: White people use it like that to-- Speaker 2: Yes, indeed. Speaker 1: I gotta come all the way from Timbuktu, but they have no idea what it is. Speaker 2: I had fun with that at Lehigh [University] because I told, when then they asked where are you from? I said, Mali. We don't know. The name just changed. It used to be called French Sudan. And, but in 1960, the name is Mali. It didn't make it through the books yet, so I found out what you just said. I said, I'll fix this. Now, when they ask me where are you from, I ask them, are you going to believe me? They say, yes. I say, from Timbuktu (laughter). They jump up, you are pulling my leg. Then I pull out my little map (laughter) and show--I had a lot of fun with that one (laughter), yes, indeed. Speaker 1: All right, so, and this is, you know, there's a traditional scholarship, I mean someone from Timbuktu could probably the scholars, like your ancestral scholars-- Speaker 2: Correct. Speaker 1: --I mean people having named these scholars (unclear), you know, Ahmed Baba who wrote forty books on a different, each on a different subject-- Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: --from law to some--(unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Correct. We had everything, mathematics, philosophy and religion, you name it? We had it, until--(unclear) anthropology, you name it, we had it. Yes, indeed. Speaker 1: Okay, so-- Speaker 2: We really had it. Speaker 1: So this name now, now, this is a name that African Americans are somewhat familiar with who've had black history courses,-- Speaker 2: Correct. Speaker 1: --African history courses, and there aren't that many who have, but some are. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 23244 Speaker 1: So did as a, but did it [Timbuktu Academy] catch on in the community and-- Speaker 2: Oh, it is known all over. Not only this community, but the whole state, and students come all over, Oregon, Washington, D.C., California, Arkansas, you name it, Atlanta [Georgia], from all over to participate in our summer program and, of course, to also enroll in the undergraduate program and study here at Southern, yes. Speaker 1: Okay, so it's basically a summer program then? Speaker 2: Oh, no, it's more than that. We started it first as a summer program (unclear) for five high school students and year-around mentoring of physics majors, twenty physics majors. This was the first funding by NSF [National Science Foundation] and the Board of Regions. That lasted three years, but the initial result we had, we went to ONI [sic, ONR: Office of Naval Research] to ask for much more funding. That's when we extended significantly to include middle and much more extended program for high school students, and then many more undergraduates. No longer just physics majors, but engineering majors and chemistry majors and later, we expanded it to mathematics and engineer--and computer science majors, yes. So the average number of students in the, around 2000, in the program we were supporting financially was always between 7,200, and I mean when I say supporting financially, I meant all costs paid. You name it, we pay for it, and I'm talking about the undergraduate work. And their job was to do basically as I did, full-time studying of conducting research. And, of course, needless to say the rest was self-fulfilling prophecy. They all were shining like the rising sun. It doesn't happen by accident. It was by design. Speaker 1: Okay, how many people does it take to staff the project? Speaker 2: How many? Speaker 1: How many people does it take to staff the project? Or do you need a very large staff to run the academy? Speaker 2: Yes and no. The "yes" part is that I, yes, I have many faculty members involved at a variety of levels because if I am supporting engineering students, and I do some mentoring with them, weekly seminars and others, bring them to conferences, I expect engineering faculty to be doing what we need to do to immerse them in their appropriate engineering things they're supposed to be in. So in that sense, yes, there's many. But when they come to the programmatic operation, I generally had only one full-time professional staff member--right now, I only have one. Generally, minimum BS level, preferably MS level with degree in physics, which is the case now, with one graduate student and three or so undergraduates. That's it, staff-wise for operating the office, yes. Speaker 1: So, and you said that people come from all over the country for the summer program. Speaker 2: Correct. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: And for the undergraduate component. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And so this is program started in 1990. It's still going strong-- Speaker 2: Still going on. Speaker 1: In 2012? Speaker 2: Correct. Speaker 1: So this, let's put this, let's count 'em up here. This is 2012-- Speaker 2: We are about 22, 21, 22 years in the running. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes. Story_ID: 23245 Speaker 1: All right, now 1992, you were appointed as the Associate Director of the Louisiana Space Consortium [LaSPACE]. Speaker 2: Correct. Speaker 1: And tell us about this? Speaker 2: Well, NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] launched the Space Consortium program, and invited states all over to participate. So Louisiana wanted to participate, and what happened was that I was already involved at the level of the State Board of Regions representing Southern University on some major committees, committees that were in charge of directing some of the collaboration between universities. So, when this opportunity came from NASA, it went to the region, and, of course, I brought it to Southern [University] saying, it does not matter what happens, we have to participate. And so the, I don't remember who, whether it was the vice chancellor I talked to or the chancellor. Somebody turned to me immediately and said, well, this is a NASA thing. That's mainly physics, so you will have to be the representative. So they turned it back (laughter), right back to me. So, well, then, that's how I went to work with some other colleagues from several other universities, with Dr. John Welfa (unclear), who was a faculty member at LSU [Louisiana State University] when I was a graduate student. And we worked together so that we had it funded. And Southern had (unclear) running it. So it is still running. As a matter of fact, the Louisiana Space Consortium, last space, is the one now funding, how many? Twenty of the undergraduate scholars of the Timbuktu Academy. It's still funding twenty per year. Yep. Speaker 1: Okay, that's another piece institutionalized here. So now, in '96' [1996] you were appointed as the director of the Master's degree program in physics here at Southern University. Speaker 2: Correct. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We developed the proposal, and in fact, our proposal was for the PhD. It was reviewed marvelously. But, hey, the state, state politics, they just didn't give it to us. It was not because anything was missing in the proposal or we didn't have the capability. That was just, simply politics 101. So when we figured out this, we had to get the MS. Otherwise, I'm going to be crying foul, and I wouldn't do that. Those are the things I don't hesitate to do when I have the facts and the figures in my hand. So, we got at least the Masters. So, and, of course, I was directing it. I wasn't chairman at the time because I was, did not even want to have nothing to do with chairmanship because I was busy running the academy, doing my research, doing my teaching. So, but I decided to run, direct that program because we wanted it to succeed and well. So, that's how that went. Speaker 1: Okay, now, since you've been at Southern, have you been able to devote, like a significant portion of your time to research as opposed to teaching or is there, is more heavily balanced on teaching than research or-- Speaker 2: The appropriate numbers actually for me are likely to be about, since '93' [1993], no more than 25 percent teaching since '93' [1993]. Before '93' [1993] is another story, maybe close to 50 percent teaching, but since '93' [1993], no more than 25 percent. But I always try not to make it zero because there are some critical courses, particularly, mathematical physics which is pivotal for students to excel in graduate school, that I do design based on my training, way back in Mali, and after collecting graduate course content and so forth, from ten universities around this country, East, North, South, East, you name it, and so that coursework is designed exactly to allow our students to excel. So I teach that one almost always, there's no matter what happens. Otherwise, the, so that's the teaching. The rest of my time is most, I was almost 50 percent this program running. If it were not the Timbuktu Academy, it will be the Timbuktu Academy and the Louis Stokes Louisiana Alliance for Minority Participation of which I am now the state director. Story_ID: 23246 Speaker 1: Okay, now, that one started in '96' [1996] and I was just getting ready to-- Speaker 2: Correct. Speaker 1: --to ask you about it, so tell us about the Louis Stokes program? Speaker 2: Well, that, the Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation are the major programs of the National Science Foundation, whose name says, the name says everything, actually. It says simply some mechanism by which we want to include the participation of underrepresented minorities and science technology, engineering, mathematics, period. So in order to do that, these alliances are based on undergraduate degree programs and undergraduate degree which in the STEM, so what we call STEM area. And that the funding is almost strictly for that, a little bit for programmatic, but most of this money is to go to students and they are to be mentored, engage in research and monitored and very well advised and so on and so forth, exactly the kind of thing we have been doing in the Timbuktu Academy. So that's why, when this came along, I was in charge of writing the narrative for this. It was a model of Timbuktu Academy from the beginning to the end. And I'm delighted to say every one of the seven reviewers of NSF who read the proposal, excellent, every single one of them exclusively noted the fact that it is based on a successful model of this Timbuktu Academy and so forth and so and so and so. And from then on, the rest is history. We, the funding of this program was significant. It was about, no less than a million dollars from NSF per year and $500,000 per year from the Louisiana Board of Regions. That went on for ten years in a row. And then after that, NSF funding came down to 500 [thousand], but the Louisiana Board Regions funding is still at 500 [thousand]. So our budget cash now is no less than one million cash per year, in addition to, of course, the in-kind contributions coming from the participating institutions which are twelve at the moment. LSU [Louisiana State University] is in need, should be all the, historically black colleges, are in New Orleans (unclear) Grambling [State University], Xavier [University], SUNO,[Southern University at New Orleans], SUSLA [Southern University at Shreveport] and Dillard [University] and then, of course, Tulane and UNO, [University of New Orleans], ULL, University of Louisiana, Lafayette and Magnee [sic?] State University and then, yeah, I believe I named all of them--and Nunez Community College and that's about it, twelve of them now. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And each doing well. Speaker 1: It's still going on, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Story_ID: 23247 Speaker 1: In 1997 you received an award from the Republic of Mali, the Ciwara D' Exception National Award. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, now, what was that like? Now, how, they were--who was keeping them informed about your (laughter) activities? Speaker 2: I'm not even sure, who. Well, I guess news travels, over the Internet and all that. That may be what made it possible, but the Ciwara D' Exception Award was following my 1996 U.S. Presidential Award for Excellence because of my engineering mentoring. So we all (unclear) felt very, very much honored by that, and therefore, they said, well, that's how I got that award, by, from a national organization. The name is the Association for Excellence and Management and so forth in Mali. That was a national organization that awarded that, and they said, they Ciwara actually is typical statutes in Mali, a statute of, which represents hard work. And they had this golden, they make this--the prize was a golden model of that statute in real gold and so forth. So, but I didn't go to pick the gold up (laughter). I certainly appreciated the commission, yes, indeed. Speaker 1: But you didn't get the gold? Speaker 2: No, I didn't go to get the gold medal or whatever. When I went later, well, the gentleman to whom I gave my acceptance speech who made the presentation, who took the thing, I couldn't track him down. So I, and I didn't want to make any--it's not worth it (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (Unclear) making a fuss about the rest. Story_ID: 23248 Speaker 1: You mentioned the gold statute. Just thought about the gold you see when you read articles about Mali. The women wear these big gold earrings that, and it's a country known for having lots of gold. Speaker 2: They're still doing it. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, is it--when you were growing up and when you lived there, did you see lots of gold? Speaker 2: A lot of it. The only difference now is, we're, maybe learning a little something about it because before, they had this very, very, very, very heavy, massive gold pendant that was tearing, literally tearing the ears on some because too heavy. Now, they are learning finally (laughter) to have something hollow and then put the gold on top of it, and that will look like, (unclear) an effaces, but at least it won't tear your, somebody's earlobe off. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's-- Speaker 2: And so, but we are still doing it, and we still have gold rings, gold pendants of all different kinds, broaches and so on, yes. Speaker 1: Yeah, the earrings are like bolts almost. Speaker 2: Yes, indeed. Speaker 1: Great, big gold earrings. Story_ID: 23249 Speaker 1: Tell us about how you're able to sustain your programs funding wise? Speaker 2: Well, in the year '99' [1999], we understood that if we only have a funding source and the day that one will dry up for whatever reason, then the programs are likely to be in trouble. So we concluded very quickly that we needed to establish a diversified funding base, and that's how we always managed to have one, two, three, sometimes four or five sources, funding the project at the same time. In the case of the Timbuktu Academy, for instance, even though ONR [Office of Naval Research] was the funding source for ten years in row, during those same periods, for instance, NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] was funding ten students and NES [sic?] was funding some students, and we had NSF also funding a few, as well as the Board of Regions funding some. So, and right now, as a matter of fact, the Academy funding sources are mainly the National Science Foundation and the Louisiana Space Consortium. We are working on a proposal for the third one, and so on. So that's how we sustain them. And that seems to be something applicable to most other organizations out there, by the way, yeah. Story_ID: 23250 Speaker 1: Okay, now, in 1999, for your extraordinary efforts to significantly increase the African American PhDs in Physics and Chemistry, you were awarded the American Association for the Advancement of Science Mentor Award for Lifetime Achievement. Speaker 2: Yeah, that was 2009, right, not 1999? Speaker 1: Oh, okay, was it? Okay, 2009. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: That's a difference. Speaker 2: Yeah, the award was named the 2009 Award, even though the ceremony was in 2010. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So we've jumped ahead too far. But other highlights I have here is that, in 2000 you received the Southern University Grantsmanship Award-- Speaker 2: Yes, I (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --the Millionaire Club. They have a (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Southern University awards, I have very many of those, presidents' excellence award and several others, millionaire club awards and you, quite a number. Well, I figured out what I had to do because, to contribute to building the institution. Speaker 1: Now, in 2002, the Timbuktu Academy received the 2002 United States Presidential Award for Excellence in Science, Mathematics and Engineering Mentoring? Speaker 2: Yep, that is award I'm particularly happy about because you see it was a validation award. When I got the individual presidential award in 1996, and I went there, and I learned at that time, that, oh, there are two types of awards. There are individual awards, there are program awards. I said, well, if I'm really good as a mentor, then by all means (laughter), my program should certainly (unclear) for one of these. But I did have to wait, though, till five years passed because I didn't, couldn't not account for that submission application. Anything that was remotely counted for my award and include din, as a base or support for my award. You understand me. So I had to wait five years. So that's why we waited until 2001 to apply, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And now, as a matter of fact, the award itself has that rule of no entity applying within five years if that entity--well, has gotten anything before. And it makes sense, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I'm particularly happy with that award, yes, indeed. Speaker 1: All right, now, 2007, Dr. Bill Cosby or William Cosby-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --presents you with the National Benjamin Banneker Legacy Award. Speaker 2: Correct. Speaker 1: And that's, so where does the National Benjamin Banneker Legacy Award come from, I mean-- Speaker 2: It is from the Benjamin Banneker Institute which is a congressionally established entity. Yep. And that award was in the Jada Blue Marriott in Washington, and I was really delighted about that. And the award cited, what it was to me and to the Timbuktu Academy. So we, I gladly accepted it for all of us who have been contributing to the Academy, yes. Story_ID: 23251 Speaker 1: Okay, and has there been any thought about trying to establish the [Timbuktu] Academy at other historical black colleges? Speaker 2: Well, guess what? As a matter of fact, through the Louisiana [Stokes] Alliance for Minority Participation, it has practically been duplicated in our early partner campuses. That's right, because the ten-step systemic mentoring model, the Academy invented and is following to the letter, that is the same, those are the same ten-stem systemic mentoring model, the Louis Stokes Louisiana Alliance for Minority Participation is following on all the campuses, yes. So in that sense, it has been replicated, not only in the HBCU, but also in some non-HBCU institutions. But on the other side, my dear friend who was the first director, in fact, of LSLAM, of the Louis Stokes Alliance in Louisiana, Dr. Robert Ford, is now in TSU [Tennessee State University], and he has established a center there. And for all practical purposes, it seems like he's, the brother is on his way to do a magnificent replication and extension of the kind of work we do at the Academy. And I have made a presentation at other institutions which are trying or have done in a variety of different ways, even though, of course, we don't necessarily take the name Timbuktu Academy, but the fact still remains that they are doing the kind of work we need done, yes. Story_ID: 23252 Speaker 1: Okay, now, 2009, the National Thurgood Marshall College Fund bestowed the distinguished faculty award upon Professor Bagayoko, which is yourself. Speaker 2: That is correct. Speaker 1: And so this is another honor, and I'm sure there're lots of honors we have not named. Speaker 2: Yeah, there are some more, yes. Speaker 1: And, but, we always ask this question, sir, when you look back on your career so far, you're still not that old, you're (laughter)-- Speaker 2: Thank you. Speaker 1: So, when you look back on your career today, what today would you consider to be the most outstanding aspects of your legacy? Speaker 2: I would generally site two, and I can't run those two without absolutely, as far as I'm concerned, on the same footing. One, a colleague and I, in 1997 and 1998, we introduced the Bagayoko Zhao and William method which is known was BZW Method. Speaker 1: That's Bagayoko-- Speaker 2: Zhao, Zhao is written Z-H-A-O. Speaker 1: A-O. Speaker 2: And William. William was my Masters student and I forget American at this time. We introduced, so the name of the method is BZW. We introduced this method in 1997-'98' [1998]. We solved a problem that existed since the beginning of quantum mechanics in physics. And the problem was, to be precise, that theoretician or theoretical calculation, were not able to correctly describe from first principle the electronic energy of the core properties and the later one of materials due to the fact that there is--materials which are not metals, due to the fact that there is something called energy gap or bend gap, that they could not get correctly. If the experiment says it is five electron volts, some authority will give you two, some will give you one, some will give you 1.5, some will even give you zero. It was chaos. We solved it completely with our method. And the method was enhanced further by two of my students, [Chinedu] Ekuma and [Lashounda] Franklin, and now we call it the BZW-EF. Not only does it describe atom, molecules, nano structure, semiconductor and insulator correctly, but also it predicts them and experiment verifies. We did that for silicon carbide. Two years later, experiment confirmed what we probably--we did that for, cubic indium nitride. Two years after we published our prediction, experiment verified it. So this, for me, monumental. Story_ID: 23253 Speaker 1: The only other thing that is on the same footing is the fact that we established, we established or introduced the law of human performance. That was by, by (unclear) Ann Kelly, as an extension of a law that always existed, that existed way before we did our work, which was known as the power law of human performance. But people taught that the power law of human performance applies only to sports. We are the ones who extended it so that we know understand, it applies to all kinds of human endeavors, including studying, doing research. Hence, this has been the bedrock science that led to the design of all the things we did in the Timbuktu Academy and the fact that we literally took hit and hitting and missing out of teaching mentoring and learning to put it on a vigorous scientific basis. Now, that places second to nothing because for the future, it is just phenomenal. Oh, one reason for this is very simple in my mind because in some communities, when you go and talk to some individuals in some, or they will tell you creating new knowledge of frontier research for chair different, chair that. I have a simple argument. I have not seen yet an excellent and highly productive researcher who has not been benefited immensely from the teaching and the mentoring of others. I haven't seen one. What am I trying to say? What I'm trying to say is, it is about time that we woke up and understand that while creating new knowledge is absolutely critical, it cannot be more critical than the training of the next generation of intellectuals or scientists, period, because if you think it is, well, then we are in trouble. And, unfortunately, this is not understood by many people or some people at least or in some quarter. And it is serious. And when I, even become, how do I call it? My tone becomes somewhat acerbic when I begin to talk about this because we are talking about the future of a country, the future of a community, the future of a nation, if we don't get this point. Speaker 2: Yes, we hear stories from people who train in the sciences especially, of going to one institution where they're basically on their own-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --whether they fail or succeed, nobody really cares. Speaker 1: Yep. Speaker 2: And then there're other institutions where they're mentored and, you know, and, fortunately, most of these are the black colleges. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: So, though it happens in other places too. There are lots of them. Speaker 1: Oh, I know, I know. But they, the bottom line is, even, the bottom line, if you go and check, there is no one out there who has not benefited from good teaching, good mentoring, good support because mentoring is sort of--for instance, I was telling at a conference to some people, I said, okay, imagine, here is someone who has access to the large hydro collider. He was there participating in an experiment. Do you think he just woke up, where everybody can wake up one morning and be in that group? No. A lot of things happened to be there. Now, we are the ones who does not have any opportunities to be there. It doesn't mean that one doesn't have the capabilities, certainly not. Similarly, if I don't have access to the images from the "x" or "y" satellite which is doing astronomical measurement, don't expect me to make the kind of astronomical discovery. The one who have access to those pieces of information will do. Come on. So, some components has to do, and all of that also has to do with allowing the access, giving the enabling things that allows somebody to develop someone's capability. Yes. Story_ID: 23254 Speaker 1: Now, when you look back on your life, again, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could go back and change it? Speaker 2: That is a good question. It is indeed. And my personality predisposed me not to find any (laughter) because even if there were one, somehow I'm focused now on doing better, whatever it is I will get in the future to do, as opposed to bemoaning of what I may have done, which I can't change anyway. So, no there is not really (unclear) measure out there I would change. No, not that I can see. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That does not mean all the things I did were the right one or the best possible one on the planet, but in my perception and my view, no. I remember the only decision that, one key decision I made all on my own had to do, after high school when professors in philosophy were coming to my family, the one in language, French, were coming and everybody was coming, telling my parents that I need to major in the discipline in college. And my, to, my grandfather, and he concerning my, they all said, hey, guess what? He's the one who's going to do the studying. He's the only one who's going to do the studying. They are the ones telling me this. So, but (unclear) to everybody. But they are telling me, you're the one who will decide. You tell us what it is. You go and do it. And then I had to really, for one whole week, I almost went into isolation to work out what discipline to take. This, so I arrived at that conclusion of physics, very logically. In fact, I even wrote it in one of those documents because I figured, when I do physics, I can't escape mathematics. I will still be doing mathematics. I love--which I love. And at the highly-advanced level, physics gives me access to the most sophisticated aspects of chemistry because quantum chemistry is nothing else but advanced physics, period. And when it comes to literature and so forth, well, these things don't prevent me from learning to read and write for (unclear) philosophy and whatever. So that's how I ended out physics, as opposed to taking strictly chemistry or taking strictly mathematics. And I, if you ask my opinion, that was the best possible decision I could make. Story_ID: 23255 Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: My concerns are numerous actually, but I won't engage in a long listing of things. Socio-economic status has some, socio-economic status has some serious betting on enabling or not enabling somebody, no if's, and's and but's about it. And this is something ignored by some well-to-do and either by desire or by ignorance or by some policymaker or whatever, who in their limited thinking, don't quite see it yet, that this country is a boat which is competing with China, which is another boat and that in this boat, all the ethnic groups in this country are in together, whether they like it or not. All the genders are in together, all the religious groups are in together, whether they like it or not. This is my view. So, if one day we were to succeed in understanding these things, I am of the opinion that we will, perhaps, begin to deal with the huge limitations that come and that affect the African American community, and all the low socio-economic community including white low, socio-economic communities in terms of preparing for the future because my eyes are always on the educational component in that business. That's partially what is in the back of my mind when I'm talking about all of these items because that's the key element, the key factor, the key weapon in this global competition. Everyone seems to be agreeing on that. So otherwise, the potentials are huge. And thanks to the law of human performance, now we know that basically any child you can see, unless that child is suffering a severe physiological or mental impairment, that child can go and earn the Nobel Prize in physics. The only question is, if the child is getting the appropriate first-grade reading, second-grade exposure, this grade level, etc., enough time to do this, they're being exposed to homework, developing study habits and so, and being given the appropriate encouragement, the appropriate atmosphere, and the context and avoiding other circumstances that may get them harm, bring them harm or other things. That, that's it. So this is my, I, therefore, put it in two things, the limitations that are there, which concern me and which can--some, one way or the other, are always tied to socio-economic status, and then the immense possibilities that are there. So the way we tried to do the Academy is just go for those opportunities. And that, my attitude will be for the whole country actually, and the whole community to begin to seek things in that fashion. And this will be relevant now, (laughter) now, and a hundred years from now, it's going to relevant, whether the powers that be understands it or not, is immaterial. So. Story_ID: 23256 Speaker 1: Let me ask you about your family. Now, do you have children too? I know you-- Speaker 2: Three. Speaker 1: Okay, well tell us about your children and family? Speaker 2: The first one is Namory Djigui. The first name is the grandfather, I mean the--I call him grandfather, the, the patriot in the family where I grew up and went to school. Speaker 1: Keita's Speaker 2: Yeah, Namory. That's the name of the patriarch. Djigui is the name of my father [Djigui Bagayoko]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So he's now an orthopedic surgeon. Then he's an undergraduate at Florida A and M University. He's a, medical doctor [sic?] at Johns Hopkins [University] and he's finishing his residency in orthopedic surgery at the University of Virginia, at Charlottesville. The second, a girl, Kelley Elizabeth, and she went undergraduate at Tulane University [New Orleans, Louisiana], and law school at Tulane University. She's now an attorney in New Orleans, trying to establish herself. The third, a boy, William Cherif. He is in Wisconsin, Madison, where he's working for, I believe the biggest journal, newspaper in the state as a web something, master. He's a computer scientist, earned his computer science degree from the University of Wisconsin, Madison, and he's also playing semi-pro soccer. And that's it. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: They are all doing well. They are all, all left. They are, and we are happy (laughter), we are happy they left. And, of course, as I told you earlier, when they were very young, of course, I told them, well, it is known, you are all going to college, that much--that's not what the issue is here. Oh, sure, we are going to do, excel very, marvelously well in school. And that's not an issue. Oh, no, I'm not debating that. I'm not worried about that, to the point where my younger, the girl surprised me one day when she went to North Louisiana to visit her maternal grandmother. There were some people that were--well, she has a relatively big head, who said, oh, you've got a big head. You must be very smart. She said, well, I have to, I'm a Bagayoko. I said, oh, my goodness. I did not know I did this well (laughter). But anyway, that's the story about (laughter) my children. Story_ID: 23257 Speaker 1: All right, now, I'd be remiss if I didn't mention something about current affairs. As we sit here today, in 2012, August the 18th, some of the historical sites in Timbuktu [Mali], in Gao [Mali] and Jenne [Mali] in Mali are being attacked by Islamic fundamentalist who are armed with, I think, with weapons left over from the Gaddafi regime, I guess. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And some of the shrines of the scholarly saints-- Speaker 2: Are being destroyed. Speaker 1: Yeah, Sidi Yaha, Ahmed Baba, I know. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: What are your thoughts on this state of affairs? Speaker 2: Well, to say that it is a deplorable condition is simply because I don't have any stronger words, how to express it. But another way of putting is that, particularly, the destruction of these treasures is particularly painful in the sense that they represent a lot more than art and simply art and culture. They represent a particular contribution of this particular part of Africa to the intellectual and culture (unclear) of the world. That's the way I see it. And therefore, it is very tragic. However, given that it seems that the discord in the capital city is more or less resolved now, my hope is that this senseless destruction along with the senseless crimes they are committing, by the way, because the same rebels who also includes some drug trafficking and some other, whatever some might claim are the name of a religion or right, but generally have other qualifications--other motives for this kind of behavior. The point that I'm making, will, hopefully stop them and soon, thanks to not only the calm being finally established in the capital, but particularly with the help we are beginning to get from the region and the rest of the world because as you noted, the weaponry that any of these people have is not much out of all in any way by what the Malian army had. Oh, Malian army actually didn't have any of it to phase them. That was part of the, the pitiful situation, and, and allowed these people to do all the things they did. So, but hope is in the horizon. That's the way I'm looking at it. Story_ID: 23258 Speaker 1: Okay, sir, could you, before we end this interview, describe the, just kind of go back over the significance of the BZW [Bagayoko, Zhao and William] Method? Speaker 2: Well, the significance of the method resides in the following facts. Nowadays, we do theoretical calculations using the fundamental theory known as density functional theory, which was discovered by Hohenburg and Kohn and then Kohn and some work to develop it and make it usable. Then Professor Walter Kohn won the Nobel Prize in chemistry in 1998 for the discovery, and his contribution to this theory. Well, guess what? Without the BZW Method, or its extension, enhanced version, the BZW-EF [Bagayoko, Zhao, and William- Ekuma and Franklin], one can only describe medals with the theory almost flawlessly. For atoms, molecules, nano structures, semiconductors and insulators, one must necessarily utilize the BZW or BZW-EF Method to get the accurate result from first principle. By first principle, I mean, you are not putting in by hand, but using the theory as it is to get the result. And that's why I indicated earlier that we have actually used it to predict, we're the only one of whom I know, who have predicted and published electronic properties of materials. And two years later, the Bend, the energy got, with calculator, the Bend gap with calculator were confirmed. Other properties, we (unclear) clear were confirm. We did that, not once, twice, and the third one is in the literature, waiting for the confirmation. And, of course, all the other semiconductors we studied, we obtained the bend gap correctly. These bend gaps are nothing else but the separation between the energy level where there are electrons and the levels where there are no electrons. This is the in-between part, we call the Bend gap. So this, it is the critical figure. If you don't have it correctly, you cannot get optical properties correctly. You cannot get, transfer properties, correctly, and a lot of other properties cannot be obtained correctly. That's why the BZW Method is, as far as I'm concerned, of extreme importance. And as the years go by, in fact, it's importance will be known more and more because as we said, there are aspects of it that can even be applied to the nuclear density functional theory. And with that, one may even be able, on a desktop computer, to study nuclei theoretically and be able to see if there are nuclei which can have population inversion and give you a gamma, possibly a gamma ray laser which we'll call gamma, we'll call a GRASER gamma ray amplification by stimulated emission of radiation. The same way the laser is light amplification, by stimulated emission of radiation, well, we are naming the GRASER as one of those things one can look for theoretically using our method which is not possible in any other way I know. Yes. Story_ID: 23259 Speaker 1: Okay, now, is there anything that I haven't asked you about that we need to discuss before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: Well, not that you didn't ask about, but maybe the questions were geared to getting me to elicit the things about me. As a result, I maybe didn't talk much about some other individuals who have made a contribution in so many different ways into the Timbuktu Academy and over the years and to the Louis Stokes Louisiana Alliance for Minority Participation, to the Louisiana Space Consortium to all those efforts, some, because of some I which I have gotten so much recognition. I just want to note that I wasn't the only one, lone ranger out there-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --accomplishing. I mean it turns out like research or like anything else, we do these things in teams. And I just want that to, to note that point. But that's not something, because you left you left anything out. It just comes with the nature of the film because the focus, given that I'm the focus, and I tried not to stray too much, but Kelley, for instance, Dr. Ella Lee Kelley, is the cofounder of the Academy. And she happens to be my wife, but hey, she's the one who planted the idea in my mind to begin with, and Dr. Raza Mishum (ph.) who is no longer at Southern, was also, even though he was not a cofounder of the Academy, but he was the core investigator when we first went to ONR [Office of Naval Research] to expand to engineering, and I named Dr. Robert Fore who was at the beginning of the LS [Louisiana State University] lab and so on and so forth. Yes. Story_ID: 23260 Speaker 1: The last question, similar to legacy, but a little bit different-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --sir, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: As someone who certainly tried his darn best to make positive contributions to society in the intellectual arena, in teaching and in mentoring and as a scientist, I would even say that the reason I speak in that fashion is that my more than 160 publications could serve as a backup of my assertion or my claim of having contributed in the intellectual arena. And 60 of those publications, by the way, are on teaching and mentoring and learning. Hence, while the other hundred are on theoretical physics, therefore, there is the other side. And the thousands of pre-college students who have blossomed through the summer program of the Timbuktu Academy, the undergraduate students who have been shining like the rising sun and are still doing it, and who went to get PhDs all over the country. One just finished from Cal-Tech [California Institute of Technology] in theoretical astro-particle physics. One is about to finish at University of Chicago [Illinois] in Physics. They went everywhere, from, you name it, so many universities, I can't begin to name them, although I've been here for quite a while. So those are the basis for this, and the reasons also, I was preaching earlier that I have two firm, I just firmly believe in the necessity for all of us to pay significant attention to education. We, in my understanding until teaching, mentoring and learning. Story_ID: 23261 Speaker 1: This one is the president advisors for science and technology is under, on my left, and the director of the National Science Foundation is on my right, and what--the certificate I have in my hand, is the U.S. Presidential Award Certificate for the one I got in, received in 1996. Speaker 2: Okay, that's '96' [1996]. Speaker 1: Yes, 1996. Speaker 2: Okay, and give the name too when you say, yourself. Speaker 1: And here I am standing in front of the Pyramids in Gesar in Cairo, Egypt. Speaker 2: About what year? Speaker 1: This was in 2003. Speaker 2: Okay. This one has a caption. Some of these do have a caption. Speaker 1: Yeah. These are student participants in the Timbuktu Academy program. As you can see, we have the Timbuktu Academy teachers, most of them, the few who were not aware, didn't bring the teacher. Now, the upper row pictures shows, for instance, a typical quiz bowl where we have these students focus and intently on something other than having fun or jumping or getting trouble. But this is at the quiz bowl. Speaker 2: Now, on the right, you have two student participants, as you can tell by their smile that these students are certainly happy. So, and we try to not only get them to do the studying but also do that, why we let them know that there is life beyond studying. As a matter of fact, the studying is to make the life better. So. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And this Mr. Pauly Stewart, the star student. We recruited him, he joined the Academy as an undergraduate student in, at the age of 14. But before that, he spent three summers participating in our summer program. His parents home schooled him, but at the beginning of the ninth grade level, the parents realized that they had reached more or less the limit. That's when they came to the Academy and told us to help and from that point on, we took over in terms of, not only training him well in the other areas, but also allowing him to have the social interaction he was missing with home schooling. So it worked out beautifully. He's doing very well, and will graduate this semester. Yes. Speaker 1: Here we have U.S. Neville Academy dinner in November 2005, and the same down because as I said, the department of the Navy, Office of Neville Research has been a key funding source of the Academy for 10 years in a row. Speaker 2: Here, this is, I'm holding the certificate or plaque for the Benjamin Banneker Legacy Award and the honorable Dr. Bill Cosby is the one who presented that to me. And-- Speaker 1: (Unclear) at the bottom. Speaker 2: Yeah, the bottom one is the opening ceremony of one of the programs, the Exxon Mobile (unclear) summer science (unclear) by the Timbuktu Academy, and the other on was simply the display in front of them with the various prizes the students have won in the national quiz bowls. They are made legendary. Speaker 1: Now, the picture below shows me with Dr. Zelda Gilds Sheppard, who is the first student of mine who was a student grand marshal at Southern, meaning the top of the entire graduation class. She earned her PhD in physics from Georgia Tech, and is doing very well at Lockheed Martin. Speaker 2: And here we have a participant of the 2008, participant in the summer science institute for mid school at work. And up we have the middle school students and down we have the high school students, SSIM, the "M" means middle school, summer science institute. Challenge is also the same as the summer science institute. The down one is for high school students. Challenge and SSI are for high school. Speaker 1: Ms. Casey Stevens is one of those top scholars of the Academy who is, was also a student grand marshal. We more than 11 or 12 grand marshals now. The last one was this past graduation ceremony. Speaker 2: And I am here, when I called myself relatively young, when I had just arrived at LSU in the, '78' [1978], '78' [1978], '79' [1979]. Speaker 1: Yeah, this is a more or less close up picture of me doing during that same time, more or less. Speaker 2: And here, this is the American Association for Advancement of Science Lifetime Mentor Award ceremony, me in the middle and officials on both sides. Speaker 1: And this is the photo of me in the publication which is called the "Black Coalition" that has a special article on the Academy, and I love their title. I didn't give them that. But, of course, "The Timbuktu Academy, the Genius Factory of Southern University". I said, I really love that title. Speaker 2: Do you know Colabo Yasalam that used to in the military over there (unclear)-- Speaker 1: (Laughter) Uh-huh, yes. Now, this is a collage of a variety of pictures and we have the [dropped mic]-- so I was saying, this is a collage. On upper left corner we have the Timbuktu Academy logo shown at a recruitment at a middle-school, Prescott Middle school. Below, we see me in, more or less with the background with students participating and parents participating in an opening ceremony. In the middle you have the typical kind of picture we take with program participants and the teachers at the Timbuktu Academy. I'm sitting in front of that group. And on the right, you have the picture from the U.S. President Award Ceremony for the Timbuktu, I won--the Timbuktu Academy as a program received it. Dr. Robert Falls, to whom I refer to is the one with the certificate in his hand. And one, and our program officer is the lady standing next to him, and I'm next to her. And, of course, below that, that is some students at work. In the center, you have the logo of the Timbuktu Academy. Matter, Energy in Space Time with Phenomenal Interaction, which shows the physics, more or less origin of (laughter), at least the physics affiliation of the (laughter) of the director (laughter). What can I say? Speaker 2: Now, yeah, this is the family, about 26 years or so ago, 25, 26 years ago with, yeah, my wife in the center, holding the youngest one, William and we have the oldest boy in suit, Namory Djigui, and the youngest, the girl in the, in my hand, Kelley Elizabeth, yes, who is now a lawyer. Speaker 1: And what is your wife's name? Speaker 2: She is here, she's Ella Kelley. She is here, she's now, in fact, in this office, right in that, downstairs as the Assistant Provost...