 Story_ID: 156645 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer for The History Makers, our videographer is Matthew Hickey, observing is Debra Latham [ph.]. Sir, can you give us your full name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: Tyrone Brown, I'm the only one of seven children without a middle name. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have any nicknames? Speaker 2: T-Y-R-O-N-E,-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --B-R-O-W-N. Speaker 1: All right. I'm sorry stepped on you-- Speaker 2: No problem. Speaker 1: --when you were spelling but do you have any nicknames, any favorite-- Speaker 2: Ty [ph.]. Speaker 1: Ty, okay. And what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: November 5, 1942, Norfolk, Virginia. Speaker 1: Okay. And, sir, what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm a, a law, attorney, lawyer. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's my, my, profession. But I'm-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --pretty much retired now. Speaker 1: Can you (unclear) like a specialty that you-- Speaker 2: Telecommunications and the media. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. And what is today's date? Speaker 2: It must be March 6, 2012. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're at my apartment in Washington, D.C., 2727 29th Street Northwest, Washington, D.C. Story_ID: 156646 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we always ask as a warmup. And the first one, they only require a short answer, but the first one is do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: (Laughter) I probably can't eat my favorite food. My wife would say my favorite food is ice cream, ice cream and chocolate would probably top the list. Although, the thing that I have every day is orange juice without fail. Speaker 1: Okay. And do, do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Probably blue. Speaker 1: Okay. Favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: We live in Washington [D.C.] and in Miami Beach [Florida] now, spring in Washington, winter on Miami Beach. Speaker 1: Okay. Sounds good to me (laughter). Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: Do you-- Speaker 2: Washington is beautiful in the spring. Speaker 1: Now, do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: For many, many years it was Bermuda, maybe second would be Paris [France]. Speaker 1: Okay. And the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Yeah. People would say that my favorite phrases are "Wow" and "Gosh" (laughter). Story_ID: 156647 Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side and but I'm gonna keep 'em separate so we can keep 'em, you know. So can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: Julia, J-U-L-I-A, Antoinette [ph.], and her maiden name was Goodman [ph.]. Speaker 1: Goodman, okay. And what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: She was born April 26, 1923. I'm wrong about the 26th but I'm not sure, it is, I'm not sure about the, the date in April. Speaker 1: But that's close? Speaker 2: But that's close. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: All right. And where was she born? Speaker 2: She was born in, I wanna say Franklin, Virginia. I know she was born in that area. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But I'm not sure. Let's see my father [Madison Brown] was born in Isle of Wight County [Virginia]. My mother [Julia Antoinette Goodman] was born, I think in Franklin County [Virginia]. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what do you know about the ancestors on your mother's side? How, how far back can you trace them? Speaker 2: I really don't know much on my mother's side. Her father was Henry Goodman [ph.]. Speaker 1: That's your grandfather? Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. I never knew my grandmother because she, on that side, because she died when I was very young. Speaker 1: Now, was Henry Goodman from that same area? Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: Franklin area? Speaker 2: Yep, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. And as far as you know, is that family, does it, does it family have any, a history of being in some other place or is it-- Speaker 2: No, they were in, they came out of slavery in that area. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: Ha, out of slavery in that area, you know, the area was the area where the big slave uprising took place in the 1830s-- Speaker 1: The Nat Turner revolt [1831]? Speaker 2: Nat Turner, yes, right in that area. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yep Speaker 1: This is near Southampton County of Virginia? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: My mother was born in Southampton County [Virginia]. Speaker 1: Southampton County. Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Speaker 2: And my father was Isle of Wight County. They're right next to each other there-- Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: --in the Tidewater [Virginia] area. My mother's mother's name I don't recall. No, I don't recall my mother's mother's name and I never knew her. Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: No. Story_ID: 156648 Speaker 1: Well, are there any stories about what they did in those, in, in that area? Speaker 2: I, I, my mother [Julia Goodman Brown] used to say that my, my grandmother, I was kind of a chunky little baby and she called me her Fat Rone [ph.]. But she would have died when I was maybe six or seven months old 'cause I know she died when she was maybe forty-eight years old, something like that. And my grandfather [Henry Goodman], my mother's father, had a small farm in the Tidewater [Virginia] area outside of Norfolk, Newport News, Franklin, Virginia area. But I really don't know much about that, that side of the family. I remember years later when we lived in the Orange Valley in Orange, New Jersey, when my parents took us out of the South and moved us North, we first lived in the Orange Valley [New Jersey] with a cousin. And I can remember the picture of this little old white lady sitting on the front porch of that house. And I asked my mother many years later, Mom I remember this little old white lady sitting on the porch at Cousin Elmer's [ph.] house. And she said, yeah that was my mother's sister, so. Wait a minute, was she her mother's sister? No, she was her grandmother's sister. Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: Yeah, she was her grandmother's sister. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Beyond that, I really don't know. Speaker 1: Okay. So that-- Speaker 2: I have, I have pictures of her somewhere here maybe I can mind the pictures. Speaker 1: It indicates on some level--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: I have a couple of pictures. Speaker 1: --there were some white people in the family maybe (unclear). Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: On both sides, on both sides. On my father's [Madison Brown] side we were closely related to [HM] Eartha Kitt. And I can remember, I then, and you can see some of that, and we could see some of that in my father and especially in his sisters. And I know because there's been research done on, on his side of the family. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, I wanna get to him in a minute. Speaker 2: Okay. All right. Speaker 1: Trying to keep-- Speaker 2: All right. I'm sorry. Speaker 1: --separated but-- Speaker 2: But, yes on both sides. Speaker 1: Okay. But in, in, on your mother's side of the family-- Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: --are there any stories about Southampton [County, Virginia], slave insurrection or, or-- Speaker 2: No, I've never-- Speaker 1: --any-- Speaker 2: --I never, I never heard anything-- Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: --about that. Speaker 1: It was discovered later on that Southampton County was the place? Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly. Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean, I, I discovered it in my reading-- Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: --when I read the, the Nat Turner book, the book on the, who let's see, I'm trying to remember if there's anything else that I recall particularly on my mother's side, nope. Speaker 1: Are there any particular-- Speaker 2: She didn't do a lot of talking about their past on either side. Speaker 1: I take it they're mostly farmers, you know, the families. Speaker 2: They were, they were-- Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: --poor farmers, yeah. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: I don't think they were sharecroppers but they were poor farmers, my-- Speaker 1: So they, they owned their own-- Speaker 2: Yep, yeah, I believe so. Story_ID: 156649 Speaker 1: Okay, were there any particular talents that anybody displayed or positions that they held that you remember? Speaker 2: No. On my mother's [Julia Goodman Brown] side, the only thing I recall is that my, my mother's older sisters were cofounders of a church. Speaker 1: Well-- Speaker 2: This happens in New Jersey. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In, in Orange, New Jersey. St. Matthew's A.M.E. Church, which was the church where I was baptized. Speaker 1: Now, that's significant. Speaker 2: And that's the church where the whole, you know, basically the family, all of us kids grew up in that church. And her older sisters had preceded her to New Jersey. One of them settled in Orange [New Jersey] and one of them settled in Newark [New Jersey]. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, now what did your mother say or did she talk about growing up in Franklin [New Jersey] or Southampton County [New Jersey]? Speaker 2: Not really, not really. Speaker 1: Did she talk about what life was like in terms of-- Speaker 2: No, she really didn't. Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: Not, not with me anyway. Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: I think my mother was very, very forward looking, she didn't do a whole lot of looking back. Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: In one sense but then in another sense she did because as you might imagine being poor in New Jersey in the late 1940s without veteran's benefits 'cause my father [Madison Brown] didn't go to war, he had a heart murmur, and uneducated and with seven children, was a difficult life. And especially with the seven children, part of it because finding some place that, where we could live was always difficult, nobody wanted that many children on their property. So it was always very difficult for them. And my mother pined to go back home. I can remember, you know, hearing her, "I wanna go back home, I wanna go back home." And we finally did actually when I was eleven or twelve years old, we went back for one year and my oldest brother ran away, none of us liked it and so they had to turn around and bring us back to New Jersey. Speaker 1: I wanna get to that--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: But that was, that was in-- Speaker 1: --too but-- Speaker 2: --that was in-- Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: --early to mid '50s [1950s], early '50s [1950s]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Well, I'm trying to-- Speaker 2: I know you're trying to do the beginning. Speaker 1: Yeah, what was your mother's upbringing like and what did, you know, did she go to school and had a chance to go to school? Speaker 2: Well, she did. I mean she went to school until she had, she spent two years at a boarding school and then she became pregnant and, and she and my father were married. Speaker 1: Okay. So-- Speaker 2: So-- Speaker 1: --is this like a boarding high school or-- Speaker 2: Yeah, it was a boarding high school. Speaker 1: Okay. In, in, in Virginia? Speaker 2: In Franklin, Virginia. Speaker 1: Right. Is there a, do, do you remember the name of it? Speaker 2: No. But there couldn't have been more one or two for, for the black--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --for black kids. Speaker 1: There's Bluestone [ph.] or something I keep hearing about? Speaker 2: I, I, I don't know. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I don't know but I know she, yeah. And my mom was smart, you know. I mean she was kind of bookish smart. Speaker 1: And what was her, did she ever share with you an aspiration that she maybe didn't get a chance to fulfill when she was-- Speaker 2: No, not really. I think she, what she did was she transferred all of her aspirations to her children. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And she was, she was determined (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She was determined that her children were gonna have the opportunities that she, you know, that she didn't have. Speaker 1: Did you think that she wanted to go to college or something (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Probably, probably, yeah. Story_ID: 156650 Speaker 1: An interesting thing, I always, I always wondered how this happened. It seemed to me that she named her children after movie stars. I'm Tyrone, my oldest brother is Madison [ph.], and my sister is Caroline [ph.], one brother is Curtis [ph.], another one is Cecil [ph.], another one was Arthur [ph.], another one was Wayne [ph.]. And it seemed to me like she picked the name, but I don't know that. Speaker 2: So you would be-- Speaker 1: I never asked her. Speaker 2: --then Tyrone Power? Speaker 1: Tyrone Power, right. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: I never asked her how she came up with those names but it, it seemed to me, although the Madison, well the, that's my father's [Madison Brown] side of the family, the Madison came from an Irishman, so, yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. (Unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 1: Now, when I got to, when I, Tyrone is a very common name now but when I was a youngster nobody was named Tyrone except Tyrone Power. Never heard, until I got the, until I got to law school, I never heard the name Tyrone other than for me or Tyrone Power. And then in law school I, there was an article in the New York Times that mentioned a black guy about my age and his name was Tyrone, and people sent me the article that's how I knew about him. But when I got to law school one of my professors said, "Do you know where the name Tyrone comes from?" I said, "Yeah, Tyrone Power." He said, "No it doesn't come from Tyrone Power; it comes from County Tyrone in Ireland," so. Story_ID: 156651 Speaker 1: Let me ask about your father's side. Can, can-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Yeah, my father's name is Madison, was Madison Doles Brown. Speaker 1: D-O-L-E-S? Speaker 2: D-O-L-E-S. And he was born in Isle of Wight County [Virginia] which is down there in the Tidewater [Virginia] also. Speaker 1: This is Isle of Wight, W-I-G-H-T? Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Now, and what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Woe, June-- Speaker 1: Well, his date of birth rather. Speaker 2: --June-- Speaker 1: June. Speaker 2: --19, either 1917 or 1918. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Now, I wanna say something like June 26, 1917 or 1918. Speaker 1: Okay. So you were, your father's name is, first name was Elgin [ph.], right? Speaker 2: No, Madison. Speaker 1: Madison. Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: M-A-D-I-S-O-N. Speaker 1: Okay. Madison Brown. (Simultaneous) Speaker 2: Doles Brown. Speaker 1: Okay. How far-- Speaker 2: His father was named Roger Brown [ph.]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: His mother was a Doles, D-O-L-E-S. Speaker 1: And what was her first name? Speaker 2: I, I think of, they called her Dolesy [ph.] I think. But again she, she, she died long before I was born. So that in both cases what you have with my, my father [Madison Doles Brown] and my mother [Julia Goodman Brown] is two fathers, my grandfathers [Henry Goodman and Roger Brown], who finished raising their families after their wives died. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: And I think my father was just nine when his mother died, something like that. Speaker 1: Now, they're both from, you know, Southampton County [Virginia] or in that area? Speaker 2: That area, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 156652 Speaker 1: --Okay. Speaker 2: Now, my, my grandfather [Roger Brown] on my father's [Madison Doles Brown] side, I know he owned a farm and he owned quite a bit of land in that area, his family did. And I think that over the years he basically just abandoned it, it. Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: He wasn't irresponsible he just didn't, you know, during the, the [Great] Depression he couldn't farm it and so the family I think lost the, the land to taxes. Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: Over, gradually over a period of time. But I remember, I remember two things about the house where he lived because we lived with him when I was a very young child. Speaker 1: This is Roger Brown? Speaker 2: Roger Brown. We lived in his house. One, I can remember one of my brothers being born. I'm gonna guess it was Bernard and I would have been less than three when he was born, maybe yeah, I think I was less than three when he was born. And I remember him peeing on me (laughter). As I was looking at the beautiful new baby. I remember that, and that happened in my grandfather's house. My grandfather's house was in Courtland, Virginia. Courtland is to this day, a kind of a country maybe a, a county seat, I'm not sure about that outside of Norfolk, Virginia. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I drove out there with my mother [Julia Goodman Brown] about ten years ago, it was the last time she went back there. And I'd remember my grandfather's house. It was weathered, it was unpainted. It seems to me it was all on one floor, right on the side of the highway coming out of Norfolk [Virginia] or Portsmouth [Virginia]. The second thing I remember about that house is that after we had moved to New Jersey when my brother Curtis was being born, we spent the summer in that house with my grandfather and his last child had just, my Aunt Lydia [ph.] had just graduated from high school, and we spent that summer running around barefoot in the little farms. And when I went back there with my mother like ten years ago, I could remember, I knew where everything was 'cause I could remember it from that summer. I said there's a railroad back there and there was, you know, that kind of thing, yeah. There was in that, in that little town, Courtland, Virginia, there was the, the city area and then there was the black area off outside the city and little farms around and some big farms. And I think maybe the most important black person in the area was Cooper Smith [ph.]. He owned the little general store. And he had a son, and that summer his son kept us in trouble, you know, running around stealing, picking people's fruit and watermelons and stuff like that. We just romped around. I say we, it was me and my oldest, older two brothers. Story_ID: 156653 Speaker 1: And years later I, I was driving down [Interstate] 95 and I saw this sign, it said Courtland [Virginia], you know. And I couldn't believe that this little town actually had a sign on the highway and so I went off the highway and drove to Courtland. And it's sixty or seventy miles from 95 but there's nothing between except, you know, country, and so that was the city and I drove there. And I went to where my grandfather's [Roger Brown] house was, it wasn't there anymore. But I saw there the little general store, closed, rundown, you know. And I knocked on the door and this lady comes out, this old, old, old lady, and she was the lady whose husband had run the general store and then I remembered her from when I was four years old, five years old something like that, Cooper Smith was her name. I can't remember her first name. And so we called my mother [Julia Goodman Brown] from the store and had a conversation. Speaker 2: That's interesting. Now-- Speaker 1: He was the local head barber to 'cause I remember going there to get a haircut. So he was kind of the, it was the little general store for the little black community outside of Courtland. Story_ID: 156654 Speaker 1: Now, did your father [Madison Brown] have a chance to finish school or-- Speaker 2: No, my father, the way I heard it was my father, I don't think my father got to the sixth grade, he was a, he worked on a farm. Speaker 1: Is there a story about how the family acquired land in the first place that you knew about? (Simultaneous) Speaker 2: No, but what the, what, what I heard, I'm trying to remember who told me this, I think my mother [Julia Goodman Brown] told me this that maybe Roger Brown was an only son or something like that but he inherited from his father a sizable amount of land in that area that he did not farm. And he, you know, it basically it, I was gonna use the word escheat basically it went back to the, to the county. Speaker 1: Now-- Speaker 2: But their records on that. Speaker 1: Yeah but, okay. I wonder now, I'm thinking, now did Roger Brown have a lot of children or did he have-- Speaker 2: Yeah, they all had a lot of children. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Roger Brown had, let's see I can go up-- Speaker 1: The reason why I ask 'cause usually your children, your crew, you know, to, to work the land-- Speaker 2: (Unclear) Speaker 1: --you know, that sort of thing. Speaker 2: Yeah, but they all, they all, you know, this is the-- Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: This is the '30s [1930s] and I think that they left because it was, it was, it was poor. I mean, you know, they went, I had two uncles on my father's side who went to California during that period. Then there was my father and two brothers who stayed in the Virginia, in that, in that area until they finally moved to New Jersey. One of them fought in the Korean War, the youngest son. And my two aunts on that side are still alive, Eliza [ph.] in Portsmouth [Virginia], and I can't they think of the name right now of the other one. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But she--oh, Lelia, L-E-L-I-A. She lives in New Jersey. So that's at least, how many does, is that six? I think there were seven children on, on, in that side of the family. And on my mother's side as well there were a lot of children. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They had big families, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. That's not, that's usually-- Speaker 2: Probably-- Speaker 1: --the case. (Unclear)--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --childbearing is what killed the-- Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: --the mothers young-- Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: --you know. They had a lot of children. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, so your father went to about the sixth grade you said and-- Speaker 2: Yeah. I'm, I'm guessing there. Speaker 1: And then he started to work? (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: But he could get along. But he could read and write, you know. And yeah, then he went to work on the farm. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 156655 Speaker 1: Now, is there a story about how your parents [Julia Goodman Brown and Madison Brown] met or how they fell in love? Speaker 2: Well the, I came away with the impression that my mom, who was then a boarding student in Franklin, Virginia 'cause it was a, it was a boarding school, and my dad who was a farm boy in the area, my father was six years older than my mother, and my, I, I can remember my, my, my mother saying, "He thought, he thought I was too young for him. He thought I was," 'cause she was only sixteen, "he thought I was too young for him." That's, that's, I can remember that but my father adored my mother, spoiled the hell out of her (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. So, they, they-- Speaker 2: They, they were, (unclear) they were like, I, it's hard, I can't, I can't, I can't convey, well, I can. Basically what they were, they were children who grew up together. I mean they met when my father was in his early twenties and my mother was fifteen or sixteen but emotionally they were children and they just kind of grew up together. That's only way I can describe it, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. So she was in school and he was-- Speaker 2: Right, yeah. Speaker 1: --working on the farm? Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: So they got together while she was in school? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So she, she had to stop going to school 'cause she was-- Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: --pregnant with-- Speaker 2: With my older brother. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: All right. And this is, this is around what, 19-- Speaker 2: It's 1940. Speaker 1: '40 [1940]. Okay. 1940. Speaker 2: '40 [1940]. I was born in-- Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: --'42 [1942], '39 [1939], maybe '39 [1939]. Speaker 1: Okay. So-- Speaker 2: He's two and a half years older than I am. Speaker 1: All right. So in 1939 or '40 [1940]? Speaker 2: That, '40 [1940]; '40 [1940]. Speaker 1: Okay. '40 [1940]. Speaker 2: 1940. Speaker 1: Now does, when you think about your parents' personalities and their talents and their, their abilities, their habits, their looks even, who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: I would have to say my mother though I've gone through phases when I, I people say I look exactly like my father but I don't, my father is lighter than I am. I think my facial characteristics are more hers than his but I'll see people who I, who knew him and like when I go to a funeral or something and they say, "Gosh you look just like your father," yeah. But in terms of the dominant instructor in the family that would have been my mother and so we all carry a big part of her emotionally and intellectually. My father was more withdrawn, although if you really, really, if you really pushed him too hard he'd let you know. Story_ID: 156656 Speaker 1: Can you tell us about a time when your father [Madison Brown] kind of lost his patience? Speaker 2: I actually can think of two. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The, the, well actually, three that were, one was when I was maybe ten years old I kind of inherited a paper route in Newark, New Jersey from my older brother who had what do they call it, rheumatic fever and he had gone off to a sanitarium so I took over his route, even though I was too young. And one of the, one of the, I'd go through the neighborhood at six o'clock in the morning whistling at the top of my lungs and I, I've got a very powerful whistle, and I'd go and collect money on Friday or Saturday and people would say, boy you really whistle loud in the morning. And I would feel so proud and I look back on it and what they were saying is, "We wish you'd shut up so we can sleep." But at one of the places that I went to, to deliver the papers, I'll never forget it, they lived above a grocery store, and I would open the door and throw the paper up and the reason I would up to the second floor where these people lived, and the reason why I did that was because they had this big German shepherd dog who would, who would bark, bark, bark and come running down the steps every morning. Well, one morning I opened the door and the damn dog was there waiting for me. And he lunged at me and I grabbed his hair on both sides of his body and I (making sounds) and he was (making sounds) and backed me two blocks down the street, one block one way and one block down to my house. And I got to the house holding, still holding on to this damn dog who was going, he was furious with me 'cause every morning I was throwing this paper, paper up, you know. And I banged on the door, "Dad, Dad, Dad, Dad, Dad," my father opened the door, the dog, and I let go of the dog and ran inside and the dog ripped his pants. He chased that dog, I never, he went after that dog and that dog (making sounds) ran off. So he was a very powerful man. And another one I remember, and to this day I have a problem with, I have a real, a real resentment of people that I could consider to be in the role of bill collectors, to this day and it's so silly. But when I was a youngster, the bill collectors came on Saturday morning, you know, your insurance person came, the rent person came, you know, if you had a, they actually came to your door and collected the money for the week or the month, and they seemed to me to be so humiliating toward my parents, you know, and I just didn't, and to this day, I have resentment even though it's done by telephone I get, you know, if, if, if they're not polite to me I get very angry and I know all of that's coming out of that period of time in my life, you know, and my parents were struggling from week to week and, you know, we went to school like princes and prince, you know, but the fact of the matter is they were poor people who were struggling. And this one day, my mom [Julia Goodman Brown] was sick, she was sick at home in bed but really, really sick, I think she'd had some food poisoning or something. And my father had spent the week's money on medical care for her including the hospital and medicine and stuff like that. She was really sick. And the bill collector comes to the door and my dad said, "I'm sorry I can't pay you this week" and the guy said (making sounds). My father almost killed him. He picked him up in one hand by the neck, and my father was my size, and he, "Don't you ever talk to me that way" and (making sounds) and the guy went off. I mean this is like in, in the entire time that I knew my father, he had only lost his temper, that I'm aware of, three times and those were two of 'em. Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: He just, he went bananas over this guy. That guy and he got of there and, you know, (laughter). The other time, and I'm, and I'm somewhat hesitant to tell this story because it says so much about my family in some ways but I'm not sure what it says. My older brother, Madison, was a all-state football player. He was, he didn't go to college but he was really a very good football player. I was a scrub, you know, my brother, Madison, was bigger and stronger. And when he was about thirteen or fourteen, and he grew fast and was, got strong quick, and I can't remember what the discussion was about but my father asked him to do something and he said, "I ain't gone do that." My father went and got a hammer and he walked up to him and he said you ever say that to me again I will put you in a grave and go to jail for it. My mother stepped between them, you know, and pushed my father and sat him down and looked at my brother and said, "Now you go upstairs and do what your father said do." And my brother went upstairs and never challenged my father again. Then within the hour, the nine of us sat down around the table in the kitchen and had dinner and my father sat there and said, "Thank you Lord for the food we're about to receive, for the nourishment of our bodies amen" and the whole family said amen. That was the third flash of temper that I saw in my father. Twenty years I lived with him those were the three. Story_ID: 156657 Speaker 1: Another story I would tell about my father [Madison Brown] from that period when we were young, when we first lived in our own place in this little Roseville community in New Jersey where [HM] Dionne Warwick went to the same grade school that I did, and then we went to the same high school in East Orange [New Jersey] because people moved out of Newark [New Jersey] and into East Orange because East, if they could, because East Orange had a, a better public school system. We first lived right up against the railroad on Gray Street in this little section in a basement apartment. And now I'm five, six. And as I said my father was a construction worker but people would call him, he didn't go looking for jobs, they would call him and ask him to work on their jobs, I mean it was just a, just amazing. The entire time I was growing up it was that way. And on this particular, and my dad would come home from work on Friday night, he'd take out his paycheck, and he'd drop it on the table, and my mother [Julia Goodman Brown] would take care of the expenses through the week. She didn't give him an allowance (laughter) but, you know. Well, this one, I'll never forget, this one night, I don't think it was a Friday night, but this one night he didn't come home from work, it was a, always was home at 4:30 'cause he worked from 7:30 to 3:30, that kind of thing. And he didn't come home and it got dark and he didn't come home. And it turned out it was a, it was Christmas time and my mom really got worried so she sent my oldest brother out to try to find him, "Where is your father?" You know. And I can remember, I remember this part of it, my older brother came back and he said, "He's outside." And she said, "Well why won't he come in?" He said, "He's outside." So my brother, my, my dad was drunk sitting out on the stoop, you know. It, ashamed to come into the house. And my mother brought him in, I remember, brought him in, bathed him, put him to bed and just talking all the time, just, I mean, talking about (making sounds) I can remember this but they, very loving. And that's the only time, that's the only time I ever saw my father having, having had anything other than a beer maybe once a month. He had gone to a Christmas celebration after work and got drunk and didn't, didn't want his children to see him drunk so he didn't come in the house. It's neither here nor there but-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --one thing leads to another thing. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But that's that kind of people they were. And there were a lot of people like that, you know. That generation that preceded you and me, there were, there were a lot of people, you know, and, and their whole, their whole view of, of what America was about was providing opportunities for their children that they didn't have. Story_ID: 156658 Speaker 1: Yeah. That, that whole series of stories says something-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --about your mother [Julia Goodman Brown] and your father [Madison Brown]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Now, just for the sake, sake, of history, now you were born in Norfolk [Virginia]? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And, and by age three you said, 1945 or so the family moved to New Jersey (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: To New Jersey. Three or four, yeah. Speaker 1: So about 1945, I guess. Speaker 2: Yeah, somewhere around there, right. Speaker 1: Okay. And-- Speaker 2: And I would think right after the war. Speaker 1: And the, your family moved in with one of your mother's cousins? Speaker 2: That's right, Cousin Elmer (ph.), Orange Valley [New Jersey], Christopher Street. Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: I know that because we actually lived there for a short period later. Speaker 1: Right. Now you were describing earlier before we started this interview, the house is a big place they lived in. Speaker 2: It was big ramshackled house right next door to a tavern. The Orange Valley where black people lived was a very poor area. And a lot of those kids, a lot of the boys, including two of my cousins, that lady's children, didn't survive their early twenties. They died violently. It was a, it was a rough, rough, tough area. But Cousin Elmer had a heart of gold, and people who moved out of Virginia, a bunch of 'em lived with her. My, my parentsdid that when, when my grandfather [Roger Brown] on my father's side moved to New Jersey, he lived with us for a while and his youngest son lived with us for a while, and my mother's sister when she moved from Virginia lived with us for a while. So that's, that's, that's what black family, that was part of the migration story of people moving out of the South, they'd move in with relatives for a while and then they'd get their own place. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Now another thing you said to is that your, you think your mother's move, she calculated the moves that your family made. Speaker 2: Except for the one back to the Virginia. That was a, that was an emotional thing. She was just, it was real, it was tough. I know that. Seven kids in, in Newark in the late '40s [1940s], early '50s [1950s]. And see the, a big part of the problem was landlords did not wanna take a family with six children into their houses and so it was very hard for them to, to find places where we could live and, and she always wanted us to have a backyard. And that was hard to do, it was easier to do down in the country, so we eventually moved down there. But yeah, I mean I realize now how calculating she was. She was calculating in moving us into that little Roseville neighborhood [New Jersey], that neighborhood was amazing back then. I can, I can remember, we had a police athletic league team, group that was every Friday night. I, from the time I was six years old I went to the local precinct to play basketball and sports with the police officers who were, who were all white and mostly probably Irish Catholic. But it was, it was there in that little section. We had something called a Pumpkin Parade (ph.) on Halloween and the whole idea was to keep the kids off, off the street in disorganized activity and put them in organized activity. And so the local, through the local school and the local merchants, we built floats and the kids marched all around the neighborhood on, on Halloween and wound up in the local armory, (laughter) where they had, you know, food and drinks and everything for families. I was the scout of the, the year in Newark, New Jersey in maybe 1953 or something like that. And we had a--I mean it was like, it was, what it was, all the things that middle class people had, we had in that little community even though black and white people were pretty poor. Story_ID: 156659 Speaker 1: This was in Roseville [New Jersey] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: And it was, this is the Roseville section. And it bordered on a black community, an Italian community, a Jewish community, and we kind of, we didn't, and there were gangs but in our little community there wasn't. And so we kind of hung together, black and white. Mark Chesner [ph.] his parents owned the local bakery. My father [Madison Brown] worked overtime in that bakery to make some extra money some time. We became very close. My brother is still very close to that family, my oldest brother. They were Jewish. Robert Townes' [ph.] parents owned the local women's dress shop and they were Jewish and he and I were close buddies. Dr. Samuel Berg [ph.], Roseville. The reason why he was important is because, we always worked, okay. And we always, whatever we made was ours. Parents never took, and we made a lot of money as youngsters, my brothers and I. We carried, we did what we called carrying orders. Which is to go to the local A&P [The Great Atlantic & Pacific Tea Company] with your wagon, which you would get for Christmas, and as the ladies finished their orders of there, there'd be these tall bags with food and they'd have three or four of 'em for the week and you'd put it in your wagon and take it off the four or five blocks because nobody had cars, all right. And so that's how they got their food home and so you'd stand in line and wait your turn, you know, and on a Friday night and a Saturday you might make twelve, fourteen dollars. That's a lot of money, man, for a kid who's ten years old or nine years old. And our parents never took any of it. And one day this local doctor, Samuel Berg (ph.), who lived on Roseville Avenue in one of the big houses, Jewish guy, he went up there to the local A and P looking for somebody to help him around his house and to take care of his lawn and do stuff like that and he settled on my brother. And then from that day, that would have been maybe 1952 until maybe 1970, one of the Brown sons learned how to take care of the lawn, paint a house, do repairs, working for Dr. Samuel Berg. I had my turn, my next brother had his turn, right on down the line. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And he owned two, he owned three houses in that area. And so every summer we were painting one of the houses or redoing the floors, we were mowing the lawns, you know, we were just taking care of his properties. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And he, you know, when my oldest brother got to the point that he was playing football and he couldn't do it, he'd say, "Well, Mrs. Brown have you got another son?" And then when, when I went off to college, "Mrs. Brown what about the next one," and that's what they did. That's what we did (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) how many of you all-- Story_ID: 156660 Speaker 1: Is it--I don't think I asked you this question formally, so can you name your, your siblings in, in order? (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: In order, Madison is the oldest. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Arthur [ph.] was, he, he died when he was twenty, Arthur was number two. He had a congenital heart defect and he just never grew very much. He committed suicide when he was twenty-- Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: --when I was in college. Then me, then my sister Carolyn [ph.], right in the middle, spoiled rotten. Although probably today the most responsible member of the family in my judgment. And then my brother Bernard [ph.], and Curtis [ph.], and Wayne [ph.], so there are seven of us. Story_ID: 156661 Speaker 1: Now we always ask this question so, you've covered some of it already-- Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: --but what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Well, as I said the first one was what, was my brother peeing on me. That's the first one I recall. The second one I recall was, and it might actually have preceded that, we lived in a place called Oakleaf Park and my older cousin was taking care of me, Oakleaf Park was in Portsmouth [sic, Norfolk, Virginia], and it was housing that was built for [U.S.] Navy base workers, thrown up like that, during the, like early, like at the beginning of the war, and it was segregated. There was a, there was, there was comparable white housing. And that stuff stuck around for forty years, some of it might still be there in Portsmouth. (Simultaneous) Speaker 1: Now this is before you moved to New Jersey? Speaker 2: This is, yeah before that. This is, this is when I'm-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --we probably moved in there when I was two or three. 'Cause what happened was my father [Madison Brown] told his father [Roger Brown], "I'm not gonna work on this farm anymore" and he just hitchhiked to the [U.S.] Navy base and got a job and then the family moved out there. But the second thing I remember is my, my cousin winding me up in one of these swings, you know, the swings that where the, the bars came down, and she let it go and (making sounds) and somehow knocked out a couple of my teeth, I remember that. The third thing I remember is, I told you about our living in the Orange Valley [New Jersey] and my cousin's house was one of these places that had a set of stone steps and then a set of wooden steps that went up to the house, and I can remember falling all the way down to the ground level and knocking out the rest of my front teeth. I remember that. But most of what I remember, oh, I remember, I'll tell you this story because it's a, it's a part of, of life then. I mentioned to you not, before we started I mentioned to you that for a while we lived with an aunt in Newark [New Jersey] when we left the Orange Valley, I'm now maybe four or five, I'm five probably. And one end of the block were, were tenements where black people lived and the other end of the block were small detached houses where white folks lived. And I had a little friend that I played with and we'd go down, a, a little white boy, we'd go down and play in his front yard, I can remember the front yard. And one day we were playing king of the mountain on his front porch, I can see it like it's yesterday. And I pushed him off and he fell and, and hurt himself and he got up crying and ran in the house. And I really felt bad, and his mother came to the door and she slapped me right across the face and said, "You little black nigger don't you ever come here again." And I had enough, I had enough awareness not to tell my mother because she would have killed the lady or she would have tried to. So, and I never went back there but I remember that. But that was, you know, you were, we were on a border, you know, and there were, there were the frictions that you have on a border. Story_ID: 156662 Speaker 1: But I remember good things too. I can remember, you know, the, I was a star in this little school. Speaker 2: Now what was the name of your school? Speaker 1: It was called Roseville Avenue School [Newark, New Jersey]. Speaker 2: Okay. Roseville-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --Avenue School. And you were--(unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 1: My problem, my problem was that I never met a standardized test that I didn't like, and my kids are the same way. And so I always, I always, always kind of stood out as a result of, you know, scoring off the charts on these, these standardized tests. Speaker 2: Well what were-- Speaker 1: And that was true right up through law school. Speaker 2: Well, why do you suppose that, that's true? You know, there have been studies that indicate that tests can be culturally biased and-- Speaker 1: I don't know. Speaker 2: --you know, that black people don't sometimes get it, so (simultaneous) Speaker 1: The answer is, the answer is I don't know. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I, I remember, I finally figured this out, it took me years to figure it out. I didn't, I couldn't figure it out. I started school late. My mother [Julia Goodman Brown] kept me out of school an extra year and I realize I never talked to her about it but I realize why she did that. I'm eleven month old, younger than my older brother who died who was sickly. And we would have wound up in the same grade, and so she let him get a start in school and then I went to school at six years old. Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: Which was late. But it didn't work because they immediately moved me up a grade. So I was in my brother's class. And then in second grade and fourth grade I skipped a half grade so I wound up, a year ahead of him. But that's why she did it. Speaker 2: Hmm. Speaker 1: I always knew I started the school late and I didn't know why and I finally figured it out. I never asked her about it but I'm sure that's why she did it. Speaker 2: Now, had you-- Speaker 1: She actually kept me out of school an extra year. And the schools didn't, you know, they skipped me. So, but-- Speaker 2: Had you had any home instruction prior to going to school, could, could you read or write or do anything-- Speaker 1: Not that I'm aware of. Speaker 2: --before, okay. Speaker 1: Not that I'm aware of. Speaker 2: So you didn't have kindergarten or anything like that? Speaker 1: I spent like three days in kindergarten, you know, when I went they put me in kindergarten because my brother was a year ahead of me in first grade. And after a week they moved me into his class I remember, I remember that. And then when I was in grade school, starting in fourth grade, this little school, it was a tiny little school, was it, it was in effect a satellite school because the larger grade school in the area, I mean, it had its own little borderline zone. It's what, it's why they called it the Roseville Community but the, the, the principal was also the principal of the larger school, and she spent most of her time, actually it was a he and then a she, most of their time at the larger school. Speaker 2: What was the name of the larger one? Speaker 1: Sussex Avenue [Elementary] School [Newark, New Jersey]. Speaker 2: Sussex Avenue? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Which is probably where Whitney Houston went to grade school because her church was right down the street, I remember that church. So starting in fourth grade, I remember my teacher saying, "Principal wants to see you, Ms. Rosenblatt [ph.]," I said, "Okay." I went down. And she said, "Well here's what we're gonna do. When I'm not here, you're gonna sit in this office and you're gonna take care of things, and if there's any problem you'll call me at Sussex Avenue but you'll be here, and over there is a bookcase and you read anything you want to, ask me any questions you want to." After that I didn't go to class. To this day, I can't long divide properly because I didn't learn long division in grade school. Speaker 2: Hmm. Speaker 1: You know, stuff like that. But I did, after that from fourth to sixth grade I didn't go to class. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I just sat in the principal's office and read and if they needed supplies, the teachers would call me or if they sent somebody to the office to, you know, 'cause they had been bad, they'd come down and I would oversee them and-- Speaker 2: So this is-- Speaker 1: If a parent called, then I would answer the phone. Speaker 2: This wasn't a punishment? Speaker 1: No, oh, no, no I was taking care of, I was the manager of the, the school office, oh, no, no, no. Speaker 2: So they were utilizing your talents to-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Right. Speaker 2: --where they could have an employee (laughter). They should have had an employee. Speaker 1: I guess that's right, yeah, so. I, I, always thought they did it because I was bored in the class and they felt like I was gonna be bored in class. At that point I was reading all the time. At that point I was just reading everything I could get my hands on. So-- Speaker 2: So-- Speaker 1: --and there were, and it wasn't just me, I was the only one who, who actually ran the office but there were three white kids who they also skipped at the same time in the fourth grade so that the three of us skipped together. And if we hadn't left New Jersey I would have skipped again, they were planning to skip me again in the sixth grade but we moved, yeah. Speaker 2: So in-- Speaker 1: And that wasn't an advantage 'cause I wound up in high school barely fourteen, ninth grade, and that's too young to be a ninth grader, you know, so. It had its, its disadvantage but they were just, you know, they were saying, "Well, he can handle it intellectually, we're just gonna keep pushing him ahead." Story_ID: 156663 Speaker 1: Now, now this is a-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --this is an unusual situation, here you are in charge of the off, office when the principal's not there. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And, now did this ever put you in, in the point of conflict with other students when there were disciplinary problems? Speaker 2: I, I had, I had problems with other students that grew out of being precocious and cocky as a result of being precocious, I'm sure. One of them was that I wound up in classes with and in positions with older boys who were two, three years older than me. And they didn't like me being in a position of apparent authority. I remember when I was in the fourth grade, the sixth grade teacher pointing at me and saying you're gonna be the, the head school patrol boy, you know, corner patrol boy. (Unclear) they took it very seriously, you know, you had to walk around and make sure everybody was on their posts and that, and the kids didn't like that at all, those kinds of things. And this, these classes were maybe twenty percent black, twenty-five percent black in this little community. Great teachers, tough disciplinarians. Ugh, these they were German and Jewish, and, and boy were they tough. So I had to kind of fight my way, literally, kind of up the line from time to time but I, as a youngster I was tough. I can remember when for seventh and eighth grade you went to the next school which was Sussex Avenue [Elementary School, Newark, New Jersey], which was the largest school where, where the principal spent most of her time. And this group of four us, kind of skipped into the seventh grade and it, and we were treated as being special. And I can remember one, one boy Steven Franks [ph.], Jewish guy, his parents owned the local delicatessen. And he didn't like me very much and he and I wound up in a fight, and Steven weighed about twice as much as I did and he was very strong. And for the first time I wound up fighting somebody who I really couldn't beat, and we fought after school for three days. And finally the fourth day, he came to school and he had his wrist all bandaged up and so I said, "What happened?" He said, "I broke my hand on your head." So that was the end of the fight. That's how that fight ended. I'll never forget that. Story_ID: 156664 Speaker 1: --But the reason I tell that story is that so I am ten, so maybe ten years later, we're now living in East Orange [New Jersey] but in the section of East Orange that's on the border of the Roseville [Newark, New Jersey] section in Newark [New Jersey], and at Christmas time every year, my mother [Julia Goodman Brown], mother would think of things that she hadn't brought so she'd send me and one of my other brothers down into the old area to buy something that she hadn't gotten for Christmas day and we'd, you know, walk the eight or nine blocks. You walked everywhere. We walked all over that city. We walked down the eight blocks, I'll never forget in front of St. Rose of Lima, which was the church, the Catholic Church where the only crossing guard, the only crossing guard in the community was not at the Roseville Avenue School [Newark, New Jersey], which was a busy intersection, it was in front of the Catholic Church, okay, where, where the church school was. But my brother and I are walking in front of that church and this, years later I thought I dreamed it, and I said to my, the brother who was with me said, I said, "Bernard I keep having this feeling that one of, on one of those trips into Newark at Christmas time four white guys attacked us, you know, I just keep having it," he said, "Yeah. I was in college at the time but I was back home," he said, "Yes that happened, I'll never forget." Well, what happened was this guy Steven Franks from the, the guy I'd had the fight with when I was ten years old, and three other guys with, you know, blue jeans and boots and, you know, their hair all duck billed and all that kind of stuff and black leather jackets came across the street, said, "There are two niggers let's get 'em." And they pulled off, I'll never forget they were pulling off these belts that had bolts-- Speaker 2: The studs? Speaker 1: --studs in them, you know, and wrapping 'em around their wrist. And I said to my brother, Bernard, I said, "The first one that gets close, get him in the nuts. And, and then put your back against mine and we'll go from there." And as they crossed the street this guy looks at me and says, "Are you Tyrone Brown?" I said, "Yes, Steven, I'm Tyrone Brown." It was the guy that I had the fight with in grade school. And then he says to his buddies, "Leave him alone." I'll never forget that as long as I live. He died, you know, in a gang or something like that, you know, in his twenties. Speaker 2: Hmm. Speaker 1: But his parents were well-off, they were fairly wealthy because that, that, that deli that they ran was the big, you know, local grocery deli. But I'll never forget that 'cause I knew, we were getting about, and then my brother said, "I'll never forget it 'cause I peed my pants" (laughter). Story_ID: 156665 Speaker 1: So, were there, when you were in school now, you were in school with well, some of the fellows you were, the, the Warwicks were there, [HM] Dionne Warwick-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and her sister. Do-- Speaker 2: Dee Dee Warwick was in my class the, Dionne Warwick's younger sister. Speaker 1: Hmm Speaker 2: Her name was Delores [sic, Delia]. Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: She was in my class in Newark [New Jersey] at Roseville Avenue School [Newark, New Jersey], in maybe the first grade. And we moved to, my family moved to East Orange [New Jersey], her family moved to East Orange later and she was two years behind me in the high school. Back then it was typical, typical when you moved from Newark to East Orange they would move you back one year. And they hadn't moved me back one year and she got moved back a year and so she wound up a couple years behind me in, in high school. Dionne was a year ahead of me. I think she was a year ahead of me, although I've seen something that said she graduated two years ahead of me but I don't believe that's accurate. I'll never forget I went to Hamilton College [Clinton, New York] in upstate New York and when I was, scholarship all the way, gee I mean just a, just a, a lucky story. But and I went on a math scholarship because I was very good at math. And Hamilton didn't give athletic scholarships it was a tiny little boys finishing school basically is what it was but very, very rigorous. And only 200 students in my class. But I wanted to play football, my high school football team would have killed my college team. And-- Speaker 1: Now what school, this is the story we need to get to when we get you to college or-- Speaker 2: No, no, no-- Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: --this is a, this is a East Orange story. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Okay. Basically it's an East Orange story. And I'm at Hamilton and in order to play football, and I also had to work, I, I helped make breakfast for the freshmen class and I also had to keep my academics up and the only way I could do everything I wanted to do was, I would go to football practice, go to dinner, go to bed, get up at midnight, do my homework, work until six o'clock, and then go to the kitchen commons to help make breakfast for the freshmen. I did that for a whole year. So that when my roommates were sleeping, I was doing my homework, with the radio, the music on 'cause we had separate bedrooms from where we studied. And one night I'm sitting there doing my homework writing in my essay or whatever I'm doing and listening to the radio, and I hear this music and I say, "Jesus Christ, that's sounds like Dionne Warwick." Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: That's sound just like Dionne. And that's how I found out that she had become a star. Speaker 1: That's a good story. Speaker 2: She had been head of the acapella choir, the girls glee club, every, the gospel choir, okay. They were a very, very poor family but she had this unbelievably beautiful voice, and East Orange's high school was the kind of place where if you did, didn't whether you were Catholic or Jewish or black, if you had talent, it came to the fore. Speaker 1: Now was her cousin Cissy Houston there too? Speaker 2: No. They then lived in Newark. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I know that because I know, I've since learned the background of that family, they would have, they moved to East Orange in 1968 following the Newark riots. And at that time I was in law school or out of law school but Dionne's parents had moved to East Orange twelve years before that. Story_ID: 156666 Speaker 1: Okay. So I don't forget this-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --it just dawned on me that your whole family moved back to Virginia, when you were twelve (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: When I was--for one year. Speaker 1: Yeah, so-- Speaker 2: --for one year (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --when you were the office manager there from fourth grade to sixth grade, so this puts you in about-- Speaker 2: It's, it's the seventh grade. Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: This is happening in-- Speaker 1: Seventh grade. Speaker 2: --the seventh grade. So in the seventh grade-- Speaker 1: So was there a particular crisis that, that, that made your mother [Julia Goodman Brown] just say, "Hey, this isn't working. I gotta go back home"? Speaker 2: I think the struggle of, of, of, you know, high rents, food costs and all of the rest of it, and the unfamiliarity of, you know, picking up and moving into an urban area, I think can be very difficult for a country family. And she just always wanted to go back and my father [Madison Brown] finally gave in and said, "Okay we'll move." And right in the middle of the school year, I was in seventh grade in the Sussex Avenue School [Newark, New Jersey]. And not that, it, it was early in the school year. And that year I went to school in Newark. I went to school in Crestwood High [School] in Portsmouth [Virginia, sic, Chesapeake, Virginia], brand new school because Virginia was then fighting like hell to make separate but equal, equal. I mean it was just the, the, it had just opened up and the teach, teachers didn't know how, how to use half the facilities they had, it was so well furnished. Speaker 1: Okay. This is Crestwood High School? Speaker 2: Crestwood High School. Speaker 1: Portsmouth, okay. Speaker 2: So I went to there, then we moved back to the Orange Valley [New Jersey] with my cousin, and I was in school there. Speaker 1: So there was a (unclear) Speaker 2: That's three schools in one year. Speaker 1: So what was the name of the third one in Orange? Speaker 2: Forest Street School [Orange, New Jersey]-- Speaker 1: Forest Street. Speaker 2: --in the Orange Valley (laughter). I really was a little nerd because I remember in that school, I'm sitting there in, at Forest Street, I'm sitting there one day and the teacher is teaching us something and I'm taking notes and she looks up at me and she says, "Stop playing with that pencil and pay attention." And I looked backed there and I said, "I'm taking notes." And she said, "Okay." And then she called me up after the class and said, "I'm very sorry. I didn't realize that's what, nobody does that (laughter)." Speaker 1: So where did you--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: So, so everywhere I went, even that year, I became, you know, I was like in that school for three months at the end of the year, yet I wound up being the head of the police patrol, you know, that kind of thing. Speaker 1: Well how are you-- Speaker 2: I was just a little. I was-- Speaker 1: How do you account for that kind of (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: I was a little mama's boy. Speaker 1: Was there-- Speaker 2: That's how I account for it. Speaker 1: Okay. (Unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: I was little mama's boy. Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous) your mother that set the model? Speaker 2: Yeah, but I was, I was talented but I was also a little mama's--so I, I just didn't cause trouble for people, you know. Story_ID: 156667 Speaker 1: Now, now was there, I haven't asked you this I guess, but, but is there, was there a particular teacher or-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --a mentor-- Speaker 2: There was one. Speaker 1: --Boy Scouts-- Speaker 2: There were a couple especially-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --a couple especially. One was my junior high school home room teacher, so she would have taught us one class, Miss Johnson [ph.], it was her first year of teaching. I have actually, one of the pictures over there actually is from that year. And this was the eighth grade and this was the, my first year in East Orange [New Jersey], Vernon L. Davey Junior High School [East Orange, New Jersey]. And because I was, because instruction came so easy for me and because teachers tended to make me their pets, I was very cocky and what is the word I want, I mean I can think of a lot of phrases but I really basically thought that I could do no wrong, that whatever I did was fine because I was doing it. And this lady actually civilized me, Miss Johnson, she, she, oh, the other thing was that if somebody made me angry I just fought. You know, that's what you did, that's what we did in Newark [New Jersey] and in the East, but people didn't fight in East Orange, you know. It was, you know, if, if, if you went, went to fisticuffs in, in East Orange it was because something was wrong with you. And she basically, this lady basically civilized me during that, that year I'll never, I'll never forget her. It was her first year of teaching. At the end of the year she wrote a little something in my book about how being, you know, a first year of teaching could be very hard and that she really had enjoyed blah, blah, blah, blah, you know, but I enjoyed her. She really, really, she mothered me, she calmed me down, and she made me understand that being smart wasn't, and as a matter of fact, this lady I'll never forget this, this lady wrote she, she wrote this little note in my little book about how, how nice it, it was to have me during the first year of teaching. But she did something else. She wrote a little inscription at the top of her note to me, and the inscription said Proverbs and then it gave chapter and verse of Proverbs but it didn't, the word weren't there. Of course, she knew I'd go look at Proverbs and read it. And what she had written, and what she had written was, what she had directed me to was the saying, "knowledge is the principal thing. Therefore get ye knowledge but in all thy getting, get ye also understanding." Obviously, I've never forgotten that. Story_ID: 156668 Speaker 1: So for me going to East Orange [New Jersey] it was a, it was a, it was a, a new world, a different world. I, I couldn't rely on my fists anymore, which was good 'cause I was a little guy and everybody else was growing up and being stronger than me so it was good that I couldn't rely on my fists anymore. Speaker 2: So this is Davey-- Speaker 1: Vernon L. Davey Junior High School [East Orange, New Jersey]. Speaker 2: Vernon L. Davey Junior High School, okay. Speaker 1: I think it has a different name now. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But there are only two junior high schools in the city. Speaker 2: All right. So you go to high school at East Orange? Speaker 1: East Orange High School [East Orange, New Jersey]. Speaker 2: Okay. Now what was that like? Was that--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: Well, my oldest brother-- Speaker 2: --did you continue-- Speaker 1: --preceded me there. And he was a football player, very strong, so I kind of had his protection. Although, something we never did, we never fought for each other. Only one, only on one occasion did, was I aware of one Brown brother fighting for another. But people didn't know that we wouldn't fight for each other. You know, I mean, if it was a gang or something like that it was a different story but one on one we wouldn't get involved. Speaker 2: Hmm. Speaker 1: But it was a, for me it was a, it was a, it was a new world, it was a different world, there were gobs of opportunities. One important thing I did there was, I went out for football but I was, I was too young and to light in my first year, they'd wouldn't give me a uniform, I didn't weigh a hundred pounds. Speaker 2: Hmm. Speaker 1: It was probably good they wouldn't give me a uniform, so I ran cross country instead, first year. But I got a job in the local library and I worked there for maybe three years when I wasn't out for a sport or after, they'd close at nine o'clock, I might even work go, go in for work after dinner. And so I would, what do you do in a local library? What you do is you shelve the books, you know, when people bring the books back. That's what, the, the, the kids would do. And I can, I would see what people were bringing back from reading and, you know, if people, a lot of people brought back the same book then I would get the book and read it, okay. And so I just read and read and read and read and read and read, you know, stuff like 'Les Miserables' [Victor Hugo] and [W.] Somerset Maugham and Ayn Rand, and you know, just whatever people were reading, and I would read. Speaker 2: So this was like 1956 or so when you start-- Speaker 1: I started there maybe '56 [1956], yeah. Speaker 2: Fifty-six [1956]. Story_ID: 156669 Speaker 1: Yeah. I graduated in '60 [1960] so probably '50 [1950], maybe '55 [1955], I can't remember exactly. And so that was, that turned out to be important. The second important thing was, I met there the man who was the second most important man in my life. He turned out to be my first year algebra teacher, my second year geometry teacher. He was the advisor, the teacher advisor to my class, the classes had about 450 students in them. He was my J.V. [junior varisty] football coach. And he was the advisor to the student council the year that I was the president of the student council at the school. And starting in my sophomore year, twice a year, fall and spring, unless I had, you know, a track meet or a football game that prevented it, when he could do it, he would take me in his car, just him and me, and we would travel to Hamilton College [Clinton, New York] which was his alma mater, and spend a full day there, and a couple of times we stayed overnight. And that's how I found out about Hamilton College, that's how they found about me. And when it came time to apply to go to college I only knew of one college and that was Hamilton College so that's where I applied. Speaker 2: Umm. Speaker 1: Funny thing-- Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: I applied to Hamilton College after having been up there maybe five times and they knew me and they'd interviewed me and all that kind of stuff and I had done very well on the, the scholar, the, the college entrance exams, of course. And so I was admissible at this school, that was just a step below the Ivy League, that's how I would describe it, but tiny. And they didn't admit me. He went bananas, he couldn't figure out why they didn't admit me. Now I, I didn't know what was going on, I found out about this years later. My mom [Julia Goodman Brown] told me about this years later. He went up there and raised holy hell. And, you know, this kids a student leader, he's got all the grades and blah, blah, blah, blah. He comes from a strong, what's wrong with you people. And what they told him was, he was absolutely right but they didn't think I could make it. It would be too hard for me emotionally. Speaker 2: Hmm. Speaker 1: And he said to them, "That's not your decision to make. That's his decision to make and his family." And they admitted me and gave me a full scholarship. Speaker 2: Now what was this teacher's-- Speaker 1: I found out about that, I found out about that years later. Speaker 2: What was his name? Speaker 1: Gilbert Adams. Speaker 2: Gilbert Adams. Speaker 1: I still get a Christmas card from him. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: He was a math teacher at East Orange High School [East Orange, New Jersey] for many years. And then he went off to one of the further out suburban schools. And for years, starting with me, he would have a student that he would bring to Hamilton College and four or five of us got admitted there because of him. There was one other black, the others were white kids but that's-- Speaker 2: Now-- Speaker 1: --what he did for years. Story_ID: 156670 Speaker 1: East Orange High School [East Orange, New Jersey] when you were there, I think we were saying earlier that it was like 75 percent black, you think when you were, when you were at the school? Speaker 2: White. Speaker 1: White. Speaker 2: White. Speaker 1: Seventy-five percent white. Speaker 2: When I was there but it was changing fast. We didn't know that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because there was a Brown at East Orange High School for twelve years over a twelve year period. One of us was, was at least was enrolled in the school. We could see it happening. I can see it in the yearbooks, you know, I have a lot of the year books I can see the classes getting darker and darker. But it was about, about, when I graduated I would say it was probably thirty percent black, something like that. Speaker 1: And how were you treated when you went up to Hamilton [College, Clinton, New York] with Mr. [Gilbert] Adams? Speaker 2: Very well, very well. Yeah, I don't remember anything untoward at all. Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: As a matter of fact, I remember very little that was untoward when I was a student there. Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: Uhh-- Speaker 1: Now, now were there any other black students at Hamilton when he was-- Speaker 2: Yes, yeah Speaker 1: --when you were up there? (Unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: Del [Delbert] Spurlock was a year ahead of me. He was from Oberlin [Ohio]. Chip Mason [ph.] was a year ahead of me, I think he was from Ohio too, maybe Cleveland [Ohio]. Speaker 1: And you met them on the trips that you would go-- Speaker 2: No-- Speaker 1: (Unclear) you never met? (Simultaneous) Speaker 2: --no, no I met them after I got there. Speaker 1: Okay. I was just wondering if you-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I was-- Speaker 1: --met any of the students-- Speaker 2: No, no I did not Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous) those trips. Okay. Speaker 2: Chip Mason, and Skip and Skip McCoy was a year behind me. Del Spurlock, Chip Mason, Skip McCoy, and there was a guy whose name I simply can't remember who was a senior when I was a freshman. So typically what you had was one black in each class. The year ahead of me there, there were two. That's typically. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then when we had, after, after my freshman year, they had a program where African students were admitted, a couple in each class. Story_ID: 156671 Speaker 1: Now were you the first in your family to go to college? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: On either side. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: They were huge families too. Speaker 1: In the case of your brother, Madison, who was the football star, did they recruit him for college at all? Speaker 2: No, he, he, he, got married out of high school, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. So-- Speaker 2: Yeah. So, he did not. Right. Speaker 1: Okay. So you, you were the first one to go. Was your mother [Julia Goodman Brown] excited? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah the whole family was excited. I'll never forget, it must have been really weird, two times must have been really weird. One was we, we all of us, all nine of us piled into my father's [Madison Brown] car then drove up to Hamilton [College, Clinton, New York] to take me to Hamilton College. And a long trip, four hour drive upstate New York up near Syracuse [New York] from East Orange [New Jersey], before the superhighways all the way. And, you know, we arrived there, there was this family of nine black people, most of them kids, you know, wandering around looking, you know, looking for my dormitory room and all the rest of it. I'm sure they talked us up a dog but, you know, but it was very exciting for my family. And, and the second time was when I graduated when they all came. Speaker 1: Now, now back in high school when you were a senior were you in, were you a high school celebrity I mean were you a-- Speaker 2: Well, I was president of the student council which was a big thing and I was the first black president of the student council which was, was bigger. I was president of the boys (unclear). I was editor of the newspaper and the yearbook. So I, I, I was pretty much--but sports were important in that high school, okay. Speaker 1: Not-- Speaker 2: For the black kids. And, and, you know, I was a scrub as far as sports were concerned but that was okay, you know. Story_ID: 156672 Speaker 1: So we have established your popularity in high school but were you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I don't know about popularity. Speaker 1: --a smooth-- Speaker 2: But, okay. Speaker 1: Well, you, you-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --were in all these important positions so you were doing things, you were an active-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --high school student beyond-- Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: --you know, going to-- Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: --class. So, and I'm sure people knew you. So were, were you a smooth operator to with the young ladies or did you-- Speaker 2: No, not at all. I was very shy. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I, I, I felt like I was poorer than I was. East Orange [New Jersey] was then a working class community for large Italian population, large Irish Catholic population, and a significant and growing black population. We all had it in common that we were families who were struggling to get into the middle class. That's what I would, I would say. Although there was a large number, it was, there was a large part of the community that was solidly in the middle class. It had been a solidly middle class community. It was a place where that generation of students were beneficials, beneficiaries of a community that had been a fairly wealthy community in prior decades. It had a swimming pool, which had gotten boarded over, (laughter) when, when black kids started going to the school. We used to say but we don't know why but it got boarded over. It had all kinds of clubs. The, the local schools, every elementary school occupied a city block, it had a playground and a grassed area and a baseball field and a basketball court and most of them had tennis courts around the school with supervised play. So that there were people who was permanent job was to, was to supervise those playgrounds. I played basketball all over the city, you know, everybody did. It was, it was just, it was truly an amazing place but I was very shy. I didn't learn how to dance until I was a junior. Sometimes I think that the, the school was remarkable because black and white kids got along so well together and, you know, black kids if they were talented would get elected to positions as I did. And they would get opportunities as I did. One person who could, who, who got his form of opportunity was John Amos, the father on 'Good Times' and, and actor in a number of other, a number of movies. John Amos was, I think, three years ahead of me. He was very a close friend of my brother. Speaker 1: Yeah, he was an, an athlete to wasn't--(unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: John Amos was an all-state fullback. Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: And John had I, I'll never forget John had the, the biggest calves I've ever seen on a human being when he was a high school athlete. But John was also a stand-up comic, I'll never forget this. When John walked into a room, people started, they start, there began this undertone of laughter because you just knew John was gonna do something that was gonna make everybody crack up, you know, he'd walk in, he, he was loud, he was smart. Not academically smart, but smart and he would just, he'd bring laughter. I remember years later when I was an F.C.C. [Federal Communications Commission] Commissioner, many years later visiting California, and somehow, I think, through my older brother, spending a, a day at lunch with John Amos at, oh Lil's [ph.] oh, it's a very famous Los Angeles soul food place. I think it was called Lil's, with him and a woman named Vonetta McGee who was a black actress, very pretty lady, and my youngest brother, who I was visiting out there, he lived out there then. And we're sitting, and John is telling war stories about East Orange to Vonetta McGee and my younger brother. And one of the things he talked about was the East Orange walk, and it was both the white kids and the black kids, okay. And he, he, he would say, "Ty don't you remember, don't you remember the East Orange walk?" I said, "Oh, John no, you, you gotta remember it, you know." And we leave the restaurant and I'm walking with Vonetta and my younger brother is walking with John Amos and they're in front of us. And John is walking down the street like this and I said, "Holy Moses, he's doing the East Orange walk, that's what he's talking about." It was, he was, it was still in him, very much in him. But he was an absolute character. Story_ID: 156673 Speaker 1: And he was an all-state football player. Now, that East Orange [High School, East Orange, New Jersey] football team which were state champs two years, I think my junior and senior year. Here's how we got to be the state champs, most, not all, most of the linemen were big Italian Catholics, big boys, okay, most of the linemen. Most, not all, of the backs and skilled players including the quarterback were black. We were unstoppable. We were unstoppable. We had the beef, the power, and we had the speed. It was just unstoppable. Who was the quarterback? Speaker 2: Cliff Baskerville became all-American high school basketball, football player. Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: He went to, I, I don't know where he went to college, he didn't, you know, he, he didn't shine as a, as a, a college player particularly but, yeah. And so I always said that we kind of, kind of showed the way for the N.F.L. [National Football League]. And I can remember coming home from football practice with those guys, okay. And we're walking down the street because the, the stadium is actually in the, the section of town where none of us lives because it's over, there was a small high school in the city and it was over near the small high school, and so we'd all wind up walking three, four miles home after practice. And I can remember us walking down the street, blacks and white players, "Oh, I wonder, wonder who be do oh, who," you know, singing our songs as we're going down the street, going home, yeah. You know, I thought and I've talked to my older brother about it, he says the same thing, I thought that was America, I had thought that was what America had become, you know. We didn't know about this conflicts and stuff back then and there, you know. We didn't know a lot about, you know, as I said the school was tracked and in the nature of things the black kids for the most part wound up in the, the lower tracks but that was, it really was a matter of achievement within that school. I was always in the A plus section. So there were four, over 400 students in my high school class. I, I went through four years of high school basically with the same students because we were all, we were in this, you know. And I think there was one other black student who was, you know, in that, that section. We literally went to, you know, except for electives we were always all together. And so that's how I know the school was tracked, okay. Nobody ever talked about it or anything but that's how I know the school was tracked. And most kids did not go to college. You know then most public school kids didn't go to college and most kids didn't go to college but some of us did. But it had, it had, you know, it had wonderful choirs, it had wonderful sports teams, it had a great little school newspaper, you know, and anybody could take advantage of, of any of that stuff. Story_ID: 156674 Speaker 1: Oh, did you go to the prom and stuff (unclear)? Speaker 2: I remember going to the prom with a, with a, a, a young lady that I, that I was in love with for over a long period of time. And, but I was, I, you know, as I said I was a nerd, okay. She and I were buddies, okay. And I couldn't even dance at that point, you know. By the next year I learned how to dance. I went to my junior prom, I didn't go to my senior prom because I was going out with a girl and my senior prom who was all but engaged to a guy who was in the [U.S.] Army and she didn't wanna go to the prom and so I didn't go. But no I wasn't, I was not a, I mean my buddies were because they were the, you know, they were the leading football players. Now I say that we were quote, you know, blacks and whites were intermixed, kind of the way the kids are today but we really weren't socially. The school had, what did call them, Y [ph.] High-Y [ph.] Alpha Beta [ph.], you know, they had sororities and fraternities and the white kids were in the sororities and fraternities. The black kids had something called Club Martez [ph.]. And Club Martez, was a teen canteen that was held at the, the largest of the local playgrounds that I described, it had a large fieldhouse. And it was held on Tuesday nights so the kids would walk from all over the city, the black kids, and, and dance at Club Martez on Tuesday night, and then we'd all walk the girls home and walk ourselves home and, you know, from all over the city, you know, and it was a nice, it was a nice event. And I belonged with the, I, I belonged with a group of kids who were kind of the black leaders in the school, most of them were leaders because they were, the boys were football players and track stars and the girls were cheerleaders (laughter) drum majors and stuff like that. And we called ourselves kind of The Club [ph.] and that was our social group. And on Friday nights there'd be a, Saturday night there'd be a party at somebody's house. And all the kids kind of took turns going out with each other. But that part of the social life was separate, okay. Now I wound up in a, it, in a lot of white kids homes 'cause I played chess with the white guys and, you know, I played basketball with them and, and when I, when I ran for student council, I befriended as many smart, shy black and white girls as I possibly could and they, they became my fighting team, so (laughter). That's what I meant when I said I was calculating. I wrote a little column, little sports column for the local weekly newspaper when I was in high school but that's because I was a sports editor the, in the school newspaper. I can remember once, I think during my senior year in high school, I mean, I was doing so, I was working, I was playing a sport, I was president of the student council, I was doing, doing so many different things. And I remember once standing up in my kitchen on the telephone talking to somebody and I just passed out (making a sound) from exhaustion. I didn't even know I was tired. So, I mean, it wasn't, it was, it wasn't a healthy thing I'm not, I don't mean to describe it as a healthy thing, it was, kind of obsessive about being first, I guess, I don't know, something like that, so. Speaker 1: Now-- Speaker 2: And then I remember another time oh, I know what happened that very time, you know. I got up, you know, and I went and took a bath because I was going out that night and I took my, my, my bath shower and put on my clothes and, and started out the door and my father [Madison Brown] said, "Where are you going?" I said, "Oh, you know, its Friday night I'm going," he said, "you're not going anywhere tonight." So I didn't go. "You're staying home and resting tonight," so. Story_ID: 156675 Speaker 1: So did, now when you went to Hamilton College [Clinton, New York], I imagine since there were only so many black students, and were there any black females at Hamilton (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: Oh, no, there were no females at Hamilton [College, Clinton, New York]. Speaker 1: You had male-- Speaker 2: That was one advantage, it was, it was a men's school then. Now it's coed but then like, like most of the better schools in the east, it was single sex back then. You know, Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut] and Columbia [University, New York City, New York] and all those places were, and then there were the seven little sister schools. Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: And they were the ones that matched up against the, you know. So to have a date you had to go a long way except, you know, maybe winter, winter carnival when, when we'd invite women to the campus, so. So with that part of, of the, of racial conflict or tension-- Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: --didn't exist because there weren't any women there-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --so. Speaker 1: Did you maintain the same high level of activities at Hamilton that you did in high school or did you have to cut back a little bit? Speaker 2: I, I would say not as high as in high school but I was, let's see I played football three years. I ran track two years. I played lacrosse one year. I was a reporter for the newspaper. I was a member of the student government three of my four years. I was, some of it was ironic. They had the sophomore, junior, and senior honor societies selected, they were self, all three were self-perpetuating, the group from the year before would select the group. And the sophomore group had thirteen members and I was selected as one, as those thirteen. And the junior group had eight members, and I was selected as one of those eight. And the senior group, called Pentagon [ph.], had five members and I was selected as one of those five. So I, I guess I was, I was pretty active. Basically at Hamilton College when I was there, if you weren't a member of a fraternity, most of them were national fraternities, you didn't eat because the eating facilities were in the fraternities, in the fraternity houses. A couple years before I got there, they built, no, they didn't build it, they made it possible for people to get meals other than the freshman class, that's what it was, the commons was for the freshman class. They made it possible for upper classmen to get meals at the commons so that they didn't have to join fraternities-- Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: --if they didn't want to. But still when I was there, ninety percent of the students were members of fraternities. I was a member of a fraternity, Tau Kappa Epsilon. Tau Kappa Epsilon had a national policy at the time against blacks, Jews, and Catholics. Story_ID: 156676 Speaker 1: So how did you manage to-- Speaker 2: At Hamilton College [Clinton, New York], a majority of the members of the fraternity were Jewish or Catholic or me, black, or Drew Days who was also black. Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: So we just, you know, we just ignored the national, the national restriction. Speaker 1: Yeah, so, were you the, I guess you weren't the first then black member of the fraternity? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The guy whose name I can't think of ahead of me was, may have been the first member. I'll think of his name before the interview is over. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But he, I know he was a member of that fraternity. And so, but the story I was gonna tell you is that they had something called total opportunity which meant that every student, every freshman got an opportunity to join a fraternity. That was one of the requirements that the college imposed in the '60s [1960s]. You didn't have to join a fraternity but if you wanted to you would get at least one bid. And what that meant was that on rush weekend, the students would attend all these affairs at the various, and then he'd get a bid from a, a fraternity or they might get three or four bids and they decide what fraternity you're going to. At the end of the rush weekend, there might be twenty students left over who didn't get bids. And then they had what they call the turkey shoot. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that is the, the presidents of the fraternities would sit down and figure out which of these students who had no bids would get bids from their fraternities. Obviously, what the fraternities would want to do is select people who would not join their fraternity or if they joined, would be so out of it in terms of fitting in that they would just drop out. So the college established a, a committee called the Total Opportunity Committee. And the Total Opportunity Committee of students would do this placing, the so called turkeys in fraternities where they thought they would fit, and those fraternities would have to take them, okay. I was the chairman of the Total Opportunity Committee. So it was my job, I'd never forget my senior year to place maybe twenty kids who, and I was a, I was a dorm advisor in my junior year. Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: Lived in the freshman dormitory and kind of took care of them. I always said they took care of me, especially they took care of me that year because that was the year my, my, the brother who was eleven months older than me died and it was a difficult year for me, it was a difficult year. Story_ID: 156677 Speaker 1: You said he committed suicide? Speaker 2: Yeah, Arthur committed suicide. I always believed that he committed suicide, it was right after Marilyn Monroe committed suicide. Arthur was gay, although nobody ever talked about it, you know. And I don't think I've ever said it to anybody but my sister but looking back he obviously was. But beyond that, he was, as I said he had, oh, God that's another story, he had a, a real bad heart. As a matter of fact, he was a blue baby. And when he was born in 1940, no he was born in '41 [1941], seven days before Pearl Harbor, when he was born, those babies died, and they told my mom [Julia Goodman Brown], "No, he's gonna die." And she said, "Like hell he's gonna die." And he didn't die. But when he was thirteen, maybe twelve, he had experimental surgery at St. Michael's Hospital in Newark, New Jersey. And until then, he just, well the part of what was going on with him was that his, his blood vessels were constrained so that he, he, he never got much taller than that, okay, even though he-- Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: --grew to be twenty years old. And when he was ten he looked like he was five. Oh-- Speaker 1: But he looked like he, he really looked like he was five when he was ten. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But he had open heart, they froze his heart, this is like 1952, and straightened stuff out and it helped him to live until he was twenty. But a couple of things I never knew. One, was that the surgery, open heart, one of the very first open heart surgeries, put 'em on a machine. The surgery was billed as successful but it really wasn't and he wasn't getting enough blood to his brain. And he, he was getting more and more retarded. My mother knew all this but she never told us. But looking back I can see that that was going on. The second thing about this story is something my brother told me. I have talked about how my father [Madison Brown] just never got sick, he just worked every day and he brought his check home. Drove my mother all over the place because she was so, that's how he came home and then they'd go out shopping or whatever. And, but my mother worked as a nurse's aide in Presbyterian Hospital in Newark, New Jersey and she worked nights. And that meant two things, one, it meant that one of them was always there with us because when, whenever my mother worked, she worked nights so my father would be there and during the day she was there. The second thing it meant, and I never realized this until my older brother had just told me recently, he said "Ty she did that because she got medical insurance working in the hospitals." All I knew, was we always had the very best medical care. My brother nineteen, early 1950s open heart experimental surgery. Me, my appendix popped, the family doctor, the family doctor who took care of all of us okay, he winds up at the hospital and scrapes the poison out of my body because they had burst. I mean we all just had excellent care. And I always said to myself, how did they do that? How did they make happen? And Madison said, "They made it happen because mom worked at the hospital." But I don't know how, what got me on to that story. Story_ID: 156678 Speaker 1: We were talking about your, death of your brother the year-- Speaker 2: Oh-- Speaker 1: --that-- Speaker 2: --Arthur, Arthur was a character (laughter). He was a, he, he had a beautiful voice. He was, he, you're too young to know of something called 'The Ted Mack Original Amateur Hour,' it was on TV. Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I know about it. Speaker 2: It was on TV. Arthur appeared on 'The Ted Mack Original Amateur Hour,' He had a beautiful, a beautiful voice. You know, if--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: Now, this is-- Speaker 2: --if Arthur-- Speaker 1: --a nationally televised show? Speaker 2: Yeah, if Arthur, well it wasn't then, I think (unclear) then it just operated down in New York [New York]-- Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: --now this is the early days. But, and, and Arthur won the contest that, that, that made it possible for him to get singing lessons for years, I mean it went on for two or three years. A beautiful voice, but he was also always sick. I think he always had migraines because he was always having headaches that (unclear) there were things that weren't noticed at birth, they were noticed, were made difficult for him. I remember there in that house, 12 North 13th Street is where we lived in the Roseville [Newark, New Jersey] section, right off of the Orange Street commercial area. It was a dead end street so we had our playground right out in front of our house. And we used to play on the roofs of the, of the buildings on Orange Street which were the commercial buildings on Orange Street and we'd get to them by going through the bakery where our buddy's family had operated the bakery. They had a bachelor apartment for his older brothers upstairs and we'd make believe we were teenagers playing poker and stuff in the bachelor apartment and we'd go out on the roofs of the building. And we had, I remember we had a, we had a, a test you had to go through to be part of our 13th Street Club because we weren't permitted to pay, play with the kids in the gangs. And what you had to was you had to jump from the roof, three story roof, so it would be the equivalent of the fourth story down into a garden below, in order to be part of the club. And my brother, Madison, and I took my brother, Arthur, up on the roof one day and he wanted to, he wanted to jump. It was a long, long jump four stories is pretty, yeah, it's forty-five feet, fifty feet. And so we held him, you know, when he said he was ready we let him go and he went through the air, whee, he loved it, he just loved it, let's do it again. When he was twenty he went down to Bamberger's, which was the department store, and Newark had a bustling business area until the riots, it was the, you know, all the department stores were there and everything, and he jumped off the roof, actually jumped off the roof of the Newark Star-Ledger newspaper. I was in Mexico then, so I came home for the funeral. That was 1962, '62 [1962]. Speaker 1: So people are just pretty much convinced that he had, he had killed himself? Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Oh, yes, no, he committed suicide. He jumped off the roof. He, I think that was '62 [1962], yeah that '62 [1962]. Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) and that, this is your sophomore year? Speaker 2: I was twenty, he would have been twenty-one, no I was nineteen and he was twenty, okay, yeah. It was the summer after my sophomore year, so my junior year. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Going into my junior year. Story_ID: 156679 Speaker 1: I think I mentioned when I came in that, that I, I knew that Bob Moses [Robert Parris Moses] had been a student-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --there at Hamilton [College, Clinton, New York]. He, he, he was ahead of you, right? Speaker 2: Bob graduated, I think, the year before I arrived [Moses graduated in 1956 from Hamilton College]. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: He came back a couple of times so I met him then but he, he had left. He, and he left quite a, a reputation and quite an impact because he was, he is quite an impactful person. Speaker 1: Yeah, I know he's a philosophy and mathematics major. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: (Unclear) Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: So. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Of course, he went on to one, be one of the founders of, of, S.N.C.C. [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee]-- Speaker 2: S.N.C.C., exactly. Speaker 1: --Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. So was there, was there at Hamilton a, I guess, a, an activist arm I mean or-- Speaker 2: Not at all. Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: Not at all. It wasn't, it wasn't, I didn't find it to be a hostile environment. I was very well treated there. And in some senses, I was kind of a pet, you know, I was the, I was the, I was kind of unique for, for the time and place. For two reasons, not just one. I mean I, I came from a good, from by that measure, from a very poor family. I came from a struggling working class family. And looking back on it, I'm beginning some, sometimes I think that my greatest difficulties in terms of adjustment came as a function of disparity of class more than disparity of race. Story_ID: 156680 Speaker 1: All right. Well, tell us this story. You said there's a story from Hamilton [College, Clinton, New York] that you wanted to tell at the end of the last-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. On the surface outwardly at Hamilton it certainly appeared that I was thriving. I was an officer of the fraternity, I was, you know, I very active in student government, I played sports, I was thought well enough of to be elected to these honor groups, being a dormitory advisor was very important 'cause you got free board, (laughter) and lots of kids applied for it, and school leaders tended to get that job, so I mean it was, they treated, I was, I was treated very well. And I was, I was treated as a peer academically. I mean nobody, except for one professor, nobody treated me, you know, as though I were an inferior or intellect. And so I left there having felt that I did well, that I thrived, didn't do as well as I wanted to but I did very well and I, you know, I got a full scholarship to Cornell Law School, so. That was all very fine. But I never went back to Hamilton. And from time to time I'd ask myself why is you never went back. And when I was a commissioner at the F.C.C. [Federal Communications Commission], I received a visit from somebody in the administration, I didn't know it was an interview, I thought we were just having lunch or dinner. And a few weeks after his visit I was asked to join the, the board of directors or board of governors of the college. So I was, you know, I was gonna be the first black who ever did that and the very, it, it, it was one of these schools that had been supported by a few wealthy families, you know, five or six families had provided most of the buildings and the funds and all the rest of it. That's how most private colleges got their, you know, got their starts. Hamilton, Hamilton in 1812 but there were four or five families that were really supportive and the chairman of the board of directors always came from one of those families. And so there I was in 1983 joining the board of directors with the, the guy who had been the chairman of the board when I was a student, who, who had interviewed me as a black leader in, in college. And so it was, it was nice. I mean it was, it was a mark of, of acceptance, achievement that I would be asked to be on the board of directors. Story_ID: 156681 Speaker 1: And so I went back to the college [Hamilton College, Clinton, New York] for the first time to attend my first board of directors meeting. Beautiful summer, fall weekend, the likes of which you get maybe one or two weekends in that part of the snow belt of upstate New York. God, my first year we had the biggest snow storm I have ever seen in my life. So I attended the meetings and I stayed in the, there was a little hotel like affair in the student union and I stayed there. And after the Saturday meeting, I'm walking down to the student union and I'll never forget this as long as I live, this actually happened, you can, you can say about it or do with it what you want but this actually happened. Speaker 2: This is 1981? Speaker 1: This is 1981 or '2 [1982], yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: '81 [1981]. I'm walking down the hill on a beautiful Saturday afternoon, the tree color is just unbelievable, okay. Orange and gold and red, and then all of a sudden I am not walking down that hill in a beautiful fall afternoon, I'm walking up the hill, okay, this actually happened. I'm walking up the hill and I'm walking up the hill through a blizzard. And in front of me is a young kid, obviously a college student. He has on dungarees, jeans, engineers' boots, and he's wearing one of those plaited hooded things that were popular in the early '60s [1960s] and gloves and he's striding up the hill. And I don't see his face but I know he's me. Literally, this happened. I'm looking at this kid walking up the hill and he's walking up the hill with his fists balled and his determined stride, going through this snow storm and he just disappears into the midst of the snow. And I broke into tears standing right there that afternoon. And I realized, I realized that when I left that place, I left that kid there. That was, that was, I will always be grateful for having served on the board of directors because it gave me that closure or maybe that opening, maybe it wasn't a closure, maybe it was an opening-- Speaker 2: Hmm. Speaker 1: --that I hadn't had. This, I swear to you this happened. It was real. I really saw that kid walking in front of me and I knew it was me and I knew he was lonely and unhappy and stubborn, you know, it was just amazing. And I left that place and left him. Speaker 2: Hmm. Speaker 1: Took me many years to reintegrate that. Speaker 2: So-- Speaker 1: So that Hamilton [College, Clinton, New York] was an alien place and I adjusted to it, okay. Speaker 2: And I did, I think, I've read the same thing reading Bob Moses [Robert Parris Moses] story that it was-- Speaker 1: (Laughter) Speaker 2: --a very isolating kind of-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --a place to be. Speaker 1: But I didn't-- Speaker 2: Not hostile but-- Speaker 1: No, not at all, and I didn't, I, oh, I had very good friends there. I mean people treated me so well. But Kenny Green [ph.] that I grew up with in East Orange High School [East Orange, New Jersey] and we walked, you know, every street in East Orange [New Jersey] looking for the party on Friday night and, you know, no, I didn't have that, you know. So but boy that, that truly, truly, truly, happened. Story_ID: 156682 Speaker 1: Who--I have a checkmark by John, John Nichols, is that the person (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: John Nichols was at Hamilton [College, Clinton, New York]. He was a year ahead of me. He was an author. He wrote a book called the 'The Sterile Cuckoo.' Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: He, when they made the movie of it, I went to the movie and, and they used the front of one fraternity house and the back, you know, you could tell the parts of the campus. Although not all of it was filmed on campus. I think part of it was filmed at Colgate but a lot of it was filmed on campus. And he was, you know, he was one of many, many, many, many bright kids. It was a college, it wasn't a university, the education we got was the classical education in the sense that, for example, you had to take public speaking. You had to take two carry over sports, you know, not football or track or something like that, you had to do something that you could do after you left college. You had to go to chapel or some other kind of service every week. You had to wear a jacket and tie at dinner. You could wear jeans but you had to wear a jacket and tie. You had to take courses from across a range, science, humanities, arts, you know, it was the, the classical liberal arts education, and it was very rigorous. Speaker 1: So what was your major? Speaker 2: Philosophy and religion. Speaker 1: Okay. Philosophy and religion? Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: I think that's-- Speaker 2: I thought for a while I was gonna be a minister. Story_ID: 156683 Speaker 1: I failed, I failed to ask you about the church your, your mother's sisters founded in East Orange [New Jersey]. Speaker 2: It's called St. Matthew's A.M.E. which is Methodist Church-- Speaker 1: Now, is that the church-- Speaker 2: --in Orange. Speaker 1: --you all went too? Speaker 2: It's still there. That's the church I grew up in until I was about thirteen, and then I stopped going to church. Speaker 1: Okay. Is there a reason why you stopped going to church or-- Speaker 2: I, I can remember having a conversation with my father [Madison Brown] right about when I was thirteen because until then, pretty much the deal was we'd get up on Sunday morning and we'd go to Sunday school, Madison, I, Arthur, and Caroline, the four oldest. We'd take the bus, Madison would take us on the bus to Sunday school and before that my father would take us on the bus to Sunday school. And then at eleven o'clock my parents [Madison Brown and Julia Goodman Brown] would show up and they'd bring the young kids and then that's. We didn't do it every Sunday but we did it a lot of Sundays, it seemed like every Sunday. And at some point I just said I didn't wanna go anymore and my dad said okay. And they were gone to church one day and I, I wasn't going, I was home, you know, and I was getting ready to go out and my dad said, "Where you're going?" I said, "Well I'm gonna go play basketball or something." He said, "No. I said, I said you didn't have to go to church, I didn't say you can do something else (laughter)." So, that's, that was the deal-- Speaker 1: So what did you do (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: --for awhile. That was the deal. I just read, you know, that was just the deal, so. Story_ID: 156684 Speaker 1: Okay. So well, okay. But, but now, now what prompted you to major in philosophy and religion? Speaker 2: I felt that I was very religious. I, I felt that I didn't have a, that my approach to religion wasn't the conventional approach. I thought that Jesus at the time, I thought Jesus was a very good man and I thought his message was profound but, but I didn't believe that it was miraculous. I, one of the, one, one of my failings then going back to Miss Johnson and the difference between knowledge and understanding was that I didn't understand then that a good life is a miracle. So I didn't, I hadn't pieced it together. And one of the things I thought I might do in college was try to piece together my feelings about religion with conventional religion and maybe come out of it being able to be a minister but I, that didn't happen. So, so I then, the major was philosophy and religion but I majored in philosophy really. And with an emphasis on the logical approach, logical analysis which worked very well for law school and worked very well for my computer like mind at the time. Speaker 1: All right. And did, did you take any of the sciences then? Speaker 2: (Laughter) I had to. One way I got through it because I, I, I never liked science, I never liked it. I like it better now, I mean I read, you know, all you have to do is publish a book, book that says, you know, physics for the ordinary man, or woman or, you know, something like that and I'm gonna buy it and read it. So I, all that stuff I read now. But in college my, I, I it was poetry and literature and history and stuff like that. But I had to take something that qualified as non-humanities. And one thing I did was I took a logic and for some reason logic, oh, logic was treated as a science. Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: And I, I got to the point where I was grading logic papers for the underclassmen. That's one of the things that I, I did to earn money. So I got pretty far advanced in terms of classical logic. And the second course I took was biology. Biology, the only course I got a D in, in college. Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: And the reason I got a D in biology is because in the lab one day they asked us to dissect fetal pigs and I refused to do it. I just was not gonna do it. And I didn't do it. And they gave me a, a different assignment. I had to go out and do a botany scrapbook, you know, it had to have a thousand different varieties of something, you know, I, I, I spent days and days walking around the fields of upstate New York putting together this thing. And so I passed the course but I got a D (laughter), yeah. Story_ID: 156685 Speaker 1: Now why did you apply to, to Cornell [University, Ithaca, New York]-- Speaker 2: Yeah, in a way, in a way it was a little bit like getting to Hamilton [College, Clinton, New York]. In the sense, that I had a professor who knew the assistant dean at Cornell who was a Hamilton graduate, and I got to my senior year not knowing what I was gonna do next and so I, you know, back then if you didn't know what you were gonna do you went to law school. So I took the L.S.A.T.s [Law School Admissions Test] and I did very well. I'll never forget 'cause it was one, one of the two times in, in college the night before I got drunk, that only happened twice, and one of those was the night before the L.S.A.T.s but I still kind of scored off the charts. And I remember after the football game, this professor had me come over for dinner and he introduced me to this dean at Hamilton, at Cornell and we got me applied then. And so I applied to Cornell and Columbia [University, New York, New York] and I got admitted to both places. And got a scholarship to both places, about the same amount of money. Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: And I decided that I'd rather be poor in Ithaca, New York rather than New York City [New York], so that's why I went to Cornell instead of Columbia. And I got to Cornell and I worked like a dog. The second reason I went to, I went to Cornell was that I'd fallen in love with this coed who was at Cornell. And she and I actually married, she's my kids' mother, and she was, she was a junior Phi Beta probably the first black ever to be a junior Phi Beta at Cornell, she was a very smart lady. She's now like number three at the Library of Congress I think. Carolyn Brown is her name. But I worked my head off that first year, especially the first semester. I didn't know it at the time but the secret of law school is the first year because its, its, it sets everything in terms of are you gonna be at the top of the class or at the bottom of the class? Are you gonna get opportunities at large law firms to spend summers or are you gonna not get those opportunities? It kind of sets everything. And I just worked and worked and worked and at the end of the first semester I was fiftieth in the class, class of a 185 students. I was just, I was beside myself with shame. And I remember talking to that guy, the assistant dean and who, who kind of mentored me at Cornell in the same way that people did at Hamilton, and he said, "Ty you did very well. You're in the top, you know, you're in the top third of the class would you, why are you unhappy?" And when he said that to me, I stormed out of his office. I didn't speak to him for the next semester. I was so upset that he would think that I would accept that. Well, second semester I was first in the class. Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: Now a 180 students, I was the only black one, I was number one. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So that kind of set the tone for law school, yeah. Speaker 1: Now you, you had-- Speaker 2: Editor of the law review and, yeah. The other thing was that in that first year back then they had what they call the, a mock court competition where you stood up in front of judges from the state courts and but they started off with you writing a brief, an argument, and the argument would get graded and then you argue, and it was an elimination contest back then. They don't do it now but the whole class was re, required to participate. And so there would be, you know, the first round was ninety arguments, the next round was forty-five arguments, you know, that kind of thing. And it went on for a month I remember. I, I was, I, it came down to me and one other guy. Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: He beat me. It was, as a finalist but I spent a month doing nothing but drinking beer and I forget what I ate but I didn't eat very much, like my stomach was so upset. That made me decide that I was not gonna be a court lawyer, a litigator. I decided I'd have a heart attack at thirty-five if I did that, so. Story_ID: 156686 Speaker 1: Did you know any lawyers back in New Jersey or-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Any, have any sense of-- Speaker 2: I didn't, no, I didn't have that in my background. Speaker 1: Were there any black lawyers in town that, you know, of in New Jersey? Speaker 2: I'm sure there were but I didn't know any. Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: You mean, in New Jersey? I, I after my sophomore year in college I really didn't-- Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: --you know, I didn't spend much time in New Jersey. Speaker 1: I just wonder if you had any role models as, or someone you know of-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --black attorney that that-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --you got a sense of-- Speaker 2: I really didn't. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I really never did 'cause when I came here [Washington, D.C.] out of law school, the major law firms didn't have any black lawyers either, so there was nobody to look up to in that regard. I was the first black lawyer hired by a major law firm in this city. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So you're at Cornell [University, Ithaca, New York], you're the only black law student-- Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: --in the class. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Right. Did others (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: There was one black student who was a third year student when I was a first year student but after that I was the only one. Story_ID: 156687 Speaker 1: Who are some of the, are there any memorable encounters with teachers or did anybody serve as a mentor-- Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: --for you. Speaker 2: One guy, a guy named Thoron Gray [sic, Gray Thoron]. I had dinner with him about five years ago, I wonder if he's still alive. I'm sorry, Gray Thoron. He was a, a teacher there. He had been a dean. Had come out of Texas. He took a great interest in students. Students didn't return the respect sometimes that he should have gotten. He wasn't a powerful intellect in terms of a teacher but he took great interest in students, and he took a great interest in me. And I suppose I probably aced his course 'cause I aced all of them in my second semester. There were three or four professors who I really became close to in part because I was very argumentative in class so if class got quiet, they'd point at me and I'd expound on some topic and they'd use me as a teaching tool. Sometimes it meant making me out to be a fool, you know. That's the way it, you know, that's what happened in law school back then. But there were three professors I got to know, Gray Thoron I mentioned in particular because in my senior year, unknown to me, he wrote a letter to Earl Warren, who was then Chief Justice of the United States, describing me and my achievements at Cornell Law School [Ithaca, New York] and my background and urging the Chief Justice to consider me to be one of his law clerks, one of his three law clerks. Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: And I found out about it when I got a letter, no I don't know whether it was a letter or it couldn't have been a call because I didn't have a telephone, they would have had to call the law school, so maybe it was a letter but asking me to come to Washington [D.C.] interview for the job. Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: And I came down and I interviewed, now with him, he didn't interview his law clerks, he had a committee of former law clerks who interviewed for the position. Speaker 1: Now this is, this is 1964? Speaker 2: No, this is now, I graduated in 1964-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --from, from college. Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: So this would have been 1966, the (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Okay. So it was after graduating? Speaker 2: This is the fall before I graduated from law school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I went to law school in '64 [1964]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I graduated in '67 [1967]. And I went all the way from kindergarten through law school without ever missing a year in terms of school. Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: Which was quite common then. It isn't now. Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: And I would have benefited from a year of working in the real world, clearly. Speaker 1: So it's the summer of, of '66 [1966]? Speaker 2: So it would have been, it was the fall of '66 [1966]. Speaker 1: Fall of '66 [1966]. Speaker 2: Early fall of '66 [1966]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, and I went down. And I think, maybe late in the fall, maybe in December I came to Washington. It was my first real trip to Washington. I had been in Washington once before in my life. I remember getting a haircut at a little barber shop over on Fifteenth Street which was then the, the area where the law firms were. And I was interviewed by three lawyers who I know or I knew later, who had law-clerked for Earl Warren. And maybe six weeks later I got a letter from the Chief Justice saying that he had selected me as one of his law clerks. Story_ID: 156688 Speaker 1: Here is Earl Warren, Chief Justice, United States Supreme Court, you're gonna law clerk for (laughter) Earl Warren. Did, at the time did you have a sense of the, of his position in terms of civil rights and the country? Speaker 2: Well, I did have a sense of it and the reason, the reason I had, a particular reason I had a sense of it, was that Earl Warren and Thurgood Marshall were my mother's [Julia Goodman Brown's] heroes. So much so, that from the time that I could first remember, my mother would say to me and to people in my hearing, "Ty's gonna be my doctor, Ty's gonna grow up to be a doctor, Ty's gonna be a doctor," okay. After Brown verses Board of Education [1954], my mother would say, "Ty's gonna be a lawyer, Ty's gonna be a lawyer." Another reason was that Earl Warren who had been governor of California before he became Chief Justice of the United States before [Dwight D.] Eisenhower made him, nominated him for Chief Justice of the United States, about which Eisenhower later said, "The, the biggest damn fool mistake I ever made." He had been a very powerful governor of California. But they had six children, and so my mother had this great sense of affinity, she was that kind of person with the Warren family and followed their history, she knew the family, the kids, and everything because, you know, they had a big bunch of kids and she had a big bunch of kids and so. Funniest thing in the world I, I, I remember sitting with some people many years later talking about my mom, and when my mother was here she'd sit in there and watch this television a good part of the day 'cause she wasn't mobile and she always watched, always wanted to watch one movie. And I just couldn't understand why she has, I would say to people she has nothing in common with this woman, why does she wanna watch this movie all the time, you know. If I ever gave her a chose, a choice on a movie to watch she just wanted to watch 'Coal Miner's Daughter'. Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: You know what 'Coal Miner's Daughter' was, okay. Whose story is it, it's the country singer [Loretta Lynn]'s story. I forget which country singer. Speaker 1: Yeah. You know, Sissy-- Speaker 2: Sissy Spacek played the role. Speaker 1: --she's, she's in it, yeah. Speaker 2: And she did a very good job of it. My mother must have watched that movie 500 times. Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: And then finally, finally, some woman said to me, "Ty, don't you understand? She had a bunch of babies when she was young, your mother had a bunch of babies when she was young, of course, she under, you know, they have something in common." But she, she had this strong feeling for Earl Warren, so I mean, this is really kind of weird that I would wind up working for Earl Warren and that it would be the year that Thurgood Marshall came to the Court. It was the year that that [Lyndon Baines] Johnson appointed Thurgood Marshall to the Court, and so it was his first year there. Speaker 1: Now, were you really kind of up on the civil rights movement when you were in Hamilton [College, Clinton, New York] and-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: (Unclear) Speaker 2: I was not. It's one of my, it's one of the things about which I'm ashamed of that, in terms of my life. Speaker 1: Well, you're in a--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: That I didn't plan where I could go. Speaker 1: --in little isolated situation. Speaker 2: Yeah, I know, I know. Speaker 1: You're an achiever, you're trying to achieve as much as you can. Speaker 2: I know, all, all of that is true and I give myself that but I, I, wish that I had, I mean Bob Moses [Robert Parris Moses] was very active. It was after he graduated from college but even so he was very active but I never was. I remember the March on Washington in 1963. I worked that summer, my dad [Madison Brown] got me a temporary union card as a construction worker for the summer and I needed to make money. And I remember when people from my area were, were getting on buses and, you know, coming down to, to march, I made the decision that I couldn't, that I had to work, that I couldn't do that. But I wish I had, you know. I missed something and it was something very important. Story_ID: 156689 Speaker 1: Okay. So, there's a story about Earl Warren and your mother [Julia Goodman Brown] you want to tell. Speaker 2: Well, the, the year was very hard. It was hard for me because at, at Cornell [University Law School, Ithaca, New York] I had studied mostly business law. And there's a big divide between business law, commercial law, and constitutional law which is what the court practices. And so I wasn't, wasn't nearly as strong in constitutional law and I felt even weaker, so it was a difficult year for me but I got through it and did some good stuff. But at the end of the year, during the year, you worked round the clock. You worked, if you were awake, you were working because you were doing research for these very, very important positions that the judges were writing, the opinions which affect the whole country and you just worked and worked and worked. And the only time that we were awake and not working was on Saturday afternoon, the chief [Chief Justice Earl Warren] would come and get his law clerks, and there were three of us, plus we had another guy, who, who was, was assigned to a retired justice but helped the chief, and he would take us to the University Club in Washington [D.C.] on 16th Street for lunch. And we would sit and have lunch and over lunch he would tell us stories about when he was governor or stories about the court, or stories about how he came to positions on decisions, it was really very intimate close stuff. And, you know, we'd sit with him for maybe two, two and a half hours, he'd go off and take a swim in the University Club and we'd go back to work at the court. And this would happen every Saturday that he was in town. It was really a very important part of the job. And at one of those sessions, I told him I think about how he was my mother's [Julia Goodman Brown's] heroes, he and Thurgood Marshall. He said, "I'd like to meet your mom, bring her in some time." I said, "Okay I'll do that." He was a nice man, okay. We get to the end of the term, and this is, this was a very trying time in America and I'm now talking about the year that Gene McCarthy [Eugene McCarthy] did not win in New Hampshire but he became close, Lyndon Johnson abdicated, said he wasn't gonna run for President, [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] was killed, Bobby Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy] was killed, and Richard Nixon became President, that's the year I'm talking about, now. Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty-- Speaker 2: Eight [1968]. Speaker 1: --eight [1968]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And Earl Warren retired as Chief Justice of the United States, all in 1968, my first year in Washington. And so we get to the end of the term and I get a call from his majordomo, Mrs. McCune [ph.]. Mrs. McCune scared the hell out of every law clerk. She would treat us like we were babies, okay. And she calls me and she said, "Mr. Brown," I said, "Yes Ms. McCune." "Mr. Brown, the Chief tells me that you promised to have your mother come in to see him and you haven't done it, when are you gonna do it?" I said I didn't know he was for real, of course, and yeah one of those things. I said, "I'll, I'll have her here tomorrow." She said, "Okay, what time?" Next day early morning my mom gets a train from East Orange, New Jersey, comes down. I take her in to meet with the Chief and we go in and I sit and I introduce them and then the two of them look at me. And I'm just sitting there, and, and the Chief says you don't need to stay here Ty. I walked out and they spent forty-five minutes talking. Speaker 1: So they dismissed you? Speaker 2: And, and so after and for years after I'd say, ask my mother what did you guys talk about? She says, "That was between me and him" she would say, (laughter) yeah, forty-five minutes. Speaker 1: That gives us some insight into Earl Warren. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: How did you do, did you interact with him much when you were-- Speaker 2: Years later, many years later she said they talked about their children. Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: I should have guessed that. Story_ID: 156690 Speaker 1: You were asking another question about Earl Warren. Speaker 2: Yeah, did you interact much with him [Earl Warren], you know, on a daily basis in (unclear)? Speaker 1: No, because the other justices, you had, there were three office suites, you had the justice here, you had his majordomo here, and you had his law clerks here, and the other justice, the one difference between the other justice and the chief justice was that the chief justice had three clerks. In part because we handled more cases. We had a, a, a part of the docket that only we handled. With the chief, the, the entire suite was taken up by him and his majordomo, so his law clerks were upstairs in huge offices, (laughter) you know, but we were upstairs. Speaker 2: Hmm. Speaker 1: And so we didn't see him day to day. We saw him when he called us down and we saw him on Saturday and he'd call us down when we were working on opinions with him. Speaker 2: So what were some of the opinions, important opinions that you worked on (unclear) Speaker 1: My opinions were, were not that important. I mean they were important at the time. One was a criminal case it, that extended the right to get a federal hearing to people in jail beyond what they could before that. Another case was an antitrust case. The most important (unclear) case I worked on, never got argued in the court but it sure taught me a lesson. I, I mentioned to you that we handled a group of cases, the Chief's law clerks that the others didn't. And what they were, were cases that came from the jails. They were the cases where people in prison wrote letters to the Supreme Court saying that they had been convicted unfairly, that they were treated badly or something. And we called it the pauper's docket. And only the Chief Justice and his law clerks went through that docket looking at cases to determine whether injustice had been done and if the clerk and then the Chief concluded that an injustice had been done, then the Chief would take that case to the other justices to see whether they were willing to hear it. You follow me? Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: And that's one reason why he had three clerks because we, that was a huge docket in of, in of itself but we were the only ones who briefed it for the whole court. Story_ID: 156691 Speaker 1: Raiford State Prison [Florida State Prison] in 1967, Raiford State Prison in Florida had a prison riot. And they quelled the riot and I don't know whether blacks and whites were involved in the riot or not but it was blacks who wrote this letter to the court, they described what I'm describing to you. They were the riot was quelled, a group of them were placed in a cell, twenty men or more, in an eight by eight cell, naked-- Speaker 2: Hmm. Speaker 1: --kept there for days with the only toilet facility being a hole in the middle of the cell and fed porridge. And I read this thing, I said this is, I read it, I read it and I said this is crazy, there's nobody would do that. Then another one arrives and one of my co-clerks who saw it said, "Ty here's another one of the things from Raiford," 'cause we'd talk about our cases. And then another one, and another one, and another one. And so I finally said, "Hey, maybe something happened down there, there." Oh, they, Florida made a mistake, the mistake they made was that they took these guys out of jail, took them before a court, and had their sentences extended for rioting, okay. And when they did that, that had confessions from these guys, the confessions were gotten from them while they were naked, starving, and had police dogs nipping at their legs (laughter). Okay, this actually happened in 1967. I can't believe it had happened. So I write a memo to the Chief [Chief Justice Earl Warren] I says, "Look one or two of these it's incredible but we got about eight of 'em," and, and he took an interest in it. In one of those cases when you took an interest in it, one of the jail cases, what would happen is the court would send a letter to the attorney general of the state saying would you tell us what happened here. The attorney general of Florida didn't respond. Another letter went to the attorney general of Florida, he still didn't respond. So then the Chief said okay. He took it to the court. You know, I wrote up a memorandum for the court, took it to the court. The other justices, liberals and conservatives, took the position that the court, one of the rules unspoken of the, the Supreme Court then was that it did not get involved in prison discipline cases, you know. Once you go to prison you lose your civil rights. They, and it wouldn't get involved in prison discipline cases. On that basis the other justices did not wanna take the case. Story_ID: 156692 Speaker 1: Warren [Chief Justice Earl Warren] was furious, he was livid. He, his approach, which was my approach, was that this is not prison discipline because they took them out to the civil courts and convicted 'em and gave them additional time, okay. That's not prison discipline, that's a criminal conviction and we haven't given that up. He comes to me and he says, "Brown, I want you to draft up something for me to work with because I'm gonna dissent, I'm going to write a dissent from the refusal of the court to take this case," which almost never happens that a justice will say I dissent because the court won't even hear a case. And I wrote something up for him and he looked at it and he called me down and he said you, you know, I didn't, I didn't describe the gruesomeness of the facts. He said it's not gory enough, you're not describing the gruesomeness of the facts. And I went back up and worked on it some more and sent it back down to him, he called me down and says you still haven't got it. He said, "Look, Brown, what you've gotta do is you gotta say they took these men, they stripped them naked, they put them in an eight by eight room, twenty of them, and with a hole in the middle for them to defecate in, they brought them out, and in front of dogs nipping at their asses, they signed confessions. And that's not America. That's what you have to write." And he said, "And if the rest of them wanna take the position that that is America, let's put it in the books and let posterity decide." That's what he said to me. I went back and I wrote it. He took it to the court for a conference, you know, with a, when they, they issue their orders, they would sit in conference and then decide what they were gonna do. After the conference he, he called me down and he said, "Well you know that little case?" I said, "Yeah," he said, "Well, you know, after the dissent was circulated, you know, first Justice Brennan, then Justice Marshall, then Justice Stewart came and said they wanted to join my dissent," and so I got a majority to take the case. And then he said, "Justice Black sat there and said that, you know, I'll join you if you agree to take the case, reverse the decision below summarily without argument on that dissent," being the court's per curium opinion. Court never heard the case, they just reversed it [Brooks v. Florida, 1967]. That was [Chief Justice] Earl Warren. Speaker 2: Hmm. Speaker 1: That's the kind of person he was. Story_ID: 156693 Speaker 1: Well, 1968 tell us about, I asked this story of a lot of people, what were you doing April 4, 1968 when [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] was assassinated, were you in [Washington] D.C.? Speaker 2: I was working at the [U.S.] Supreme Court. Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: The year was kind of winding down. I was in my office when the word went out. I know it because my office overlooked downtown from the Supreme Court building (laughter). Supreme Court building has a garage under it, you know, you're on my first year in Washington, I've got a parking garage for my little Volkswagen and driving in every morning, you know, at seven o'clock in the morning, the guards going (unclear) (saluting) (laughter) little black boy from Newark [New Jersey], yeah. But I didn't, I didn't have a real appreciation of the irony then, you know, looking back on it now I have an appreciation of the irony. I was working in my office, I think somebody from the, probably, Ms. McCune [ph.] called us and told us what had happened. The night before it happened, didn't it happen at night or did it happen in-- Speaker 1: It happened in the afternoon. Speaker 2: In the afternoon, okay. Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: And I watched, from my office I watched downtown Washington go up in smoke, could see it, and here I am at the Supreme Court of the United States looking down to Sixth Street, which was the old downtown, and gradually it was going up in smoke. The federal government let people off from work early but no buses were running. And so everybody was walking home, it was like you were at a, in, in a since, it was a like you were at a, it was a beautiful sunny day and it was a warm day it was the week before Easter Sunday I think. Yeah, that would be about right. And I lived in what was then called the New Southwest. My wife [Carolyn T. Brown] was working at the Library of Congress. I left my car at the court because the people were in the streets. Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: We, that weekend the city was locked down. They brought in a lot of troops because of the riots. They weren't riots; they were lootings, they really weren't riots but a lot of the old inner city burned up. I think, I think that that oddly enough, I think that that time wound up doing great economic damage to black America because we burned up our own communities. Where the small business people were, a lot of them black, we burned up our own communities. And it's, and, and it took twenty, thirty years or more for the recovery to take place. But that weekend, the lootings continued and it was going on all around the country and the burning. And we had paratroopers at every street corner in the inner city and we had a curfew from dust to dawn. But a call went out for lawyers to come to the local court to stand up with people who had been picked up and were being arraigned, who had been jailed, you know, for looting or whatever. And so I climbed into my Volkswagen and drove off to the courts to stand up with the people who were being arraigned. And every block along the way, I lived on the south, the south side of the [National] Mall, the courts were on the north side of the Mall, every block along the way I got stopped by a soldier and one of them would point the gun from one side and the other one would point it from the other side into my car and they'd ask me where I was going 'cause I wasn't supposed to be out there. And I'd tell 'em, "I'm a lawyer and I'm going up the road to the courts to stand up for arraignments," they say, "Okay, sir," and I'd go another block the same thing would happen, Washington, D.C. Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: Yeah, I remember 1968 man, yeah it was something; it was weird. It was so weird. And then Bobby [Robert F. Kennedy] got killed. Speaker 1: About two months later, I guess. Speaker 2: In early June [June 6, 1968]. Story_ID: 156694 Speaker 1: Maybe late May, maybe late May. But when Bobby [Robert F. Kennedy] got killed the week after that [June 6, 1968], the Chief [Justice Earl Warren] told us he was gonna resign. And I always felt he decided to resign because he thought things had just gotten out of hand. Speaker 2: Hmm. Speaker 1: And he said that he, that Richard Nixon was gonna be President and he didn't wanna be, serve under Richard Nixon as President. Speaker 2: How old was Earl Warren at that point? Speaker 1: I'm gonna guess he was early eightiess at that point. Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: I remember one of the things that happened with the Chief was, and all the justices did this, and I'm sure they still do, do it, at the end of the year, they have a weekend with their clerks-- Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: --and their clerks' wives. And the former clerks come to Washington and spend the weekend with the justices, the Chief did it every year, and so his clerks could, going all the way back to 1954, would come to Washington with their wives and there would be a dinner at the Congressional Club and a stag dinner at some place downtown and a brunch and it would be a really nice weekend. And he did it that year. And what stands out particularly from that year for me is that at the stag dinner, on Saturday night at a club downtown on H Street, we were sitting there having cigars and cordials after dinner, 'cause you wore your, you know, your formal clothes for that one dinner, or you rented them (laughter). And we're sitting there and he's talking to the group and in walks Lyndon Johnson. He, nobody came to those affairs but the justice and his clerks but he did that as a mark of respect for, for Earl Warren because Earl Warren had announced his, no, he hadn't yet announced his retirement but he had told Lyndon Johnson he was retiring. Speaker 2: Hmm. Speaker 1: Lyndon Johnson walked, and I'll never forget that, I've been around presidents, I mean, I sat, sat next to Bill Clinton [William Jefferson Clinton], I've met with, with Jimmy Carter [James Earl "Jimmy" Carter] many times, I've been in the same room with Bush and, you know, I mean, you know, I've, I spent time [HM Barack] Obama. Lyndon Johnson walked into that room that night and it was like lights came on from all over, it was just I, I've never seen, I've never experienced anything like it. He just took over the room, you know, the Chief Justice was a powerful and important man, very important to me, it was just, I've never experienced the physical charisma of an individual in the way that I experienced it with Lyndon Johnson that night. Speaker 2: You know, now, now that's in contrast to his TV persona which seemed to be kind of dull. Speaker 1: I know, exactly. Speaker 2: But-- Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, exactly. Speaker 2: The man was the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Exactly right. Speaker 2: --the [U.S.] Senate whip, right. He was a Senate whip. He was the majority-- Speaker 1: (Unclear) Oh, yeah he's-- Speaker 2: --before he became-- Speaker 1: Absolutely. Story_ID: 156695 Speaker 1: And he [Lyndon B. Johnson] got cowed by the Kennedys when you think about it because he, you know, he takes over in, in tragic cir- circumstances, they never accept him, the country never accepts him really. His story really is kind of a tragic story in that sense. But boy, whew, I'll never forget that one. But in many ways the city was kind of surreal when you think about it. I mean the riots, you know, watching from the [U.S.] Supreme Court, watching the city burn up, the troops-- Speaker 2: Bobby-- Speaker 1: And then later, and then later in the, in, in the spring Bobby [Robert F. Kennedy] gets killed and you go through another surreal experience, they had the funeral, I'll never forget, up in, at, I think it was at St. Patrick's in New York [New York]. And then the idea was, was that they were gonna dictate the train down to Washington [D.C.] and he was gonna be paraded down Pennsylvania Avenue to his burial place in Arlington Cemetery. And so there's a huge crowd lining the road from Union Station all the way down Pennsylvania Avenue past the White House, and they don't arrive. We get out there in the early afternoon and they don't arrive, and they don't arrive, and they don't arrive, and it goes on and on and on and there are troops all over the place, and there are people sitting and waiting. And finally after dusk they arrive and what had happened was the train had killed a kid coming down from New York and it had delayed them by an hour or two, you know, there had been other delays, a little black boy. Speaker 2: Hmm. Speaker 1: You know, because people were out all the way down on, watching. And when the, when the funeral group went through it was night and it was, you know, all these troops and special police and it wasn't a, it was a, it wasn't a mourning it was a, it was, if felt like something happening in Russia, you know. It was just, it was just a weird time. It was a weird, weird time. I had been hoping to go to work for Bobby Kennedy in his election once I left the court but I didn't get to do that, obviously. Story_ID: 156696 Speaker 1: So later that year [1968] Richard Nixon's elected president. Speaker 2: Yeah. And by then I had taken a job as a young associate lawyer in Washington [D.C.]'s then largest law firm. It was called Covington & Burling [LLP]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: All right. Now, how did that come about, how did you get that position? Speaker 2: A guy who, the way things always happen, being, being, you know, a Supreme Court law clerk you're gonna get many offers for jobs but before that I had gotten many offers for jobs in New York [New York], Washington [D.C.], and Cleveland [Ohio]. I almost went to Cleveland because I was an editor of my law review, you know, on top of the class in law school. So when the year that I'm working at the court, a partner from, it's not on your list, I don't know why, a partner at Covington & Burling called me and said let's have lunch. So he came over and had lunch with me one day. And we talked and talked and I think he invited me over to meet with the lawyers at some point, I, and I was very impressed by the fact, impressed, well that's the word I used maybe it was impressed, but back then I was gonna be the first black lawyer in a major law firm in Washington and this law firm was, you know, the, the law firm at the time, and so I took the job there. I almost went to a very good law firm in Cleveland called Jones Day, except that every time I went out to Cleveland they took me to Shaker Heights [Ohio], and I said, "Well if they don't want me to see the city it must be a reason not to move there (laughter)." I really liked the law firm and I liked the people there. And I got a very good education at, at Covington. I was only there for two years, a little more than two years. And I went to work for [Edmund] Ed Muskie, that's when I went back to Capitol Hill. Speaker 1: Okay. So you were there from '68 [1968] to '70 [1970] (unclear)? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And Ed Muskie, I, I went to work for Ed Muskie when he was running for president, so that would have been '71 [1971] or so [sic, 1972]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I was staff director of the committee that he chaired and I worked on writing speeches for him and stuff like that. Story_ID: 156697 Speaker 1: Yes, while were you at Covington & Burling [LLP], we were saying off camera that the largest antiwar protest took place on the [National] Mall in '69 [1969] I think it was? Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-nine [1969] or 1970, I don't remember which, maybe both times, probably both times. One of them was a major student event. That was the one where the young lady stuck the iconic flower in the barrel of the, of the iconic rifle that a soldier was holding, you've seen that picture. Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: For those of us who lived in Washington [D.C.] whether we participated or not, our friends would come to town and they'd wind up sleeping on your living room floor, you know, because they came to town for the protest. Speaker 1: Did you have some? Speaker 2: We had, oh, yeah we had, we had that two or three times. Speaker 1: Now, were you married at this point? Speaker 2: I was married, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I married while I was in law school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And my wife [Carolyn T. Brown] was, while I was in law school, she was a year behind me and she was studying for a Ph.D. but we didn't stay in Ithaca [New York] along enough for her to get it. She got her Ph.D. at GW, George Washington [University, Washington, D.C.]-- Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: --here in Washington after we had a couple of kids. But for one of them and I think it was the second one, I was not an active protester. Although I was very much opposed to the war, and for one of them the organizers of the protest came up with a great idea to get lawyers and doctors who were unwilling to take part in the protests for various reasons to be out there on the street and they named a class of people they called legal observers and medical observers whose job it was to try to keep the crowd calm, try to monitor and watch what the police were doing and the soldiers were doing and the, you know, to kind of keep things under control. So I jumped into that role. I was a legal observer. And I'll never forget this one, on Saturday night, and I think this was in the spring of 1970 but I'm not sure, there was a huge protest. There I was being a monitor, I was standing on the police line in front of the South Vietnamese Embassy which was then at, god I can't remember the name of this circle, but it was on Massachusetts Avenue, it's right on a circle, not Dupont Circle, it's the next circle west from Dupont Circle, like Sheridan Circle or something like that. And the marchers were coming from Dupont Circle, you know, they were trying to get to the embassy and then there was this thin line of blue, police officers and silly me standing there with 'em. Silly because I didn't recognize or didn't stop to think they all had on gas masks and I didn't (laughter). And the crowd comes up Massachusetts Avenue and all of a sudden I start hearing these lawn mowers, they're spewing out tear gas. And it was the first, my first experience of tear gas and I really panicked. The whole crowd just fooo, dispersed. And I went running headlong down Massachusetts Avenue because it's not tear gas, it's asphyxiating is what it is, you think, you think you're not gonna be able to breathe. I couldn't get my breath and that you know, and somebody finally tackled me and put a wet rag up against my face and I could breathe again. So that was my experience during that particular protest. Story_ID: 156698 Speaker 1: But shortly after that, so this was late '70 [1970] I think, shortly after that, one day I was having dinner with my wife [Carolyn T. Brown] and two very good friends, and he was a young lawyer too, we each had two kids and, and their older son and my older son are best of friends to this day. And we were sitting having dinner at their house, they lived right next door to us for a while down in the southwest, and I announced that I was gonna leave my law firm. Speaker 2: Hmm. Speaker 1: And I said that I had to go to work for somebody who was gonna get rid of Richard Nixon because I thought he was destroying the country. Next Monday I went to work and announced that I was leaving. And then the people at the firm helped me get a job, and they helped me get a job with [Edmund] Ed Muskie who was-- Speaker 2: Hmm. Speaker 1: --gonna run for-- Speaker 2: So-- Speaker 1: --for president. Speaker 2: --when you announced you were leaving, you had no idea what you were gonna-- Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: --do. Speaker 1: I just, I just wanted to do something that would, you know, that would-- Speaker 2: Could it get, the kind of work you were doing at the firm was-- Speaker 1: Corporate. Speaker 2: --corporate law. Speaker 1: Corporate business work, which is set, put me in good stead for much of my career. I've spent most of my career doing start-ups, yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Now Edmund Muskie tell me, now had-- Speaker 1: Nice man. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Nice man. Speaker 2: Okay. From Maine, right? Speaker 1: He, he was (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: He was senator from Maine. Speaker 1: He was senator from Maine. I think he had been governor of Maine for a short period. Kind of large family, I think he had four kids. Family man, I, I don't think he would have made a great president because he was too much of a detailed person. He had that same weakness that Jimmy Carter [James Earl "Jimmy" Carter] had. But such a solid, caring person, kind of salt of the earth American all the way, you know. Didn't come from money kind of like Jimmy Carter in that way to. A very good senator who was responsible for most of the environmental legislation of the 1960s and that's when the big foundation of environmental legislation was passed he was, he was "Mr. Environment." He had run for Vice President with I'm gonna say Hubert Humphrey. Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm trying to think of who ran with Humphrey-- Speaker 1: (Unclear) Speaker 2: Who ran in '68 [1968]? Speaker 1: It might have been-- Speaker 2: Humphrey-- Speaker 1: I think it might have been Muskie. Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm (unclear) Humphrey and Muskie. Speaker 1: Yeah, I think it was Muskie. He was a very good senator, very well-respected. And he hired me in a position that I wasn't prepared for, like so much of what I did in my early years, too much of that. He made me staff direct of the subcommittee that he chaired in the Senate. So I was the first black director of a Senate subcommittee or committee, it was called the Committee on Intergovernmental Relations, Subcommittee on Intergovernmental relations. We held hearings while I was there on something called revenue sharing with the state. One of the people who came to testify at those hearings was a governor from Georgia, the name was Jimmy Carter. Another one who came to testify was a mayor I later knew from Newark, New Jersey. I can't think of his name right now, black mayor from Newark, New Jersey. I did a lot of writing, briefing papers for the senator, senator on urban issues. Story_ID: 156699 Speaker 1: Kenneth Gibson from Newark [New Jersey]. Speaker 2: Ken Gibson. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: You got it (laughter). I, he, I and [HM the Honorable Reverend] Walter Fauntroy escorted him to the first Congressional Black Caucus-- Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: --dinner, the first one (laughter). What a character, oh, he [Edmund Muskie] was a character. He, he didn't like being, he didn't like being led around, directed. He didn't like, he wanted to do what he wanted to do, he didn't want, he would, I would sit down with him, for a while I actually ran his office, you know, his main Senate office and then I had to oversee his schedule, oversee getting stuff to him, that kind of thing, being sure he was in the right place, saying who could be with him and who couldn't, you know, that kind of thing. And he, I'd go through the day's schedule with him and he would, "When do I get to go to the bathroom Brown? Yeah, do I ever get to go to the bathroom around here (laughter)." I remember he's running for president and it must have been the, the Christmas of 1971 at the end of '71 [1971], and I'm, he's getting ready to go on Christmas break, okay, but there's certain things he has to do before he can leave, I mean official stuff he has to get done before he can go. And I'm sitting there with his, his personal assistant, nice young lady, and, and, and we're handing him pieces of paper that he has to sign or say yes, I'll do it or no, I won't do that, you know, it, and then in an hour he can go home and forget about us for two weeks. And I'm handing him these pieces of paper and he's balling them up and throwing them across the table to me. And I'm handing him these and he's balling them up and throwing 'em, you know. After about seven or eight of those the, the young lady I can't think of her name, she looks at me and I look at him and okay, okay, Senator go on home, okay. And I just get up and I storm out. And ten minutes later, he was a big man-- Speaker 1: Yeah he was a-- Speaker 2: Yeah, he, he walks through the door into my office and he comes up, he gets up and he comes up to me he looks at me, he puts both arms around me, he picks me up off the ground and hugs me and says, "Ty you have a very good Christmas," and he puts me down and walks out (laughter). I've got, I think I've got his picture over here, maybe I don't, I don't know. (Laughter) What a character. Speaker 1: Edmund Muskie. Speaker 2: What a character. Speaker 1: About 6'4" or some, big guy. Speaker 2: Yeah he was a big man. Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: He did, he literally picked me up off the ground. (Laughter) what a character, good man, very good man. Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: He really cared about America. Speaker 1: So, so he ran for president in '72 [1972] against [Richard] Nixon? Speaker 2: No, he ran, he ran for the nomination in '72 [1972] and--that's work going on over there. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: [George] McGovern actually became the nominee. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: [Edmund] Muskie had the so-called "crying incident" in New Hampshire where people had said that he called Canadian Americans Canucks, which is like calling black people niggers, and he was so angry he just broke into tears. Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: And they got, they got it on film and made it a negative ad and that was the end of his candidacy (laughter). Speaker 1: And to think that that could derail someone's candidacy-- Speaker 2: Yeah, that well did. Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: It did. Speaker 1: Of all the-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --sensational things that we've seen in the past year. Speaker 2: I mean these, these were interesting years. I mean, I'm I, I thought maybe from the end of '71 [1971] until Nixon resigned, I was afraid there was gonna be a [U.S.] Military takeover in this country, I really was. I didn't know well enough about what was going on. Ahh, that's what we skipped over. Story_ID: 156700 Speaker 1: [Edmund] Muskie's campaign was coming to an end and I stopped working for him, and my friend who interviewed me and got me the job at Covington & Burling [LLP], who had brought me over there and who was helpful in getting me the, the job with, with Muskie, came and had lunch with me and said, "Ty, The Washington Post is looking for a general counsel for their broadcast operations." They owned something called Post-Newsweek Stations [later Graham Media Group], I don't think it's in there, Post-Newsweek Stations. The Post-Newsweek Stations was the Channel 9 in Washington [D.C.]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: It was Channel 13 in Jacksonville, Florida. It was Channel 7 in Miami, Florida, and it was maybe, Channel 4 in Hartford, Connecticut. Speaker 2: So that's the Post-- Speaker 1: And they were all owned by The Washington Post. And they owned three radio stations, they owned an FM and an AM in Washington and they owned an AM in Cincinnati [Ohio]. Speaker 2: So these were called-- Speaker 1: Back then, these were the last hey days of the AM broadcast stations. FM was worth nothing, FM was so much worth nothing that during that time at the F.C.C. [Federal Communication Commission] if they, if you won a license for an FM, AM station, they made you take an FM in addition just to get them out, yeah. The Washington Post was concerned because they had broken the, the cover-up story, [Bob] Woodward and [Carl] Bernstein against Richard Nixon, the Watergate break-in, that was all broken by The Washington Post. Speaker 2: Now, now, let's put it-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You start in '71 [1971] and the break-in occurs when in '72 [1972]? Speaker 1: The break-in may have occurred in '71 [1971]. Speaker 2: It may-- Speaker 1: Either '71 [1971] or early '72 [1972]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: I think it may have been '71 [1971]. Speaker 2: They broke in Democratic National Headquarters. Speaker 1: Yeah, Democratic National Headquarters. Speaker 2: You can go on and explain what-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: -what they did in the-- Speaker 1: Well, what it turned out that a group that was being directed from the White House had broken into the Democratic National Committee at the Watergate, which was a group of luxury homes and offices over on the Potomac River, to get into the, the records. A night watchman, saw a piece of tape over a lock and called the police and the police caught these guys. It took six month or maybe even a year for the country to get the full scoop, which was that these guys were directed directly out of the White House, and it is what brought down Richard Nixon. Remember he resigned over the Watergate scandal because of the cover-up, and he was caught on tape taking part in the cover-up. Speaker 2: Yes, but-- Speaker 1: During that period, and The Washington Post broke, broke this story, okay, during, and, and did the follow-up stories, it's what made Woodward and Bernstein famous. Carl Bernstein, I can't remember Woodward's first name. Speaker 2: Bob. Speaker 1: Bob Woodward. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Made them famous. During this period, the tapes that came out, the Nixon tapes that came out, had the Attorney General Mitchell, John Mitchell, saying in a White House conference about Kay Graham [Katharine Meyer Graham], who was the publisher of The Washington Post, it was her family newspaper, saying about her, we're gonna catch that lady's tits in a ringer over their F.C.C. licenses. Speaker 2: Hmm. Speaker 1: My job at Post-Newsweek Stations was to make sure that all of the stations were complying with F.C.C. requirements so that The [Washington] Post, so that the administration wouldn't be able to take away their licenses. Speaker 2: Hmm. Speaker 1: The Post was deathly afraid that, and the admin, and they never, the F.C.C. basically refused to go along with the White House but The Post didn't know that. Story_ID: 156701 Speaker 1: As a result in part, The [Washington] Post which had too much concentration of media power in Washington [D.C.], AM, FM, TV, newspaper, gave away its FM station, which was then the less valuable of the properties, and now, of course, FM is much more valuable, but back then there weren't that many FMs in cars in 1970. Speaker 2: Right. FMs, you know, as a classical-- Speaker 1: Right, exactly. Speaker 2: --station, public radio later, you know. Speaker 1: The FM station became, is it WHUR? Speaker 2: In Howard? Speaker 1: It became the Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] radio station. Speaker 2: I didn't know that. Speaker 1: Became Howard radio station, they gave it, they gave it to the Howard (unclear) just as I was coming over to The Post they gave it to, I, I'd like to claim credit for having done it but I didn't do it, Kay Graham [Katharine Meyer Graham] did it, they gave it to Howard. And so I was going into that milieu, not, that milieu all right, are you ready for this? This is, this is the early 1970s, I mean this country was a different place. There was a guy wandering around named George Wallace, who had been the governor standing in the, you know, in the college room door remember when [James] Meredith and the lady-- Speaker 2: University of Alabama [Tuscaloosa, Alabama]? Speaker 1: Alabama. Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) George was-- Speaker 1: Yeah, that was George. Speaker 2: (Unclear). Speaker 1: That was [George] Wallace. And you remember Wallace ran for president? Wallace is running for president, this will give you some insight into my job at The Washington Post, at the, at Post-Newsweek Stations. He came to, I wanna say Upper Marlboro [Maryland, sic Laurel, Maryland], it was over in that area in Maryland, out here in P. G. [Prince George] County. While he was campaigning, and that was his country because there were a lot of, you know, conservative, poor, and struggling white folks who were resentful of black people moving into the county. And he, he gave a speech at one of the malls there, and he got shot, paralyzed, remember, that's what paralyzed him. I'm working at The Washington Post at the, at the broadcast stations. One of our cameramen calls the news director at the station, his name was Jim Snyder [James L. Snyder], real legend in the industry, Jim Snyder was a, he added all the black people as news people in Washington, Max Robinson, [HM] Maureen Bunyan, J.C. Hayward, right down the line. He hired them at Channel 9. He gets a call from the cameraman, he comes running down to my office, "Ty, Ty, I just got a call from," I can't remember who it was, "I just got a call, he has a picture of the person [Arthur Bremer] who shot George Wallace." I said, "How does he know?" "I got some pictures, Ty, to show you." He says that this guy looks so weird in the crowd that he took his picture twenty minutes before, I said so. He said, "We gotta put it on the air, we gotta put it on the air," I said "You're crazy. Tell the guy to come in." The guy comes in from up Upper Marlboro. And we go, you know, to look at the shot and he's got it on, I think in the early '70s [1970s] they had, it wasn't digital but they had something that wasn't film, it was tape, yeah, it was on tape. Speaker 2: Hmm. Speaker 1: And we sit there and we look at it and he shows this picture of the guy and then he shows the picture of the police wrestling this guy down and you look at him and it's the same person. And Jim is sitting there saying, "Ty we gotta put it on the air." I get the call, I called the shot on something like that. Speaker 2: 'Cause you're the legal advisor (unclear)? Speaker 1: Yeah. I (making sounds) I said, and then finally said, "Okay. Go with it." It went on the air and all the networks took the feed because we were the only one who had a picture of this guy. All the networks, we were on all the networks. That was my job, so. I was twenty-nine years old I think (laughter). Story_ID: 156702 Speaker 1: Now suppose it had been the wrong guy [Arthur Bremer, man who attempted to assassinate George Wallace in 1972]? Speaker 2: I would have been fired (laughter). I knew that, I knew I, if it was the wrong guy I was gonna be fired. But so would the, the guy, the senior vice president for news. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I don't know if you're familiar with the story, this story, I knew Max Robinson very, very well. We became very close. He, he, he was in many ways a tormented person but he was extremely talented, very talented. And in this market he was king. And everybody kind of looked out for him and took care of him, and you had to do that with Max because he was very temperamental. And one night I remember when I was there at the station, Max got into trouble. He was living at the Van Ness Apartments which were, were then new high-rise building up Connecticut Avenue, they're a group of buildings. And he had gone on to the, he got drunk and went down into the courtyard and fired off a pistol three times, and had been arrested. I got into the story because I am sitting at home reading or something and I get a call, first I get a call from the president of the broadcast division saying that Max had been arrested and was in jail. And then I get a call from Max, his one call is to me. And he was in jail over here off of Connecticut Avenue. And so I went over and I eventually talked the police into letting him go but it was on the news. The next morning everybody had it on the news. And the next morning I show up at work early 'cause I know we got a problem to deal with, we've got our anchor, our chief anchor who is, you know, caught drunk and firing off a gun and all the rest of it. And I went to Max house and, and Max said I don't think that, I just don't think I can face the public now. I said Max you're going on the air tonight. You gotta. Don't even, don't even, get it, just get it through your head you're going on the air tonight. And I went back to the station and he was talking with the news director and the, the president of the company over a late breakfast as a matter of fact in the president's office, and he said what are we gonna do? What are we gonna do? I said, if you can put Max on the air tonight, then he's gonna apologize, that's what you're gonna do. He said, hey that's a pretty good idea, that's what we're gonna do. And that's what we did. And Max was passed it just like that. When Max went to Chicago [Illinois] I begged him not to go to Chicago 'cause I knew he had to be taken care of and he wouldn't be taken care of there and he wasn't. Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: Enormous talent but also enormous weakness which often goes along with enormous talent. And people in Washington [D.C.] kind of, you know, they, they took care of Max. And that works probably today but certainly then were a jungle, so he was walking into a jungle where he was gonna get brutalized and he did. Speaker 1: Yeah, the critique of him in Chicago at a later career as a local anchor, was that he was not really a newsman but more of a-- Speaker 2: A TV personality. Speaker 1: (Unclear) yeah, a TV personality. Speaker 2: No, he wasn't a newsman. Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: Yeah. He was never a reporter as such, he was an anchor. So, you know, yeah, that's true. That, that's definitely, that was always true of him but he was a very good anchor. Speaker 1: Yeah, but on that, in the black community we recognize that he also had, like his brother, a sense of, of what's important in terms of the black community. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: That he could put-- Speaker 2: Very strong. He kept his father was for like thirty years the coach of the, the major black high school in Richmond [Virginia]. And he brought, he, both he and his brother brought that that sense of-- Speaker 1: That courage-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --put some courage in-- Speaker 2: Yeah, very, very strong. Story_ID: 156703 Speaker 1: At the Post-Newsweek Stations I rode circuit. That is, I, I would spend three, four days at one of the stations, you know, checking up on everything, are they keeping their records straight, are they, or in go down and get newsmen out of jail, you know, if they, they had been put in jail for some story that ran or something like that so. It's been a lot of times-- Speaker 2: Did that happen? Speaker 1: Yeah, it happened. Speaker 2: (Unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 1: Spent a lot of time in North and South Florida. Speaker 2: Now that can't happen often that-- Speaker 1: No, but they can-- Speaker 2: (Unclear) (simultaneous) when it happened? Speaker 1: I can't, god I can't, you know, I really can't remember. Speaker 2: Was it for-- Speaker 1: But I could. I'm sorry? Speaker 2: Was it for like some, some story they printed out-- Speaker 1: Yeah, it would be, you know, yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: Hmm. Speaker 1: I, I probably would be able to get back to you on it or maybe between now and I could remember one of the incidents but I remember in jack, it happening in Jacksonville [Florida], absolutely, yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So that was my, you know, and people in Jacksonville were very nice to me, people in Miami [Florida] were very nice certainly but I was an officer of The Washington Post Company, you know, so. The only other time is, in, in my career that I spent time in the South was, you remember during the, during the Vietnam War maybe 1971 there was a bunch of protest at, on university campuses all around the country and two kids were killed at Kent State [University, Kent, Ohio]? Speaker 2: Yes, right. Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: That was in '70 [1970], spring of '70 [1970]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Kent State, there were two at Jackson State [University, Jackson, Mississippi] that same spring who were in Mississippi. Speaker 1: Was it, I thought it was '71 [1971]? Speaker 2: That was '70 [1970]. Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And here's, here's why I thought it was '71 [1971] because it was after that, that I went to work for [Edmund] Ed Muskie. So I went to work for Ed Muskie in '70 [1970] then. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: My, before I took the job with Muskie, but before I went to work for Muskie I was asked to take on a special assignment. The special assignment was to be an investigating lawyer for the President's Commission on Campus Unrest [the Scranton Commission]-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --that looked into the shootings at Kent State and Jackson State. Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: I spent the summer in Jackson, Mississippi-- Speaker 2: Hmm. Speaker 1: --interviewing black students who had been wounded or who had been in that girls' dormitory that got shot up and taking part in the hearings. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I have some where a picture of me questioning the adjutant general of the Mississippi National Guard at hearings in Jackson, Mississippi. Story_ID: 156704 Speaker 1: President's Commission on Campus Unrest [the Scranton Commission], now we were discussing you being assigned to go into Mississippi. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And I think you told me off camera what happened but what, well what happened in Mississippi? Speaker 2: I, I think we covered this but Mississippi on the same day as Jackson, that Kent State [University, Kent, Ohio, May 4, 1970], the demonstrations were done in an organized fashion occurred all over, on college campuses all around the country. It may have been May Day that year, just I can't, I think it may have been May Day. Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: And a couple of people of were killed at Kent State and a lot of people remember that but people didn't remember that two kids were also killed at Jackson State [University, Jackson, Mississippi, May 15, 1970] and a lot of them were wounded. Most of the wounded were girls because the state troopers who were surrounding the girls' dormitory shot it up, that's what happened there. Speaker 1: Yeah, I, I never heard about the wounded girls. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I never, I don't recall having heard about that one. Speaker 2: Yeah. And what, at Jackson [Mississippi] was a tinder box after that. And the state wanted to go into the dormitory and quote collect evidence and the students wouldn't let them in. Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: And after a couple of days somebody but together, I don't know who did it, maybe [HM] Reverend [Jesse] Jackson did it for all know he'll remember, but he, we charted an airplane, we, I didn't charter the airplane I was just part of the group that went. But I remember that was my first meeting with [Edmund] Ed Muskie, I think I met with him on that airplane. Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: And as I said, I think [HM] Diahann Carroll was on the plane and Sidney Poitier and a lot of congress men and senators were on the plan. Speaker 1: Said [George Thomas] Mickey Leland. Speaker 2: Yeah, I think Mickey Leland was on the plane. It was, you know, there were, I wanna say there were fifty of us on the plane, you know. And we went down and met with the students committee and promised them that there would be a, an investigation, you know, a, a bipartisan investigation and there was. And I had already decided to leave my law firm, I was going to work with for Ed Muskie and so I took off, I left the law firm and then spent probably what amounted to six weeks mostly in Mississippi, coming home on weekends in Jackson, headquartered in Jackson. And traveling around interviewing students, helping to write the report. I wrote, I wrote, a significant part of the factual part of the report on Jackson State. And I wound up examining the adjutant general of the Mississippi National Guard on television. There was this picture of me questioning him and it was very, quite polite question, he was very polite to me but it was kind of weird in the South to see this young black boy in, interviewing or questioning a, a white general on the stand. It was in the, there was a picture I think on the front page of the New York, of the New Orleans Times Picayune [New Orleans, Louisiana]. Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: And then we did our report. And I went on to work for Ed Muskie. I probably have the, the published report somewhere around here. Story_ID: 156705 Speaker 1: There's also a, from the time that I worked with [Chief Justice] Earl Warren, some years later, many years later, I was asked to participate in a forum about Earl Warren's years on the court so maybe it was thirty years after. Speaker 2: Now, now-- Speaker 1: Maybe it was 1994, maybe it was the fiftieth anniversary of Brown versus Board of Education [1954]. And I wrote a talk that I gave at that conference, it received quite a bit of coverage, as a matter of fact, if you google me it'd probably find it, and it's about my experience that year on the court ['The Warren Court: A Retrospective,' edited by Bernard Schwartz; feat. a chapter by Brown: Clerking for the Chief Justice]. I probably have a copy of that around here to. And it really, it, it captures, it captures what I was feeling about that time fifty years later, I guess. Is it 1954, '94 [1994], forty years not fifty, yeah. Story_ID: 156706 Speaker 1: I was gonna ask you how long you worked for Edmund Muskie? Speaker 2: Only a couple of years. Speaker 1: Couple of years, okay (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I went in to work for him in the campaign, in the campaign. Speaker 1: So you came in 1970 and left in '70 [1970]? Speaker 2: At the end of '71 [1971], as a matter of fact. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: 'Cause his campaign was over and that's when I went for the Washington [D.C.], went to the Washington Post and I was there for three years. (Unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 1: Now we have, we had discussed what you were doing there and-- Speaker 2: Yep, right. Speaker 1: And we kind of went back to the-- Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly. Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So we were actually-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --talked about the-- Speaker 2: The job, at Tte Post. Speaker 1: Post-Newsweek Stations Incorporated-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and what they were doing and now, and--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Yeah, I was vice president and general counsel. Speaker 1: --and how WHUR was started as a (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Of Kay Graham [Katharine Meyer Graham]. Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: Yeah, she was the one who, who donated the station. And I, you know, I can remember, she had, she lived in a mansion in Georgetown [Washington, D.C.], big beautiful house on one of the biggest lots in Georgetown, it takes up half a block I know the house well, and it was in the family for a long time but it's not in that family any more. And I remember one night going there for dinner with, you know, the other officers of the company, my wife and I, and sitting in her parlor and I tried to be very polite because I was by far, you know, by decades the youngest person in the room with my wife. And so when everybody kind of sat on the chairs and the couch and things, I sit on this little stool, you know, basically a foot stool, and I plop down on the foot stool and it went (making sounds) and, of course, it was 200 year old, you know. Oh, she goes, "Don't worry about it (making sounds)." It's things like that you remember. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She was, she was, she was something. I-- Speaker 1: This is Katharine Graham? Speaker 2: Katharine Graham, yeah. Speaker 1: And you called her Kay? Speaker 2: I know her granddaughter. Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I had to think for a minute now, oh, Katharine Graham that's what, you know. Speaker 2: I, I know her, her granddaughter quite well, who is now the publisher of the newspaper. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Newspaper's going through rough times. Another thing that happened there when I was there, the company had just gone public in the late '60s [1960s]. As a matter of fact I think it was, yeah it wasn't her husband Phil Graham, it was Katharine who took the company public. And, and she just worked there in the paper, she had her office in the paper. And I remember seeing, when I did go downtown to the paper offices, I can remember seeing her running around barefoot looking at copy and stuff and talking to people. She was just there working. And one, one day the, the broadcast president, Larry Israel called me and said, "Well, tomorrow Kay's gonna come over to our offices," which were not in the same place as the newspaper, "and she's got, got a person she's thinking about being, putting on the board of the company and she wants all of the officers to meet and, and so we're gonna have break, breakfast at the broadcast station tomorrow, and you're invited to breakfast." So I came and had breakfast that morning with Larry Israel who was my boss and Kay Graham who was the head of the company, and the chairman of the board was there, Fritz Beebe was his name, and the perspective board member, who was Warren Buffet (laughter). You know who that is? Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, Warren Buffet of the-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --many, many, many millions of billions of-- Speaker 2: Yeah, and dry as the dickens. Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: But brilliant, yeah. You know, typical dry Midwesterner (laughter) but boy was he brilliant. Story_ID: 156707 Speaker 1: All right, now you were there, now I guess 'til 1974 and that's, that's a-- Speaker 2: Yeah kind of, yeah. Speaker 1: By this time the, the Watergate hearings were going on and-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah I was there during the, the period of the, I was there when Richard Nixon, I, I was still there when Richard Nixon resigned and [Gerald] Jerry Ford became president. Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: I was still at the [Washington] Post. Speaker 1: Were there any legal issues that you had to, that the Post was, was concerned about? Speaker 2: No, the only thing that happened, the only big political thing that happened after the scandal and then, you know, that went on for two years. Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: It went on from, from '71 [1971] 'til '73 [1973] which is when Richard Nixon resigned, so it went right through the '72 [1972] election. Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: And the only other really big thing that happened during that period was the Pentagon Papers. Of course, the Washington, the Pentagon Papers were initially reported by the New York Times but the Washington Post was one of the three papers that published them. Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: And, you know-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) did any of (unclear) Speaker 2: And, and Nixon tried to put everybody in jail but it didn't work and then ultimately wound up in the Supreme Court. Speaker 1: Right. And these are all-- Speaker 2: So that was going on during that time. Oh, yeah this was a, it was a-- Speaker 1: And this is the-- Speaker 2: --this is a telescoped period of, of big stuff. Speaker 1: Yeah, the exit from Vietnam too? Speaker 2: The exit from Vietnam, yeah all of it, all of it happening-- Speaker 1: Helicopters leaving Saigon [later, Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam]. Speaker 2: --all of this happened between '67 [1967] and '72 [1972]. Completely changed our country, completely changed our country. Story_ID: 156708 Speaker 1: In '74 [1974] though you left The [Washington] Post-- Speaker 2: Yeah, and I went to-- Speaker 1: --or Newsweek--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --I went to Caplin and Drysdale. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Which is another law firm. I wanted to get back into law practice. And I went to practice in a law firm for a bunch of guys I had been-- Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: --that I law clerked with at the Supreme Court. They had gone to this tiny little tax law firm and they loved it. There were three of 'em. And I said, well hell if they like maybe I can like it. And so I went to Caplin and Drysdale and practiced tax law for three years. Speaker 1: Is-- Speaker 2: And was pretty good at it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Anything particularly significant about that? Speaker 2: I just got to be a good tax lawyer which was helpful later on, again, when I had gotten to the field that I really enjoyed which was doing startup businesses. Speaker 1: And now did you have anything to do with the, with the Jimmy Carter campaign? Speaker 2: I did not. I, I was, I was then, I was singularly focused on becoming a partner in a tax law firm because I had taken all of these diversions from law practice, okay. And in terms of law practice I was now behind the game. Guys my age at this point were being made partner in law firms where they had spent six years but I had spent six years, you know, as you can see going back and forth, most of it actually out of law practice. So I was really focused. I had two kids. I knew they were gonna have to go to private school. They were in the public, local public school but once they get, got through sixth grade they were gonna have to go to private school. And so I was really, really focused on that. Story_ID: 156709 Speaker 1: Two things that I would mention about that time, one was that I took a pro bono case, pro bono is a nonpaying case, and the case was against the City of the District of Columbia and [HM The Honorable] Marion Barry was then the mayor and I knew Marion, not well but I knew him. And the case, here's what the case involved, the police were strip searching people that they arrested for traffic violations. They were, in effect they were imposing summary punishment. And the ACLU [American Civil Liberties Union] got wind of it, American Civil Liberties Union, and they decided that it was illegal to be strip searching people that you'd arrested and vaginal and, you know orifice, kind of inspections. Speaker 2: Now-- Speaker 1: People arrested for-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Were they-- Speaker 1: No, they just, I'm gonna tell you the people, I. So the ACLU decided that that they were gonna make the city stop and they brought the case to me. I took the case. I couldn't believe it at first. And the ACLU. found my two, three plaintiffs, we brought a civil action against the city. My three plaintiffs consisted of one, an army sergeant, a retired Army sergeant who was a, a Muslim, clean-cut individual as you'd ever run across in his fifties, and they put him through this, yeah. The second one, now they selected from people who had complained about it so they, they picked the ideal plaintiffs. Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: The second one was a Georgetown University [Washington, D.C.] law student, no college student, blonde, you know, about twenty-two years old and she had been subjected to this search, strip search. The third one was a grandmother who worked at the Department of Transportation, I think, okay. When her grandson came to live with her in the Washington [D.C.] area while he worked in Washington, the, when he was off from college, he ran up a huge number of tickets that she knew nothing about. She innocently drove into the District of Columbia one day and they picked her up and strip searched her. Those were my plaintiffs. Speaker 2: Hmm. Speaker 1: I, I had made, I prepared my case, prepared my complaint, and my affidavits, I sent it all to [The Honorable] Marion Barry and I called the son of a bitch and I said, "Marion you can't win this case." They did nothing. The day after I called him I filed it, the next day it was on the front page of the Washington Post (laughter). Speaker 2: So they had a chance to settle? Speaker 1: They had a chance to-- Speaker 2: To settle. Keep it out of the news. (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: All, all we wanted them to do was to stop doing it, that's all we wanted them to do. The next day it was on the, and I refiled the case and Judge June Green, district, federal district court in the District of Columbia, we, we filed the case, civil rights case. The, the judge got the papers and she called us in within about three or four days, she gave us a temporary injunction like that. And she told the, the prosecutor for the city that she'd give 'em three days to settle the case, and then we were going to trial and he didn't do anything. She called us in after three days, he didn't show up, she picked up the telephone with me sitting in his, in her office and, and other people sitting in her office and said get your butt down here, and he came down. And we settled the case right there in her office (laughter). I just couldn't believe it, I said, "You guys I'm giving you a chance." Speaker 2: Hmm. Speaker 1: So it's a, it, it there's a couple articles in the Washington Post. I think it was maybe '70 [1970], I'm gonna guess this happened in '75 [1975] or '76 [1976]-- Speaker 2: In-- Speaker 1: --something like that. Speaker 2: --in your opinion do you think that Marion Barry, Barry actually knew that this was going on or (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 1: No, I don't think he knew it was going on. Speaker 2: Yeah. That's what I was--(unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 1: And, and he did what-- Speaker 2: (Unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 1: --most mayors they, they do what their policing officials tell them to do in the policing area because they're not competent to act. But I was doing him a favor, you know, this is going on in your city, you don't wanna, you know. Speaker 2: Do you remember who his chief was? Speaker 1: The police chief? I don't remember who the police chief was. Speaker 2: Was it a white guy or black guy, do, do you remember? Speaker 1: I'm guessing that it was a guy named Fletcher [ph.] because Fletcher's daughter wound up involved in a murder and she, she, she, she got off. Speaker 2: Hmm. Speaker 1: I think his name was Fletcher but I'm not sure it was during his period. I'm not sure who it was. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But that's what they were doing. Speaker 2: Was he white or black? Speaker 1: He was white. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But I think that was, it was before we had a, a black police chief. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But I'm not sure about that. But not it, it they were strip searching white people, black people, men, women, it didn't matter, I mean it was, it was equal opportunity, there was no, there was no particular discrimination and they were just imposing summary punishment on people they considered to be scofflaws that's what they were doing. Stupid. Story_ID: 156710 Speaker 1: The second important thing that happened for me during that period was that, while I was with that firm [Caplin & Drysdale], was that somebody got this crazy idea in 1975 or '6 [1976], I'm not sure which, probably '75 [1975], to bring together an integrated group of lawyers, men, women, black, and white, young, and old, about twelve to fifteen of us and have us conduct, participate in a joint bar association meeting with, a bar association meaning, meaning the association of lawyers, with the bar of South Africa, and it actually came off. Speaker 2: Hmm. Speaker 1: Lawyers right first, the Lawyers Committee for Civil Rights under the Law of which I was a board member in later years, was the, the group in the U.S. that really pushed it and they pushed it with a group of like-minded liberals in South Africa. And one Saturday afternoon in '75 [1975] or '76 [1976] this group of, this integrated group of black and white lawyers including judges and government officials and private practitioners, men and women, black and white appeared at the Johannesburg [South Africa] airport (laughter) going through security, oh, boy. And the, the poor immigration folks they're looking at this group, and the funny thing is that at the front of our line we, we were in, you know, there were five lines, you know, going through immigration and the first couple of people could, going through for us were white and they went right on through and then came the first couple of black people and they stopped 'em, okay. And then we said, "Hey, we're a part of that group, how did you let him through why" (making sounds) and we sat in, and we were on a 747, so nobody could get through immigration, okay. I mean the plane was a 747 nobody could get through immigration 'cause we just sat down where we were because they said, "You can't come in." Now we were supposed to have visas, we never got visas, actually the lawyers committee pulled a sneaky on us, they took, told us we were gonna get visas, then we got to the airport at [Washington] Dulles [International Airport] and found out that we didn't have visas, what we had instead were letters from the South African ambassador to the U.S.-- Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: --ask, asking us, that they permit us to enter for this weekend event. And finally they, oh, oh, oh, they went and got the, the captain of the airplane because if they don't let us in we're wards of the airline, that's what happens when you're traveling internationally. And so then the captain came down and, you know, are you gonna let 'em in, it was this huge negotiation going on. And finally they checked with Pretoria [South Africa], which is where the administrative of, yeah, South African government is. And they told them to let us in and they gave us documents that made us honorary citizens for the weekend. And we got up and went through immigration so everybody else could go through immigration. I went with the understanding that I would be able to travel around South Africa. Most of the group went for the weekend, three day weekend meeting with the South African Bar. And the whole purpose was just to raise hell, I mean the purpose was to be there as an integrated group of professionals in a county that didn't have any black professionals, and that certainly never had black women and white women, black women, white men, black men associating together, and also to lend support to the liberal elements in South Africa, and there were some, who were opposed to the apartheid system. So that was our purpose for being there. And the reward was gonna, gonna be that after three days, the group would go off to Kenya and climb Mount Kilimanjaro. I didn't wanna climb Mount Kilimanjaro, I wanted to see as much of South Africa as I could. So I got special letters from the White House, from all kinds of people asking that I would be able to permit, be permitted to stay an extra ten days and travel around the country. Story_ID: 156711 Speaker 1: So were you able to do it? Speaker 2: And we were there, I didn't know the whole weekend because everything was shut down but Monday morning bright and early, eight o'clock I was there with my passport and the passport of one other guy who wanted to do the same thing, at the Bureau of [for] State Security, B.O.S.S., it's their F.B.I. [Federal Bureau of Investigation] That was amazing, Bureau of State Security, B.O.S.S. Them people kept them, the, the blacks in line. They were really kind of frightening because they were Gestapo like. But there I was with my passport and explaining to this official that I had come to South Africa because I was told that I would be able to travel around the country, I wanted to see the country 'cause I understood it was physically beautiful and I had come all this way and here's my papers. I had a White House, I had sealed State Department, you name it, I had some kind of paper. They didn't know who the hell I was, I was a nobody, they didn't know that. And he took all my papers and I sat there and I sat there and I sat there and I sat there. And finally my buddy who also wanted to stay, got in touch with me and, and said, "They're obviously not gonna let us just stay so why don't we just give up?" And I sent his passport back to him so that he could leave on, on the flight later that day but I sat, I was gonna make them give me an answer. And after the plane left, it was taking a group to Kenya, and this guy who calls me back into this office and says Pretoria [South Africa] says you can stay. And I said "Oh, that's wonderful because I really wanna see the country." And he said but there's a condition. I said what's the condition? He said you have to give me your passport, which he knew I would never do because I became bantu (laughter), right. And I smiled at him and I handed him my passport and left. I didn't see it again for ten days. But it didn't matter because everywhere I went, my picture was on the front page of the papers saying things about South Africa that South Africans couldn't say. Story_ID: 156712 Speaker 1: I met a guy, I don't know if you, you know this name, I met a guy named Steve Biko. Steve Biko was a medical student who after, who after Nelson Mandela was probably the, the most notorious of the activists in South Africa. He was a different generation, he was my generation, and he had been put under what they called a banning order. A banning order then in South Africa meant that you had your physical freedom but you were circumscribed to a location, typically the place where you were born, and you couldn't leave the confines of that place, your name could not appear in print, you could not publish anything. You became a nonperson basically. But, and he had moved to, to Soweto [South Africa] as a baby. He never spent any time in the little village where he was born out in the sticks, that's where they banned him to and that's where I met him. A South African priest, I'm gonna say he was an Episcopalian priest, you know, stopped me one day in the, in the, in the hallway of my hotel and gave, gave me all kind of code words about you're gonna wanna to meet this person, somebody's gonna call you by (making sounds). I got a call and it was, you know, ABC this, and D that, and a few days later I was on a plane going down to East London [South Africa]. And from there I got picked up by some people and driven to a little place and then picked up by some more people and driven to another place and I wound up in Steve Biko's village and I spent a week, no I spent spend a day with him and his family. Speaker 2: What, what was he like? Now he's, he's, he's modern and-- Speaker 1: He was very, he was very-- Speaker 2: He was (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 1: He's one of these very impressive people. I would say that he, the person he reminds me of, he reminded me of most, except that he had even more of the elements that are remarkable about this person, is Denzel Washington. He, he had that same kind of carriage, that same kind of feel, the same kind of distinctiveness about the way he spoke, the same kind of certitude in his eyes but, but all of it was even more powerful than it is in Denzel. That's, that's-- Speaker 2: And Denzel played him on the screen, you know, so. Speaker 1: I didn't know that. He did? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: (Laughter) I didn't know that but he did. I mean the den, Denzel would be the person I would pick to play the, to play that role. Speaker 2: Yeah, he had been, he was just briefly give the story. Well, why was he banned (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 1: He led, he led a, a peaceful protest movement against apartheid when he was a medical student. Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: And the, the government shut it down and put him under a banning order and eventually they put him back in jail-- Speaker 2: Hmm. Speaker 1: --after I left. I started writing something about him, him from that visit. And, and then I said to myself, "Oh, my god, this could be harmful to him," you know, 'cause he was under a banning order, he wasn't, they knew I met with him, of course, they knew I met with him, but that would be like a slap in the face, so I stopped writing what I was writing and then he died, you know, he got, he died in prison. Speaker 2: He was beaten to death, yeah, I know. Story_ID: 156713 Speaker 1: Well, at some point I had to call his [Steve Biko] house in terms of the secret, oh, the secret codes and everything that was going on about, about my getting to see him, although as I said, of course, the, the South African security police knew I was going there and knew, knew I had been there in any event. And so I wound up calling his house one evening, and under his banning order he couldn't answer the telephone, his wife [Ntsiki Mashalaba] answered the telephone and I can't remember exactly what I had said but it was to let them know that I was indeed coming. And when she answered the voice and I began to speak, she said, "Yes, master," and I just wanted to cry because my voice sounded like I was a white man-- Speaker 2: Hmm. Speaker 1: --and that's how you address the white man, "Yes, master." I, I just was, it, it brought home so much in such a, a powerful way. And this was an intelligent woman I got, you know and, and a powerful woman, I got to meet her to and their little boy. I had pictures of their little boy, I probably can't find them now. Speaker 2: Now this was before Steve Biko became an international celebrity or, or-- Speaker 1: Well this was-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) politically prosecuted. Speaker 1: --he wasn't quite, he had, he wasn't known that much out of South Africa--- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --but when they imprisoned him, they made him a martyr. Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: And that's when he got to be known outside of South Africa. And the fear was that he was gonna be killed in imprisonment and he was. Now-- Speaker 2: He, he was actually well-known before he was actually killed but, but there was a period of time when only a specialist would even know who he was. Speaker 1: Oh, oh right exactly. Speaker 2: That's the time that you were there-- Speaker 1: Yeah, that's right. Speaker 2: --only specialists and Africans. Speaker 1: Well, when I say that they martyred him-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --he was, I, I are you, I didn't use it technically correctly. I had, I saw him as a living martyr when he was in prison. Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: And that's, you know, that was the stupid thing they did. But I came back to Washington [D.C.], back at my law practice but now serving as a board member of the Lawyers Committee for Civil Right Under Law and we had a, a ongoing project in South Africa that tried to, you know, that support groups that were opposing apartheid. And one day we get the reports Steve Biko died in prison. And I think the report from the government was that he hung himself or something like that. Speaker 2: Hmm. Speaker 1: But the international outcry was so loud that they forced the government to hold a public inquisition. Speaker 2: Hmm. Speaker 1: And he was, what do you do with bodies you, to see if there was-- Speaker 2: Oh, a autopsy. Speaker 1: They autopsied him. Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: And the report from the, the experts was that he had suffered what was the, the killing blow was a, was a what's called a contrecoup. And that is you get hit on one side of your brain, and the force forces the soft matter of your brain into the other part of your skull and that was the killing blow. It's called a contrecoup. So here I am looking at these death pictures of the person who a year before I had sat in his kitchen in his, in this little primitive village where they had banned him. So it was a, it was difficult. And I remember well, talking with a lady that I went out with one day and I had a book out on South Africa, I guess, but I don't know, and I sitting there and I was saying to her, you know, I really wish I had written something. And she looked up at me and she said you did. I said what? And she pulled out pages (laughter) that I had written, you know, about Steve Biko during that time. And I had, I had forgotten that I had actually gotten well into writing a little essay on, on him in that time, yeah. He was really, really a very impressive person. Really very impressive. And on the way back from that trip I had to do the reverse two car handoffs and then to the airport, and as I'm going to the airport to go back to Johannesburg [South Africa], two guys, kind of beefeater types, you know, red, brawny maybe look like rugby players, and they had on, I'll never forget, they had on these shirts that were kind of the, you know, the Hawaiian tourists shirts that you see in all the color, and one of 'em walked up to me as I was boarding the plane and said, "Well Mr. Brown we hope you enjoyed your day in Queen Elizabeth's Ville [sic, Biko was restricted to the King William's Town magisterial district]" (laughter) which was where I spent the day with Biko. So they knew exactly what I was doing, after all, you know, all the secrecy and all the rest of it (laughter). Story_ID: 156714 Speaker 1: I did (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) A third thing I would mention about, about that trip was I remember obvious I, I got really exhausted 'cause everywhere I went I was being interviewed, I was being asked to go to places and I'd go to din, dinner, traveling mostly by myself I'd go to dinner and I'd sit down to have dinner and they'd sit me off in a corner, you know, 'cause all these are, you know, black people never went into these places. I remember down in Cape Town [South Africa] sitting off on the other side of the piano bar from the rest of the guests in the room or the piano from the rest of the guests in the room, and from the moment I sat down until I got up, I must have received fifteen little scrawled notes from people who were there, it was a family hotel, people who were there with their families, "Can I speak to you for a moment, Mr. Brown?" And somebody would get up and walk over, and I'd say, yes, they'd get up and walk over sit down to me and tell me about their view of apartheid and what it meant and you don't understand our country and, and then I'd start to eat my dinner and somebody else would do it, and it just happened all over the country. It was exhausting, just exhausting, emotionally it was just exhausting. And I remember-- Speaker 1: Was there a way you could generalize the tone of those conversations? Were they in defense of, apologizing for the country or were they progressive for the change? (simultaneous) Speaker 2: Some, it was all, it, it was a place where there was huge variety, okay, among the white population. The Afrikaner population, which traditionally is, or the Dutch Germans who colonized, who originally colonized the southern tip of Africa, they tended to be very conservative. They're the people who they called the Afrikaners. And they were the people who were put into concentration camps by the British at the turn of the twentieth century, you know. So the British, you know, they, they, they actually won their freedom from the British. Speaker 1: Boer War. Speaker 2: Yeah, the Boer War, yeah. And they were very inward-grown people. They had their own newspaper, their own language, which is basically Dutch, and they wanted all the black people in the country to speak Afrikaans or that's what they taught in the schools when, when they took over the country. And then there were large Jewish population that tended to be progressive. And the large British population some place in the middle. Every group had its own newspaper I, I wound up being interviewed by the editors of three or four different newspapers, got one of them into trouble because I had quoted him as saying something that he didn't really say and I had to clean it up because he was gonna be in trouble with the government. At one point that first weekend that I was there, I had met a bunch of people including a lot of lawyers, and then I went off and traveled around the country and came back to Johannesburg [South Africa], and when I got back to Johannesburg I was exhausted. I visited [Steve] Biko on that trip. Story_ID: 156715 Speaker 1: Who was the lady, the black lady who adopted, who lived in France and adopted all those children? She was an actress. Speaker 2: Oh, are you talking about Josephine Baker? Speaker 1: Josephine Baker. I got on the plane in Johannesburg [South Africa] or someplace or, or Cape Town [South Africa] or someplace one day, and there were two black people on the plane me and Josephine Baker (laughter). She sat next to me, to me, yeah. Speaker 2: Did you have a conversation with her? Speaker 1: Yeah, we had a conversation. We talked all about, she was, you know, she was touring, I mean she, she sang, she was doing what she did. Speaker 2: (Unclear) her comebacks. Speaker 1: Yeah, right, exactly. Speaker 2: (Unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 1: And there was Josephine Baker (laughter) on the plane going from Johannesburg to Cape Town probably. But when I came back to Johannesburg, I was absolutely wiped out, completely wiped out. And I arrive at the airport and I come out of the gate and there's a man and a woman standing there, a white man and his wife, and they said, "Mr. Brown, Tyrone, you don't know us but we met you ten days ago when you first arrived here at a cocktail party. And we figured you are just completely wiped out so here is our proposal, come to our house, chill out, spend the night, tomorrow do whatever you wanna do but just spend the day resting," and I took advantage of it. And they lived, they lived in Pretoria [South Africa]. And (laughter) which I, I, I they had two young children and I remember the afternoon sitting there in their, in their kitchen talking to the two of them and outside were three plain clothes bureau of state security [Bureau for State Security] people because I didn't belong in that neighborhood. The next day I had some events I had to go to. I got picked up from their house by a coloured who worked for U.S.A.I.D. [United States Agency for International Development], you know, there are three races in South Africa, the coloured are, are a mixed race, not all of them are Indian and whites, some of 'em are black and white, they'd say all of them are Indian and white but they're not, some of them are black and white but they're, they're a mixed race that's all. But it's a very ingrown mixed race group just like everything else in South Africa was ingrown. And the coloured U.S.A.I.D. employee picked me up and took me to a tea at a, in a coloured township outside of Johannesburg, the equivalent of Soweto [South Africa], only it was the coloured township I think it was called Alexandriaville [ph.] or something like that. I spent the afternoon at this tea with coloureds, and he took me back to the front gate or the, the entry to the coloured section of the area around Johannesburg 'cause coloured couldn't live in the city either. And I got picked up there by a black who worked for U.S.A.I.D. and he took me to an evening party at, in Soweto. And he drove me back to the front gate of Soweto and somebody drove me back to these people's house, okay. And I get there and it's, and I had said thank, you know, I'm leaving the next morning and I thanked the husband and the wife for, you know, and I'm getting ready to go to bed and the wife is just sitting there looking at me and I said, "What's wrong?" She says, "What was it like?" I said, "What was what like?" She said, "Well, what's it like to spend the morning in a white suburb, the afternoon in a colored suburb, and the evening in a black township? Nobody in South Africa ever does that, what's it like?" Yeah. It was, it was, it was, it wore me out, it wore me out. And then having Steve Biko die that way that, yeah. Speaker 2: Now, this is 1970-- Speaker 1: This is now, I'm now up to 1975, maybe '76 [1976]. Speaker 2: Seventy-five [1975], okay. Story_ID: 156716 Speaker 1: I didn't, '76 [1976] I didn't work in the [James Earl "Jimmy"] Carter campaign because I, I really didn't have an interest in, in politics really beyond intellectual interests-- Speaker 2: Hmm. Speaker 1: --and emotional interest but not an interest in elective office or anything like that. Speaker 2: Were you surprised with Carter's success 'cause I know I was, I, a lot of people were I thought-- Speaker 1: I'm trying-- Speaker 2: --but you might not have been you, you worked in Washington [D.C]. (Simultaneous) Speaker 1: I wasn't so surprised because [Gerald] Jerry Ford, who was very nice man, was not that strong a campaigner nationally. So Carter kind of took advantage of the fact that the Republicans had put up their, maybe the weakest possible candidate, he was very moderate, moderate Gerald Ford was. He was, he was Michigan, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And he was, he was a good man. And I think, I think, his, he, I think he performed a service for the country because the country was torn, we, we were at each other's throats. The Republicans were furious that [Richard M.] Nixon had been forced out of office. The, the Democrats were furious that he managed to stay in for so long. And Jerry Ford just kind of calmed things down, and he did, and he, and he did that. The first words out of Jimmy Carter's mouth at his inaugural address, he turned around looked at Jerry Ford and said, "On behalf of the country I wanna thank you for, for the service that you've provided during this difficult time," and then gave his speech. Speaker 2: Hmm. Speaker 1: And he was absolutely right about that. So that's my feeling about Jerry Ford. (Unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: Some say his pardon of Nixon is what lost him the election. Speaker 1: Yeah, it probably did, it probably did. It was that close. But he was the kind of man who would do that, you know, he would, he would do what he felt was the appropriate thing to do in terms of, of getting it behind us. And he would take that hit. He was the kind of person who would take that hit. I think he knew that he was hurting himself when he did that. Story_ID: 156717 Speaker 1: So during the campaign people kept asking me won't you work on the campaign, won't you work on it, no, I, I was really focused on, on becoming a partner at Caplin & Drysdale. And then [James Earl] Jimmy Carter wins and because I had spent time in broadcasting at the Post Company[Graham Media Group, formerly Post-Newsweek Stations], people started talking to me about becoming a Commissioner at the F.C.C. [Federal Communication Commission], and that is people who were staffing that part of the selection process for the Carter, and my name wound up on the list and I said, "I'm not interested, take my name off of any list that it's on," you know, I, I wasn't being coy or anything, I just, it wasn't the time in my life to do it. And then a month later I'd hear that the list was shorter and my name was still on it and I'd say don't, please don't, take my name off the list. Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: Then it was shorter still and one day I got a call from [Hamilton] Ham Jordan . He said, "we'd like to meet with you," and I said, "Mr. Jordan, I've told people I don't wanna be an F.C.C. Commissioner, I'm not interested, my personal life it just isn't in play," "Aww come over and talk to us at least, you know, about, you know, and the thinking about that, just come over and talk to us." So I went over and talked to them, and I went over to talk to them and I meet Ham Jordan and he's taking-- Speaker 2: Hamilton Jordan? Speaker 1: Hamilton Jordan, yeah. He takes me into the Oval Office. And I think Carter, and maybe most presidents treat the Oval Office as ceremonial because he wasn't there, he came in after I was seated and we sat and talked, and what I found most remarkable about him was that he had these penetrating steely blue gray eyes that would just look through you. And it was just, ah, you know, you were caught, you know, in the cross hairs and that's, that's what I remember about him. And then he said, "Well, we've decided we want you to take this job at the F.C.C." And stupid human being that I am, I was only thirty-four, but still stupid human being that I am, I looked at him in the eye and I said, "Mr. President, I've told your people that I can't take that job now, I don't wanna take that job now, I have personal reasons for it and your staff has done both you and me a disservice," that's what I did. He looked at me (making sound) he pushed the button. Ham comes up, and he looks at Ham and he says, "What the hell is going on here?" And Jordan says, "Oh, my god, well we, we were sure he would take the job if it actually got offered to him. He told us he didn't want it blah, blah, blah." And the president stands up and says, "well you two walk, work it out," and he walked out. This is, this is is the honest to god's truth, this is what happened. I went home, first I cursed him out, I told him I said, "You really shouldn't have done, that's just not fair what you did." And I went home and talked with my wife [Carolyn T. Brown] about it and with my friends about it and most of 'em said, "You idiot you never turn the president down, you don't do that." And but what really got me was the senior partner in my law firm he found, when he found out what I did, and he had served as Commissioner of the Internal Revenue Service under Jack Kennedy [John F. Kennedy]-- Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: Mortimer Caplin, named partner of the firm. He walked into my office one day and he closed the door and he said, "You don't ever turn down the President of the United States you, President of the United States has asked you to do something, you do it. You wanna be a partner here don't worry about it, you will be a partner here but damn it when the President of the United States says do something you do it." Speaker 2: Hmm. Speaker 1: So a few weeks later I said, "Yes, I'll do it." In the meantime what they had done, I still was being hardheaded though, in the meantime what they did, was they had a story run in The New York Times that said that I was being, A, I was being considered, B, I was being vetted, C, if I didn't get the job which would, you know, made it sound like, you know-- Speaker 2: You were trying to get it. Speaker 1: Yeah, like, like something was wrong. Then the replacement for [HM Reverend Benjamin] Ben Hooks at the F.C.C. probably would not be a black person. How do you like that? I, what could I do, I didn't have a choice, so I took the job. Loved it. Loved the job (simultaneous). Speaker 2: Now, did, you know, Benjamin Hooks? Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, I knew Ben. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: And I gave a big party for Ben like, you know, shortly after I took over for him. I, I considered him a mentor, yeah. Nice man, yeah. Story_ID: 156718 Speaker 1: Well they had--when [HM Reverend] Benjamin Hooks was in office, and I don't think he came up with this policy but I know he, I heard him speak several times of, and he talked about the what was required of television stations in terms of public service. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah and, and the obligation to serve-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --all of their community (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 1: Yeah. And if that that obligation wasn't met, they'd take your license. Speaker 2: Right Speaker 1: And he was serious about it. Speaker 2: Oh yeah, oh yeah. Speaker 1: You know, and stations knew it. So-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --he found all these black and community shows Latino shows, all these shows start emerging. Speaker 2: They started during his time and they, and, and I carried it forward. I carried them forward. We had something when I was there that got invented my, in my office it was called a tax certificate. And the tax certificate was a program, I've been very proud of this for forty years, today I'm not quite as proud of it. What it was, there was a provision of the Internal Revenue Code, and that's how I got involved in it, taxes, that said if the Federal Communications Commission transferred a broadcast station license in furtherance of a national policy, then the transfer of that license--flying right into National Airport down the street--then the, the transfer of that license would be tax-free if, and it, here's how that developed, it developed because back in the old days when there was just radio, there was CBS and there was N.B.C. [National Broadcasting Company]. N.B.C. had a red network, and a white network. N.B.C. owned two radio stations. The Justice Department under the antitrust laws made N.B.C. sell off one of its radio networks to create the networks, and that sell-off became A.B.C. [American Broadcasting Company]. N.B.C., of course, fought having to sell off basically half their assets but to add insult to injury, because they had almost no value, no tax value in the network they were being required to sell, they were gonna have to recognize a huge tax on the sale because the sale was at, at a very high price and that was in the days when you paid fifty percent or that high, so it was huge. So Congress passed this law, as they sometimes do, it sounded like a general law but it was really passed to make it possible for N.B.C. to transfer their second network to the company that became A.B.C. without having to pay a tax, okay. And the way they did it was they had this law say that if the government required you or the government encouraged you to transfer a property to further national diversity interests, that's the key word, then it would be tax-free. A guy named [HM] Frank Washington walked into my office at Caplin & Drysdale, this is before I went to the F.C.C.[Federal Communication Commission], he had worked on the campaign. He said, "Ty you're a tax lawyer, I have an idea, tell me if it'll work. What if we had the F.C.C. adopt a policy furthering minority ownership of broadcast stations, wouldn't sales that take place under that policy with white owners selling to minority individuals be in furtherance in that, that policy and therefore wouldn't those sales by the white owners to the new black owners be treated as a tax-free transaction." I said, "Holy Moses," I didn't say holy Moses, I said holy something else. And six months later I was the Commissioner, Frank was the assistant for the chairman of the Commission, and we adopted the policy. And the tax certificate was the basis on which all minority ownership broadcast stations occurred under the next, for the next twenty-five years. Percy Sutton in New York, and, you know, Inner City Broadcasting, [HM] Cathy Hughes and Radio One, all of them under that policy. Congress finally got rid of it in the '90s [1990s]. Story_ID: 156719 Speaker 1: This is the birth of black urban radio? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, really. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah but it was really [HM] Frank [Washington] who came up with the idea. Various people claimed credit for it but I know who came up with the idea, it was Frank Washington, good man. Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, prior to becoming head of F.C.C. [Federal Communications Commission]-- Speaker 2: No, I wasn't the head, I was a commissioner. Speaker 1: A Commissioner. Speaker 2: Then there were seven commissioners-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --the other five and our chairman was a guy named Charlie Ferris who worked for, he worked on the [Capitol] Hill. He was Chief of Staff to the Speaker of the House. And the Speaker of the House was an Irish man from Boston, [Thomas Philip] Tip O'Neill. Speaker 1: Yeah, Tip O'Neill. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So, well prior to you getting involved with the F.C.C. commission were you focused on media at all or-- Speaker 2: Well, I was a, I was-- Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: I was in a sense-- Speaker 1: --television and radio. Speaker 2: --in the media when I was general counsel-- Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: --for the Post-Newsweek Broadcast Stations. Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: And that's what, and the area that I was focused on was, was the regulatory area-- Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: --which the F.C.C. regulated. So I would, I was, that was the part of the media that I was focused on. So in that sense it, I was a natural candidate for the F.C.C. Speaker 1: Right, that's true. Speaker 2: Yeah but I was babe, so. Speaker 1: Okay. And I guess another thing that's starting to jump when you're on the commission is cable television? Speaker 2: Oh, big time. Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: Big time. Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: Charlie [Ferris] was very, very supportive of cable television. And he was the first Democratic chairman in maybe twelve or thirteen years, and the broadcasters had, the broadcasters then were all powerful because the media back then, this is the late '60s [1960s] mid, to mid '70s [1970s], the media consisted of, and communications consisted of broadcasting, radio and TV broadcasting, and AT&T, which provided all the telecommunications under a monopoly. So what the F.C.C. regulated was the F.C.C. and, I mean AT&T and the broadcast stations. And so coming from a broadcast background, that's made my background particularly relevant. And cable was just getting started. Story_ID: 156720 Speaker 1: All right. So cable. Speaker 2: So cable was a step system. Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: And broadcasting was all-powerful. The chairman immediately preceding [Charles D.] Charlie Ferris was a Republican named Dick Wiley, Richard Wiley. Richard Wiley is one of my favorite people on the earth, and such a decent human being. He is, by my measure an old-fashioned conservative Republican, not a moderate radical conservative Republican. Really decent human being, and he tried to keep, he, he constantly tried to find ways to get consensus, which made him an excellent chairman. And he opened up the possibilities for cable in terms of the broadcasters who felt threatened as a commercial business matter, tried to bury cable, keep it out of the cities, starve it from programming and, and [Richard] Dick Wiley started to open the door in that area. Yes, I later practiced law with Dick Wiley but this is before that. And Charlie Ferris carried it further to the point that cable finally got the right to programming and the right to enter into the cities, and became gradually, now cable dominates the media not the broadcasting. So these things they go through their cycles (laughter). One of the people who was very colorful back then and really ultimately maybe one of, one of two or three leading cable pioneers was Ted Turner. Ted Turner had a, he had a channel in Chicago [Illinois], WGN, W, TV station. Speaker 1: No, that wasn't Ted Turner WGN but a TBS. [Turner Broadcasting System] has (unclear) Speaker 2: No, he also had, he also, he had the super, there was a superstation. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's the WGN. That's the Tribune Company owns WGN in Chicago. Speaker 2: They didn't own it back then. They did not own it back then. I'm telling you that that was Ted Turner, along with T.B.S. I think, maybe I'm wrong, maybe I'm wrong. But I really think that that Ted, I know he had one of the original superstations. I thought it was his idea. Speaker 1: It says WOR in New York [City, New York] was that, that the one-- Speaker 2: That wasn't a superstation, no. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It wasn't a superstation. By superstation I meant stations that put themselves on cable and therefore got themselves coverage all across the nation. Speaker 1: That's what I'm talking about. Speaker 2: Yeah, and Ted Turner did that. Ted Turner came up with C.N.N. [Cable News Network], the idea of twenty-four hour news. Ted Turner bought the M.G.M. [Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer] movie library and created T.N.T. [Turner Network Television] and a bunch of other programming and people, he paid a mint for it, and people said he was crazy. Speaker 1: Is that Turner Classic Movies? Speaker 2: Yes. And he--and TNT. Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: And he was crazy like a fox. He made, he made ten billion dollars is what he did. Speaker 1: I remember when he was-- Speaker 2: (Unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --colorizing them. Speaker 2: Yeah, with his moves, the guy was just cra- I mean he was, I, he's certifiable I can tell you, I know him, but the guy was a business genius, an absolute genius. Story_ID: 156721 Speaker 1: He [Ted Turner] bought the M.G.M. [Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer] library and people laughed and they said boy, did he get taken and within five years he turned it into a goldmine. He created cable news out of his head. People said that's crazy. What a guy. I remember one, when I was at the F.C.C. [Federal Communication Commission], one of the, the exchanges I had with him. My older boy loved sports, he loved football and he loved basketball. And Ted [Turner] then earned, owned the Atlanta Hawks. And Ted knew that my boy loved basketball and in one of those years 1977, I think, maybe '70 [1970] no, it would have been '78 [1978], the last time the Washington Wizards wound up in the play-offs, in, in one of the early, and they, certainly the last time they won the championship. In one of the games in those series they, or series in those playoffs, they were matched up against the Atlanta Hawks and Ted calls me and says, "Can I take your son to the basketball game," and I said, "Oh, man is that great oh, sure I, it will make his life," you know. And so Ted arrived at my house and, and Christopher [ph.] went off to the game with Ted Turner in Ted Turner's car. And, and he came home crying. And I said, "Chris [ph.] what's wrong?" he said, "He's such a bad sport, he just made, it made me feel, they won the game, Atlanta won the game, Dad, he made me feel just miserable, Dad he made me feel miserable." Well a couple nights later the final of that series, I was at the game and Ted Turner was sitting in front of me and I gave him absolute hell. Of course, it, it meant a lot more to him because he was, you know, millions of, tens of millions was riding on whether he went to the next stage. What a guy. Well, Charlie Ferris was very, very supportive of Ted Turner and, and cable and I would say that, and I, I voted in support of this stuff but I would say that cable owed a very large debt of gratitude to, to that chairman of the F.C. and C because he got them room to operate where they didn't have it before. He had to fight Congress for it and he had to, he had to resist the, the broadcasters. Story_ID: 156722 Speaker 1: Yeah, that was the time when-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --television culture changed completely. Speaker 2: And it's changing again right now before our very eyes, yeah. Now when I was at the F.C.C. [Federal Communication Commission] I tried to be a lawyer 'cause that's what I was, so my, my approach to decision making was to, to, to look at the argument, send them writings by the parties, so the lawyers wouldn't try to come up with the right decision. But there's also significant politics involved in the, that decision making, I wasn't nearly as good at the decision at the, at that part of it. But during that period I met two individuals who have become my best friends and two people who became my most important mentors going forward one of them was Bob Johnson [Robert L. Johnson] and this is before Bob Johnson founded B.E.T.[Black Entertainment Television] Speaker 1: Now this was, about what time would this be about 19-- Speaker 2: This is 1978. Speaker 1: '78 [1978], okay. Speaker 2: And Bob was then vice president of the National Cable Television Association. Speaker 1: Now, the National Cable-- Speaker 2: Television Association. Speaker 1: --Television Association. Speaker 2: That was, that was the lobbying group for cable. Speaker 1: Now is this a black lobbying group? Speaker 2: No, this is the, this is-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --this is the big industry organization for cable that was fighting the broadcasters. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And Bob was the, was the vice president and among his jobs was to, was to lobby me. We got to know, and I don't think, I don't think he ever asked for my vote on anything, we just got to know each other as human beings, we played tennis together. I got to know his family. He made sure that I got to the National Cable Television Association conventions a couple of years. One of them was in New Orleans [Louisiana] I recall, and the water came into the hotel up to our thighs (laughter) in the lobby, you know, they had one of those storms, you're walking around barefoot, I remember that. And I met a lot of people in the industry and I gave speeches to the industry a couple of times but I went to broadcasters meetings to and, you know. But I got to know Bob and I was really, really impressed, smart, subtle, insightful, I really got to know him very well and I really got to like him. And I became a supporter of cable but I would have been a supporter supporter of cable anyway. And I think what he did was he gave me a reason to come to understand the industry more than I would have otherwise. The second person I got to know while I was there was a person that I described to my staff after my first meeting as the smartest Negro I'd ever met. He walked out of my office and I said there goes the smartest Negro I've never met. His name was [HM Herbert P.] Herb Wilkins [Sr.]. Herb grew up in public housing in Boston [Massachusetts]. Herb is one of your HistoryMakers (laughter). Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: I forgot about that, you know, who Herb Wilkins is. Speaker 1: Yes, yes. Speaker 2: He grew up in public housing in Boston. He walked in one day. We had, we had adopted this tax certificate program that I described to you a little while ago but we had gotten part of it wrong, Herb walked into my office one day (laughter) asked for a meeting, got a meeting, we sat down and I'm looking at this guy, I didn't know him from Adam, and he said you got this part of it wrong and here's why (making sound). And after thirty seconds, I knew exactly what he was saying and we, we corrected it, we got it right. He walked out and I said whew. He was a Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] M.B.A. completely on smarts, and he was setting up an organization called Syncom. Syncom became the venture capital fund that funded all of these black acquisitions of broadcast properties under the tax certificate that the, that the F.C.C. adopted for two decades. And in the process Herb became a rich man because he took warrants and he had, you know, stock interests in all these companies and when they went public or sold out, he worked, wound up being worth a couple hundred million dollars before it was all over. Story_ID: 156723 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But he [HM Herbert P. Wilkins Sr.] and I-- Speaker 2: He is here in [Washington] D.C. Speaker 1: He, he lives out in one of the suburbs-- Speaker 2: (Unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 1: --far out suburb, actually closer to Baltimore [Maryland] than it is to D.C. Columbia [Maryland]. And he and I and Bob [Robert L. Johnson], when I left the F.C.C. [Federal Communications Commission] we became what people described as the Three Musketeers. Herb and I were on the B.E.T. [Black Entertainment Television] Board. When Bob founded B.E.T., he talked with me about it. I was still then at the commission. And he described what he wanted to do and when he founded it, two people spoke at the, at his launch event in Washington [D.C], one of them was [HM the Honorable Reverend] Walter Fauntroy for whom Bob had worked years before. And Bob had been at, a Woodrow Wilson Fellow at Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey]. And then he came and worked through Walter Fauntroy in this district government and then he went to the National Cable Television Association. And when he was forming it, we talked, we played tennis out in Virginia, and he asked me to be his partner and I said, "Bob no, I'm a lawyer, I'm not, I'm not a businessman Bob, I'll be your lawyer." Now, there are a couple of ways to look at that, one is that I passed up an opportunity to be worth a few hundred million dollars. But the way I look at it is, is that one of us me or my best friend would be dead if we become partners because we're both so stubborn. And he was, he was the one to do what he did and I was the one to do what I did so I've never, certainly never regretted not, you know, coming, becoming part of B.E.T. But god what a mind, you know, what a mind. So I as far as I'm concerned two of the very brightest, most successful, most driven, yes, most perceptive-- Speaker 2: Hmm. Speaker 1: --black men to come along in my generation in that small group were Bob Johnson and Herb Wilkins. And the three of us won the cable franchise in the District of Columbia [Washington, D.C.]. I was the lawyer, Herb was the financier, and Bob was the politics. And we had nothing, and we won the franchise, yeah. And then Bob went off and got his buddy John Malone, who was then the cable kingpin to finance it for us, and that's how we built the cable franchise in the District of Columbia. I was president for many years, you know, I did the writing of the application, all that kind of stuff. Bob provided the politics. And Herb provided the initial money. Speaker 2: What I'm hearing here may be something for people watching this to chew on, and that's the fact that after this country was founded, a lot of people got a chance to get free land and resources and we were left out of it. That-- Speaker 1: That's true. Speaker 2: --for the most part. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's true. Speaker 2: Now here is a new technology, something new on the horizon and we got people like you Three Musketeers jumping on those-- Speaker 1: Absolutely-- Speaker 2: --you know. Speaker 1: --that's what we were trying to do. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And we did it, Herb did it in Chicago [Illinois] 'cause he had a piece of the Chicago, he put in money, he was always the black guy who put in the money, okay, with [HM] John [H.] Johnson. John Johnson owned part of the cable system in, in Chicago for a while and Herb was part of that company. Newark, New Jersey with [J.] Barry Washington, he was the financier of that system, the seed money financier. And also in South Central, Los Angeles [California] all, you know, minority communities, black communities, where the black community had the politics to be able to deliver the license to a minority company. Speaker 2: Hmm. Speaker 1: And Herb was in on every one of those deals. Bob and I were only in on the District of Columbia 'cause I was practicing law at the time. Speaker 2: Hmm. Speaker 1: My law firm was nice enough to let me also be president of this company. And my law firm did all the legal work. I had, I had all the support I needed in terms of putting together the application and fighting for it because my law firm provided five or six lawyers, young lawyers, to help me put the whole show together. You know, I supervised them but the firm and, and we couldn't pay 'em and the firm said well when you win the franchise you'll be able to pay us. And this was even after they'd had the preliminary evaluation of the applications and there were three applicants, one was Percy is, you know, who Percy Sutton was in New York [New York], one was him. He, he was first. Chester Davenport with a group, was number three, well number two. And we were number three (laughter) in the preliminaries. And my law firm still said don't worry about it go ahead and do your thing. And eventually we turned it around and we paid them all the money we owed them. We owed them (laughter) $600,000 and they, and we paid it. Yeah, that was really something that my partners would do that. Story_ID: 156724 Speaker 1: You know they talk about cable in those days, some of it seemed that, seemed to people to be-- Speaker 2: Corrupt. You mean in terms of the franchising? Franchising processes were terribly corrupt. I loved it. After we won, we got sued, okay, because that's what always happened in the urban, in the urban cable because there was also something wrong. And what would happen with the lawsuit was that the parties would get together and settle the lawsuit and they'd piece out the ownership, you know, and everybody would get a piece of the action. And so after we won the franchise especially when we started out as number three, we got sued. We didn't have any money so we were gonna have to settle. I said, "No, we're not gonna settle." I said, "Here's what we're gonna do guys, the reason why these suits cost so much money is because the litigation goes on forever. The litigation goes on forever because the people who are bringing the lawsuit insist on seeing all kinds of confidential documents. They go through, you know, they go through all kinds of depositions and it's, it's the preparation for the trial that costs the money." I said, Here's what we're gonna do guys, we're gonna take every piece of paper that ever got generated in connection with this license application." I said first and I don't know if it ever happened again in any antitrust lawsuit, it was antitrust lawsuit. We're gonna take every piece of paper that any of us wrote, that any of us received, that anybody on our board received, we're gonna request any letter involving us from the city council, we're gonna, any schedule of meetings with us with the city council, we're gonna put it all in a room and we're gonna tell the plaintiffs to come and be our guests. And I talked to my partners at the law firm they were, you know thinking about this big antitrust lawsuit they were gonna (unclear) doing it. And we did that and we told the judge that we had done that, okay. And he said well, hell we can go to trial in three months (laughter). It was over, that was the end of the lawsuit. Literally that was the end of the lawsuit. Percy [Sutton] folded, and the other guys folded because, you know, we were basically saying we got nothing to hide. I don't know what you guys, we had nothing to hide, be our guests. And that was the end of the lawsuit. Story_ID: 156725 Speaker 1: So then John [C.] Malone funded us, you know, to build the system now, and we had to sell him 75 percent and we kept 25 percent. That was it. Speaker 2: Now did, did Mr. Wilkins [HM Herbert P. Wilkins, Sr.] think that you were pretty smart after this? Speaker 1: Yeah, he thought I was pretty smart. Yeah, he, he thinks I'm pretty smart. Yeah, we all think, I, I, yeah, we're smart. But the, the reason why we ultimately won the franchise, Washington, D.C. sits on this, this downtown area, sits on old underground conduit, you won't find any above ground power lines, they're all underground, okay. In Georgetown [Washington, D.C.] the underground conduit through which the lines run, a large part of it at least in the 1980s was wooden. It had been built in the 1890s, all the way up to Florida Avenue [Washington, D.C.], this old underground conduit and if you dig into it, it would just go (making sounds). And so building the cable system in the District of Columbia was gonna be impossible. We were gonna have to build it into new, we were gonna have to reconstruct the cities underground infrastructure. Speaker 2: Hmm. Speaker 1: It was gonna cost a fortune. And I'll never forget I sat in my law firm office one day with Herb and Bob [Robert L. Johnson] and we were talking about nobody, you know, "Nobody's gonna come in and finance this thing." I said, "Yes, they are, here's what we're gonna do. We're gonna let the phone company build our cable system, and we're gonna rent their conduit." And Herb said, "Hey, man that's pretty good." And, and Bob said, "But Ty, the phone company cannot be involved in ownership of the cable television system because the F.C.C.'s [Federal Communications Commission] rules wouldn't permit a company to own both then the telephone system and the cable system in the same community." I said I'm not talking about their owning the cable system. I'm just talking about their owning what they already own, the lines, and they will rent us space on the lines. There was a, it was a, a model for that. It was a called a right of indefeasible use, that is we can buy a right to, to pass through there. And we had them construct the system under a contract. And Percy [Sutton]'s group took us to court on that, took us to the F.C.C. on that 'cause they were absolutely certain that the F.C.C. would not approve it. I was absolutely certain that the F.C.C. would approve it. And the F.C.C. approved it and to this day, it's the only one of the cable systems that got built, the original cable systems that got built by the phone company. Speaker 2: Now what was the-- Speaker 1: And if we hadn't done that we never could have financed it. Speaker 2: Now, how did you persuade the phone company to rebuild the conduits, I mean the-- Speaker 1: [Delano] Del Lewis was then president of C&P Telephone Company [Chesapeake & Potomac Telephone Company]. Del Lewis is a local guy, really he grew up in, I wanna say Kansas City [sic, Arkansas City, Kansas], worked for what later became C&P became Bell Atlantic and then it became Verizon. And they originally consisted of four or five local telephone companies in New Jersey, Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] area, Richmond [Virginia] area, Washington [D.C.] area, maybe Delaware, it was the, part of the Bell System. And Del became the president of that company, black guy. He was a very good friend of Bob Johnson's, I knew him. He and Bob Johnson worked for [HM the Honorable Reverend] Walter Fauntroy at the same time. When I came up with my idea, he was then president of the local telephone company. And we went and met with Del, had dinner with him and explained to him what we wanted to do and, you know, they would build the system for us under a contract in which they would get a profit and they would also make a profit for renting us their, their underground conduit. Speaker 2: Hmm. Speaker 1: And he said, "I love it." And so when we went to make our presentation to this city council, we went there with the president of the local telephone company. And so the city knew the system was gonna get built because the telephone company was behind it. And I think that's what won us the franchise. Bob's relationship with [HM the Honorable] Marion Barry did too. But what really won it was the city council was they knew we could build it. But boy, was that stuff corrupt. I remember one of the council members do not, I'm not gonna tell you her name, every time I'd go to see her, you know, 'cause there were eight council members and they had or nine, they had to vote to approve. And I knew this lady pretty well, so I'd go in and talk to her, and one day I walked in and she said, have you seen her bag man. You know, have you seen him yet? And have you, you know, then she named her bag man. And everybody in the city knew that he was her bag man. And finally I said, "No damn it. I haven't seen him and I'm not gonna and you're gonna do the right thing." And she did, ultimately (laughter), but boy, I mean everybody got paid off in these kinds of processes but not here. Didn't happen here-- Story_ID: 156726 Speaker 1: When did [Washington] D.C. get (unclear)-- Speaker 2: 'Cause Percy wouldn't do it either, Percy Sutton. You know, he might have been a carpetbagger but he wasn't, he didn't do that. I really liked Percy. Yeah, he was a good man. Speaker 1: I was asking like when did you get cable here in D.C.? Speaker 2: We won the franchise in 1984, and we built out the system over the next six years. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Good. Speaker 2: Herb [HM Herbert P. Wilkins] and Bob [Robert L. Johnson] and I basically convinced the industry that the urban areas could be profitable for them. They thought that the urban areas were too poor to afford cable, that it was gonna be very expensive to build for a business like I described for the District of Columbia [Washington, D.C.], and that they were gonna be serving largely black audiences, and that it just wasn't a winner. And we spent a year after we won the franchise meeting with all the major players and we couldn't get any of 'em. Then it was Bob's relationship with John Malone, 'cause John Malone had backed B.E.T. [Black Entertainment Television] that, that brought us--I'll never understand that relationship. John Malone is the toughest human being that you ever wanna meet and he and Bob Johnson are brothers, simple as that, loving brothers. It's just amazing to watch. And we convinced him that he could make money in Washington, D.C. We said, "All the reasons that you're describing are reasons why you're gonna make money in the urban areas. It's cheap entertainment, all right." And the whole, the whole industry then moved into the urban areas but we really takes part of the credit for having convinced the industry, industry that they should do that. John Malone who roasted me for putting the, when I say roasted I mean he was livid with me, he was furious that I had talked Bob into filing a joint application with the local telephone company 'cause the telephone companies and cable industries were at each other's throats in every city and we brought this thing together, and I said, "John, it's the only way its gonna get built in Washington because of the conduit problem." He was so angry with, he called me and I was, I, I'll never forget, I walked out of Bob's office because I was so angry at, at what he did. And that, Bob called me later and said, "Come on back Ty." And I came back and we went to dinner and we sat down and really explained to him what we were doing and why we did it and he said, "Okay, fine (laughter)." But boy I mean that was a time, the three of us we were something. Story_ID: 156727 Speaker 1: At the FCC (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) All right. Speaker 1: --one speech that I gave to the local Communications Bar, the lawyers who, who represented people, businesses, really before the FCC [Federal Communications Commission] was a speech in which I said that the Court of Appeals that reviewed, FCC decisions go to the Court of Appeals and then to the Supreme Court, but the court that was reviewing FCC decisions was, was really making itself a super FCC by reversing our decisions based not on the law but on policy. And it got coverage in the Washington Post and the New York Times (laughter). And the next week I got calls from three judges on the Court of Appeals asking me to come up and meet with them, individually. And they were very nice I mean (unclear) then and one of them said, "okay, now show me which opinions you think, you know, we overstepped our bounds" and it was really, these old, they were old and they were men in their seventies and I was still in my thirties, and what, and we talked and I became friendly with two of them, the three judges that I met with were [James] Skelly Wright, who was a very liberal judge who had been appointed to the court in the '50s [1950s], they were all white. [David L.] Bazelon who was then Chief Judge of the Court of Appeals and he was very liberal. They, they done a lot of stuff in the civil rights area and, and in the protection of consumers areas in terms of making law. And I can't think of the third one's name. He had been a airline lawyer but he was also very liberal, and he was the one who said, "Okay, yeah," he had all his books and he said, "Okay, Brown, you don't, you think we went too far here, you think we went too far here," you know, that kind of thing. And Bazelon would invite me up to lunch periodically, you know, we'd just sit and chat. He liked working with young people, he was that way with his, his law clerks himself and then had found out that I had been a clerk for Earl Warren. But one day I went up to have lunch with Judge, Chief Judge Bazelon, he lived in the Watergate as matter of fact, and he said we're going, usually we'd have lunch in their chambers but he, he said, "We're gonna go out for lunch today." And so we got in his government limousine and he drove me to this place that I didn't know existed. It was in the warehouse area of the District [of Columbia], about three miles from here. If you ever come into the district from New York [Avenue, Washington, D.C.] you kind of go through this warehouse area. And we walked into the warehouse, we walked into it was, was a liquor warehouse. I walked through these rows of beer and booze, literally this happened, this happened, and emerged in a little kitchen cafeteria area. And the kitchen cafeteria area had maybe six tables and each of the tables had the little red and white checked, you know, plastic or, you know, whatever, top. And there were people sitting around eating lunch. And the man who owned it was a guy named, I think it was Milton Kronheim was his name, he was the importer, you know, distributor. And he was the friend with justices of the Supreme Court, and sitting there having lunch with Thurgood Marshall and Brennan, Justice Brennan. And Chief Judge Bazelon and I sat down, had lunch with the two of them and Kronheim came and, you know, stood over us and made sure that things were going and, and with other people at other tables. Right here in, (laughter) didn't know it existed. Boy, that-- Speaker 2: Yeah that's something. Speaker 1: I've run into people who, who knew about, you know, that place and had had lunch there but not many (laughter). Story_ID: 156728 Speaker 1: So over the years what, you mentioned it before but what did you think of Thurgood Marshall as a personality? Speaker 2: I never really got to know him that well. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The year that, the relationship at the court, you have a relationship with your judge, you don't have a relationship with the other judges. And very few of them reach out beyond their own. You know them by reputation through their law clerks and through the community of law clerks, the ones that are close to their law clerks and the ones that give their law clerks a rough time. Oh, a very liberal judge got a reputation for being really, really hard on his people, I'll think of his name in a minute. It wasn't Black. It was Mr. Justice Douglas, yeah. Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: Very liberal but he had a reputation for being horrible to his people. [William J.] Brennan had a reputation for being really nice to everybody including other law clerks. He was one of the ones that I got to know. The other one I got to know somewhat was [Abraham] Abe Fortas. Again I, I will repeat that Thurgood Marshall was in his first year, so he getting his feet wet and I'm sure that he was concentrating on what was going on in his office. We had at least one lunch as clerks with each of the justices so we got to meet them in that context but beyond that I didn't get to know, Thurgood Marshall at all. I knew people who clerked for him and later, and he swore me in as an FCC [Federal Communications Commission] Commissioner (laughter). Speaker 1: Now did-- Speaker 2: I forgot that. Story_ID: 156729 Speaker 1: When you look back on your, your time as a FCC [Federal Communications Commission] Commissioner, do you have any regrets about your time there? Speaker 2: Yeah, I should have stayed longer. See I, I, I was appointed to finish [HM Reverend Benjamin] Ben Hooks' term and it had like two years on it. And then I got reappointed with unanimous consent which is kind of unheard of for somebody who actually spent two years making decisions and ticking people off on-- Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: --both sides but I guess I ticked them off equally or something. But I just got, I guess, I got passed through unanimously, first vote, the second time around. But then I only stayed for a year. I resigned on the day that Ronald Reagan was sworn in as president. I sent my resignation to Jimmy Carter at 11:59 (laughter) on inauguration day 1981 (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Did you-- Speaker 2: I'm still being a kid, you know. So, you know, I look back on that and I say that was pretty silly. Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: I probably should have stayed, and people expected me to stay and people were, were invested in my staying. Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: And looking back on it I think I owed it to the public to stay but I didn't. So I regret that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And it was, and it was a good experience. I also, I didn't wanna be in a position of dissenting from the policy decisions. I didn't wanna be, you know, one of the people who didn't matter and that's another reason why I left, you know, because the Republicans were then taking control. And the, the way these agencies work, this chairman comes from the party of the president, and the president gets, the president's chairman gets one extra vote and so that represents the majority. Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: And I, I felt I'd be dissenting all the time. As I looked at how the place operated in after years, I could have been comfortable there, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, so that, I felt that was a mistake. And-- Speaker 1: Okay. So, so Reagan could have like picked his own, you know, he could, did he have the power to pick his own--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: He picked his own chairman. Speaker 1: Well choose his own-- Speaker 2: He picked his chairman. Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: He couldn't get rid of me because the way the agency works is you are appointed for, it's intentionally that way, because it's bipartisan, so that you get appointed for a term of years and they can't do anything about it. Back then there were seven members on the commission. Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: And one commissioner rotated off every year-- Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: --and so when I got reappointed, I was reappointed for seven years, which meant that I could have stayed until 1986 or something like that but I didn't, so. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So-- Speaker 2: So the Republicans were delighted (laughter) that I left, yeah. Story_ID: 156730 Speaker 1: So after FCC [Federal Communications Commission] commission you go to-- Speaker 2: Steptoe & Johnson [LLP]. Speaker 1: Steptoe-- Speaker 2: That's when I went to Steptoe & Johnson. I became a partner there. And I was there from 1981 to 1992. Speaker 1: Now, why, why, didn't you go back to, to the other firm do you think? Speaker 2: Because at that point, I, I went and interviewed with them but at that point I had decided that, you know, my field was gonna be communications and they had no telecommunications or communications practice. Their practice was all tax. And I had been away from tax at that point for three and a half years or so. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And Steptoe had a, not a huge communications practice but they had a communications practice and were trying to, to build it further. Speaker 1: Okay. So what did you do? Kind, kind, kind of legal work do you do for Steptoe? Speaker 2: I did his communications work-- Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: --representing companies on communications matters. A significant part of it was representing startups like BET [Black Entertainment Television], I did a lot of work for Bob [Robert L. Johnson] and he couldn't pay me that well at the beginning but five years in it turned out to be worth it for the firm because we were doing a significant amount of work and he could pay for it. I represented the cable company that we founded. I spent a lot of time-- Speaker 1: What was the name-- Speaker 2: It was called District Cablevision. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that was the [Washington] D.C. Cable Company. Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: Spent a lot of time on that and in my first two years at the firm because that's when we were trying to get the application filed. Represented a number of companies on some rather difficult, fine points of communications law. Some of 'em turned out to be very significant but they really are kind of archaic, I mean, they were important but they were archaic. Represented the Ford Motor Company when it thought it might get itself into the satellite business. And we, I and another partner at the firm were able to win a satellite authorization or license for the Ford Motor Company but then they decided not to, to go forward with the license. At early in the practice, was a lot of time with Herb [HM Herbert P. Wilkins] and Bob, with Bob around BET and then the cable franchise, we formed a company within the firm a, a group of private investors, you had to go through a S.E.C. [U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission] process even though we weren't going public, you know, to get authorization to, to go out and raise money. We raised a few hundred thousand dollars to fund the early period of our, our work for, you know, the cable system, and I and a partner at the firm did that. And then at the end of the process in 1990, '91 [1991], I, I became the, I was the lawyer who oversaw taking BET public, becoming the first black company to be listed on the New York Stock Exchange. I actually wrote the guts of the, the document that we filed at the S.E.C., yeah. That was quite a process, woo, that was a process. Boy, it was, it was, it was something. Herb Wilkins told me going in, he said, "Ty, you don't want to do this. You don't want to represent the company taking public because in this kind of transaction somebody always really, really, really gets screwed and you're gonna be the one who gets screwed here." That's what he said, and he was right. But I wouldn't trade it for anything it was a, it was quite an experience. Speaker 1: Okay. So-- Speaker 2: Oh, and when we finished-- Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: --he said he looked at me and he said, "I didn't think you could do it" (laughter). He said, "Congratulations I didn't think you could do it" (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. So this is like '91 [1991]? Speaker 2: That's '91 [1991], '92 [1992]. Speaker 1: '92 [1992], okay. Story_ID: 156731 Speaker 1: And in '92 [1992] I took off from law practice and I took a sabbatical for about a year. I was going through a difficulty with a marriage. And I had a, a really difficult time also with Bob Johnson [Robert L. Johnson] that led to my not representing him anymore and it was a really, the whole process and year were very difficult for me. And so I took off from practice for a year, and left Steptoe [& Johnson LLP]. And that's when I went to, when I came back, I came back to Wiley Rein [LLP], Dick Wiley's, law firm. Speaker 2: Now, you wanna talk about what happened with Bob Johnson or-- Speaker 1: No, I'm not, it was, it was, it was a, it was a, a, a business difference. Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: And I, I felt like, he and I have talked about it a lot, you know, since about 1995, and I felt like he had been very dismissive of me and my law firm in the going public process. And I felt like we had bent over really backwards to make it work for him and so I really felt like, you know, things went exactly the opposite from the way that they should have gone. And so I just didn't wanna be involved in representing him anymore. Speaker 2: Hmm. Speaker 1: But on the other side of it my firm wanted to represent, major public company at that point, they wanted to be involved in representing him so I was really kind of caught in a box. Speaker 2: Hmm. Speaker 1: I left the firm. Speaker 2: Okay. Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Uh-- Speaker 1: But we've, we've, we, I'll never forget, about a year and a half later, I'm in my house, I then lived in a townhouse community up in the northern part of the city [Washington, D.C.], and my housekeeper who came once a week to clean up my house and do the laundry and things like that, I was taking a shower and she comes running upstairs and she bangs on the shower, she never came into the bathroom when I was there, "There's this man down stairs, he wants to talk to you. He came up in a limousine." So I knew it was Bob. He came in and we had coffee and sat down and talked and got through it, you know. But that's the kind of person he is, so. Story_ID: 156732 Speaker 1: Now I've heard different versions of, you know, like criticism of Bob Johnson [Robert L. Johnson] and BET's [Black Entertainment Television]-- Speaker 2: Yeah, well he's a tough guy. Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: He's a tough guy. Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous) you know. Speaker 2: He's a, he's tough, he's smart, he's generous in ways, I mean he's just, he's a, he's a unique individual. He's a very complicated individual. And he did with BET what very few people could have done. It was a huge commercial success. Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: He and I constantly argued about the programming because I thought he should do more public service kind of programming. And he would say, "A, you have to produce it and that costs money that I don't have, and B, people won't watch it." That was his, you know, and he was right, and I was wrong. But still I felt like he should do more. Speaker 1: (Unclear) Speaker 2: So we, we, we went back and forth on that. Speaker 1: Isn't [HM] Tavis Smilely's-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --story about it, about how he left-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: is it? Speaker 2: Yeah, right. Speaker 1: Was Aaron McGruder's cartoons about BET-- Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: --and then the general public's-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --resentment-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, a lot of people. Speaker 1: --the sale to Viacom-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --because-- Speaker 2: There was that to. Speaker 1: --there was a very-- Speaker 2: Well there was a strong feeling that it was a black community asset Speaker 1: And that-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --that, that's the aspect of BET that was used to sell ads and that sort of thing. Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: But it was also, I mean that's the same-- Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: --thing creating-- Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: --the anger, the feeling of ownership. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: That we own this, it's ours-- Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: --'cause we're black. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And, and they sell it but the reality, the legal reality is that he owns. Speaker 2: He owned it. Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 156733 Speaker 1: He [Robert L. Johnson] owned 51 percent of it [BET, Black Entertainment Television]. He always owned 51 percent of it. I'll never forget when he went public, he owned 51 percent of it, T.C.I. [Tele-Communications, Inc.], John Malone's company, owned maybe 30 percent, maybe 20 percent. Time Warner owned maybe 10 percent, and a company called Taft Broadcasting which was a television station company based in Cincinnati [Ohio] or Columbus [Ohio]-- Speaker 2: Cincinnati (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 1: I'm not sure which. Speaker 2: Taft. Speaker 1: They owned maybe 10 percent. And when we decided to go public and found out that this company was worth a lot more money than anybody thought it was worth, we, you know, got all the papers together, filed at the S.E.C. [U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission], got through all the problems. And I'll never forget, I'm sitting, Herb [HM Herbert P. Wilkins] and Bob and I for about five years every Tuesday we would meet at Gary's Restaurant at the corner of M Street and 18th Street [Washington, D.C.], it's not there anymore, if we were in town the three of us would get together, Herb would come all the way down from his office in Silver Spring [Maryland], in later years Bob would come over from wherever BET was and actually moved, I don't, he was then building his headquarters over on the railroad property. And we'd sit down and we'd have these huge fights about what to do next about this and that and how do we get the cable industry to do this and that and we did it for years. We just had this Tuesday night dinner. And at one of these Tuesday night dinners we realized that we pulled it off, Bob had pulled it off, his company was going public and it was going public for, with a high valuation like $400 million or something like that which was unheard of at the time for a black company. And that would mean that he was worth $200 million out of the bat. It actually went public for more than that in terms of valuation. And Herb looked at me, he said, "Okay Ty, you've got one more assignment left." And I said, "Well Herb what's that?" And said Herb, "Well you gotta go talk to John Malone and find out how much of this action Bob is going to get to keep." I said, "You know, John's gonna, he's not gonna let Bob have 51 percent of this goldmine," it's just, you know, blah, blah, blah, blah. And I said, "Okay." But that's my going in position right, Bob owns 51 percent, right? So I called John, I was on, I could call him back then, I can't call him now but I could call him back then. I called John, I said, "John I gotta come out to Denver [Colorado] and talk to you." He said, "Anytime Ty but, but what's it about (laughter)." I said, "Well we have sit down and figure out what the division is gonna be on this company as it's going public" because, you know, when you sell a company public, you sell part of the stock 51, if you sell half the company 51 percent becomes 26 percent, like that, okay, because the half goes to the public. And so in that process, it's very easy for Bob to lose his majority control of the company. There were ways to fix it. I said, "We gotta sit down and figure out how we're gonna divide this thing up and Bob and Herb said I gotta be the one to negotiate with you over it." I, he said, "I don't see anything to negotiate about, Bob owns 51 percent of the company now and he'll own 51 percent of the company after it's over." And that was it. Speaker 2: Hmm. Speaker 1: John Malone never did that with anybody else in his entire career. Bob owns 51 now, he'll own 51 after it's over. I reported back to them and they said oh, what. And so we put it together in a way that Bob kept 51 percent ownership. We all issued new classes of stock and stuff like that. It was just amazing. The relationship between those two people, just amazing. Story_ID: 156734 Speaker 1: Now at Wiley Rein, LLP what-- Speaker 2: Wiley Rein I just practiced communications law. I was involved with, and I really was working kind of part-time, I never really worked full time there. I was of counsel, I was not a partner. I didn't wanna be a partner 'cause I didn't really wanna work full time and I worked on startup companies, some of which went somewhere and some of which did not. I became involved with a, cellular phone company in Puerto Rico, became an officer of that company, it was called Clear-Com. They had gotten into trouble at the FCC [Federal Communications Commission] and I helped get them out of trouble at the FCC, and became an officer of the company, which I did for a couple years. And spent part time down in Puerto Rico where they were licensed. But the biggest thing that I got involved with while I was there, uh, how did this happen? Oh, I know how it happened. There was coming from Chicago [Illinois] you may have heard of the, of the company called Iridium [Satellite LLC, later Iridium Communications, Inc]. Iridium was a large mobile satellite company, international. What Iridium consists of is sixty-six operating satellites, they're floating around up there as we speak. And what it is, is a cell phone system whose towers are in space. And the sixty-six satellites are the towers of the cell phone system. And those sixty-six satellites are the only satellite system in the world that put a footprint on every square inch of the globe simultaneously. They're placed and the earth rotates around them, or, or (unclear) and they are the only ones that simultaneously put a footprint on Antarctica if you get, if you hear a live voice from Antarctica, it's probably coming over a radio or from the Arctic or from the fisheries in the Atlantic or from zones of conflict where the infrastructure has been torn up because of the war. The military uses Iridium because it's instant infrastructure. They were, it went bankrupt one year after they launched because it cost Motorola $60 billion dollars, $6 billion of other people's money to build it and launch it, and it went bankrupt in a year. Herb [HM Herbert P. Wilkins, Sr.] and I, a guy named Dan Colusssy, and an Arab prince [Prince Khalid bin Abdullah bin Abdulrahman] took it out of bankruptcy for $25 million at the end of 2002. Speaker 1: Okay. So it was built by Motorola? Speaker 2: Built by Motorola. Speaker 1: (Unclear) Speaker 2: We took it out of bankruptcy for $6 billion. We took it out of bankruptcy for $25 million. Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: We operated for six years and sold it for about $470 million in 2009, and we made it a business. But, of course, we didn't have the $6 billion of debt. What bankruptcy does is it washes away the debt. But we made it an operating business. That was, that was my last big startup project and it was with Herb. Bob [Robert L. Johnson] was in it at the beginning and we took, Herb and I took the project to Bob and said, "Well lets go do this one, this is the next thing for us to do," we were as a matter of fact we had just sold off the cable system-- Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: --in 1999. And Bob said, "Hey sounds like a great idea," he went to John Malone and John Malone said, "Motorola did, wasn't able to make a go of it, what makes you guys think you can make a go of it?" And Bob said well, "They, Herb and Ty have kind of an interesting idea." Our idea was to turn it into a village telephone system for close to sixty percent of the globe, where people at the end of the twentieth century had never made a phone call because they had no infrastructure and we were gonna provide satellite infrastructure for those people and village telephones, that's why we wanted it. Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: Before we came in to take it over, there had been another guy who was looking at it and people thought that he was gonna take it over, his name was Craig McCaw. And Craig McCaw was one of the early pioneers of mobile telephone. He, he, he became a billionaire on mobile telephone systems. And he went in and looked at it and the government wouldn't give him the kind of deal he wanted so he walked away from it. And we basically said we'll take that deal (laughter). And that's how we got it, but we, John Malone sent us to Craig McCaw and said, "Go talk to Craig McCaw." And we went to Craig McCaw and Craig McCaw, who had spent six month, months looking at the system, said, "You know, what it is, it's a, it's a dumpster with a Mercedes engine." That's what he described it as, you know. He said, "You can't make money, money with that thing." And we finished the conversation and Bob said, "Okay Ty, we've, you know, we've vetted this, I'm, you have spent some money and time send us a bill and your expenses, we'll divide it three ways and that's that." And Herb said, "Sorry Bob I'm going forward." And I said, "I'm going with Herb, Bob." And so, and it's the one project that he didn't join the other, the two of us on, and, and he regretted it later on. So did Craig McCaw. Story_ID: 156735 Speaker 1: They were saying off camera that--when you bought it, you were able to, to see that the U.S. Military's gonna use 50 percent of it? Speaker 2: Right. Yeah, we had a contract-- Speaker 1: They were already-- Speaker 2: We had a contract with the U.S. government. That wasn't good enough for Craig McCaw but it was good enough for us and we, we said we could go forward with this and make a go of it. Speaker 1: And you were saying also that fisheries in northernest other latitudes-- Speaker 2: In the low, southern latitudes and the very high northern latitudes are outside the areas of communication infrastructure-- Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: --and Iridium [Satellite LLC, later Iridium Communications Inc.] supplies channels of communication in those areas where, where there can't be, where they don't exist. The way I describe Iridium is that if you're in the Gobi Desert and you wanna call home, you better have an Iridium phone. Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: If you're in the middle of the Arabian Desert and you wanna call home, you better have an Iridium phone. Doesn't matter where you are, you can call home. For a while I tried to sell Iridium as a potential village telephone system in West Africa. And I, I spent a lot of time in Ghana and Senegal, some in Nigeria meeting with government officials, Abdoulaye Wade in Senegal, I met with him a number of times and I actually got a license for IRIDIUM from Senegal but I couldn't get the government to be our partner. Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: And my approach was I'm not gonna go into a business in a foreign country where I don't have local, you know, skin in the game. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because they could just take the license away. Speaker 1: So would--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: But a-- Speaker 1: --IRIDIUM operating-- Speaker 2: But I could, I could, I could, stand in a field in a village-- Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: With no telephone service in the country in Senegal, and lift up the antenna on my Iridium phone and talk to home just like that. Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: Because there was a satellite right up there. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Always a satellite right up there somewhere. Speaker 1: And was Iridium phones on sale, you know-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --of places where you-- Speaker 2: No, no they weren't, they weren't. Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) then how would you, how (unclear) Speaker 2: And they were, Iridium phones are expensive. Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: They're, if you remember the, the old they're not that big, they're not like the old [U.S.] Army walkie-talkies. Speaker 1: Brick cell phones. Speaker 2: But it's a brick. Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: Yeah, it's a brick. And it's like that, you know, and that thick. And they're expensive. Speaker 1: Are they still being sold as (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: And they're still, yeah. See they've gotten smaller but they're still, they're a small brick now but they're never gonna be the size of a cell phone 'cause you, you're, you're going, you're going a few hundred miles up into space for your signal. Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: But they were, it's, it's, it was just a, you know, for a soldier, you know, it's wonderful for somebody who's stuck on a, on a fishery. The way these fisheries work is the crews go out and stay for months, the fish get sent back, okay but the crews stay out on the water for weeks and weeks and weeks and so being, and it's Filipinos, its Indians, you know, you, Chinese people who, who, who do most of the fishing for the world market, okay. Story_ID: 156736 Speaker 1: --What would your phone bill be for a week? I'm just curious. I don't want-- Speaker 2: For IRIDIUM? Speaker 1: For, for a month say with IRIDIUM? Speaker 2: I'm trying, I'm gonna try to give you a sense of the way it worked. Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: The IRIDIUM phone, I think the IRIDIUM costs about $1200. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Minutes of use cost maybe ten dollar a minute. Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: Now, we were gonna get 'em way down, the minutes way down for this village phone service because that model, the model that I just described is the model where you had few very units, users, maybe twenty, 30,000 uses around the world. What Herb and I were hoping to do was to have millions of users around the world by taking this brick and not having it as an individual telephone but having it as a village telephone so that somebody in the village would own this telephone and they would sell minutes to people who lived in the village who had no means of communications any other means of, that was our idea and that would bring the cost way, way, way down but we weren't able to get any of these countries to, to go along with us. And I learned something in that process and it's also true here, it's not just true in the Third World, and that is that basically around the world officials in urban areas, national legislators and people in urban areas, don't really care enough about deprivation in the rural areas to do, to spend money to do something about it, okay. And that's true in West Africa, but it's also true to an extent here, just look at Appalachian. You know, and that just brought it home because I mean we were handing them the, you can get telephone service to a hundred percent of your population. Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: And they, they wouldn't buy into it, so. But then we made a, we made a fistful of money by serving the fisheries, by serving the, the military, by serving yachtsmen, by serving N.G.O. [non-governmental organization] people who've traveled to the Third Worlds, you know, and, and needed instant communications, and by providing tracking, electronic tracking for companies like Caterpillar and Deere-- Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: --companies that had equipment worth tens of thousands of dollars out in the field and they wanted to, they needed to monitor the operation and whereabouts of that equipment. And that became a large part of our service internationally. Speaker 1: So with an outfit like it's a Halliburton-- Speaker 2: Halliburton. Speaker 1: --that they use. Speaker 2: The oil rig companies they use, you know, they were a big part of our market. Wherever people went, where there was not communication infrastructure we were there. And all they had to do was buy our handheld and they were into the network. And we were the only network in the world, and still are, where the satellites, and this was important to the U.S. State Department and the U.S. Military, the satellites talk to each other. So that if I'm standing in a field in Senegal and dial home in Washington, D.C. my voice would go from my handheld in the field to a satellite above me in Senegal. It would go from there to a satellite over the Atlantic Ocean and from there to a satellite over the East Coast of the United States without ever touching the ground, it would only come down to ground in the United States. And so that, what that meant is that for a company or a user or a government that wants secure communications, the communications never touched any place on the earth except the destination. We were the only ones who provided that kind of service. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So. Story_ID: 156737 Speaker 1: Now, let me, is it time to go to the Media Access Project? Speaker 2: I only spent a year there. And it was an attempt to do a give back, frankly. I had, I had, in the, in 1999 when AT&T. bought out our cable system here in Washington, D.C., I had a multimillion dollar pay day. It's a lot more money than I'd ever seen. Speaker 1: D.C. Cablevision. Speaker 2: Yeah, District Cable. I saw more money than I'd ever seen in my life and more than I thought I would ever see, not the kind of money that Herb and Bob saw but it was very significant. Of course, I left it in A.T&T. stock and AT&T went into the cellar over the next year so I lost most of that. But it was a big pay day. And then when we sold the IRIDIUM in 2000 and-- Speaker 1: Nine [2009], I believe. Speaker 2: Nine [2009]-- Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: --I had another multimillion dollar pay day and this time I held on to it. And so I felt like, you know, I, I, I had gained a lot and I wanted to give something back in my field and Media Access Project was a, a way to do that. It didn't work out, it didn't work out with the guy who, who founded the organization and was its president for thirty years, who had indicated that he was transitioning out and they were having difficulty raising money. And I felt that I could help him in the transition and, and raising money but it just didn't work out. That's very hard to, it's very hard to, for one to work with a founder of an organization like that who, who has mixed feelings about how he's gonna transition, so. It just didn't work out. And I, I, I didn't, it wasn't something I needed, it was an effort to give back. So I, I, I gave up after a year. And since then I really haven't been involved, you know, going to an office day to day. I think the only thing that you've, you've kind of missed, that we've missed that I consider to be significant is, I loved the two years that I taught at Duke University [Durham, North Carolina]-- Story_ID: 156738 Speaker 1: I absolutely loved it, I just loved it Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now, what years were you at Duke [University, Durham, North Carolina]? When, when you (unclear) yeah I saw it-- Speaker 1: I'm gonna guess it was like 2007 to 2009 or 2006 to 2008 something like that. But I just loved it. I loved it. The students were bright, so they were cocky, you know, and Duke is a largely white university, of course, but they, they were I just loved teaching those kids. I got paid almost nothing and I finally, I, I, I remember saying to my kids over the years always make sure you get paid what you're worth because if you, if you don't do that you're selling yourself short. And I just could not, and academia as an outside adjunct professor, basically you do it for the pleasure of getting to work with the kids (laughter) they don't pay you anything. And after a couple of years I just, I, I, I remember going to the dean of the school and saying, you know I, I don't need the money you, you know, I don't need the money, I was flying down there once a week every week and, you know, the little money I was making was barely covering my expenses but I really, I just, I just can't do this and hold my head up with my kids if I don't get, you know, something more and he really couldn't do it. So I said well, I, I and I wish I hadn't because I loved it so much. You know, they have something, that's why they pay these adjuncts nothing because it's so much fun. I taught journalistic ethics. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And boy, oh what a, what I really taught was something quite different but it was within a context of a journalistic ethics class. I'll give you a quick example of, of when I mean that it was something different. My first assignment for the students turned out to be a, a mock situation, there's a word for it and I can't think of it right now, right. I gave them a one paragraph description of a situation and asked them to write an essay about the situation. And the situation I, I would give them was an example of a, a primitive community living in oh, the sixth century or the tenth century B.C. living on the edge of the, of a, the last glaciers in Europe. And they had just found out that another community had moved into, down the river from them, near the lake where they got their fish from and it was a bigger community. And they sent out scouts to report on this community and the scouts reported back that it was a larger group of people and this community had to decide what they were gonna do. Were they gonna go down and fight the people possibly for their territory, were they going to go across the ice sheet to the east, to a place where they knew there was food but they might very well lose of their people traveling across the ice sheet, or they could go west on to the tundra where they could also find food but they were hazards there to. And they had a, a, a lady witch doctor who had actually made the trip across the tundra once, across the ice sheet once and she had made it and she said it was awful but the community survived nobody, had ever gone west, they just heard stories about the west and they had the report from the, the scouts that they had sent out. My question was what do they do and why? That was the beginning of my journalistic ethics class and I, I, you would probably like a lot of people would say that has nothing to do with journalist ethics but the scouts were reporters and the information that they were bringing back to the community was news and it was information based on which the community was gonna make life or death decisions. And that was the context of my whole class in journalistic ethics. So, and--wow we had a ball. I loved it. I loved it, so. Should have been a teacher. Story_ID: 156739 Speaker 1: Now we, now what are you working on now? Are you working on something now that you-- Speaker 2: No, what I'm doing right now, what's taking up most of my time, my wife [Carolyn T. Brown] and I we bought this house, this apartment condo on Miami Beach [Florida] overlooking the water on Collins Avenue straight down to the water. On one side and we got views looking east and west. And looking east it's the Atlantic Ocean and the west it's the inter-coastal and there's nothing on either side. Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: And so it's a wonderful view but the apartment was a nightmare and so we just broke it down completely. We bought it eight months ago and we've been redesigning it and refurnishing it and so I go down there three or four days a week. I got contractors coming out the ear, and we're buying furniture and stuff like that. And so spending a lot of time doing that. And it's now gotten to the point that, that it's fun but boy, midway through the project it looked like we'd never get through it. Speaker 1: So, so you're enjoying the fruits of-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm enjoying that. I'm really enjoying that. I enjoy my kids. I don't see enough of them. Speaker 1: Now tell me about your kids. Speaker 2: Well, I'm really proud of my kids. I remember saying to their mother [Carolyn T. Brown] once and she agreed with, with me that that they would make us famous. They never met an exam they didn't like either. And Christopher [ph.] my older son, they went to school up here in Shepherd Park Elementary School [Washington, D.C.]. It was a mixed neighborhood, at the northern tip of the district, middle class neighborhood. And it was in transition when we lived there. Black and white professional couples coming together and raising their families and fighting hard to keep quality at this local elementary school, and we did it dog on it. It was a, it was a battle fighting the city over, you know, to get resources and getting decent teachers and stuff like that. We had to run what we called a parents caucus. I was president for a couple of the years and we got permission to hire our own principal, you know, and stuff like that when nobody was doing that. We got, our kids tested when the District of Columbia [Washington, D.C.] was not testing kids. We had Bill Raspberry [HM William Raspberry] as part of the group, he wrote for The Washington Post and the city was deathly afraid that he was gonna write an article about, you know, about the schools, so when, when we asked for something, they figured out a way to get it to us. We tested, got the kids tested and, and found out exactly what we thought was true, our kids went into Shepherd Elementary School when, when they were tested at first grade, they were at third grade level when they were tested at third grade they were at third grade level, when they were tested at fifth grade they were at fourth grade level. I mean, yes. I, I manipulated the principal into, to taking these tests, if the parents signed for them and all the parents said yes, and that's what it showed. I took the results to my office at my law firm, I was then at Caplin and Drysdale, and I put the results on a chart. And the chart just showed, you know, whew in terms of achievement. I sent it to every parent in the school and just said we got the results of, you know, the national achievement tests they we took of our kids. All the parents, maybe two parents opted out or something like that, and sent it all of them, just the chart, just showing what had happened and I included two paragraphs that said what happened, the procedure and what they showed. The parents went crazy. They went bananas. The, the, the superintendent of schools showed up in Vinnie Cohen basement, I'll never forget, with every one of his assistant supervisor this and the this and that and the other thing. And the parents were hanging from the rafters what are you doing to our kids, look what's, what is going on. He walked out of that room after the meeting with his deputies and he, he pulled me aside and he looked at me and he said Ty your principal will be gone in two months I promise, and she was. And we hired our own principal and the school went (making sound). And after that, five or six schools in the District of Columbia got autonomy. But our little school in Shepherd Park was the first one to do it. Story_ID: 156740 Speaker 1: All of the white schools in the City [of Washington, D.C.] got autonomy but we the first ones to do it. Oh, you asked me about my kids. So they went to the local public elementary school. And then they went Sidwell [Sidwell Friends], which is a local private school for junior high and high school and they did very, very well there. They didn't miss a beat, going from public school to, to Sidwell. Sidwell is the place where Chelsea Clinton went to school and it's the place where the Obama girls are in school now. And they both did so well that were both early admits to Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut]. Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: And they both went to Yale. Christopher played football at Yale, he was a, all-Ivy, yeah, defensive back. But he also was a scholar. And he graduated magna cum laude and he became a Rhodes Scholar. And so he went to Oxford University [Oxford, England] in England for two years and after two years he was doing so well with his research that the university gave him another two year grant and he stayed there for four years, and he got his PhD at Oxford. And he was a, at Oxford as a student, he was a Junior Research Fellow. Junior Research Fellow was selected university wide one, every year. And he's the first American ever to become a Junior Research Fellow at Oxford University. Speaker 2: And his research is on the transatlantic slave trade? Speaker 1: His research, I'll, I'll give, I'll give you a copy of the book when you leave 'cause I've got some paperback copies. Speaker 2: And he's teaching now? Speaker 1: And he's teaching now at Columbia University [New York, New York]. His brother who also went to Sidwell and then to Yale, didn't have an athletic career because when he was a eighth grader, playing on a dirty gym floor in one of these private schools here, slipped, slipped when he was doing a lay-up and wound up with two, he didn't think he would walk again, with two huge bolts in-- Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: --under his knee and he wasn't able to do anything until he was a senior. He ran cross country as a senior. I remember the first time I took him skiing, we skied a lot before then, and the first time I took him skiing after he got well again, it was a wonderful trip. We went out to Colorado. But Michael [ph.] was a National Science Fellow at, at Yale. His field is neuroscience. And he was also a Whiffenpoof. And a Whiffenpoof at Yale is more important than being a football player. And to get to be a Whiffenpoof, you devote more of your life to music and singing and being off-campus traveling around singing, than the parents would ever stand for in terms of, of sports at those schools. I mean he was never there on the weekend, you know. I don't know how he got through his work. But he got through his work and did well and, and he was a lead singer in the junior group. And he was one of the, I, I guess there are 9 members of the Whiffenpoofs. And when they graduate they don't go home after graduation, they go off on a world tour for four months, and sing before the Queen of England and the Emperor of Japan, the, you know. So he got that experience. It was very nice. He lives here, his brother lives in New York 'cause he teaches at Columbia, yeah, so. Story_ID: 156741 Speaker 1: How did you meet your current wife? Speaker 2: Ha, Michiru [Nonogawa] and I, I've, I've also been a devotee of sushi. And from, from my first trip to Japan when I was an F.C.C. [Federal Communications Commission] Commissioner I went, I, I spent a couple of weeks in Japan. And in the days that I worked at Steptoe & Johnson [LLP], just south of Dupont Circle I would often go to a sushi restaurant, a small inexpensive sushi restaurant for lunch in Dupont Circle. And when I went to Wiley Rein, I, uh once every couple of weeks I'd walk the six blocks up to Dupont circle and have sushi for lunch or for dinner. And at some point in the near 2002 and 2003, 2004 period, somewhere around there in 2005, I, this young lady was a hostess and waitress at the, the local sushi restaurant that I went to. And I, I just liked the way she handled herself, you know. I really liked the way she handled herself, very professional, very, but very friendly at the same time and her, gracious, you know, in the way that we kind of idealized the Chinese culture kind of, the Japanese culture kind of thing. They're really tough, mean women, (laughter) actually but it doesn't come through on the surface. And so I really, I, I, I became interested in her and, and I started going more often. And they would always have, I, I guess they could tell that I was interested in her and she was a part of the reason why I kept coming back so she always served me. And then at some point I gave her my card and asked her to call me and she said hi, which is, means no. It means yes but it really meant no. And but we talked a little bit when I was there. And I wound up eating sushi every night, six nights a week for six months at one point, you know. And I'd never done anything like that in my life. I mean people just laugh when they hear this story, I never did anything like that in my life. And, you know, every six weeks or so I'd give her my card again, you know, with my home phone number on it and ask her to call me and she'd say hi but she wouldn't call. So finally after six months I gave up. I said okay. That's that and I stopped going for sushi. Sushi will eat up your stomach if you, if you're don't have a tough stomach 'cause you're eating raw fish. And I said I'm not getting anywhere so, and so I stopped going and she called me. That's how we got together. Story_ID: 156742 Speaker 1: Let me just ask you, now your, your father [Madison Brown] I guess passed away earlier. Speaker 2: My father passed away at the age of sixty-four in 1981. Speaker 1: He did get a chance to-- Speaker 2: Two [1982] maybe. Oh, yes. Speaker 1: --appointed by [James Earl] Jimmy Carter to the F.C.C. [Federal Communications Commission] Commission. Speaker 2: Yes, both of my parents were there-- Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: --when I was appointed to the F.C.C. I had just become a partner at, at Steptoe [& Johnson LLP] when, when my father died, yeah. Speaker 1: Now, looking I mean, becoming an old parent myself, I mean, looking just trying to think of what they might have been thinking. I guess they were really amazed at the progress and the-- Speaker 2: I think they were, I, I would say that they were proud. Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: But I was not, in that stage of my life, I was not that close to my parents, you know, in my thirties and forties, I was not that close with my parents. In order, to succeed, and she succeeded in a big way in getting us raised the way she wanted to get us raised, my mother was very domineering. And so I, I, I had to get space, I just had to get space. And it wasn't until many years later that I was able to come back together with her. But I always knew that I was gonna be the one who was-- Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: --who, whose job it would be to make her older years comfortable. And one of the, certainly, one of the things about my life that I feel best about was being able to provide her with that eight years of comfort when, you know, people, people could come in and see her and she was taken care of, she didn't have to worry about anything and heavens knows she'd earned that, so. I was glad I was able to do it. Story_ID: 156743 Speaker 1: There's another aspect of life you mentioned and I think maybe we oughta mention it on camera that before I ask, I've got about two more, two or three more questions-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --to ask. But you were talking about the, the community basketball game that the-- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: That the black lawyers and professionals will have-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --with their children involved in it-- Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: ---and this went on for over twenty years? Speaker 2: Oh, thirty years. Speaker 1: thirty-- Speaker 2: And it's still going on. Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: Kids are still doing the game the last I heard. So (unclear) it was in that little area in Shepherd Park [Washington, D.C.], you know, where there's a Shepherd Elementary School. It's an area of the city where back in the '80s [1980s] I checked it out because it really struck me as kind of a remarkable area, it was almost fifty, fifty black and white. The average number of degrees in each of the houses on average was in excess of three. That means somebody in the house had a graduate degree. The houses were really nice, old houses but they were in the city and there was, you know, and public schools were terrible so you could get these houses fairly inexpensively, beautiful mansions, I mean, you know. The place we had was a big, huge old six bedroom barn, I mean it was, you know. And a lot of the black lawyers and doctors and professionals and government workers lived in the area. And across the street from where I lived, its backs right into Rock Creek Park, walk across the street and around the corner and you're in Rock Creek Park. And the whole neighborhood kind of backed into Rock Creek Park so it was beautiful, beautiful area of the city, with these custom built houses that you got for $60,000, you know, $70,000. Now they're a couple million (laughter). And there was this school called Marjorie Webster Junior College. Marjorie Webster Junior College [Washington, D.C.] was a finishing school for dumb white girls. It was a, it was a finishing school. And it occupied seven acres of land in that community and we lived right across from it. And the desire for that kind of, you know, we, like Mrs. Smith's finishing school that's what it was but it was a boarding school. The need for those kinds of places disappeared. And so in the late 60s [1960s], early '70s [1970s] Marjorie Webster Junior College went out of business and it was just sitting there. So we rented the school gym for many, many years and played basketball every Saturday in the school gym. Story_ID: 156744 Speaker 1: Vinnie Cohen [Vincent H. Cohen] sounds very Jewish, Vinnie Cohen is very, very, very black. He just died this Christmas. He was an all American at Syracuse University [Syracuse, New York]. His roommate was Jim Brown [James Nathaniel "Jim" Brown]-- Speaker 2: Hmm. Speaker 1: --at Syracuse. Vinnie was by far the most successful of the black large firm attorneys in this city for many, many years. He became the senior partner at maybe the largest major law firm in town, Hogan & Hartson [later Hogan Howells], the highest paid attorney in that law firm. His client list included all the major companies in America, who had to come before, for one reason or another a jury in the District of Columbia [Washington, D.C.]. If, you, if you had to do that, you wanted Vinnie Cohen representing you. And Vinnie was part of the, in the group and his kids and my kids, you know, we, we'd play and if a, if a little kid wound up on the court the game stopped until the kid was taken off the court. And my kids knew all their kids. Cliff Alexander [Clifford Alexander, Jr.], Cliff was head of the equal, Chairman of the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission. One of the first chairman of the Equal Employment maybe the first chairman of the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission. Black man, who went to the Field School (ph.), is it Field? No, it's the Fieldston School [Ethical Culture and Fieldston Schools, New York, New York] in Manhattan [sic, the Bronx], and to Yale[University, New Haven, Connecticut, sic, Harvard College, Cambridge, Massachusetts and then Yale Law School] I think, I think he went to Yale. Wound up working in the Lyndon Johnson administration and Johnson appointed him to, as chairman of the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission and Jimmy Carter appointed him Secretary of the Army. Speaker 2: Hmm. Speaker 1: He was Secretary of Army during the Carter Administration. He became a partner at Arnold and Porter which was the other large law firm in town. I might have said to, at some point today that I really didn't have my role models but for me those two guys were role models. I became employed by one of these firms before they did but when they came in, they came in at a higher level because they served at a high level in the government. Two very remarkable human beings. The Redskins football players would come out and play basketball with, with us as their careers were ending. So we had [Brigman] Brig Owens came and played for, with us for a while and Calvin Hill came up. That guy, he could stand at half court with me hanging on his shoulders and do a jump shot that would just go swish. What an athlete. Speaker 2: Of course-- Speaker 1: His son is Grant Hill. Speaker 2: Grant Hill, right. Speaker 1: Yeah. What an athlete. Speaker 2: He was a Yale athlete, right. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Went to Yale. Speaker 1: But Calvin he, it was his, it was like you weren't bumping him, it didn't matter. Who else? Johnson, Gus Johnson. Speaker 2: Gus Johnson. Speaker 1: Do you remember who Gus Johnson was? Speaker 2: (Unclear) Speaker 1: Bad knees. He had bad knees, he'd play with us. Speaker 2: The first man I-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --saw to tear down a backboard-- Speaker 1: Was Gus Johnson. Speaker 2: Gus Johnson. Speaker 1: It would be weird people out there. Then there'd be the city administrator who played with us, [HM the Honorable] Marion Barry's city administrator played with us, for, for years. And-- Speaker 2: So-- Speaker 1: It mean it was just, you know, people, you know, we'd be out there and we'd play basketball. Teachers at Howard University [Washington, D.C.], doctors, lawyers, and we'd get out there and we'd curse and we'd fight and argue and, you know, and then we'd go out and take our kids to lunch after we played for maybe three hours. Speaker 2: Hmm. Speaker 1: We'd all go off to lunch. It was really very, very, very, it was important. If some of us felt, I felt this way, if I was east of the Mississippi at six o'clock on Saturday morning, I was gonna find a way to get to Washington [D.C.] and to the gym by nine o'clock. Speaker 2: Hmm. Speaker 1: And a lot of us felt that way about the game. And it went on for years and years and years. I finally stopped playing, I started playing in that game when I was maybe twenty-eight, twenty-nine. I stopped playing in the game when I was about fifty-seven or fifty-eight because I had started doing long distance running. I was afraid I was gonna hurt my knees. Story_ID: 156745 Speaker 1: --Neglected to mention that you set some records in college at Hamilton [College, Clinton, New York], right, some sort of record? Speaker 2: Well, just, just a-- Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: But it was a small school. Speaker 1: Triple jump and stuff. Speaker 2: The triple jump, I mean, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I'll be damned. Where'd you get that? Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: You know, we, yeah. I, I, I truly was not much of an athlete, I had a lot of determination but I had, what I had for my size was spring. When I was nineteen I could dunk a ball. Of course, you see kids do that now all the time who are my height but back then almost nobody could do that. And so I had a, a, New York state small school record in the triple jump and it still is I, last time I took, looked it was still a record, you know. I just I had spring, I could, I could, I could leap, you know. And so when I played in this game I would usually be guarding people. I'm 5' 8" and I'd be guarding people who were 6' 2" or 6' 3" because I really could jump but I couldn't shoot to save my life, (laughter) you know, so it was good, it was, oh, we loved it. (Unclear) (Simultaneous) Speaker 1: I thought I had to raise that because the frame of reference that might pop up again or something. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: It's a great story. Story_ID: 156746 Speaker 1: We always ask this question and when you look back on everything you've done to this point what today would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: Oddly enough, I would have to say my kids. And about that I would say that I wish that I had spent more time with them when they were young. I spent a lot of time working when I might have spent more time with them. And their mother [Carolyn T. Brown] and I went through a divorce and we didn't grow apart but I didn't spend as much as time with them after that as, as I would like to have. So that's a regret-- Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: --that's a second regret that I would, that I would mention but, but certainly the most important thing for me, in my life would be my two boys. And now my grandkids. In terms of my career, I think that that tax certificate project that I described then became a cornerstone of black ownership of broadcast stations was extremely important. I think that B.E.T. [Black Enterprise Television] going public, it certainly wouldn't have happened when it did if I had not been involved, I mean it's Bob Johnson's [Robert L. Johnson] thing don't get me wrong, he built that company, he was it but I'm, I, I facilitated the, the, the stock exchange listing, the going public and, and that's something that I think was, was extremely important not because of B.E.T.'s content but because here you had the first black billionaire in effect taking the company to the New York Stock Exchange, that was very, a very important financial event. A letter that I wrote at Herb Wilkins [HM Herbert P. Wilkins] request that we gave to Bob Johnson, that Bob Johnson gave to Bill Clinton about our hopes and aspirations for the Iridium Satellite System, which had some part to play in that system not being decommissioned which is what Motorola was gonna do because it was a black eye to them, and they, they just wanted it to go away. It wouldn't have happened if I hadn't written that letter. And during my career that's kind of what I was a master of, taking a situation and converting it into something that could be put on two pages-- Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: --and then described to the decision maker, decision makers in terms of an argument. Speaker 1: So you can frame an argument? Speaker 2: Yeah and, and I mean that's basically what I did in terms of building the cable system. I, I decided it couldn't be built unless we got C and P to do it so we had to find a way and to make it legal for C and P to do it, and we did that, you know. And I came up with the way to do it. And we feel that that doing that had a large part to do with the urban buildouts of cable systems throughout the country. Clearly, in my life I've received so much more than I've ever given back, sometimes because I couldn't, and sometimes because I simply didn't. But I've gotten so much more out of life than, than, than I've been able to give back. That was one of the reasons why I did the, wanted to do the Media Access thing 'cause I thought that might be a way to give back. And I'll find a way, you know. Teaching at Duke [University, Durham, North Carolina] was kind of a way to give back. Helping young black folks who were trying to get into business in my field, and I do some of that as a way of trying to give back. Story_ID: 156747 Speaker 1: I'm working with a, another guy right now on a project that we call the Black Heritage Network. And we are trying to found a new cable television network. That's what my meeting with the commissioner was about today. Which we describe as Discovery [Channel] plus the History Channel from the black perspective. The individual who heads up this efforts is a white guy, his name is Richard Reingold, I met with him and Commissioner [Mignon] Clyburn today and it's been his passion. He has felt, and he's convinced me and a lot of other people, that there is a place in this media crazy content world where there isn't sufficient organized information of black, about black history, black culture, black pioneers in business, music, and the arts, and we think we can build a channel around it. One of the, the resources that we're going to use is The HistoryMakers and all of these interviews. Our plan is to build a program around all these interviews and air it on our channel and we've been talking with your, your, your president about that and I think just about got an agreement signed up. That's a huge resource of information. It's a wonderful resource. We went out and met with Janelle [sic, Julieanna Richardson] about a month ago. And I mean it's just there's, it's a goldmine of information about black history in the last hundred years because you've interviewed young people, you've interviewed old people, you've interviewed athletes, you've interviewed musicians, you've interviewed artists, and business people, and government officials. So we're gonna have a program on our channel called The HistoryMakers. Speaker 2: Hmm. Speaker 1: We've got a, a an agreement from the N.B.A. [National Basketball Association] to give us their classical footage so we can do biography, yeah biographical programs about the black stars going all the way back to the '50's [1950s] in basketball, David Stern loves the idea. We've got an agreement from CBS to, to let us have at no cost their archives of programs like 'Julia,' 'Amos and Andy' although I can't think of what we would do with it, 'I Spy,' you know, going back to the '50s [1950s]. And we're gonna turn this into a network, that's my passion right now. And we're out trying to get carriage, distribution, that's the way you, it's the way you build things and, so that's what we're doing. And, and that's taken a good bit of my time right now. We're gonna make it happen to. So it'll be, it, it, it won't be a black movie channel and it won't be a black music channel. We think there's room for something else. Story_ID: 156748 Speaker 1: Now we always ask this question too. What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: I have spent a lot of time, I've been very, very concerned during this period that we're in now since the, the recession. It, that recession was more than a recession because what it did was it set a large segment of the American public on a permanent downward spiral that will not be reversed without major action by the government and the government seems to be unable to, to get consensus to, to deal with the problem, and I don't think they're gonna get consensus to deal with the problem. So short term I'm very much concerned for the parts of our population, and it's disproportionately black and Latin who were just getting their feets on the ladder, you know. The upper the, the American story, the upward bound ladder when this thing hit them, and put them underwater and in this generation, they are never gonna come back. They're, you know, they're underwater, they can walk about from those houses but they can never build the kind of equity that they thought they were building. This happened to black people, it happened to white people, it happened to brown people, it happened, you know, we get the flu when America gets a cold. So I'm very concerned about that. Long term I'm optimistic because long term I'm an optimistic person because of my religious feelings and, and faith in, in humankind but for the foreseeable future, we face a difficult situation. And that brought me to reexamining what are the elements, you know, in our culture, in this country, that make America the exception and certainly it's our, it's the democracy, certainly it's the fact that we have, happen to inhabit a part of the world that is rich in natural resources, and that's a big part of the America story. But what is it that made us, this nation, great, and what is that made the West more successful than other parts of the world aside from avarice and aggression, and what it is I decided just this week, is family. This country is built on democracy and government and service of family. And we are going through a transition to something else. And nobody seems to know, I certainly don't know, what that something else is and whether this country can maintain its greatness as it goes through that transition of reinterpreting what family means, is an open question. Story_ID: 156749 Speaker 1: And it's a very, very important question for the black community because while we're not willing to talk about it very much or willing to admit it very much, the family ties in the black community don't have the strength and the resiliency that they do in the majority community. That maybe largely a legacy, probably is, of slavery. It's a legacy of economics. It's a legacy of the black male never being in a position of paterfamilias, father of the family, leader of the family because for so much of our time in this country, the country hasn't permitted that to happen. Right up to the 1960s you were a boy in the southern part of America where most black men grew up. My mother [Julia Goodman Brown] was so dominating because she was a southern mother and if she didn't bring her six sons to heal and get them pointed in the right direction, they were gonna be killed because that was the experience of the southern mother. And that's, you know, we're crazy but that's, that's the way it was. So I think that a reason why black America, putting aside whose fault it is and why black America doesn't, hasn't thrived in this country in the way that it should giving the history of other immigrant groups into the country is that we've had-- Speaker 2: Hmm. Speaker 1: --defects, weaknesses, pathologies in the family structure that have not permitted us to overcome hostility, resentment hatred, in the way that the Italians did, in the way that the Irish did, Irish need not apply, certainly the ways the Jews did in this country. And there I don't know the answer either. I don't, I, I don't where it's all gonna turn out maybe it's all gonna turn out that the kids will be like my grandchildren half black and half white, I don't know. But I'm rambling, I'm sorry (laughter). Speaker 2: Okay. Well, is it, these are all, you know, weighty issues now, now there's no easy answer. Speaker 1: I spent a lot of time thinking about them these days. I have all my life. I think I'm seeing more clearly now. It's funny how when you get past the crisis of living day to day that you can get a different perspective on what's going on around you but I spend a lot of time thinking about these things. Story_ID: 156750 Speaker 1: All right. Now, sir, is there anything I haven't asked you about that we need to talk about before I ask my last-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --question. Speaker 2: Okay. I, I've rambled all day long. I can't, no. I can't think of anything that-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --that, that comes to mind. Speaker 1: Well, the last question is similar to legacy but a little bit different. Sir, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: I wanna give you an honest answer. The answer that, that jumps to mind is I wanna be remembered for my children. That's the answer that jumps to mind but there's also a more career oriented answer and that would be that I, I, for, for the small successes that I have had, for the, the tables that I've sat at or near in this city, I feel that it's been very remarkable to be a witness at so many events at such a variety of, of important moments. Curious moments, ironic moments, but the truth of the matter is that I wish I could remember, be remembered for something I said that advanced the cause of understanding between the races. That advanced the cause of, of making America a more perfect union. And to this day, I sit down and I write op-ed pieces and send them to the newspapers with the hope that they get published. I haven't had one published in years but I still do it because in terms of a career aspiration, my aspiration would be to have other people feel that I had a contribution to make to the intellectual civil discourse in this country. And I haven't succeeded at that yet but I got a lot of years ahead of me. Story_ID: 156751 Speaker 1: First picture, proud papa and older son Christopher [Brown (ph.)]. Speaker 2: About what year? Speaker 1: 1968. Speaker 2: So we didn't get a full name of (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 1: So, Christopher, my son, and a few months after I finished my clerkship at the [U.S.] Supreme Court. Speaker 2: This is Christopher meets the Chief Justice. We went and visited Chief Justice [Earl] Warren when Christopher was less than a year old. Speaker 1: The day I graduated from Hamilton College [Clinton, New York] with my sister [Caroline Brown (ph.)]. The whole family came up to attend my graduation. And a couple of my professors actually had members of my family stay with them in their homes-- Speaker 2: So-- Speaker 1: --on that graduation weekend. Speaker 2: That would, this would have been my senior year after a victory. We won all but one game that year. Speaker 1: At what high school? Speaker 2: No, this is at Hamilton College. Speaker 1: Okay. Very good. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: I'm gonna guess that's after one of my marathons in the past, maybe 2005, 2006 something like that. That was a proud moment. This was the day that Christopher, who's in the academic robes received his Doctor of Philosophy Degree at Oxford University in, in Oxford, England, and on the other side of Christopher is my second son, Michael. We all went over to, for that event. It was some time after he graduated, he finally went back and got (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 1: Me on the-- Speaker 2: ---on the right. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Christopher-- Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: Christopher in the middle who, who, who got his D.Phil. [Ph.D.] that day, and Michael [Brown (ph.)] my younger son on the left. Speaker 1: That's a picture that I kind of like because it's one of the nicer pictures that I have of my mother [Julia Goodman Brown] and father [Madison Brown]. This picture would have been taken in maybe 1970, maybe 1972 in East Orange, New Jersey. That's me doing the high jump in my senior year at Hamilton College. Odd, oddly enough it was the day, that that turned out to be the day that I jumped the highest and ran the furthest and the fastest. Speaker 2: Remember the day (unclear) Speaker 1: But I wish (laughter). Boy that's an old. This is my junior high school graduation picture, so I was all of thirteen years old. That's a picture, going from left to right of me, my oldest brother, Madison [Brown (ph.)], and my younger brother, Bernard [Brown (ph.)], with my mother maybe on Mother's Day. I'm gonna guess that was some time in the early 1990s. That's my brother, Arthur [Brown (ph.)], who died when he was twenty years old. He had a congenital heart defect. Had, ex, experimental open heart surgery when he was twelve years but it only partially successful. That's my, my son, Christopher, when he was maybe eight. This is the oldest picture that I have of myself, my oldest brother, and my brother, Arthur, who was eleven months older than me. I am on the left. My brother, Madison, is in the middle, my brother, Arthur, is on the right. That would have been in Orange, New Jersey. I would have been about four. That's my high school [East Orange High School, East Orange, New Jersey] graduation picture. And my son, Michael, in the corner, my younger son. Speaker 2: Oh, no, no, no, that would be, he would have been, when that picture was taken he was maybe a junior in high school. That's my mother and my sister. My sister is an absolute knockout. That picture there is a picture of a sixty-six year old woman. Speaker 1: Your sister? Speaker 2: What's her name? Speaker 1: Caroline [ph.]. Speaker 2: And my mother. It was taken here after my mother was living here. And that's me and my two boys and that picture is, that picture is from the period in 1990, something like, no, I'm sorry, from the period 2000 something like that. Speaker 1: Yeah, Michael is, Michael is on the far right, Christopher my younger son is on the far right, you see they're both bald, (laughter) Christopher who claims they burned up their hair because they worked so hard in school, is in the middle, and I'm, I'm on the left. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: That's my wife, Michiru [Nonogawa] and I. Michiru and I have been married for three and a half, going on-- Speaker 2: Can you spell that? Speaker 1: --yeah, going on four years. Her first name is spelled, M-I-C-H-I-R-U, Michiru, Italian words are pronounced the way they would be if they were Italian. Japanese words are pronounced that way except that there's no accent in Japanese. And we are in that picture, we are in Paris [France] 'cause that is the Eiffel Tower behind us. Speaker 2: That's a picture of my mother and my father [Madison Brown], there aren't, I don't have a whole a lot of pictures of my mother and my father. And they look sad there and it wasn't until, and my mother never liked that picture and I didn't understand why but it dawned on me that that picture was taken on the day of my brother, Arthur's funeral. Speaker 1: And that's why they have that sadness in their eyes. And I didn't realize that until many years later. Speaker 2: That was in 1962. I was in Mexico at the time. I had to cut, I came back for the funeral. These are my two grandchildren, the older one is Miles [ph.] and he is on the right, and Jackson [ph.] who is the younger one is on the left. That is a picture of me with [Edmund] Ed Muskie in the middle, who I worked with as staff director of a committee that he chaired on Capitol Hill. And to his left is a guy named Al From. And Al From is a well-known individual, certainly better known than I am because he was the president of a group called the Democratic Leadership Council, which was the thing, the Democratic think group that rightly takes credit for getting [William Jefferson] Bill Clinton elected president. Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: There are two groups that got Bill Clinton elected. One group was Ron Brown, a black guy-- Speaker 1: Yeah, Ron Brown. Speaker 2: --who died in a plane crash. And the other was Al From. Speaker 1: His, his wife [Ginger From] is out here at a bank in suburban [Washington] D.C. Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. [James Earl] Jimmy Carter, of course, at the time that I was a Commissioner at the F.C.C.[Federal Communication Commission]. Earl Warren-- Speaker 1: (Unclear) Speaker 2: --at the time that I law clerked for him in 1967, '68 [1968]. Again Jimmy Carter when I was a Commissioner at the F.C.C. That was a White House event. Speaker 1: You want it the long way or the other way? Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: This is the article that was carried in one of the Newark [New Jersey] newspapers when it was announced that I was gonna be a law clerk to, to [Chief Justice] Earl Warren. It was a, in the local community it was a rather significant news event. Speaker 2: And this is the article, the one that you're gonna bring up now, is the article from the Washington Post when my son, Christopher, was selected to be a Rhodes Scholar to go to Oxford [University, Oxford, England]. And Christopher's in the, the section on the left. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: That's it. Okay, so. Speaker 1: Yeah, there's one over here I'd like you to--There are two over there that I'd like you to pull down, one is the, the, the kid in the striped shirt, the broad stripes. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: That one, and the other one is in the, the graduation robes. Speaker 2: This one? Speaker 1: No, not that one, the other, over-- Speaker 2: (Unclear) Speaker 1: --that one, yeah. And the first one is-- Speaker 2: Here you go. Speaker 1: Michael at about age nine. And Michael as a youngster had this beautiful soprano voice. Speaker 2: Hmm. Speaker 1: And he was a lead singer in the [Washington] D.C. Youth Choir. Just wonderful, beautiful voice. And I remember going, going to a, a Christmas concert when he was about twelve years old, and in the middle of his solo his voice cracked. Speaker 2: Really? Speaker 1: (Laughter) I said ah, my kid's voice is changing. Speaker 2: And the other one is Michael, the other one is a picture of Michael when he graduated from Yale University [New Haven, Connecticut]. Speaker 1: Is he the one who sings in the Whiffenpoofs? Speaker 2: He was in the Whiffenpoofs, yeah (laughter). Yeah, he's got a great voice. I, I wanted him to go on in, in the arts. Speaker 1: Yeah can you said (unclear)-- Speaker 2: (Unclear) I really wanted him to go on and he said, "Dad I can't make any money being a singer" (laughter), so...