 Story_ID: 57 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm an interviewer for The History Makers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Sir, would you please state your name for us and spell it please? Speaker 2: Certainly. Dr. Alfred S. Brothers, Jr., and that's A-L-F-R-E-D. The last name is B-R-O-T-H-E-R-S. Speaker 1: All right. What does your middle--your S stand for? Speaker 2: Sylvester, like the cat. Speaker 1: Okay. I'm not going to ask you to spell it. Speaker 2: Thank you. (Laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your date of birth? Speaker 2: December 14th, 1942. Speaker 1: Okay. And where were you born? Speaker 2: Boston, Massachusetts. Speaker 1: All right. And what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm an engineering program manager at the present time with the Raytheon Company here in Fort Wayne, Indiana. Speaker 1: All right. We'll have to find out what that is later. (Laughter). Speaker 2: Okay. (Laughter). Speaker 1: But it sounds--yeah, okay. And you're a pilot too? Speaker 2: Yes. I was a pilot in the air force. I was in the air force for twenty-two years and learned to fly on behalf of the air force and enjoyed it immensely. I still fly. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And what's today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is July 30th, 2002. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present? Speaker 2: We are presently at the Indiana-Purdue Fort Wayne campus here in Fort Wayne. Story_ID: 58 Speaker 1: Okay. Let's talk about your early years and your--well your background. Can you please give us your parents' names and spell them for us and their dates of birth? Speaker 2: Sure. My father is Alfred S. Brothers, Sr., again spelled like mine as far as that goes. And he was born in, November 4th, 1919. My mother's name is Edith Irene Yates and the last name is spelled Y-A-T-E-S. And she was born the 19th of February, 1924. Both of--my father was born in Summerville, Mass. My mother was born in Boston, Mass. Speaker 1: Okay. Oh, before I get into anymore depth, there are five "People Magazine"-ish type questions that I failed to ask you. Speaker 2: Fair enough, okay. Speaker 1: The first one is what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: Favorite food is steak. Speaker 1: Okay. Sir, what is your favorite color? Speaker 2: Blue, Air Force blue. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: I think spring is probably the best time of the year because things are emerging. Speaker 1: Okay. And do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: My wife would accuse me of saying I never take a vacation. So in that situation it's probably you know the next destination we go to tends to be the favorite destination. Speaker 1: Okay. And do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Well nothing is impossible. Story_ID: 59 Speaker 1: Okay. Now let's go back to your parents [Alfred S. Brothers, Sr. and Edith Irene Yates]. Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: Did either of your parents or grandparents have stories about your family background going back to I guess reconstruction or through slavery or through the 19th Century? No, they were both born in Boston [Massachusetts]. They probably didn't have-- Speaker 2: Dad [Alfred S. Brothers, Sr.] was born in Mass [Massachusetts], Summerville, Mass. (OFF CAMERA) Speaker 1: But yeah, I was asking you about your family history, stories you can remember that your parents may have told you, grandparents, about the family history going all the way back to far as-- Speaker 2: The farthest back we can go you know again because my father's [Alfred S. Brothers, Sr.] family came from Canada. And what happened was they apparently were servants in New York and obviously were on the wrong side during the American Revolution. There were a number of blacks who consequently moved up to Nova Scotia [Canada] and that's where the family originated from and originally came back here. So we know about that, we traced it back and everything else so it's interesting. Speaker 1: It's a story of Lord Dunmore I believe he offered blacks freedom and then he relocated a group that fought from the side of the bridge to Nova Scotia. Speaker 2: That's right. There are a number of movements. Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: Oh yeah because there are a number, at least five or six different towns that were founded by blacks you know in the, in that arena and right now my family's, my Canadian family is scattered all over the place up there and it's really interesting to go up there and visit. And the other part is I do know that my grandmother [sic, great-grandmother] [Mary Jane Hazard] on her side, the Monroe side, ended up being one of the first inter-racial marriages in Massachusetts. And again if we could find records of it and it ended up being a situation in which this case Monroe, this man's name was James Monroe was disenfranchised by his family as a consequence. Of course in those days they put out the announcements and everything else and we found all those in the papers in Massachusetts itself. Also later on as she was growing up as a kid the most vivid memory she has was after her father passed away. I guess it had been as a result of an accident. They were burned out and so they were forced to move into Boston [Massachusetts], really Cambridge, Mass [Massachusetts] at that particular period of time. Then another group, the Washingtons, one was an escaped slave from Virginia and made his way up you know to Massachusetts and founded a, on the Cape Bay, a trash hauling business down there. So again people came from different directions and you know with different motivations and we've been able to document those kinds of things. Speaker 1: Now you got Washingtons and Monroes. Speaker 2: That's right, interesting. That's right, that's right. Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: That's right. That's true, that's true. Speaker 1: (Unclear) there's a direct connection between Virginia and Boston in those days with the sons and daughters of planters going--well the sons of-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --(unclear) going to school at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. Speaker 2: Sure. Sure. Sure. And others obviously who made the migration later on because obviously some were freed later on. Speaker 1: That's interesting. So yeah, your grandmother was married to a white man named--? Speaker 2: Great-grandmother, her name was Mary Jane Hazard. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: And she married James Monroe in that situation. And then that was in, I believe it was in Graton, Mass [Massachusetts] in that area. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So again, and the Hazard family is again we're deeply involved with those folks, primarily had Indian [sic, Native American] roots initially you know a combination thereof. And then my mother's [Edith Irene Yates] side, her mother passed away actually at childbirth so we're now doing, investigating her family a little bit more. We do know they're from Virginia, both the Balls and the Burgesses were from we believe Fredericksburg, Virginia. I've been to visit there a number of times and didn't realize it, and moved to Washington, D.C. Speaker 1: All of these names are historic names. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Even though they may not be directly linked to the famous-- Speaker 2: That's correct. Speaker 1: --Burgess. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: The house of Burgesses, you got-- Speaker 2: That's correct, that's true. Speaker 1: --the Balls. There's an Edward Ball that just wrote a book called "Slaves of the Family" tracing both sides of the white and the black side (unclear). Speaker 2: That's true. So again I've not you know followed that research (unclear). I'm in the process of doing that. And then her father, last name of Yates and of course Yates really is a Cherokee name. And so you know of course we had you know blacks who were Cherokees who were mixed in that situation, in that time period and that's how that evolved again down to the Washington, D.C., Maryland, Virginia area. Story_ID: 60 Speaker 1: Well how did your mother [Edith Irene Yates] and father [Alfred S. Brothers, Sr.] meet? Do they have a story about how they met? Speaker 2: They were living on the same street, Harris Shaw Street in Boston [Massachusetts] and so they really were growing up together. You know it's really about a block, block and a half away and so they had a chance to meet you know in that particular location. And then my dad [Alfred S. Brothers, Sr.] was married--they married when she [Edith Irene Yates] turned nineteen and then dad went obviously in the service you know the whole gamut shortly after I was born. Again World War II and into the black 366 infantry division that served in North Africa and Italy. And that's where he met you know later on Senator Edward Brook who ended up being his commander and a very close personal friend you know till this day. Speaker 1: So what did that unit do in--? Speaker 2: They were combat engineers. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And again that--really a totally segregated group obviously again with white officers to some, particularly superior officers. But again they had the opportunity to you know serve with distinction in both areas, in Italy and in North Africa. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. That's something. So what--the section that you grew up in Boston, would that be considered, is that South Boston or--? Speaker 2: No, it was Roxbury and Dorchester. Speaker 1: Roxbury and Dorchester. Speaker 2: Right. And originally, when I was originally growing up it was primarily a Jewish neighborhood growing up and then later on of course it changed over time to become a predominantly black neighborhood. But again we had neighborhood schools, the whole bit and it worked out very, very well. And again we also had a synagogue right down the street so it really gave you an appreciation immediately for you know for a different religion, that of Judaism again because of course my neighbors were Jewish at the time but also because of the support that the synagogue provided the community itself. The interesting thing is again because of the Sabbath day on Friday night, again they had us light candles for them and I had a chance to, as a little kid, taste some of the you know some of the cookies. Help us out (unclear) great. And again they were great neighbors. Speaker 1: Okay. Now how many brothers and sisters do you have? Speaker 2: I have one sister, she's four years younger and she lives in Chicago [Illinois]. Her name is Donna. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Donna Edith and Edith for my mother's first name. Speaker 1: Okay. All right so just the two of you, yeah. So what did your father do for a living? Speaker 2: My father initially was a general contractor. Of course after coming out of the service he went to Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts]. He went to high school in Boston again, Mechanic Arts High and then after coming out of the service he went to a two year program through Boston University, did some general contracting, became a real estate broker and later as an EEO manager with the government office of accounting in the area. So again, his--one of the other things he has done was also serve as a state representative for four years in the House of Representatives in the State of Massachusetts. Speaker 1: Okay yeah. Well yeah he was very busy. Speaker 2: Very much so and recognized as a youngster you know the value of politics and understanding you know the roles of politics and people who are in it. And of course Massachusetts is well known for its politics in that situation with both republican and democratic in that situation. And recognizing of course you have good people on both sides and you have to understand both sides of the issues. Speaker 1: Okay. Now what did your mother do? Speaker 2: My mother was a homemaker and her--and she really sustained that role all the way through and she does it right now up till this very day. So again she was the supporting arm and the, life really evolved around her because she was the steadfast one, the one who maintained the home front. Story_ID: 61 Speaker 1: Okay. Okay, all right. So I want you to think back to some of the sights and sounds and smells of your neighborhood in Boston [Massachusetts] and tell us what things were like when you were a child. Speaker 2: It's interesting when you think about it, you're thinking about a small block and as a little kid being able to walk around the corner because we had corner stores at that time, to those particular stores. Candy stores, of course they had the pharmacy with the soda fountains. You had a neighborhood bakery, a shoe shine store, the whole gamut. It was a chance to take a look and grow up in a community in which everyone knew everyone else. My closest friend lived two houses down. The houses were primarily two stories, you know two family houses in the arena itself. And again my elementary school and middle school were again a block or two blocks away. And the interesting thing was in my elementary school my first grade teacher was my mother's first grade teacher. So again, one of the key things is your Edith's son. You're in deep trouble at that particular time. But again you went through a neighborhood school and went to school with all of your friends you know particularly through the sixth grade. And then once you moved off to junior high school then the decisions were made because there were multiple junior high schools. And again I opted to initially go to the Patrick T. Campbell School which walked to school both ways. It was about ten blocks away. But again it was a good junior high school, it had a good rigorous approach, but I didn't feel I was challenged enough. Then I moved on to Boston Latin School, which is the oldest public school in the country, founded in 1635, and the challenges were there. And I had the opportunity to really mingle with people who had strong educational values. And again, you were forced to compete in a situation like that. It was an all boys' school. Speaker 1: Okay, what's the name of that school again? Speaker 2: Boston Latin School. Speaker 1: Boston Latin School? Speaker 2: Latin School, yeah. And it was really founded shortly I believe around the same time as Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] was in that general time frame. And it was a feeder for Harvard because that's where your lawyers and doctors and ministers came from. That was its focus. And again our school, see we had ninety-nine percent of our school went to college. You had to sign a statement saying that you intended to go to college otherwise you couldn't go to school. So again it had a strong, I'll use the term language and a traditional background. Again you took you know obviously English, French, Latin and German. So again it was a chance to learn the classical you know approaches to language and learning. The other part of growing up in Boston was I guess the sights of Boston. Again we talked about you know the neighborhood places like the pharmacy and everything else and those occurred typically every four or five blocks. So again it really was a microcosm repeated over and over again in and around the neighborhood itself. Strong church ties you know and a number of churches in and around the area and those really were again corner posts or center posts for growing up as a kid. We went to a congregational church, a black congregational church and fantastic opportunity to learn and develop and mingle with kids from other churches in and around the area. The strong point of the features of Boston were really associated with museums you know and places of interest. One of my most favorite was the Museum of Fine Arts because of its Egyptian Exhibit. I found it you know--I fancy (unclear) with that and I keep going back every couple of years just to get you know reacquainted with it. But, and also the Museum of Science in Boston. It's now located in a fantastic place you know down on the River Charles. It was located in an old mansion before when I was growing up and to watch it move and develop from one place to another and the like, also the Peabody Museum and all the other aspects of it. Boston, the schools themselves supported those so again we were sent to those museums as part of our educational development with the School of Boston itself, the public school system. And that worked out very, very well because it really broadened the horizon as we moved around. Latin School prepared me well because I also went, headed off to Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts] College of Engineering. I'm an engineer obviously in that situation, aeronautical engineer, but again it gave me the tools with which to work you know in a good college environment, a strong college environment with strong competition. Story_ID: 62 Speaker 1: Okay. I just want to go back to grade school. Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: And just ask you about, like-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: --what kind of a little boy were you in grade school? What did you like to do and what were your interests? Speaker 2: I think cowboys and Indians early on. You know to realistically looking at those kinds of things because if you remember growing up television was rather new you know in our environment in that context. So the real big things were cowboys. Really wasn't that interested in you know in police or those kinds of things that tend to have a greater flavor for me. I wouldn't say I was mischievous but I was inquisitive. I always enjoyed nature and I still do till this day. I was very involved with Cub Scouts. Again my dad [Alfred S. Brothers, Sr.] was a Cub Master and a Cub Master for twenty years, my mother [Edith Irene Yates] was a den mother. So again that got me on the trail of scouting itself that I've maintained till this day. School was interesting. I found it challenging in that sense in a very positive way. Again it took up my time and I did well. I did very, very well in school. That was not a problem you know by any stretch of the imagination. But, and again our classes were very well inter-mixed. You know again I did not really have any all black classes at all. We typically we were in a dramatic minority when I was going to school no matter what school I went to. And it just ended up being that was the nature of Boston [Massachusetts] at that particular period of time. Speaker 1: Okay. Are there any teachers in grade school that stand out as an inspirational or any of the teachers that took a particular interest in your development? Speaker 2: I think the one key one that I remember really was in high school. I was having trouble with math in high school you know and I just couldn't quite seem to struggle through it. But that's when the standardized tests helped. I took the SATs and I scored a 700 in math and my instructor said wait a minute, you can't score a 700 and have problems with my course. What's the problem? And he also taught at night at Northeastern University [Boston, Massachusetts] and I said I don't quite get the concepts as you present them. And he said, you're getting them on your own. He says I'll work with you and help you as far as that was concerned. But individual teachers beyond that point, I don't remember names. I do remember, I did run across my, that would have been my seventh grade math teacher, oh about ten years ago. And of course I was a little kid. I was probably one of the shortest in the class and she was big at particular period of time, a tall person. Well she was a very short lady as I grew old and came back. Again, the roles changed in the sense in terms of size, but again she helped me in math also in that regard. Don't remember names necessarily but I do remember faces you know in the classroom itself. Speaker 1: Okay. What subjects were you most interested in, in school? Speaker 2: Math and science primarily. I took a lot from languages obviously but math and science led the way and the third was history, particularly world history. I've always enjoyed that. As a kid I was forever reading. We had two sets of encyclopedias, the World Book and the Grolier Encyclopedia, constantly going through looking for information and facts and figures. And I found it to be intriguing. And later on it paid off because one of the countries I really enjoyed studying was Siam now Thailand and later on in my air force career I as stationed there twice and had a chance to take a look at the places that I had visited through reading and through the encyclopedias themselves. Story_ID: 63 Speaker 1: Well it seems like you were really in a positive, nurturing type of environment as a youth. And did you have a sense at that time of what you wanted to do when you grew up? Speaker 2: A very general sense, you know engineering and perhaps flying. But I had nurturing in many ways, nurturing and support. Yes my mother [Edith Irene Yates] and father [Alfred S. Brothers, Sr.] and my grandparents all lived around and aunts and uncles, provided very, very positive nurturing and structure and advice, but also other friends. I mentioned Ed Brook and Harry Elam, the three people who really were mentors or special men you know in my life, my father, Ed Brook and Harry, all of those were involved not only in our church but also in our community. Speaker 1: I'm sorry, Harry who? Speaker 2: Harry Elam. He was the -- Speaker 1: Okay, that's E-L-A-M? Speaker 2: E-L-A-M. He was the first black superior justice of the municipal courts in Boston [Massachusetts]. And again they really worked together dramatically. Mr. Elam and Mr. Brook were both lawyers. You know, Uncle Harry and Uncle Ed, they have offices in the same building that my dad did. And then each one moved out in their individual ways but growing up of course I knew them because of the closeness that they had as individuals, the three men. And of course my uncles and aunts you know always provided a supporting environment and encouraged me dramatically in things that I wanted to do. Speaker 1: Now how did the fact that your father was involved in politics--he was a state representative-- Speaker 2: That's correct. Speaker 1: --(unclear) Boston, Massachusetts? Speaker 2: That's correct. Speaker 1: And then how did that position affect the family? I mean did you all have a sense of being special or did it take him away from the home too much or (unclear)? Speaker 2: He was out of the house quite a bit in that situation, involved you know not only as a state rep but other positions also in government. But it also gave us a chance to understand government a little bit better you know and appreciate government in that sense and what it could do and how it would operate. Had a chance to meet great people you know as I say you know from both parties and you know and understand you know that everyone was moving towards the same end goal despite the fact maybe the paths may be slightly different in that situation. So, special no not necessarily because I was still working hard and going to school so not in that context. But I can say in a situation that I had a chance to work down at the state house because of my art and see the inner-workings of it and with my dad's help also, had a chance to meet you know some of the governors and some of the folks who were the power brokers in the state of Massachusetts at the time. Speaker 1: Okay. Yeah well that's something that, that's an experience that a lot of youth don't get to have and so that's a unique experience. I mean were you and your father very close? Speaker 2: Very much so and again he really was able to you know foster my you know development in character building because one of the things that I cherish till this day is you know you must give back to the community itself in some fashion as a volunteer or whatever. And of course I've had that as part of my creed you know all of my life also being able to be involved in my community no matter where I am. Story_ID: 64 Speaker 1: Okay. In high school, you were at [Boston] Latin School? Speaker 2: That's correct, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. I guess you continued to be involved in math and science and--? Speaker 2: Math and science and clubs you know and a number of clubs including a strange, well I guess Esperanto club. Remember that artificial language, those kind of things too. Speaker 1: Yeah tell the--you know people that will be watching this in the future, they probably have no idea what in the world Esperanto (unclear). Speaker 2: Esperanto is an artificial language you know developed you know with its own set of rules and guidelines and used as a model worldwide as one that A) would be easy to learn; but B) the constructs of the language are regular unlike English. The rules are well-defined so that you could you know understand the nuances of the language very, very quickly. The club went very well. Again, I won't say I had the best language skills in terms of foreign language skills, but it was a fun club as far as that was concerned. Speaker 1: I think the idea with Esperanto was to create a worldwide language-- Speaker 2: That's correct. Speaker 1: --that would be easy for everyone to use because you know the--because the world is becoming smaller and smaller due to mass communication and travel opportunities. And that was ending--then the Cold War was going on too-- Speaker 2: That's true. Speaker 1: --and they thought that all the west should unite under one language. It's an interesting concept. Do you speak any--can you speak any (unclear)? Speaker 2: Not a--it's been too many--it will be almost thirty, forty-- ,thirty-five, forty years. Speaker 1: (Unclear) Esperanto? Speaker 2: I haven't got a clue at this point in time, it's been so long. Been such a long time, but it's intriguing that really English has emerged in that particular light cause every place that I've traveled to you know I'd find someone who spoke English or who was learning English as far as that was concerned. I mean and so it's very, very difficult for me to practice a foreign language because they were trying to practice English. Speaker 1: Right, I guess Esperanto kind of failed because-- Speaker 2: It failed, yeah. Speaker 1: --it wasn't really a natural extension of anybody's expression anyway. Speaker 2: (Unclear), it brought no traditions or culture with it. Speaker 1: Right. And English has probably succeeded because there's money and opportunity attached to learning English. Speaker 2: Very much so. Speaker 1: Yeah, right. Speaker 2: And there's a culture associated with it you know. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Whether it be related to Britain or whether it be related to the U.S. [United States], there are cultures and traditions associated with the language itself and the nuances of the language itself. Speaker 1: Okay. That's an interesting side bar, Esperanto. Speaker 2: That's true. Speaker 1: How do we spell that again, just for the (unclear)? Speaker 2: You ask me these hard questions. Was it E-S-P-A-R-N--A-N-T-O, was that, is that what it was? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I think it was. Speaker 1: E-S-P-E-R-A-N-T-O. Speaker 2: Right. But, and again as I say as an artificial language, it was a very interesting language. And I had the opportunity obviously in high school to be involved with many clubs you know and I really enjoyed that part of it too. So you know being part of either a club leadership or being part--a member of a club you know really fostered the ability to work together as part of a team and I think that's been you know the things that I've done all my life also is teamwork and working with others. And in many cases you know it's fostered by high school itself and the experience in high school. Story_ID: 65 Speaker 1: Okay, now you mentioned the Boy Scouts but do you want to talk or I mean you've been involved in Boy Scouts your whole life right? Speaker 2: Yes, all the way through. Speaker 1: Cub Scouts all the way through-- Speaker 2: From Cub Scouts and then going right into Boy Scouts and our local church St. Marks Congregation Church in Boston there. And my dad [Alfred S. Brothers, Sr.] was on the committee in that regard so again he was able to support me both in cubbing and in Boy Scouts. And we went on obviously camping trips and the like and went off to summer camp. I also earned the rank of Eagle you know, the two of us earned it together. Again we had a companion, Howell Yancy (ph.) and we made it just before our senior year so it worked--in high school so it worked out very, very well. But again it fostered a couple of things, number one, the ability to set a goal and achieve it, number one. But also number two, it also pushed me in the direction of my final career, one of engineering and the (unclear). Because not only was I in a Boy Scout troop but I was also in the air explorer post. And as you and I were talking about before, all four advisers in that post were black pilots and one was an active air force pilot who was flying 106s in the Midwest. So again we had role models right there who could help us and guide us you know as we looked to the future. So I think I'm the only one who ever became an air force pilot as far as I was concerned. Others moved in the direction but at least we were introduced into aviation in that regard. In my adult life I've been, except for the first four years in the air force, I've--where I was obviously going through pilot training and moving around before I got married, I've been involved with troops ever since and in cub packs. Obviously when my son [Alfred III] was young and involved with cub packs and also as he evolved with Boy Scout troops. So I've also worked at the troop level, the district level, the council level, I had the opportunity to be the president of the council here. I'm also now on this case, the central region board and I'm an area vice president so I've been very, very involved in that context. I still maintain some leadership ties too in other ways with boys. Four years ago I took a troop to the world jamboree in Chile, Santiago, Chile, thirty-six boys went down. I'll take a troop again to Thailand. The next world jamboree will take place in December in Thailand. So again I'm still involved with young people in that sense because that's our future and it's been very, very rewarding personally you know in that context. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. We're almost at the end of this tape so maybe just change it right now. This is a good-- Story_ID: 66 Speaker 1: Okay. So you're in high school. You know how is--tell me about high school graduation, what was on your mind then at high school graduation? Speaker 2: Well really, the thing was finally over you know, that high school was over. That--as it was an all boys' school. We had a graduating class of about 450. We were all moving in different directions but my direction was off to Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts] and engineering, you know looking to becoming an engineer at that particular period of time. I had great remembrance of high school. Again you know I think our high school was a little different because it had high school ROTC [Reserve Officer Training Corps] and we used to have school boy parades you know every spring. So again it gave us a little bit more, a military direction than others might think. And again I guess one of the other men you mentioned about teaching was a Major Kelly who was a World War II Medal of Honor winner you know type situation. And he--we had an interesting situation at our high school. We had the first protest of a high school because of bad food. And all, the entire school decided that at lunch time to go out in the yard and not go in the lunch room. And so this is a massive protest, you know all boys, white shirts, you know again you had to wear white shirts and a tie, the whole bit, in the school yard just standing there. Weren't playing a game, just standing there protesting for this half hour lunch period. And of course the administration was up in arms, they couldn't figure this out. So Major Kelly says I understand. Let me talk to the boys and he went out and said gentlemen, in this case the head master has gotten your message. You may come in and eat now. The food situation will change. That was enough. We all understood him wholeheartedly. We came inside. (Laughter). But again that was the first peaceful protest I can imagine in high school that situation, but it occurred there. So again-- Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: Again, but again a different group of people in that particular period of time saying we had to solve a problem and we had to solve it peacefully and it worked. And again he was man enough and wise enough to understand young men and say we had to fix the problem. Speaker 1: Now, but did he actually fix--was that fixed? Speaker 2: Yes it did. Yes it was. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes it was. He was true to his word in that situation and said we have to fix the problem. You know they're honest you know young men that told us the situation and we must take it seriously and they did. Speaker 1: Okay, good. Good. All right, so I guess you learned something from that experience that you can change things. Speaker 2: That you can change things. Again if you take a very, very positive attitude you know toward it and not a confrontational one necessarily but make your point and people will listen you know in that context. And good things can result if it's done in a very positive and well thought out manner and it worked very, very well. And we also respect him dramatically too obviously I might add. Again he had a demeanor about him you know. He has ceased passed--he has ceased or at this point in time he is deceased, but again he was a mentor to all the boys. You know we could look up to him, big man you know with a good reputation in that sense. Story_ID: 67 Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So any other memories of high school? Did you play an instrument? Were you in a band? Did you play sports or--? Speaker 2: No, in Boston [Massachusetts] I was clubbing you know being involved with volunteer organizations and things like this you know and that's really where my strength was. Obviously you'll play intramural sports you know but not play you know on the regular team as far as that was concerned. I did play sports and played primarily baseball. I was good at baseball in the summer leagues. But that was outside of school, not in the school itself and enjoyed that immensely. But I was too short to play basketball. Everyone towered over me. I wasn't fast enough to run track so I decided that was not a good deal and I wasn't big enough to play football. So I said I'll stick to things that I can do and do well, that I could play. So I found that to be you know a unique way to go through school. Speaker 1: Okay. Now and going to an all boys' school, did that affect your social life any? Did you have access to a girls' school nearby? Speaker 2: Well again, well that's where your church came, actually came into play if you think about it in that context because again your church and your neighborhood because obviously you're still part of it you know in that situation and we ended up having a youth program at church. And so again all the high school kids were involved in the young program either at our church or another congregational church oh, about five or six blocks away. So eventually those two youth groups merged together. You know the pastors understood so it's a wiser course of action to put them together in that situation. They can meet in either location. And so we had a chance you know to meet and greet people. Plus you also had a strong community, sense of community because our parents knew each other. So again you'd end up have a chance you know to have parties over the house and the parents would sponsor the parties. So again you were more social in that context. So again parents knew where you were because you were there you know and you were going to behave because you were there. Speaker 1: So that just is--and that was a healthier situation than a lot of other situations (unclear). Speaker 2: Very much so because the parents were involved. In this case the parents knew each other. I have an interesting situation in high school going into college. Going to you know your--in September you know the going back to school party, went to Mr. Snowden's house. He ran a freedom house in Boston. The Snowden family did--fantastic people. That was a, I guess the precursor of some or other you know programs throughout the country. But at his house his daughter threw a party. Well my wife's sister was supposed to come to the party and she was dating someone else and said no, you ought to go. (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION). Story_ID: 68 Speaker 1: Well we were talking about you know how I met my wife and it ended up being at a back to school party in Boston [Massachusetts]. And again it was orchestrated by, in this case by the Snowden family by their parents and the daughter and it worked out very, very well. Again, with the exception that I'll use the term that--a little subterfuge, the oldest sister who was supposed to go to the party you know didn't go, her younger sister went. And they, the family felt it was supposed to be a coming out party. So she--if I go to the party, run in and see it's a whole new face, you know just like a typical guy heading into a party and said I need to find out who this person is. Well I had a chance to talk and meet with her and finally I was going to have a chance to go out and meet her family. That was the nature of how things were done in that time period. Well my family went out with me to meet her. What I didn't know was her grandmother and my grandmother were in the same organizations together. My mother [Edith Irene Yates] and her mother grew up together and my dad and her dad were in the 366 Infantry Division together. I thought it was a set up in that situation. Then my mother's comment was, do you know how young she is (unclear) at the time. But it was fun again because it's a family knowing family in that situation which is not typically done you know today as far as that goes because were so transient as far as that goes, but interesting. Story_ID: 69 Speaker 1: And then I headed off to school you know again to Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts] and the College of Engineering and again it was a relatively new school at that particular period of time. Fantastic you know profs there, professors there. Many of our professors obviously were full time at Boston University but some also taught at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and also taught at BU [Boston University] or worked at Lincoln Labs and taught BU. So again we ended up having a very high grade education you know in that four year environment. I also joined the Air Force ROTC [Reserve Officer Training Corps] and that was the genesis of my becoming later on an air force officer. And again that four year program you know gave me opportunities to learn quite a bit about the air force through not only classes but also through travel. I came out to Wright Patterson [Air Force Base, Ohio] and met my cousin. Hugh Price's older brother was a young captain in the air force working at the labs at that particular period of time so I had a chance to stay with he and his wife, he and Bebe (ph.) and also take a look at the base through their perspective and also air force life through their perspective. He later on decided to get out of the air force but I, when I came in, I made it a lifelong career. But my decision to become a pilot was earlier than that. That was based upon my opportunity to fly in the airplanes at the end of high school, you know also through my involvement through ROTC itself. I saw the value of it. I wanted to become an air force pilot. I wanted to fly jets and that was the decision that I made. So I wanted to be both an engineer and you know and a pilot and I worked very hard to that end, did reasonably well. My greatest grades were not made in undergraduate school by any stretch of the imagination but again the preparation was there you know and again I did graduate you know and move on to the air force. So I was commissioned as a second lieutenant and went to pilot training. But the precursor to pilot training was the flight instruction program, the FIP program that selected us in our senior year as whether we were going to go to pilot training or not. It was a thirty hour program done through a local air port and a local FBO as a screening program. So I got my thirty hours under my belt there you know, I passed that okay and then headed off to pilot training down at Williams Air Force Base Arizona you know and never been to that part of the world in my life in Arizona. Got there in August, left Boston it was like eighty-two degrees and got to Phoenix [Arizona] it was 105. So for you know a guy from Boston, it was a whole new ball game. But again college preparation was there in that situation. I enjoyed it immensely. It gave me the background and the understanding and the study skills. You add the pilot training, the pilot training wasn't any problem in terms of the academics. My first six months were nip and tuck, I did bust a couple of check rides but I did survive as far as that was concerned. Speaker 2: You busted a couple of what? Speaker 1: Failed a couple of check rides. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Check rides. Speaker 2: Check rides. Speaker 1: But I did--check rides and did move on you know to Phase II which was the first was T37s which was a subsonic jet. It was a called a tweet T37 and a T38 was a supersonic trainer. One was, the first one was a side by side seating arrangement and the second one was a tandem or a front and back seat supersonic. After my first solo, after my solo in the T38s, I disjointed my finger playing flicker ball and so I was grounded by a--for about two weeks, the whole gamut so I couldn't fly. So they were going to have to give me another check out before I was turned loose solo again. And so I jump onboard the airplane T38 with my instructor and one of the maneuvers is a high speed dive recovery maneuver. And you're supposed to pull you know a typical, maybe three to four Gs you know and pull up a high speed dive after you pull the throttle to idle, to slow it up and everything else. I pulled six Gs and darn near blacked my instructor out in the back seat. But again we got turned loose and had a chance to go fly and again with a cast on my finger. And in the yearbook I think they called me Bullfinger but I wasn't sure, I don't remember wholeheartedly as far as that was concerned. But Arizona was nice. I really enjoyed the state you know, enjoyed the environment and enjoyed our class. Our class was half German so half of us were Luftwaffe and met one of my lifelong friends Adida Titza (ph.) who retired from Luftwaffe and lives in the U.S. today as my roommate and we had a blast. And that's where I learned how to drive a Volkswagen. One of his classmates taught me about driving Volkswagens and driving in Germany. He mentioned you either floor it or park it, one or the other as far as that was concerned. I didn't quite follow that advice but a few of those folks did. Speaker 2: That's the way they drive? Speaker 1: They drive, it's either floor it at full speed or else they park it on the Autobahn. So they're very, very fast drivers in that context. And my roommate, we have a picture of my roommate trying to explain to a highway patrol officer in Arizona that I really wasn't going that fast. And we said Dida, give up you can't win that one. So again I have very fond memories of pilot training. Yes, it was a difficult time but it was an interesting time. Had one interesting thing happen, we did have minorities in pilot training. So there were, in my class there were three of us, you know the classes ahead of us, there may have been one or two, the whole gamut. What I didn't know was that again they give you a swimming test, the whole gamut you know. And of course the kid having, as an Eagle Scholar, I had been a life guard, the whole gamut. Leaped in the water, passed the swimming test without the problem. I found out I was the first black to pass the swimming test. I said you guys didn't tell me what the rules were in this situation. But again (unclear) that was not a problem at all. But it was a different environment, really a different environment, a fun one. You know I did not end up at the top of my class. I ended up you know in the bottom half of my class, went to B52s of course. You know and our graduation speaker was none other than Chappie James. So again he was a colonel at the time and was stationed down in Tucson you know Arizona, obviously flying F4s and he was talking about you know the roles and responsibilities of pilots when he come into the air force. I had a chance to speak to him afterwards and said I'd like --I'm in bombers but I'd like to get into fighters. He says give it time son, give it time. You'll get there. Speaker 2: Okay. Did you have a sense at that time of who he was and--? Speaker 1: No. No I didn't not quite in that context. He was the DO at that time, Director of Operations at the time, not the wing commander at the time and so didn't quite you know put that together at that particular period of time. But I also ran across something else at pilot training that was interesting that was going to--that was a harbinger for the future. A test airplane came in one day and it was the in this case the TFX which later on was known as the F111. It came in, landed you know and had all the girders around it cause it was a test airplane and two civilian test pilots came out you know in this case Navy test pilots cause it was a Navy airplane at the time. One had a white, a flying suit on, the other had a black flying suit on and the whole bit. And I said that looks like a nice airplane. I think I'd like to fly that. Four years later I was flying the airplane. Went to B52s obviously and spent my tour, a couple of tours in Vietnam you know along that line. Speaker 2: With the B52? Speaker 1: With the B52 first time. Speaker 2: That was the big bomber right? Speaker 1: The big bomber, (unclear) bomber, right. Speaker 2: Big wing span and-- Speaker 1: Huge wing span, right. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So it was again it was a six man crew you know had--was one of the youngest aircraft commanders in strategic air command and I'm, I guaranty I was the youngest minority by any stretch of the imagination at that particular period of time. And I was up--I was first stationed in Roswell, New Mexico where obviously the great UFOs landed. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And went straight north to Minot, North Dakota you know from the land of the warm to the land of the cold. I left one day it was seventy-eight degrees at I guess it was 7:00 o'clock in the morning and four days later and on that trip north I stopped and saw Ed Dwight in Denver. You know four days later I ended up in Minot, North Dakota, it was forty below zero. So I went a tremendous temperature difference at that particular period of time but again I spent about eighteen months as a co-pilot which is a very, very short period of time and then became an aircraft commander and had a chance to fly B52s at that point in time. Story_ID: 70 Speaker 1: Now did you experience any negative kind of isolation, harassment and hazing or any of that in the air force? Speaker 2: Not really, no. And then again because it was--we were a different group of people going through. Again you know and I think that's--we were part of a new breed you know in that situation. We'd gone to school together you know the whole gamut. Because remember the air force academy was relatively new at that particular period of time. So again you had a different make-up of people who were involved and so they had the opportunity to work together you know and learn together. So from that standpoint--and matter of fact we even partied together so again there was not that segregation or separation at that particular period of time. So no, you didn't see that necessarily. You might see you know tinges of it now and again but for the most part no. You know people took you for what you were you know in that particular--and if you could fly you'd press on with vigor. Minot [North Dakota] was good in that situation because again I was able to upgrade pretty quickly and then that's why I proposed to my wife [Sandra] seven years after I met her to get married. I was slow but that's okay in that situation and took her to Minot, North Dakota. We first on our honeymoon when to England and Ireland and then we went there. But a great place initially because it gave me my first chance to be an aircraft commander. To you know truly command, you know commanded aircraft, command people the whole bit and move on with my career. One of the key things that got me my next assignment was my experience in B52s. When I--on one of the flights from, in this case it was from Guam over to this case to Vietnam we were actually bombing in Vietnam. Normally you refueled. You take off out of Guam and then roughly about an hour, hour and a half after you take off you refuel. You're taking on anywhere from eighty to one hundred thousand pounds of fuel and it's mirror fueling and you have the -- you're flying behind a tanker. You're both flying at about three hundred knots which is probably about, oh about 360 miles an hour, almost four hundred miles an hour. And you're flying about twenty-five feet apart. And the boom comes down and in fact it's inserted in the top of the airplane, my airplane has a receptacle and there are latches that latch. Well, on my airplane on this flight the latches wouldn't latch. So we had to go through emergency procedures which meant that--and it takes you thirty minutes to get fuel onboard, one hundred thousand pounds of fuel. The boomer had to extend hydraulic pressure on the boom and hold it against the airplane and I had to hold the airplane against the boom. And again we did it without a disconnect for thirty minutes. And I came back after that flight and the director of operations says, fantastic job young man. He says, let me know what kind of airplane you want to go fly. I said, I says I work at the military personnel center. Let me know what you want to do. So at the end of my tour I came back you know type situation and was going to go to 111s. I was actually going to go back to B52s. I didn't want to do that. And he said okay what would you like to do? And I said if I could you know could I get another assignment to Southeast Asia? And he said okay. We've got a B57 which is a test airplane. It's a twin engine attack bomber and he said would you like that? I took that one and that was the other picture that I showed you, you know again it had all the avionics that were going to go in the 111 and in other airplanes too. And so it was a very, very specialized group of people that I was with for that particular year, period of time. And it was fun because it gave us the opportunity to be with some good people. Again, Thailand was great again to get back to Thailand and the Thai people were always good but also the bases were well kept up and well-maintained. And after that assignment I called him again and they said you have to go to sack, what do you want to fly? I said I like 111s. And he says okay what base do you want? I told him Pease Air Force Base [New Hampshire]. He says you got it. He says report on this day. And so again those experiences were always good where if you do good work what often--you know good things can happen. So I came back to the states and went into the 111 program at Pease Air Force Base again as an aircraft commander for four years. And then after that assignment went to Wright Patterson Air Force Base [Ohio]. Somebody had looked at my dream sheet. I was an engineer and said I'd like engineering and a little bit of intelligence. So they sent me to the foreign technology division, the space division, the same division that brought you Project Blue Book. But again Project Blue Book had been written many, many years ahead of time as far as I was concerned so we were really looking at the early beginnings of some of the space program--military space program issues at that particular period of time and that was a very interesting assignment for three years. Story_ID: 71 Speaker 1: And we lived in Beavercreek, Ohio, had fantastic neighbors. Matter of fact one of my neighbors, if you read Mother Goose and Grimm [Grimm Fairy Tales], that particular artist, cartoonist, is and was in fact was my neighbor Mike Peters. Speaker 2: (Unclear). Speaker 1: And again so our daughters you know knew each other. They were blood sisters, the whole gamut. Speaker 2: (Unclear) cartoon in the Daily News. Speaker 1: That's correct. Speaker 2: (Unclear). Speaker 1: (Unclear) a Pulitzer Prize, the whole bit as both an editorial cartoonist as well as Mother Goose and Grim. So again it was a chance to meet great people there and it was a great three year assignment. You know Dayton [Ohio] is fantastic. The kids think it's their second home in many respects. And then a sack called me back and said you have to come back to fly 111s. You can't keep having all that good time. So I went back to fly 111s for two more years at Pease Air Force Base, New Hampshire. In this case I lived on base. The first time I was at Pease I lived off base and New Hampshire, I've always liked it cause it's not that--just one state up from Massachusetts. And it's interesting because growing up as a kid my uncle who was in the Kodak photography business helped manage one of the stores and film production of facilities in Boston [Massachusetts]. We used to take a drive up there you know with my grandmother and the whole bit. And she liked to ride and I liked to ride along too and said, I said as a kid I'd like to live here someday. I got to live there twice in that situation. So you have to be careful what you ask for. But after that second assignment, I was sent to Air Force ROTC [Reserve Officer Training Corps] as a detachment commander to a brand new detachment. It really wasn't a detachment, it was an operating location at Wright State University [Dayton, Ohio] and had the opportunity to bring that detachment from about sixty students to almost three hundred in the time I was there. My charge was to get engineers and pilots and that's, and then that's what I did. So that was an interesting experience there because the faculty were warm and welcoming. You know Dr. [Robert J.] Kegerreis as we talked about you know was the president there. Wright State University had, had, really had its opportunity to be set free in this case from Miami, University of Miami [sic, Miami University, Oxford, Ohio] and also Ohio State University [Columbus, Ohio] so it's on its own at that particular period of time so it really was a whole new horizon there, a fantastic horizon. And again I had a whole bunch of young people there who helped me not kill my kids because they were young kids at that particular period of time and they were getting on my nerves. They had nerves that, I don't think they're going to survive honey you know that type of situation. But going through you know with freshmen and realizing that kids are kids you know and they tend to repeat the same thing every year, that same age group tends to do the same thing. I said well maybe this too will pass with my kids you know? That they'll get over this phase and move on and obviously they did. So that was really a great assignment for my family and myself there. Again, the city of Dayton again was warming and welcoming but also the base was warm and very, very supportive. In that class we had the Four Star general, the air force logistic commander's son in my class in our detachment. And he asked some interesting questions. He said I'd like my dad to talk to all the cadets, at what we call Leadership Lab which we took them to either march or do something along that line. And it had never been done in Air Force ROTC before. And so I said oaky I'll--if you want your dad to do that I'll give a call and ask his (unclear) if he would, dad said he would, came out you know the whole bit. And gave a great speech you know to the kids. He was really nervous. As a matter of fact his aide said the old man is more worried about talking to teenagers than he is to congress as far as that was concerned. But the first question I think broke the ice because I had been teaching military management and talking about appraisals, military appraisals for officers and you know the whole line and what they meant. So the first question to him was sir, who writes your OER? And he just busted out laughing. He says, son I'm afraid I don't get one anymore. He says I work directly for the president. I'm not worried about that anymore. And of course he really chuckled about it. The neat thing about him, his roots were originally in Annapolis Royal Nova Scotia where my grandparents were from. So again had a great dialogue with him you know the whole gamut. You know and again I had a chance to talk to him about his family and about the kinds of things he did. So a neat man and a neat officer and a neat opportunity to serve, serve your nation there. Then I moved on from there back to flying again, back to 111s and in this case at Plattsburgh Air Force Base, New York. Went back there and worked in the area of planning and everything else from the 111s and made a decision at that point that I was going to retire after twenty-two years. And so I-- Story_ID: 72 Speaker 1: Let's back track a little bit. I think you've gone so fast. Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: Some of these things I don't have dates for them. Speaker 2: Sure, okay. Speaker 1: So let's go back to, you were at Wright Patterson [Air Force Base, Ohio] the first time-- Speaker 2: Oh the first time that would have been from, let's see, that would have been let's see '72 [1972] to '76 [1976]. Speaker 1: Okay. When you first started flying jets that was--? Speaker 2: That was 19, that would have been 1964/65 [1965]. Speaker 1: Okay. All right, so that was two years before you went to (unclear). Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. And so, and you taught at Wright State-- Speaker 2: Yes I did. Speaker 1: --in the late 80s [1980s]? Speaker 2: It would have been, let's see that would have been '82 [1982] to '85 [1985]. Speaker 1: Okay, mid-80s? Speaker 2: Right, three years there. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And had a great time, again a great experience there. Speaker 1: And now we're talking about retirement? Speaker 2: Yes! Speaker 1: All right, now what year is this? Speaker 2: I retired in 1986. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, and again we're at Plattsburgh, New York and I had a great retirement ceremony and that--you talk about alpha and omega, the beginning and the end, that was where I had my Air Force ROTC [Reserve Officer Training Corps] summer camp. So again you know again it's the beginning and the end. And, and--but I had a friend of mine, General Dave Hall came up and conduct the retirement ceremony. We had, it was fun. We had again on, in that situation. And from there you know again everyone kept asking me you know what are you going to do now? I said well I really want to get into engineering. Again that's what I spent four years in school for you know and everything else I liked. And I spent a little bit of time in the air force doing engineering. I said I'd like to do it you know again upon retirement. And that's what brought me to Fort Wayne, Indiana then Magnavox. And again because they had tremendous research and development and production facilities here I said I'd like to design something and also be able to produce it as well. Some companies you know are designed, some are massive production but this company had the mixture of both of those and it was a mid-sized company in which had an opportunity to really know everyone from you know the secretaries all the way up to the CEO who was stationed and who actually physically resided here. A great company and a great company to work for in the area of communications and software development and those kind of things. And so it was a great opportunity to shadow as an engineer and shortly become a program manager in which you're responsible for the technical direction and management of the program itself. You're the one who is responsible to attain the goals, both financial goals and schedule goals for particular government programs. And I've been doing that since that time. And it's been, and it's been really an enjoyable experience. The company has moved from Magnavox and then became part of a huge company and then finally became part of the Raytheon Company and the Raytheon family. But again each and every time that it moved, what it did do was again you were able to then merge with people who you worked with before you know as part of other companies but now they're part of your greater family. So in that context it gave you the breadth and depth to do things you couldn't do before within the umbrella of that company. But also the company gave me the opportunity to really live and work very well in Fort Wayne [Indiana]. And that's what I, I've enjoyed Fort Wayne coming here in 1986 because it gave me the opportunity to learn, to meet people you know learn in the sense that you get to know people and you get to know the community through volunteerism. Again through the astronomy club where I became president of the astronomy club and the like, then with Science Central where I became the first chairman of the board. I had been on--as part of the development of the organization, I'm on the board today. Also working with TV39, I was asked to join the board of TV39 and I'm now the past chairman of the board. I was chairman of the board two years for the public television board. I've also been involved with Boy Scouts here and again I came here, interesting I came here in late spring, called the then new executive director for the Boy Scouts Bill Copeland and said I'd like to be involved with Boy Scouts. Let me talk you out to lunch and talk and see how I might help. And he says I think I can put you to work. Speaker 1: Let's hold right there. Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: We're going to change tapes. Story_ID: 73 Speaker 1: Okay, I remember where I was. Okay, I was talking about--so let's talk about, let's talk-- Speaker 2: Oh, we were talking about-- Speaker 1: Oh yeah, Boy Scouts okay and having met Bill Copeland, the whole bit. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: The interesting part of it was you know again he had the vision that said again it would be interesting to get you on, on the board and then the whole gamut rather than working necessarily to being (unclear). I could serve better on the board in helping you know formulate a policy and help fundraise and that kind of thing. And so eight years later I was president of the council so again working with people. Speaker 2: The Boy Scouts Council of America? Speaker 1: The Boy Scouts Council, that's right, the Boy Scouts Council here which-- Speaker 2: Oh here, okay. Speaker 1: --which involves eleven counties and about fourteen thousand kids and four thousand adults. Speaker 2: That's (unclear). Speaker 1: So again the first African American here you know to be council president, obviously throughout the country, but here. But again it's because of the interaction of people and people accept you for who you are and how you can support the community and so it's been fun. So that kind of involvement has been fun. Speaker 2: And did you have a lot of enthusiasm out of the black community? Did Boy Scouts get a lot of--? Speaker 1: They tried to. It's hard because--you know we do have some, we have black troops and we have you know troops that go to camp and everything else. But again it's, it's just like across the country you know there are pockets of success as far as that goes. We're still working at it but we've been very, very successful with the troops that we have formed. The biggest problem we have with scouts is leadership. The boys are there and remember scouting is for boys and girls now you know in that situation particularly once, once they get about fourteen and fifteen there are girls in scouting also in the Boy Scouts. Speaker 2: Okay, are they in the same troops? Speaker 1: In this case the venture, or the post and venture organizations, yes, very much so. Speaker 2: Oh, I didn't realize that. Speaker 1: Um-hmm. It's different than when I was in or you were in that situation but yes they are. They're co-ed at that particular point. But it's always the leadership issues that you have, trying to find folks who are willing to take the time, the commitment of time to give a success or make a successful program for young people. And that's one of the things that those three gentlemen taught me you know, my dad [Alfred S. Brothers, Sr.], you know Ed Brooke and Harry, you must take the time to make a commitment to make your community successful. It takes people to make them successful. They do not happen on their own. And again you met, and you've talked with Hannah Stith, the same thing is true here. Again, she had a vision about the African American Historical Museum and Historical Society. And she came out to speak to in this case our reading group one time a couple of years ago. And with her enthusiasm and excitement, I said I think I'd like to help you if I can. And so I joined her and joined the organization and worked together to help get it off the ground. I'm now chairman of the board you know my second year. But again I guess my strengths are typically starting you know new organizations being one, but also moving new organizations to new heights. I've been involved in a number of a capital campaigns with different organizations and again the community has responded dramatically you know to those capital campaigns. But it's because it's people who know people that make things happen in that sense. And I think the key thing is as you work throughout the broad community, they get to know who you are you know and also begin to understand that you really here to help the community. I think that's really one of the benefits of being a community volunteer because you know who to call on. You say I need help. You know would you like to join in? And it's either yes or no. In most cases it's yes. They'll find a way to help and I think that's really the strength and--of the city of Fort Wayne [Indiana] and now in county that people are willing to pull together you know to make things happen. Story_ID: 74 Speaker 1: Yeah. I think that you know people volunteer based on relationships you know. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: If you have a personality that can engage them you know and motivate them, agitate them to do something in the community, that people they will generally respond is what you know--I believe that's-- Speaker 2: And it's true here you know and again you made--I've made you know good friends and good contacts here because of it. Again because we're willing to share in a vision, a common vision for a community. You know we want to move the community ahead and make it a better place for our kids. And the only way we can make it a better place if you participate in the growth and development of it. There's something interesting about the city of Fort Wayne [Indiana] that I've found. Its library system is fantastic. You know we talk about reading, I love to read. It's one of the best I've ever seen in the country not only for a library of its size but any library in terms of the kind of, in terms of the service that they provide. It's also, it has a fantastic genealogical center here. It's the third largest in the country. So again genealogy is one of the things I enjoy you know working on, family genealogy and of course the assets are here. So again it's a hidden secret. It's a gem in northern Indiana. Speaker 1: I didn't know that myself but that's--so what are the other centers for genealogy in the U.S.? Speaker 2: Well really Library of Congress and obviously in Utah-- Speaker 1: Salt Lake City. Speaker 2: --if you know in Salt Lake City. Those are the other two. Speaker 1: Okay, and Fort Wayne. Speaker 2: Um-hmm. And we have records from Canada, from Europe, you name it you name it and again they're all, they're made available here. So it's a really interesting you know connection here. Of course one of the key things I think that makes it so strong is because it's strongly supported by the community itself. It's something that they enjoy doing. We have the annual genealogical convention here in Fort Wayne in the summer time. Speaker 1: (Unclear). So is--well what other--now you're pretty busy even in retirement? You're pretty busy (unclear). Speaker 2: Working--well you know, if you're busy you stay out of trouble. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And I still fly you know in that situation. That's one of my other hobbies and gardening and that kind of thing too. And I fly for business as well as fly for pleasure. But-- Speaker 1: Now do you get a chance to fly jets? Speaker 2: No, not jets. Again I belong to a flying club, the Back 40 Flying Club. We have three airplanes and they're all prop aircraft, propeller driven aircraft. But again it's a cost factor. You know it's only a matter of money. For a few dollars more you can fly a jet. I'm qualified to fly them as far as that goes. Speaker 1: Right (unclear)-- Speaker 2: I just get checked out. That's not a problem. Speaker 1: --interviewed Ed Dwight he-- the same--he missed, you know what he missed about the air force the most was not being able to fly jets at a certain point. But he went on, was able to you know purchase a jet and so-- Speaker 2: He's done very well. I haven't quite, I haven't quite got there yet. Story_ID: 75 Speaker 1: But that's got to be exhilarating to be able to do that and then you know (unclear) I'm sure that someone would miss if you (unclear). Speaker 2: It's a different dimension in flying. It's akin I'd say to driving a beautiful sports car versus driving you know the family car. If you think of it in those terms what a sports car would be in comparable to the jet. So--and I said, I mentioned before you need to take up flying. It's a whole new dimension. Interesting in my travels here with my job, I had a chance to go out to Davis, California and you know run across a company called the Moell, M-O-E-l-l, Moell Company. They're designing a flying car. Yes, it is, it's four ducted jets you know on a car body and of course the jets will lift up vertically and then take off. It will fly to twenty-five thousand feet at almost four hundred miles an hour. It has a range of almost a thousand miles and it's supposed to be flying by wire so you can punch in directions the whole gamut in the air with the global positioning system and everything else and get from point to point. The problem is the FAA is trying to figure out whether you need a pilot's license for it or not as far as that goes. I have a picture of this because I had to see the, I had a chance to see the prototype on my refrigerator. I think it said if you put it on a refrigerator maybe it will become a reality. We're working hard at it. Not there yet. Speaker 1: Something mystical about refrigerators. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Something mystical about refrigerators in that context but one never knows you know. If they have the vision and the vision is there. They originally had developed a, almost a saucer like vehicle at one time you know and that may be the genesis of some of the saucer stories you hear too. But the ones that they built didn't do anything like the things you hear about by any stretch of the imagination. But again it had a vision you know and perhaps it will come to pass. Speaker 1: Yeah that's the missing ingredient for, of the future you know. I mean by this time you know when we were both kids I guess, had the projection that we would have electric toothbrushes which we got right (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --microwaves. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: We got that. They predicted the two-way I mean the video television--telephones and things. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Which the technology had been here to do but people just don't want it. They don't want to see what's going on out there that much, you know. Speaker 2: That's true. Speaker 1: And then the flying car you know cause there's a commercial that (unclear). Speaker 2: That's Jetsons. That's right but you got to remember the Jetsons? Speaker 1: With all the flying cars. Speaker 2: That's right. That's right. Speaker 1: They are on (unclear). Speaker 2: They're on the--they're literally being prototyped. Right now they're developing the engines and they're making money with the engines so they can further development of the car itself. So, I haven't put my order in. The first ten I think are supposed to be nine hundred thousand [dollars] a copy so I've got a little ways to go before I can do something like that. But one never knows. You know just like anything else when the first cars came out you know people didn't think that they were going to go that far. But again they're all over the place now. So maybe in ten or fifteen or even twenty years you know that may be something that's a real reality. It does--you can drive it on the road. It does have electric drive so, and obviously you can drive in and around the city. Speaker 1: It should be guided by a wire? Speaker 2: No it's flying by wire meaning it's flown by a computer. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So again you-- Speaker 1: You--it's hooked up to a satellite or something and (unclear). Speaker 2: In that sense from navigation. But you also program it so you know you can only go from Point A to Point B, to Point B at a particular altitude, a particular speed. And it does have a parachute on it so when all else fails you can press the panic button and the parachute opens and it comes down. That was always a question. Speaker 1: They discussed the air traffic control problems of such a system? Speaker 2: Well now because we have the GPS system, that would--and the, you know the collision avoidance systems you know on aircraft right now, that might be less of a problem than one may think quite honestly. Again because you can with enough information, with the computers, track all airborne vehicles. So in that situation it might be a little more controllable. And realistically they wouldn't be flying around New York City [New York] you know necessarily. They'd be driving in New York City. They'd be, they'd really only be flown much longer distances. Like Fort Wayne [Indiana] would be an ideal place if you think about it. That's why I like living in the middle of the US, flying from here to Dayton [Ohio] or something like that, sure. Yeah but I was always worried about you know the traffic jams, you know the traffic jams in the air, how are we going to solve that problem. But I think you get more vertical space so that's why I think we can solve it a little more realistically. Speaker 1: Solve the gapers block because if something happens nobody could see it. (laughter) Story_ID: 76 Speaker 1: And that's interesting. So you're able to--you've been in position to see a lot of cutting edge technology. Speaker 2: In that sense and it's been intriguing. Again in my, my job quite often it's the application of technology, where can I apply it? You know and that's really the role of the engineer. It's not necessarily to develop the technology but really to apply that technology for a particular product or particular purpose and that's really the kinds of things I enjoy doing you know with that kind of planning, that kind of brainstorming, that kind of leadership on project teams or program teams. Speaker 1: Is there anything else you want to tell us about that you've been instrumental in developing or working on or seen developed? Speaker 2: It's interesting as you look at it, not necessarily--software development you know and the idea of using artificial intelligence is always intriguing in that sense. I've been involved with programs to use it to sort information because one of our problems currently is the fact that we have so much information but nowhere to filter it or make it usable you know in that situation. So I've been developed--been involved with teams that helped adapt a particular process, knowing, recognizing in a military sense how it might be used but also recognizing in the commercial sense how it can be used. And again that's where the strengths of strong--software engineers come to play. One of the things I do stress very, very strongly is education. I think education is a lifelong process that you never stop. You probably saw on my resume, I just got my Ph.D. and I'm just turning sixty in that situation in a five year process. But it's an ongoing, education is an ongoing thing. You should never stop learning in that situation. I'm not necessarily saying you have to you know pursue further degrees but my recommendation is continue going to school, continue to learn because the world is evolving so rapidly in terms of the technology and science that it behooves you to understand the underpinnings of that technology or science. We're going to the moon. We've sent you know prototypes out, outside our solar system. Look at the Hubble telescope and what it sees you know many you know millions of light years away. And again what does that mean to us? And really we have to understand it and prepare ourselves for that understanding and also prepare our youth to understand it. The other thing I recommend to adults is you know take some computer classes. If you're not computer literate, do it because like the telephone you know that came about, we take it for granted today, computers will be the same way here ten to fifteen years from now. We'll have gone through the generation of kids who fully understand and use it to those who take it for granted. I think Ed would probably tell you, you know the folks who landed on the moon made a great impression on us. Doesn't make a great impression on the kids anymore, they just take it for granted. So consequently you know life is evolving rapidly. You know be part of that change, be part of that excitement. And I don't necessarily say you have to lead the excitement by any stretch of the imagination but you should understand what it is you know and be part of the process, the discussion process. Story_ID: 77 Speaker 1: Okay. Now scientists in this country as much as America taps its scientific capacity, the scientist is seen as an isolated guy, with a pencil protector, a nerd. You know he's not a fun guy. He's not having a good time or (unclear) lost in the world. And in the black community it's even more, I mean it's hard to even find a scientist or anyone who's interested in--I know there are people that are interested in science. They're out there but the general impression is that we don't have anybody prepared to deal with science at all and that's one of our, the big gaps in our educational institutions and whatever black side of town it is in any major city. The preparation for science is just not there. Speaker 2: And I think it's the--partly because we don't see very many mentors in the process. You know you don't see very many black scientists you know in operation. And that's also true of black airline pilots. How many do you see there are out there, but you don't see that many you know any stretch of the imagine--but they're there. You know the visibility makes a difference. And that's why I mentioned through my scouting experience you know as--in terms of an aviation post, that's where I was exposed to black pilots for the first time. So I could talk to people you know firsthand, what's the experience of flying. The kids really don't have the opportunity to fully understand and comprehend what engineering is. And engineering like anything else is nothing more than language. It's a way of bringing a concept into being except it's done through formulas as far as that goes. You know kids say well I can't do math. I can tell them yes you do because you know money when you go shop or this, that or the other thing. You guys do math all the time. And math is a universal language no matter where you go. It's one that's well understood. But it's just we had made math you know a mystery you know it's nothing more than another language, the same thing with language skills, foreign language skills. In the U.S., it's always been English. You know it's been entirely because we're such a huge country you tend, we've tended to not to speak more than one language. Well now we have more folks coming in who speak many different languages and so we're now moving, gravitating toward the ability to speak more than one language and I think that's a great idea. Speaker 1: Have you been involved in any projects to maybe boost the scientific profile of science in the classroom? Speaker 2: Through a couple of things. One obviously is through Science Central well we're again science education not only onsite but also you know working with the teachers and the like. But I was also for a couple of years on the NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] Advisory Board for the state of Indiana. And again talking about higher education in science because despite the fact many, many very young people go to college, they're ill-prepared to enter the sciences. Again they don't have the underpinnings you know along that line. And I think part of that is because many of our teachers are not fully prepared and it's our fault you know for not helping them in that preparation. But I think if they can be excited about it and understand how it's being used, then they can use that excitement to create interesting excitement amongst their students. Because if they consider it still a mystery or a wonder and not really a tool, then it's very, very hard to make, to help young people understand it that it's a tool for them. Speaker 1: Right. Okay, now one of your--do you have a, do you ever think about like what could happen in the black community to I guess improve its science aptitude at all? Speaker 2: Yes. Two things can take place. One is in the school itself and that is a partnering with industry so that young people get to have mentors within the school system itself so that they can work on projects. Again, engineering is not an individual job. It really is teams of people working together you know to work toward a common goal. So again if you have adult mentors who are from the industry working with teams of kids to develop a project or solve a problem, again it moves them in that direction of understanding. The other thing is bringing business into you know the inner city, technology businesses you know in that sense and allowing kids to see how these businesses grow and flourish. I had the opportunity to work with third and fourth grade classes you know a couple of years ago in Southern Heights Elementary School. And I was a mentor and one of the teachers gave me the opportunity and said okay you've got thirty minutes. Why don't you do something in math and science you know to help kids understand a little bit more about math and how to use math. So I was talking about astronomy the first time and talking about large numbers. And of course third graders, you're talking about light years. You're talking about billions and trillions of miles. And of course that doesn't seem to make sense to them. Speaker 1: A mile doesn't make sense (unclear). Speaker 2: That's right. That's right in that sense you know but then--or speeds. But I said okay let's see if we can break it down to something that they can understand and that they can count from one to ten you know, a hundred or what it happens to be. So I started using the powers of ten. Remember ten to the first is ten, ten to the second power is a hundred, that kind of thing. So we started doing that and using exceptionally large numbers and saying okay, this is what this trillion means or this quadrillion. This is what it means. This is what this distance means. Okay, so let's see if you can add, subtract and multiply and divide with it. They could! The difference between the fourth and the third grade was the third grade couldn't divide yet, the fourth grade could. So they worked together. And the teacher said, wait a minute that's normally a--taught in high school, not in elementary school. I said it can be taught in elementary school. It's a very simple process. It's a very sample process. It's a mechanical process. The other time was we set up a little company, not quite like JA, but the idea was to show them what real salaries are. And many kids had no concept of how much money someone could make and so we set up a situation in which I said okay how many of these units do you have to make to make a profit, the concept of profit and loss, real salaries. Well, someone can make seventy-five thousand dollars? You better believe they do. Someone makes fifty thousand dollars? You better believe they do, and the whole gamut. And so we were able to put that into context for them. I think one of the things that is lacking is putting real life and it's experiences in the context of the classroom. They don't understand what the numbers mean because it has no relationship or any meaning to them. Speaker 1: Are you familiar with the Algebra Project? Speaker 2: No I'm not. Speaker 1: Yeah. It's a former civil rights organizer, Bob Moses who was a mathematician. And he found you know, founded something called the Algebra Project. It's very similar to what you're talking about in terms of trying to teach--he says you can teach anybody math. In fact he started out in Boston [Massachusetts] you know-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --at Cambridge [Massachusetts] when he was working on a degree at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --to teach his kid and one of the kids in the neighborhood you know how to do algebra. Very similar in technique you know what you're talking about. Speaker 2: But it makes it real. Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: And I think learning it is really a sterile environment now. We name--we need to make it a real environment in that context and then, and I think then our kids will thrive. I also have learned that you know we put our young boys at a disadvantage and you may not realize it. You know up to about the third grade they sit at tables maybe the fourth grade, sit at tables and look at each other. All of a sudden fourth, fifth and sixth they sit in rows behind each other okay. Little boys like to look at each other because they're very visual in that situation. If you take a look where learning begins to stop, that's exactly where it starts. What do we do in college, we sit around tables again. It's a team building concept and the nurturing of a group. And that's what a gang is all about. You know it is nothing more than a group that's fronted to one another, that's all it is. So again why not learn in the same kind of environment. Story_ID: 78 Speaker 1: That's interesting. Now is there anything that you'd like to tell us about in your career that I haven't asked you before? Speaker 2: All I can say is you know, a career is not one-sided meaning just in one direction. I've held many different kinds of jobs, many different kinds of positions. I think the best thing is preparation overall. The ability to adapt and adjust through education, but also the ability to work with other people in terms of seeking out those goals and aims that you have. You typically don't do it by yourself. You end up working with other people to achieve those goals and aims. And so as you look to the future, recognize those are the two key ingredients you know, the friendships, you know the teamwork and also the education are what keep you going. Speaker 1: Okay. Now you're still young and have a lot of energy, we can plainly see. But what would you see as your legacy thus far? Speaker 2: I think volunteerism you know the ability to work with people and make things happen you know create something new you know create excitement. And I think that's really my legacy in that sense to be able to bring excitement to whatever I've done and then perhaps bring a new vision to whatever I've been involved with. Speaker 1: Okay. And you come from an accomplished family and with a lot of accomplished associates you know as you were growing up. How does your--how do your parents [Alfred S. Brothers, Sr. and Edith Irene Yates] feel about your career and what you've been able to do? Speaker 2: Oh I think they're very, very pleased with it in that situation. They've been able to see--you know visit me wherever I've been. You know they had, they've had the opportunity to you know discuss with me the kinds of things I'm looking to do. My family often has been a part and parcel of that. My kids and wife have traveled you know with me no matter where I've gone. Except overseas in Vietnam and those kind of--and my wife did visit me in Thailand so in that situation we've been there. So it's been a very, very supportive thing you know and it's been an adventure for all of us you know in that sense. Well what is he going to do next? You know where is he going to be next? You know or what's he going to be involved with next? And I think that's really excitement of life you know saying you know what am I going to do next? I've done this. What else can I do you know to be a benefit to society or you know or credit to the family itself? What can we do next? Speaker 1: Sir, once again you're still young in terms of your energy level and everything but how would you like to be remembered (unclear)? Speaker 2: As someone who's positive in that situation. Someone who's got a vision and the drive and commitment to you know accomplish that vision. Speaker 1: All right, well thank you very much. Speaker 2: Thank you very much...