 Story_ID: 378315 Speaker 1: This HistoryMakers [The HistoryMakers] interview is being conducted by [HistoryMaker] Robert C. Hayden, the videographer is Mr. Scott Stearns, the interview site is at the home of today's HistoryMaker, 611 H Street, Southwest, Washington, D.C. and the date is November 6, 2006. Madam HistoryMaker-- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: Attorney HistoryMaker, would you give me your full name and would you spell your name for me? Speaker 2: Sure. It's [HistoryMaker] Lezli Baskerville and I spell it L-E-Z-L-I, Baskerville is B-A-S-K-E-R-V-I-L-L-E. Speaker 1: Um-hm. And would you tell us where you were born? Speaker 2: I was born in Montclair, New Jersey, a small town in the northeast part of Jersey [New Jersey], about twenty minutes outside of the Lincoln Town [sic. Lincoln Park, New Jersey]. Speaker 1: Um-hm. What is your occupation? How do you describe your profession? What is your present position and title? Speaker 2: My profession is, I'm an advocate for social justice and access, I'm trained as an attorney and I'm presently the president and CEO of the National Association for Equal Opportunity in Higher Education, NAFEO. Speaker 1: Okay, very briefly and we're gonna look at NAFEO in detail later on. But very briefly, what is the purpose and the mission and goals and the program at NAFEO, what's it about? Speaker 2: NAFEO is the only national membership umbrella association of all of the nation's 105 historically black colleges and universities [HBCUs] and the emerging predominately black colleges and universities. It is the, I like to call it the voice for blacks in higher education, it's the table at which the presidents and CEOs of all the black colleges come together whether they're private or public, whether they're two year, four year, predominately, or historically. But they come together to reach consensus around common priority issues so that we can speak as one voice, but we also work to build the capacity for all of our member institutions. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: So we serve as the capacity builder and an advocate, a voice for them, we also foster collaborations among the institutions and we serve as a clearing house on information for blacks in higher education. Speaker 1: Um-hm. You said there's a 105 historically black colleges that are members today? Speaker 2: There are 105 historically black colleges in total (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Colleges. Um-hm. Speaker 2: And there're all members of NAFEO. Speaker 1: Okay. 'Cause I've heard different numbers over the years, 120, 118, 114. Speaker 2: Well the 120 figure is the NAFEO membership and that reflects the 105 historically black and then emerging predominately black colleges. So for example, Chicago State [Chicago State University, Chicago, Illinois], Medgar Evers [Medgar Evers College, Brooklyn, New York] in New York [New York], there are a number of colleges that serve disproportionate numbers of African American students, but they're not legislatively or legally historically black colleges. They have a special legislative status. Story_ID: 378316 Speaker 1: Before we get into the more formal aspects of this HistoryMakers [The HistoryMakers] interview, we have a few, what we call warm up questions-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --People magazine type questions-- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: --that will give the viewers of your interview overtime, another different slant to your personality. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And so, I'd like to ask you to start off Attorney Baskerville [HistoryMaker Lezli Baskerville], what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: Favorite food? That's a tough one, probably some kind of fish. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Let me ask you this way? I understand you're a gourmet cook? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Rumors, rumors. Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: I love to cook. Speaker 1: --I wanna ask you what is your best or favorite dish that you prepare? Speaker 2: Okay. Well that's different than my favorite food-- Speaker 1: Yeah, I know, but I'm-- Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: --kind of, yeah-- Speaker 2: Let's see. I love to bake virtually anything. So I bake rolls and cakes and pies and right now I have a banana pecan rum cake that people love and I enjoy making it, because I like them to enjoy it. I make a Beef Wellington that people love, I don't eat beef, but my guests enjoy it and, and I like to cook as a way of bringing people together to exchange ideas and to relax and that's another favorite and-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --a wide range of things-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --whatever folks say they like to eat, I like (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, you can-- Speaker 2: --learning to make it-- Speaker 1: --do it, you-- Speaker 2: --and trying-- Speaker 1: --can do it-- Speaker 2: --to do it-- Speaker 1: --you can do it-- Speaker 2: --for them. Speaker 1: --okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: That's good, that's good. Do you have a favorite time of year? Speaker 2: I like the seasons. I like seasonal change which is why I really like Washington [D.C.], I love the winter, I love snow and I like the outdoor activities that go along with snowing. And my sister [Renee Baskerville] and I grew up ice skating and I loved to ice skate and every year on my birthday, to prove that I can still do it, I go to the rink here in town, if I'm in town. I love the, the winter, but I love the summer and I love warm weather and beautiful turquoise water and white sand. And anytime I want total peace and sanity, I go someplace where I can go to a beach and take some good books and relax. Speaker 1: Let me ask you where that favorite place is? 'Cause my next question was, do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: With my entire family, it would be Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts]. We have gone to Martha's Vineyard for as many years as I can remember, it's a time when our family and our extended family come together and we cook and talk trash and read good books and go to the beach and partake in many of the cultural and social activities and so we love it together. When I go away by myself, I go to Cancun, Mexico, and I have a timeshare there at Water's Edge [ph.], perhaps the most beautiful water in the world and I've traveled the world-- Speaker 1: Yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) looking at beautiful beaches and Barbados and Jamaica and other places, but I've found the perfect spot in Cancun. Speaker 1: That's good. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Well, I should say purple (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) Not, not red? Speaker 2: No, it's not red, no. Red is just a power color, gotta have it on when you do an interview. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Peach is actually my favorite color. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Peach. Speaker 1: Good. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Last warm up question. Do you have a favorite saying or phrase that you like to use from time to time with friends, relatives, colleagues, something philosophical that-- Speaker 2: Can't think of one off hand. But my colleagues would probably think of one for me. Give me a minute. Speaker 1: Sure, we can come (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'll come up with it. Speaker 1: --back, it'll probably come up in the conversation. Speaker 2: Yeah, it'll come back. Story_ID: 378317 Speaker 1: As I was saying earlier, before the interview, we usually start by talking about your family background. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Because it's important for the people who use and study your interview and your life, and what you've accomplished. How you came to be who you are and what you are today, so we start with your family. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So, I wanna start with your mother. And would you give me her full name? Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: And when she was born, the year and where she was born? Speaker 2: Gosh. Mother's name is Marjorie Willie Henry Baskerville [Marjorie Henry Baskerville], she was born in a small place called Virgilina in North Carolina. Speaker 1: Could you spell that for us? Speaker 2: V-I-R-G-E-L-I-N-A? Or V-I-R-G-I-L-I-N-A. I don't know, it's now Roxboro [North Carolina]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And it's on the border of North Carolina and Virginia, just, thus Virgilina. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Part of the Cunningham family and there's still a very large Cunningham family in and around that area. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: So, she was born there but she was raised in Norfolk, Virginia. So, [HistoryMaker] Elaine Jones and a number of others who I know are part of the HistoryMakers series, hail from Norfolk, Virginia. I grew up there, my grandfather worked at the naval base [Naval Station Norfolk] in Norfolk, Virginia, mom went to Booker T. High School [Booker T. Washington High School] in Norfolk, Virginia, had some wonderful years there. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: So that, she's a part of Cunningham-Henry clan from there. Her father Clifford Dudley Henry's [Clifford Henry] family hail--hails from the Eastern Shore of Maryland and we went back there several summers and spent time vacationing there. Speaker 1: What did your mother share with you about her growing up years in Norfolk? You said she spent most of her childhood there? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And, what stories did she tell you about growing up in Norfolk, anything that just sticks out in your mind, a memory? Speaker 2: The thing that sticks out in my mind about my mother's childhood is a vision of her taking Mary Jane candies. Her family owned the neighborhood store, it was Sally's Sandwich Shop [ph.], her mother was Sally [Sally Cunningham Henry]. This was actually not in, in Norfolk, Virginia, where she spent most of her childhood, but on the Eastern Shore, they had Sally's Sandwich Shop. And mother used to tell us that she would run into the store and take Mary Jane candies and run behind the sofa and eat the candy. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: And she thought she was being really slick and that it wasn't noticed but, of course, everyone knew that and she would leave large numbers of wrappers behind the back. Mom was a smart kid, she loved to read, she was valedictorian of her class, she excelled and did four years in two and a half, or something like that, and, early on she was an aspiring physician. Mom didn't go on to be a physician, but my sister [Renee Baskerville] is one, so it must have been in the blood and passed down. But, studying hard, she went to Mount Olive Baptist Church [Norfolk, Virginia] and so she got her grounding there, there was Reverend Cumsey Myers [Henry Tecumseh Myers] at the time and as a child, my sister and I went there in the summer to Vacation Bible School. My grandmother had a small home, but it seemed like a larger than life farm, right next to her, her home. And so, I have memories of, of picking or helping her to harvest the vegetables there. She grew corn and okra and tomatoes and beans, peas, and all kinds of things, you had a great portrait. And when my grandfather was home, he would take my sister and me fishing and, so I have great memories of, of going down there and doing those things. Story_ID: 378318 Speaker 1: I also have memories of, of the segregation that existed, even after my sister [Renee Baskerville] and I were born. We, at the time were living in Montclair, New Jersey where I grew up, that we would go to Norfolk, Virginia to, for the summer-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and, I remember at the time, there were no planes, we certainly weren't flying but, we would drive a long ride, couldn't take the bus, or if you took the bus, had to sit in the back with your chicken bags and so forth. So we would drive long ride from Montclair, New Jersey to Norfolk, Virginia, and one summer we wanted ice cream, it was hot and we had been on a long ride and we stopped at a, at a store in route, an ice cream store in route from Montclair to Norfolk, and couldn't get ice cream. In fact, it was not true we couldn't get ice cream, couldn't get ice cream in the front of the store, so my mother [Marjorie Henry Baskerville] was told she had to go in the back of the store in order to get ice cream and they had a separate service area for coloreds. And I remember my mother ordering four of the like triple decker ice cream cones, this was after we were told that we couldn't come in the front, had to go in the back and be served out of the special tub of ice cream. She said with poise and dignity, "I'd ha- I'll have four large heaps--," and I don't remember how they scoop, but she asked for the largest that she could get and they piled it on, and then she gracefully exited, and didn't take the ice cream. But, that was the first lasting memory of-- Speaker 2: What, approximately what year was that? Speaker 1: --the entrenched segregation. Speaker 2: Do you recall? How old were you then? Speaker 1: Well, I'm not telling years. Speaker 2: Oh okay. Speaker 1: But it was when I was very young (laughter). Speaker 2: Very young, okay. Story_ID: 378319 Speaker 1: Tell me about your mother's [Marjorie Henry Baskerville], I wanna talk about her parents [Sally Cunningham Henry and Clifford Henry], your maternal parents also, grandparents. But tell me about her education, her formal education briefly. Speaker 2: Okay. Mother as I said, graduated valedictorian [from Booker T. Washington High School, Norfolk, Virginia], went to Howard University [Washington, D.C.], I think she went there when she was fifteen years, having completed her high school career. Went to high school where she studied and got an undergraduate degree in biology, some science in preparation for going to med school. It was there that she also pledged Delta [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority], it was there that she was wooed by a suave and debonair Omega [Omega Psi Phi Fraternity] man, who was my dad [Charles Baskerville, Jr.]. Had some great memories there and as long as I can remember, my sister [Renee Baskerville] and I knew about Howard University. In fact, when I was about to finish high school [Montclair High School, Montclair, New Jersey] and go off to college, there was no doubt in my mind, but that I would go to Howard University. All of the guest in the house, we either went to Howard or Hampton University [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia], but I heard wonderful stories about the educational experience that, that mother obtained there. She was a serious and outstanding student, loved to read, loved to write, fluent in languages and biological sciences. But you had a great experience there that ended up not only providing her a solid grounding for all of the professional challenges, but a man who became her life's partner, and dear friends, dear friends who came, I went with her to her fiftieth anniversary from Howard University, remarkable the bond that had been established and maintained over the years. But then mother graduated, got married, went to work as a, her study was in social work, she went to, she became a school social worker in, I think Paterson, New Jersey initially, ultimately coming back to East Orange, New Jersey, where she served for many years. After my sister and I were born, she went to get a master's [degree] in social work at Rutgers University [The State University of New Jersey] in New Brunswick [New Jersey], and had a tremendous experience there and used that to do good things in the public school system in East Orange that ultimately put her in an administrative position. She was the principal at the Whitney Houston school for performing arts [Whitney E. Houston Academy of Creative and Performing Arts, East Orange, New Jersey] when she died this February. Story_ID: 378320 Speaker 1: I think I'm getting a sense and feeling of her personality based on what you've just told me. But, let me ask you directly, how do you remember your mother as a person? What was she like as a person, her personality? Speaker 2: Mom was the most loving, generous, giving person that I've met objectively in life, and I've met fantastic people. But, she was selfless in the sense of giving her all and all, her time, her talent and her treasure, she was a philanthropist in life and she was blessed to have good jobs, invested well and decided to give it back, and she gave to students and families. At her home going service this past February, people came up, faculty, well not faculty, teachers in the East Orange [New Jersey] public school system, and said, "You didn't know this, but your mom paid for me to get my Ph.D. She said that in this day and age, you needed a terminal degree in order to max in a higher, in the education system and she paid for my Ph.D." And it wasn't one person that did that, it was two or three. And I knew about her support for the families there, so even though at some point, she transitioned from being officially a social worker, she was a social worker at heart. She cared about people deeply and passionately, she listened and she was solu- solution-oriented and if that meant, "I Marjorie Baskerville [Marjorie Henry Baskerville] can do something," she did it. She was a warm and caring and supportive mom, loved to cook and I think perhaps that's where I get my joy, loved to cook and loved to cook for other's--so early on, the dinner table and picnics and food at any time, food to celebrate good times and bad times, to bring people together and she did that. And she was into the arts, and she also invested in the arts, creating opportunities for young people in particular to pursue the arts, or to enjoy the arts. There are large numbers of students in the communities of my home and where mother worked, just twenty-five minutes outside of, of midtown in New York [New York] who had not enjoyed the Broadway play and she made that available to large numbers of students and families and, and made certain that the arts were maintained as part of the education, the core education curriculum in the public schools at a time when folks are trying to cut out the arts. But, obviously she recognized the importance of, you know, strong, English and history, the sciences and technology and all of those things as well but did not place the arts as, as any less significant in developing the whole person. But, she was selfless, wonderful, giving, generous, fun loving person. Mom taught me lessons about strength and courage. My father [Charles Baskerville, Jr.] and mother courted in college, ultimately married and stayed together until my father's death in 1991, very, very close, it was a strong loving family and when my father died, my mother taught me about loving and moving beyond, it was a time that we celebrated the good times and mother had the option, as do many folks of, of being brought down by the absence of her life's companion and, and the father of her children. But she celebrated the good times that she had and she realized that she had so much left to give that while we would celebrate him, and miss his presence in the household, there was so much more for her give, she branched out and continued to give. She became active again in the Delta Sigma Theta Sorority, which she pledged at Howard University [Washington, D.C.], but during the time she was raising her family and working, and being the wife that she was, became less active. When my father died, she became reconnected with that and worked on the arts and letters communit- committee [Arts and Letters Committee], and a number of others. But she looked for the positive in everything. She was perhaps the most upbeat person that I know, and so many others said that about her. Story_ID: 378321 Speaker 1: Tell me about her mother, your maternal grandmother. I think you alluded to her earlier-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --but give me her name again? Where and when she was born? And tell me a little bit about what you know about her. Speaker 2: Gosh, I don't know. I know where she was born, I don't know when she was born. Nana Sally, Sally Cunningham [Sally Cunningham Henry] was born in Virgilina, North Carolina, into a large family. My mother [Marjorie Henry Baskerville] was an only child by the way, so, all the doting and attention that goes along with being an only child, I would imagine she received, she and her father were especially close, but whatever she received, it taught her to be a generous and caring person. But-- Speaker 1: You knew her? Speaker 2: My mom? Speaker 1: Your, your maternal (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: My grand, my-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) grandmother? Speaker 2: --maternal grandmother? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: My maternal grandmother was one of about eleven and yes, I knew her and enjoyed all of my early years with Sally Cunningham Henry, she was a home maker. And so I remember picking grapes and making jelly, the grapes and strawberries and pears and all other kinds of preserves we would make. Cooking fresh vegetables that you pick from the garden and freezing them and bringing them out at the opportune time, most of my time with Nana Sally was in the garden and in the kitchen. So I learned a lot of homemaking skills, Nana's house was always immaculately clean, and I think I've adopted that from my grandmother. Speaker 1: Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 2: But that was Nana Sally, gardening and cooking and making a warm and welcoming home, she was also active in the Mount Olive Baptist Church [Norfolk, Virginia], my sister [Renee Baskerville] and I went right along and enjoyed that. She had good friends, a small circle of very good friends and we would do--spend time between each other's house's. And my grandfather was off in the [U.S.] Navy, he was in the Navy yard [Naval Station Norfolk, Norfolk, Virginia] and worked in the canteen there. I understand, although this is way, way, way, before my time, but (laughter) be real clear because I--we're not talking age and time. But one of the great things about Granddaddy Clifford's [Clifford Henry] work was that during the Depression [Great Depression] when, when so many were without, he found a way to provide for his family, very creative. We are a creative people. Story_ID: 378322 Speaker 1: Tell me about your father, his name, full name and where and when he was born? Speaker 2: Okay. His name is Charles William Baskerville, Jr. [Charles Baskerville, Jr.], he was born in Montclair, New Jersey, third generation Baskerville in Montclair, New Jersey, May 19, in the '30s [1930s]. I think it was '32 [1932], I'm not sure, he was sixty-three, when he died in '91 [1991]. But Montclair was his home, his father was second generation Montclair, Charles Williams Baskerville, Sr. [Charles Baskerville, Sr.] who was the first African American in the sanitation department in Montclair. Father was born to traditional nuclear family except that, the interesting thing is, his mother worked outside of the home, his mother was an RN [registered nurse], and was a nurse at a time when, when many women were opting to be at home. His father as I indicated worked in the sanitation department in Montclair, he-- Speaker 1: His name? Speaker 2: Charles William Baskerville, Sr. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He volunteered at the Montclair neighborhood center. This, there's this thread of volunteerism and the recognition of the connectivity between self and the community and the responsibility for the entire community was something that I understood from our family early on. Granddaddy Baskerville and Nana Ruth [Ruth Twilty Baskerville], his wife, my grandparents were raising three children, my father had two sisters [Janet Baskerville and Lois Baskerville], and they were working they were working hard and working regularly, which was a blessing. But whatever they had, there was a recognition that it was for the family, for the extended family. My grandfather, this is interesting, my grandfather's sister, Ida Baskerville, lived right across the street from my grandfather and my grandfather purchased the lot in back of his house and built the house that I actually grew up, in the backyard. So, the Baskerville's yards were adjoining and so the, the immediate family was literally connected by backyards, but there was the sense that the entire Willomere Avenue, Willomere court, the Linden Avenue, the community was connected. And granddaddy volunteered for the neighborhood center where they would especially pay attention to the young black boys in the community who may not have a man in the household, but he gave all of his years and died on that board [Montclair Township Zoning Board of Adjustment] and my sister [Renee Baskerville] is sitting on the board today. Story_ID: 378323 Speaker 1: Tell me about your father's careers and occupations, what, what did he do professionally? Speaker 2: I'll tell you that, but I'm gonna tell you one more (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Sure. Speaker 2: --thing about him. Speaker 1: Sure. Speaker 2: --as a kid. Charles [Charles Baskerville, Jr.] had a remarkable gift for music. My father had perfect pitch and could play every instrument in the orchestra. By the time he was in elementary school, he was playing the organ at his church, when he was in high school, he made change playing in the church, playing the organ in the church, went to Howard University [Washington, D.C.] and Morgan State University [Morgan State College; Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland], got a Bachelors of Arts in, a Bachelors of Arts in music and the humanities, after that he got a scholarship, a Rockefeller scholarship, fellowship, I'm sorry. Went out to the Karamu theater [Karamu House, Cleveland, Ohio] in Ohio, having married my mom [Marjorie Henry Baskerville], took her and he was the music director there for years and put on productions that I've seen, but an, an incredibly gifted musician with perfect pitch. His, one of his early jobs was tele-song. So, if you had a down day, he would, and it was on the radio, you would call and say, you know, "Charles, my wife just left me, I got caught cheating, I need some help," and you'd give them a few lines and tell them quickly what it was you wanted to say and on the spot he would produce songs for persons for a fee. And he did that for a number of years and made a living, enough to keep the lights on and keep the family fed. Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: He also, ultimately parlayed his gifts in music into writing jingles and he was the first African American marketing consultant at NWA Air [Northwest Airlines] in New York, where he'd served until his death. But he taught music in high schools, he produced large numbers of musical productions, off Broadway productions and he was a renowned musician, played with lots of people that folks would know and I have some of his tapes and I'm privileged to have them. Speaker 1: That's great. Speaker 2: But, it, in addition to his gifts in marketing, he, he wrote commercials and things and did that and made a serious living at a later point in life for the family. But while he was doing that, he was giving service, he was an advocate, he was a social justice advocate. He was the commissioner, civil rights commissioner for the township of Montclair [New Jersey], he was the founding member and a president of the Fair Housing Commission in Montclair, he initiated along with a group of other great people, all of the early equal access cases in Montclair for fair housing for school desegregation for municipal services. He was actively involved in the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], where he provided all of the marketing material for the battles of the day in and around the township of Montclair. And so I remember him as, not as much as a mus- musician, as an advocate for social justice, social change, and I remember our school systems in Montclair were desegregated and being strolled down first to Glenfield School [Glenfield Middle School, Montclair, New Jersey] and by the time I was in Montclair High School [Montclair, New Jersey], I, I'm, I'm sorry, into, in the middle schools, up to Montclair High School in an effort to achieve open access to the public schools and at the time to integrate the schools, we now talk about diversity but to achieve diversity in the public school systems and the housing among mu- in the municipal services of the township, and he was a loving dad (laughter). Story_ID: 378324 Speaker 1: Tell us some other things about your father Charles [Charles Baskerville, Jr.] that-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --are memorable and important. Speaker 2: My father was a family man, he was juggling career, leadership in the movement for social justice at the time, but he was a family man, family centered and his family came first in his life. I never saw him with lots of male friends although he was a friend to many men and, then worked on many projects with them but, I asked him about the apparent absence of friends and he told me that my mother [Marjorie Henry Baskerville] was the only friend he needed. He said, "I married my best friend and that's the only friend that I needed," but he evidenced his commitment for us in so many ways. He taught me about sharing and he, he gave me some great principles upon which I've built my life. One is that whatever he had was for the family and we didn't have much in the early years. My father was, was struggling to make a living, did not anticipate that he would have children when he did and certainly not two. But, whatever he had was for the family and he would put it on the dresser at the end of the day and if it was twenty-five cents, or it was a dollar, that would be there and if I wanted candy, he would not choose between the bus token to get back into New York [New York] the next day, or the candy, but he told us, this is what we have as a family and we can do with it what we choose and would permit us to make a decision. And so, there was a sense that whatever he has was all of ours and not just the Baskervilles in the household, but, but the entire family, I mean that was a valuable thing. The other thing was that mom was working on getting her master's [degree] and while she was in school [Rutgers University, The State University of New Jersey, New Brunswick, New Jersey], dad cooked, he did hair, he did whatever it would take-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --and, again at the time we didn't have much, but he spiced up a can of beans and made it taste wonderful or he would do white beans and put brown sugar and ketchup and things and so, he did all that was necessary to make sure that his family was provided for and, and made to feel loved and, and protected and cared for. He also was president of the PTA [Parent Teachers Association], virtually every class that I was in and of course as a student, the last thing you want is your dad-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --to be the president of the PTA because he knows any and everything that goes on at school, but a remarkable man. The other thing that most people don't know, even people that knew him very well was, that my dad was deaf, he was born as a hearing person and at some point in his life, before my sister [Renee Baskerville] and I were born or, or early in our life, my father became deaf. The remarkable thing is, that he continued to work in a hearing world without the benefit of signing and without the benefit of hearing devices. My father learned to read lips and so if we talked directly to him, he would understand and we could carry on a normal conversation, if you turned away from him, he wouldn't hear you and that was remarkable because he continued to go from Montclair [New Jersey], into the city, he had perfect pitch and he could have, we could hear nothing in the house, but he could feel the music through the vibat- vibrations in the floor and he wrote jingles for Beech-Nut Fruit Stripe gums and the "Be All You Can Be" in the [U.S.] Army commercial and a number of things, just a gifted, talented man. And that taught me that no matter how big or small the challenge is, the obstacles put in front of you, you can overcome them. I found out quite by accident that my father was deaf, and when I found out I, I, my mother verified that that was true and that he didn't like to talk about it and we never discussed it. He lived and functioned and thrived in spite of what some people might have perceived to be a handicap. Speaker 1: Did his hearing impairment come before or during or after Howard University [Washington, D.C.] years? Speaker 2: After the Howard University (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) After the Howard-- Speaker 2: --years. Um-hm. Speaker 1: --okay, okay. Story_ID: 378325 Speaker 1: You said your father [Charles Baskerville, Jr.] was third generation? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Tell me about his grandfather, your great-grandfather in the first generation? Speaker 2: I didn't know my great-grandfather. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I knew my great-grandmother [sic. paternal grandmother]. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: She was a seamstress and Ruth Twilty [Ruth Twilty Baskerville] was her name, she made money sewing for white folks. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Made beautiful clothes and anything that folks wanted. Granny Ruth taught a lesson that was reinforced by my father about investing. Granny Ruth made small change sewing for white folks, did an excellent job, but she squirreled away the money that she made and she spent her later years up in Mashpee, Massachusetts, still serving as a seamstress and sewing whatever needed to sew. When Granny Ruth died, she owned her own home and had amassed a sizeable amount of money by squirreling away the money that she was able to me--to make and invest in wisely. She too, was a remarkable, remarkable woman but-- Speaker 1: Wh- why to Mashpee, Massachusetts? That's near my hometown, so that's why I was interested. Why Mashpee? Speaker 2: I don't know other than it may have given her the peace that it gave me. It was not far from a pond, a beautiful pond-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --and it was scenic and quiet and we had wonderful times there but, I don't know why she chose Mashpee (simultaneous). Story_ID: 378326 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And asking you about the third gen (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: And she-- Speaker 1: --oh, go ahead (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm sorry? Speaker 1: The third generation, your father [Charles Baskerville, Jr.] being first, going back three generations, how the Baskervilles got to Montgomery, do you know? Speaker 2: Montclair [New Jersey]. Speaker 1: Montclair, I'm sorry, yeah. Speaker 2: I don't know but I know that they went from a place called Baskerville, Virginia, in Mecklenburg County [Virginia], and we actually drove through there, there's a post office, a pr- a prison there and it's on the border of Virgilina and Virginia and North Carolina, which is interesting. Because of course, he didn't know, my mother [Marjorie Henry Baskerville] as a child, but her family was on the other side of the border in Virgilina, North Carolina. But Baskerville, Virginia is where the family hails and I don't recall going to a Baskerville family reunion but I've certainly met Baskervilles from all around and participated in email exchanges. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Most of them come from Baskerville, Virginia. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: But, wherever you came from, to get to there but I know the Baskerville, Virginia and-- Speaker 1: There's a Basker (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) then third north-- Speaker 1: --Baskerville [Viola Osborne Baskerville], she's a female, who's active in politics in Richmond, Virginia, is that a relation? Speaker 2: I don't know. I've never met her, but when I saw her name and saw that she was seeking re-election a while ago, I sent her a campaign contribution because we share the name. Speaker 1: Interesting, I'm glad I asked you that question, wonderful, wonderful. Story_ID: 378327 Speaker 1: Since we're talking about family before I get to your formal schooling and family life that you've already started. Tell me about your sibling, you have one sibling? Speaker 2: I do. Speaker 1: Tell me about her, yeah. Speaker 2: I have an identical twin and she's Doctor Renee Baskerville, she's a pediatrician, practicing in Montclair, New Jersey, and in East Orange, New Jersey. She has a private practice but she's also the school physician for the East Orange High School campus [East Orange Campus High School, East Orange, New Jersey], she's a remarkable mom of an incredible son who's a third year college student and who's thriving in his college environment. Speaker 1: Tell me his name and tell me a little bit more about him. Speaker 2: His name is Alan Kenneth Baskerville-Dockeray [Alan Baskerville-Dockeray], we call him Ali. Ali's twenty and he's at Wesleyan college [Wesleyan University, Middletown, Connecticut] in Connecticut. He's a proud scholar, he's thriving there-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --but he is, at least, equally as proud that he's a newly minted Alpha man (laughter), so, my nephew pledged Alpha [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity], he is the president of the investment club at Wesleyan and, and is bringing folks from the Wall Street investment firms to the campus and participating in activities there. Speaker 1: What kinds of things do you, you and he do together? Speaker 2: Oh, Ali and I write together. He enjoys writing and I love to write, he's a creative thinker, he loves political thought and social change and so we read and, and write and exchange information about politics. He's also interested in the constitution, we study the constitutional access issues, equal protection issues together. We also go to beaches together, we walk the dog ramp together-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --we do lots together. I, I'm blessed in that I didn't actually give birth, but I, I shared my sister's son and if I talk about him like an overly proud mom, I am. Speaker 1: Good (laughter). Well, I gathered that before we started-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --that's why I wanted-- Speaker 2: --Yeah. Speaker 1: --you to tell us a little bit-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --about that and we'll have to take a look at him in the photographs a little later on. Story_ID: 378328 Speaker 1: Let's talk about your early years. How far back can you remember in your life? What's the earliest childhood memory that you can go back to and remember? Speaker 2: May I just say something else about Renee [Renee Baskerville], my sister? Speaker 1: Oh sure, go ahead-- Speaker 2: 'Cause I went from her to Ali [Alan Baskerville-Dockeray]-- Speaker 1: --go ahead-- Speaker 2: --just because there's this-- Speaker 1: --yeah. Speaker 2: --thread that evolves and I hadn't even thought about it until we started thinking. But, in addition to serving as the pediatrician, my sisters an ad- an activist in town, my father [Charles Baskerville, Jr.] was on the board of zoning adjustments [Montclair Township Zoning Board of Adjustment] and my sister has been the community organizer for all of the zoning activities, she's also on the school board in Montclair [New Jersey], where she is the voice for equal access and equal funding for all of the schools and support for those of least advantage in terms of the few dollars. Where do you put few dollars-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --in making decisions? Do you invest more for those students who are thriving and excelling and have all of the advantages of life or those of least advantage and she's the voice for least advantage on the school board. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: And in the community again with the zoning, she's also on the Montclair neighborhood center board, so there's this passion and commitment and sense that the Baskerville legacy continues, of giving your time, your talent and your treasure back to your community and that's personified in my sister and I'm proud of her also as you can tell. Story_ID: 378329 Speaker 1: Your earliest childhood memories, how far back can you remember? And what are some of your-- Speaker 2: Geez. Speaker 1: --and what are some of your early earliest memories? Speaker 2: Early memories of at least age three. I talked about one experience going from Montclair [New Jersey] to Norfolk, Virginia, but I also have really wonderful experiences of my grandfather [Baskerville's maternal grandfather, Clifford Henry] having twin Christmas trees, and he would put together an elaborate snow storm with trains and snowmen and just, it looks like it would take, you know, weeks, perhaps months to put together this, this show for his granddaughters. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: We were born on my grandfather's birthday, and so we were the apple of my grandfather's eye and he would take us on to the, what seemed to be huge ships down at the Norfolk, Virginia, Virginia naval base [Naval Station Norfolk], and I remember times there. I remember ballet lessons, I remember music lessons, as, as early as, we were able to hold a viola which I studied, both my sister and I took piano, I studied viola, she studied cello, I studied flute, she studied oboe, my father [Charles Baskerville, Jr.] could play all the instruments and so he wanted to make sure that between his two daughters, he had at least six covered, dance lessons and so forth. But I also remember as far back as elementary school [Nishuane Elementary School, Montclair, New Jersey], having to wash dishes and before I could reach the sink, I remember having a chair pushed to the sink, so that my sister and I could wash the dishes and of course I hated washing the dishes. My father was attentive to detail in all that he did, including washing dishes and so I remember having to wash dishes and when we dried them, hold them up to the light to make sure that the dust from the drying towel didn't stick on and if it did they would come back. So, I learned about neatness and tidiness and washing dishes and folks will tell you now, that I love to cook but my mother [Marjorie Henry Baskerville] said, "Before my guest can finish eating, I'm removing and washing their plates." Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Not guilty. But I remember that. I remember vacations and time together. I remember my father being an advocate for my sister and me when we couldn't be an advocate in the school system, mostly in the school system. But also, just in terms of activities at the YWCA [Young Women's Christian Association], YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association], these were the early days of-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --of trying to open doors to coloreds and Negroes, as we were at the time. But I remember having an advocate. I re--I remember having a strong disciplinarian, I remember, although I felt loved, feeling fearful of my dad because he was a disciplinarian and while my sister and I were not spanked and our par- parents didn't believe in corpor- corporal punishment, there was the fear of the long pointed finger, there was the fear of the sense of disappointing, particularly my dad. And so, I thought I had to walk the straight and narrow and if I strayed, at least make certain that he didn't know. But I knew that no matter what I did at home, when we left the home, he was my advocate, he was my voice and when teachers would call the house for any number of things, regardless of what their story was, I had an advocate in my father. He wanted to know what my sister and I, our take on the issue and he adopted that. And he was an advocate. I remember playing games on folks with my identical twin sister, we looked alike and many people couldn't tell us apart and I remember having fun with guys in particular-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --relative to switching places and-- Speaker 1: How'd your father like that behavior? Did he, thought it was funny? Or did he? Speaker 2: Dad, dad went to great lengths to make us individuals and that's an, is--interesting point. He, our names don't rhyme, you wouldn't name us Lezli [HistoryMaker Lezli Baskerville], and Bezli, so she's Renee [Renee Baskerville] and I'm Lezli. He didn't allow us to be dressed identically and, and many people thought, oh it's so cute, put them in the same dress and the same hairdo, but he went to great lengths to make sure that we were individuals, and validated as individuals, despite the fact that people called us twins, because he couldn't say hey twin, couldn't, couldn't tell you apart, didn't know your name. But at home and wherever he was, he made certain that we were treated as individuals and validated for our individual strengths and gifts and that was so very significant. Didn't allow us to be in the same classes when we had options, but sometimes we didn't and we were. And took deliberate steps to find out, what our individual passions and desires were and nurtured them. Story_ID: 378330 Speaker 1: Speaking about not being in the same classes, or maybe sometimes you were. Tell me about when you started school, where you started elementary school? Your formal education, how old were you? What do you remember about that? Speaker 2: Yes, we went to Nishuane School [Nishuane Elementary School] in Montclair [New Jersey] which was the same elementary school my father [Charles Baskerville, Jr.] went too. Speaker 1: Could you spell that for us? Speaker 2: N-I-S-H-U-A-N-E. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Nishuane, and I think it's an Indian [Native American] name. Speaker 1: Okay thanks. Speaker 2: It's--went to elementary school there and went from Nishuane School to Hillside Middle School [Montclair, New Jersey] and that was probably seventh and eighth grade at the time. Went from there to Montclair High School [Montclair, New Jersey], all public schools where my sister [Renee Baskerville] and I excelled, loved school, I remember just looking forward to getting up and going to school every day. And I remember when, when there were national occurrences or things that would go on such that school would shut down, it was just remarkable to me, I wanted to go to school. And so, our friends were there, but I took, I had great fun, reading and exploring and learning and just being a part of all that goes along with being at school. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: And enjoying the learning and the socialization experience. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: But I also remember a time when Nishuane School was a segregated school, all black students when my sister and I were in elementary school, so we were in school at the time when the schools were being desegregated and I was a part of the early busing experience in Montclair that, again, didn't just happen it was prodded, under the leadership of Marge [Marjorie Henry Baskerville] and Charles Baskerville. And oh, Bunny Rice [Marvyn Dolores Rice] and George Rice and the Browns and great numbers of other families in town, but my family was playing the lead in that. And so, my sister and I were a part of that early experience, a couple of things happened. The busing experience, after the picketing and the shutting downs of the school and all of those types of things enabled my sister and I to go to school with a broader and more diverse group of students, I had a good experience in that regard. But on the tail end of that experience came the national Black Power movement and the sense that, as African Americans, we wanted to connect with our African ancestry. And so , in addition to reading the books that we got in school that were all about white people, my reading list is prepared by my father and my mother and other elders in the community, included all the books of, by the great African American writers of the time and I loved it. And there also became an awakening of my Africanness, and I went from [HistoryMaker] Lezli Baskerville with pressed hair and whatever was the attire of the day to Amaresha Kai [ph.], I assumed an African, and African name and I adorned African attire, I had a huge afro and started to study with Imamu Baraka [Amiri Baraka], down at the, it was CFUN, Center For A Unified Newark [sic. Committee for Unified Newark] at the time. And to dance, learning African dances and to talk and study and read Swahili and learn about African countries and learn about the, the passage from African to America and learn about my African ancestry. It did not change me, it strengthened me and made me a better person, it did not create and with me, create within me, a sense of superiority or a sense that I could not associate with white students but those that had become friends and I had large numbers of white students because we had again, gone from the segregated school to the, the busing and the middle school wherein, my classes, the vast majority of the students were white because they had-- Speaker 1: So this happened-- Speaker 2: --tracks. Speaker 1: --as you left the elementary and went to the middle school level? Speaker 2: It was in middle school. Story_ID: 378331 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now was the segregation due to housing segregation? Or was it due-- Speaker 2: Law. Speaker 1: --to deliberate, deliberate acts of the school board? Speaker 2: Yeah, both. There were laws and policies, deliberate acts in place to keep the schools a part, there were deliberate differences in municipal services, we had to sue to tear that down. There were decisions by the school board that kept black teachers and Newark [New Jersey] teachers in black neighborhoods. And then there was, there were the segregated housing patterns that kept blacks on the south end where they are in most towns in America. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: And so, if you went to your neighborhood school, with the red lining and the segregation, that was pervasive at the time, you would inevitably end up in an all-black school. But along with that were fewer public dollars, where the leftover books, where all fewer resources and so, it was not about trying to achieve integration for the sake of integration, but how do I insure that my children get the same quality of education, the same caliber of instruction, the same, resources that are had in these schools where they have more financial resources? And so, there was the busing and the integration or the bringing together of, of white students and black students. Speaker 1: Tell me about that, how did that work for you and your sister [Renee Baskerville]? What? How do you remember those years? I mean you had a very positive self-image of who you were-- Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: --and so on. But, still how did that go the first couple of years there? Speaker 2: We thrived in the environment. We expanded our friends, we had great African American friends from kindergarten through the sixth grade and, I'm, I'm actually wrong on that, it was fifth and sixth grade when we, when they're start the busing push. And the quote, unquote, integration, and I put that in quotes because-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --there's no integration, but there was a bringing together of the student of greatest advantage with those of least advantage, the white students and the African American students. So fifth and sixth grade was when that started for us. But it was an excellent experience, we expanded our friends and so my sister and I had large numbers of white friends. We spent nights at their house, and they spent night here. Now there were some who I could be friends with in the day, but their families would not permit us to come to-- Speaker 1: Did you have to-- Speaker 2: --their house. Speaker 1: --leave your neighborhood to go to the, to the school that you were assigned too? Under the-- Speaker 2: Fifth and sixth grade I, we didn't. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: They bused in some white students to Nishuane School [Nishuane Elementary School, Montclair, New Jersey]-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --for fifth and sixth. And then middle school, Hillside School [Hillside Middle School, Montclair, New Jersey], we could have bused or walked and it was a very long walk, but my sister and I mostly opted to walk and enjoyed-- Speaker 1: So it was still kind of a neighborhood experience then? Speaker 2: For-- Speaker 1: You (unclear). Speaker 2: --Hillside School? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: No? Speaker 2: That was out of neighborhood-- Speaker 1: That was? Speaker 2: --for most students-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --the bus was available, it was a long ways. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: So that was out (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I'm just thinking and comparing---- Speaker 2: --but that was a-- Speaker 1: --all of this with happened in Boston [Massachusetts]. I'm not gonna describe that, but I'm just running parallels through my own mind (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well it would be about the same time, the same types of activities that required some groups of students to be bused from their neighborhood to another neighborhood in an effort to achieve integration. And so, while our parents were picketing, boycotting, demonstrating, sitting in at boards of education meetings and so forth, the good white brothers and sisters were there as well. So it wasn't only about black folks achieving, attempting to achieve integration, pluralism, diversity, but loads and loads of, of good white folks in the community who were there side by side with the African Americans. And so, in the classrooms when we had new friends of the lighter hue, they just became our friends. Story_ID: 378332 Speaker 1: And it wasn't, and, and so we were in class with white students, and again, because there was a tracking system that ended up tracking most African Americans out of the most competitive classes. Most of our colleagues were white and so we sp- we had large numbers of white friends. Infrequently, but certainly one time, two, two times is more than any young child should experience, we were not welcomed in our friends' homes, but for the most part we were welcomed in their homes, they were welcomed in ours and they were just our friends. But this metamorphosis occurred when I decided, not that I'm not going to associate with white people, but into this friendship, I'm going to bring new information about myself and my ancestry and so that my friends who were Jewish, my friends that were Italian, my friends that were all of the other ethnic--ethnicities could celebrate their pride and their heritage and we did when I wanted to celebrate my Africanness and change my name and change my hair style and wanted the classes and all of my friends to learn more about great African Americans, but learn about Africans in Africa, then Africans in the diaspora, I lost a lot friends. In my own home, my grandparents thought, you know, "You can't continue to come to our church with your wild hairdo, with these outlandish clothes, talking this language." But it was important for me at that time, it was port- important for my sister [Renee Baskerville] and me, it was important for our family. And so we celebrated that with, with all that goes along with, with trying to learn more about your heritage, we started celebrating Kwanzaa long before Kwanzaa became common in most households. We talked about the Nguzo Saba, the seven principles, and the seven principles of cooperative economics, collective, I'm sorry, collective work and responsibility, creativity, self-determination, the Nguzo Saba that they talk about relative to Kwanzaa, but it, it's broader, the philosophy taught early on by [HistoryMaker] Maulana Karenga. But the seven principles of this connectivity, the collective work and responsibility, cooperative economics, Nia, knowing a purpose, having a strong sense of purpose and working toward it, self-determination for yourself, for your community, your family, extended family and so forth, Imani, faith, in all things remain faithful, remain grounded in faith. It was so much a part of my grounding, although no one said to me at any point in life, we are living the Nguzo Saba, that by the time I reached out and learned about the Nguzo Saba, and embraced it, it was a part of who I was, it was what was evidenced in our household with my mom [Marjorie Henry Baskerville] and my dad [Charles Baskerville, Jr.]. And so, I joined CFUN [Committee for Unified Newark], and worked in the community, continued to prod social justice and expanding opportunities but, I did lose my white friends who just couldn't embrace this person who had transformed, no less loving, no less caring, no less friendly, but now I had different priorities. Story_ID: 378333 Speaker 1: Are there any teachers along the way, upper elementary, middle school that were especially influential in your academics and your school life? Anybody stands out? Speaker 2: Loretta Hodge, she is still, she may still be a math teacher in Montclair High [Montclair High School, Montclair, New Jersey], or she may have recently retired. But, school by and large came easy for me, I did very well and I studied hard and I loved it and I thrived. But, math was just exceptionally challenging and when I was in school, they put me in something called new math, because I was doing well with the algebra one, algebra two and the other courses that you had had and then something called new math came out. And I had a challenge with new math and Mrs. Hodge would take time, my math teacher, not only with me but with any student who would come to Mrs. Hodge for assistance and invite you into her home in the evening and work with you until you got it. And when you got it, she was more excited than were you. A phenomenal person who, as I said, she either just retired or she's still in the Montclair public school systems, but she tutored me in math and she tutored my nephew, my son [Alan Baskerville-Dockery], in math when he was in high school some thirty years later. Story_ID: 377930 Speaker 1: Were there any other teachers through your elementary [Nishuane Elementary School, Montclair, New Jersey], middle [Hillside Middle School, Montclair, New Jersey] or high school years that you especially remember at this point along with Miss Hodge [Loretta Hodge]? Speaker 2: I remember a gentleman who I knew as Mr. Lee [ph.], the guidance counselor and I remember him because he symbolizes my, my independence and coming of age as an activist. Mr. Lee was the first African American guidance counselor in the Montclair public high school system and Mr. Lee was treated disparately while he was there and ultimately was in the eyes of the African American community and, and many in the white community that were supporters of, of equal opportunity and justice, he was about to be railroaded out. And so, I worked with a number of students in organizing and demonstration to, not only to keep Mr. Lee, but to bring other African Americans into the guidance counseling arena that was so critical to where we would go beyond high school. We shut the school system down, but we didn't just shut it down and sit home or go to pool halls or do things, we shut it down and we went to Bill Gray, Reverend Bill Gray [HistoryMaker William H. Gray, III] who was, not long ago the president of the United Negro College Fund [UNCF], he was a member of congress, he was a pastor [at Union Baptist Church] in Montclair [New Jersey] at the time. We went to him and asked if we could have classes in the basement of his church and he opened the church and for months our, our families and students and the community came together and demonstrated and ultimately got Mr. Lee to stay and longer term, we saw a shift in the color and the culture of the guidance office which is a gateway to what you do after school. Most African American kids were, were taught that you know, you come to high school and then you ought to think about, well make sure you take typing while you're there, and make sure you take shop and mechanics and other things. A select few were steered into college and even fewer were told that if you thrive in high school you can go to any number of colleges and universities around the country or globally, so that was critical. And we were able to get more African Americans into the guidance department, keep Mr. Lee. But began to bring other African Americans in the class, particularly African American men, we have a large number as you know of African American boys who don't necessarily have strong men figures (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What was the ethnic-- Speaker 2: --in their homes. Speaker 1: --cultural make up of-- Speaker 2: Montclair? Speaker 1: --Montclair High School [Montclair, New Jersey] at this point in time? Speaker 2: Yeah, Montclair at the time was much whiter than it is today, it was, I don't know the percentages, but overwhelmingly white at the time, it is since transformed and it's much more colored, much more diverse, sad thing was there was a Latino family or two, several in Montclair but at that time, they had to choose between identifying as black or white, there were one of a very few of a number of Latinos. And so, it wasn't until I went to Douglass College [Douglas Residential College, New Brunswick, New Jersey] with my same Latino friends that, and years later, that they could come out and be themselves and celebrate the richness of their culture and their heritage and their father's family whose name they bore and all those good things that came along with the next set of challenges about celebrating and embracing diversity and pluralism. Story_ID: 377931 Speaker 1: Given your father's [Charles Baskerville, Jr.] work and in terms of fairness and justice in his community work, given some of the things that you did to support Mr. Lee [ph.]. When you were in high school [Montclair High School, Montclair, New Jersey], did-- Speaker 2: (Cough) Sorry. Speaker 1: --you have any notion of what you wanted to do with your life, what you wanted to be? Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: Did you have an idea at that early age? Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: What was it? Speaker 2: I wanted to go to law school and be a constitutional lawyer, I wanted to be a civil rights lawyer and so determined, I knew that at age fourteen and I was so determined to do that that I accelerated and I finished a four year curriculum at the top of my class in three years so that I could go on with high school, and it wasn't just a high school, it was a time of activism and engagement. So we were doing those things. But I wanted to get to college because I wanted to go to law school, all of the fights that we had, we had to find a lawyer, find somebody who was willing to do it pro bono because we didn't have resources to hire top notch lawyers and most of the time my father was the lawyer, he wasn't a lawyer but he read and studied and knew as much as any lawyer and could go up against the town lawyers and prevail. But I wanted to be that person that could be, that could use the constitution for social justice and for access to transform the lives of those who have least among us and I knew that at age fourteen. And I started studying and focusing, I doubled up, did the four year curriculum in high school, went on to Douglass College [Douglass Residential College, New Brunswick, New Jersey] where I excelled. I did a four year curriculum in three years there, again, keeping my eye on the law school, and also aware of the finances of putting two students through undergraduate at the same time and expecting that my sister [Renee Baskerville] too would go on to graduate or professional school. Putting two students through graduate and professional school. So I doubled up and completed both the schools in, in an abbreviated time. Story_ID: 377932 Speaker 1: Where is Douglass College [Douglass Residential College, New Brunswick, New Jersey]? Speaker 2: Douglass College is in New Brunswick, New Jersey. It's the women's college, Rutgers College at the time was, it was either all male or had just transformed from being all male, but when founded Rutgers College was for men and Douglass College was its sister school, it's the largest women's college in America. Speaker 1: Douglass College? Speaker 2: Douglass College. Speaker 1: That's interesting. I didn't, had not heard about it but that doesn't mean anything. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: Well tell us what the entry to Douglass College was like for you? How do you remember your entry to college? Speaker 2: I remember a bad first few weeks when I got to Douglass College it was over enrolled and I remember sleeping in a study hall in a bunk bed with about ten other women, nine of whom were white women and me and I remember that our backgrounds and experiences, our, our cultures were different and our lifestyles were different so, that was a challenge. But I remember meeting lots of wonderful people and I remember an opportunity to serve, an opportunity to make a difference. At the time, Douglass Univers- Douglass College of Rutgers University [The State University of New Jersey, New Brunswick, New Jersey], Rutgers is the flagship university for the State of New Jersey, as the flagship, it has a responsibility for educating the broad and diverse citizenry, those who were prepared and desirous of attending. But Douglass College, Rutgers University, Rutgers College, or Cook College [George H. Cook Campus at Rutgers University, The State University of New Jersey, New Brunswick, New Jersey] nor Livingston College [Piscataway, New Jersey], all a part of Rutgers University, none of them reflected the richness or the diversities of the state. And when I went to Douglass College it was so very white in terms of student enrollment and in terms of faculty and administration, although some progress had been made by the class, classes in the '60s [1960s], before me, but certainly not enough and so I had in my blood the desire to challenge and I did, I was, became president of the Douglass black student union, and fought, challenged the system through numbers of ways; writing, I wrote for the newspaper, I wrote opinion editorials about the absence of diversity, I had meetings with administrators of the university. Story_ID: 377933 Speaker 1: But the incident that, that stands out in my mind is, we were trying to get more black faculty at, at Douglass [Douglass College; Douglass Residential College, New Brunswick, New Jersey] and I'd come up against a stone wall after fighting, Rutgers University [The State University of New Jersey, New Brunswick, New Jersey] was having a winning football, a winning basketball season, Eddie Jordan, who is now the, the coach of the Washington Wizards, and Phil Sellers, I don't know what he's doing but the, guys who had, could play, they were on a winning streak and I tried all other means of prodding access and change that I could think of including, students boycotting and students sitting down in the cafeterias, shutting down cafeterias, that didn't work. Something said to me, that because of the weight that colleges and universities or alumni put on athletics in a winning season, we need to do something around the basketball games. And so, I organized the students to walk out on the basketball court at a particular time in a game when we were, when Rutgers was on a winning streak and we got the word out across, not only Douglass' campus but Livingston [Livingston College, Piscataway, New Jersey] and Cook [Cook College; George H. Cook Campus at Rutgers University, The State University of New Jersey, New Brunswick, New Jersey] and Rutgers College and all the African American students and Latino students and others of our allies were to walk out and stop the game when I gave the signal and we did, we stopped the game and it yielded fruit. But, before it yielded fruit, I remember vividly that the basketball coach sent one of the brothers on the team to get out on the court and plead with us and to say we are brothers too, we just want to play basketball. And to me that was so sad, we were talking about broader issues of education, access and equity and making sure that students around the state who were prepared and wanted to come to be a part of the flagship institution could do that. We were talking about faculty who were trained, some of them in some of the nations, most prestigious African American, HBCUs [historically black colleges and universities] and, and white research institutions all around the country could not, did not have a job there and we wanted them there. And so we were fighting for the larger principle and they sent two of the brothers from the basketball team to plead with me, to no avail, it was unfortunate that they thought it necessary to it, to send the brothers out there. But, upshot of that was that I had a off, an audience with then, President Bloustein [Edward J. Bloustein], I was selected to serve on the deans search committee for Douglass College, we were looking for a dean, I had a lot to do with bringing Jewel Plummer Cobb, the first African American woman to serve as dean of Douglass College, to the college and university. I also was on the presidential advisory committee to look at faculty and staff and student enrollment and a number of things. Speaker 2: I was gonna ask you, amidst all of this, were there any personal repercussions for your activism and leadership? But you seem to be saying, that there were some things that, that you were able to turn around, but were there any personal consequences to your life, for being as courageous and stepping out there and being that kind of leader? Speaker 1: I think the personal consequences were that I opened a great many doors, I was prepared and I was doing everything that I was expected to do, I remember harassment, I remember being picked up by campus police and those types of things, but they were pebbles--They were not even stumbling blocks. And so, with all determination and a group of really good people-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --that were also determined to make it different. Story_ID: 377934 Speaker 1: Who were the people who (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And to expand the opportunity. Speaker 1: --gave you your greatest support through these activities? Speaker 2: There was an administrator named Wilma [ph.], Wilma will kill me for not remembering her, her name, because she was in a strategic spot and without her support and her encouragement, and her guidance, so much of what we did wouldn't have gotten done. Maxine Summey, was an administrator at Douglass College [Douglass Residential College, New Brunswick, New Jersey] when I as there, and she had been a part of the last wave of activism and so we obviously learned blessings from Wilma, we learned blessings from Maxine. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: There were guys there on Rutgers campus, who were there, Paul Robeson was, obviously had been gone for many years, but his legacy as an alum of Rutgers University [The State University of New Jersey, New Brunswick, New Jersey], I, I worked, I worked three jobs while I was putting myself through undergraduate school and being an advocate. But one of my jobs was serving as the, the, the sta--staff coordinator of the Paul Robeson Cultural Center [Piscataway, New Jersey], so you had the vision, the image, the power, the legacy of Paul Robeson, so while we couldn't touch and feel him, we could certainly read about him, we know about his mission, we know about his philosophy and those types of things. And, my father [Charles Baskerville, Jr.] was very helpful there. My father wrote me a letter every day that I was in Douglass College, every day that I was in Douglass College, the three years that I was there, he wrote a letter and it was a note of encouragement and he, he coined the phrase, he said, that was, honorable black scholar [HBS]. So before I got my B.A. and my J.D., I had HBS after my name and so my father would say something encouraging and uplifting and something to let me know that he was with me, my mom [Marjorie Henry Baskerville] was with me, you honorable black scholar, and that said to me, you know, remain honorable at all times, stay focused on scholarship and, and your goal of, of getting where you need to be academically, but struggle for justice and access and for the inclusion of African Americans and Latinos and others. And, and he was a strong source for me, it was remarkable that with all that he had going on, full time job, full time family, full time activist, he would stop at some point in the day and drop me a note. Story_ID: 377935 Speaker 1: How did your family, mother [Marjorie Henry Baskerville] and father [Charles Baskerville, Jr.] and you and your sister [Renee Baskerville] work out the financial obligations that you had to get you through undergraduate school? Did you work to, to earn that or? Speaker 2: I did. Speaker 1: Have scholarships or? Speaker 2: I didn't have a scholarship, I didn't take out a loan, I worked three jobs and Douglass College [Douglass Residential College, New Brunswick, New Jersey] was the public institution and so, that was manageable-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --with the three jobs. My sister went to Oberlin College [Oberlin, Ohio], a private college, very expensive, had some support from the family, but she had student aids, student financial aid. At the time, thank God, there was a different balance of need based student financial aid, and what they're calling, quote, unquote, merit based aid today, which I think is a false dichotomy. Because many in greatest need are also those who are great--who are mostly meritorious, but I'm not gonna go there yet. But, my sister had a job, I know she worked in the kitchen, I remember her talking about scrubbing floors and pots and whatever it would take. She also had a job off campus, so it, she was pre-med and she was pre-med, she was also an athlete, she ran track, we were both athletes in high school, I gave it up by the time I got to college, but she ran track for some of her three years, if not all of them at Oberlin College, and she worked. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Stayed focused, stayed engaged-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. What jobs did you have? You said you had three jobs (unclear). Speaker 2: I did. I worked the Paul Robeson Cultural Center [Piscataway, New Jersey], I worked for the leukemia foundation, I would make calls to solicit funds for a Leukemia Foundation and I had a student research assistantship. Story_ID: 377936 Speaker 1: But no more track there you said that, until you got to Douglass [Douglass College; Douglass Residential College, New Brunswick, New Jersey]? Speaker 2: No track, but I trekked from New Brunswick [New Jersey], into Brooklyn [New York]. I set up a food bank in Brooklyn and, and some friends of mine went down there with Reverend Herbert Daughtry [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Herbert D. Daughtry], and on the weekends setup food banks. There was a, a professor at Douglass College who was from Brooklyn and we talked about ways in which we could help and Rutgers University [The State University of New Jersey, New Brunswick, New Jersey] is an agriculture school. I wasn't taking those agricultural products but there was a connection and so, on weekends we would borrow, the professor's car, a red corvette, so it was a great thing to drive in at the time. But going to Brooklyn early, early on Saturday mornings and help with the food banks, food that would be gathered by gleaners and then we would make it available at a rate that was much more affordable than the market and so those in the community would have fresh fruits and vegetables and things that they might not get in the local grocery store and certainly at a cost that was more reasonable, the bulk purchasing. Story_ID: 377937 Speaker 1: You finished Douglass College [Douglass Residential College, New Brunswick, New Jersey], what came next right after that graduation? Speaker 2: Went right into law school. Speaker 1: Where? Speaker 2: Th- that was the agenda. Went to Howard University law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.] and could have gone to any law school that I wanted to in America-- Speaker 1: I was gonna ask-- Speaker 2: --what accepted-- Speaker 1: --you about that. Speaker 2: --was accepted at every school I applied to. Speaker 1: Why'd you go to Howard? Speaker 2: Howard was where all of the social justice and civil rights and access cases had been spawned. Howard was where Herbert Ordre Reid [Herbert O. Reid, Sr.] was a distinguished professor of constitution law was presently, or was at the time, and it was no doubt, no hesitation in my mind, but that to get the quality of education that I wanted to get, the understanding of the [U.S.] Constitution and to make it come alive for social activism and justice, I needed to be at Howard University. And I went and that was the right decision for me. Story_ID: 377938 Speaker 1: I started early, as I was learning about the [U.S.] Constitution, I was also engaged in, in applying what I'd learned immediately. And so, when I got to Douglass College [Douglass Residential College, New Brunswick, New Jersey], the Bakke case [Regents of the University of California v. Bakke, 1978], the Weber case [United Steelworkers of America v. Weber, 1979], fully loved the cases, the big landmark affirmative action cases were coming, were taking place. But also the case that, that put me on my present path, Adams versus Califano [Adams v. Califano, 1977], Brown versus Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] had been decided a long time ago, a long time ago, but the issue of the unequal higher ed system had not been brought to the fore nationally. Adams versus Califano, catapulted that issue to the front burner. It looked at the dual and unequal system in higher education, the dual and unequal system that, by the way, spawned HBCUs [historically black colleges and universities] but for the discrimination and the inability of, of black folks to go to white college and universities. The churches that started the early HBCUs would not have necessarily done that, but for the fact that the 1862 land grant institutions, the white land grant institutions had closed doors to black students or certainly an unequal application and admissions process--1892 [sic. 1890] land grants institutes would not have been started. But, I've learned, Herb Reid [Herbert O. Reid, Sr.], was representing NAFEO [National Association for Equal Opportunity in Higher Education], when I got to Howard University [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.], they association that I'm privileged to serve now as president. And as I would learn about the Constitution, he would draw me in and tell I had to help with this Adams versus Califano case. The case was looking at the dual and unequal higher ed system, we were looking particularly at thirteen states in which the public HBCUs were receiving woefully inadequate funding, funding disparate to their white counter parts. We were looking at the fact that, HBCUs and historically white colleges and universities, the publics, were not getting equal public dollars, the facilities were unequal, faculty salaries unequal. The wide range of disparities-- Speaker 2: This is post '54 [1954], though right? Speaker 1: Way post '54 [1954]. Speaker 2: Well, weren't there some cases, however though before '54 [1954]? Speaker 1: Lots-- Speaker 2: That paved the way for '54 [1954]? Speaker 1: --absolutely. Speaker 2: Well what (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It paved the way-- Speaker 2: --was some-- Speaker 1: --for '54 [1954]-- Speaker 2: --of the-- Speaker 1: --then when I'm coming along (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(Simultaneous) yeah. Speaker 1: Now we're talking '70s [1970s], but this was at a time when, when and lots of them-- Speaker 2: What was the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) that paved the way-- Speaker 2: --significance of those-- Speaker 1: --for that-- Speaker 2: --earlier higher ed cases? I mean what? Speaker 1: Well, those all, those earlier cases made it so that African American students who wanted to apply for and could go to any college in America (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh those were the admission? Speaker 1: --so by the time-- Speaker 2: --that was admission stuff? Speaker 1: --I was-- Speaker 2: That was admissions kinds of things? Speaker 1: There were admissions cases. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: There have been cases dealing with faculty, staff, administrators, so we had employment and admissions cases. But when I came along they were looking at affirmative action. Story_ID: 377939 Speaker 1: Bakke [Regents of the University of California v. Bakke, 1978], which was the early affirmative action case that's made. It was the first case on which I worked with Herb Reid [Herbert O. Reid, Sr.] that involved a medical school in California, we worked on that. But before we got to the Bakke case, and I think that was actually about my second year or so in law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.], but the first year was an appeal to equalize public dollars for public higher ed institutions, meaning bringing the funding for the HBCUs [historically black colleges and universities] up to par with the funding for the historically white colleges and universities looking at the institute--the infrastructure, looking at the libraries the research facilities the faculty and the entire gambit of areas in, in attempting to achieve parity. Mary Frances Berry was assistant secretary for Civil Rights [United States Commission on Civil Rights] at the time, had my first experience working with her, a brilliant and passionate and committed woman. But, over the course of years we were able to facilitate a consent decree that required states to take affirmative steps in, in the thirteen states we were looking at to begin to achieve parity and funding and support for HBCUs. And so, I, I was a part of that, I was part of facilitating the consent decree, I was part of monitoring for the next ten years and working with some brilliant creative passionate people. But that was my first exposure to the category of institutions called HBCUs--what they meant, how they came about and their significance in terms of successes of educating a wide range of students, the fact that they are the nations ha- at all times, been open and equal, even when other institutions weren't but have been particularly successful in educating African American students and my passion for the family of HBCUs, I became, I came to know as, as a family as a fraternity of unique equal educational opportunity institutions. Story_ID: 377940 Speaker 1: When you finished Howard law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.], you did a clerkship, did you have a clerkship? Or what, what did you do when you finished law school (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I did, I did. Speaker 1: You already worked with, with Reid [Herbert O. Reid, Sr.] right? Speaker 2: I did (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You worked with him, but then what happened? Speaker 2: I clerked in the court of appeals [District of Columbia Court of Appeals] with Judge Pryor [William C. Pryor], he'd been on the trial court [District of Columbia Superior Court] and had just been elevated to the court of appeals and had a wonderful experience and-- Speaker 1: That was where? Speaker 2: Here in the District of Columbia [Washington, D.C.]. Had an opportunity to shape a number of cases and to understand how the court of appeals worked. As I indicated, I love to write, had an opportunity to, to have some input in writing opinions which was a remarkable experience for me, did that as a stepping stone to what I knew was gonna be the civil rights law career. And, but I did it because Herb Reid said, "Need to do this," in fact, Herb Reid walked me down to the court and introduced me to Judge Pryor and then I went through the application process. Story_ID: 377941 Speaker 1: Went from there to the Lawyers' Committee for Civil Rights under Law [Washington, D.C.] and knew that I had arrived at a place that was home, that was aligned with my passions and the training that I had acquired and as, I was a part of the appellate litigation team, I worked on education access cases, I worked on employment, equal employment cases-- Speaker 2: Can you give us an example of educational case or employment case that you especially remember? Speaker 1: I, I remember having my hands in the Charlotte Mecklenburg [Swann v. Charlotte-Mecklenburg Board of Education] case as an early part of the team and I'm not suggesting by any stretch of the imagination that I was lead counsel there, I was just out of school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.], but it was fascinating to me, it was having to do with discrimination in, in Charlotte, North Carolina school systems. And I remember that because Eric Smith [Eric J. Smith], who was the superintendent of schools then, I met at another point in my life, when I had gone from lawyers committee to national legislative counsel to NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], to Capitol Hill [Washington, D.C.], to private practice of law and then the college board, I was reconnected with Eric Smith who, was at the time, the, he wasn't yet the chairperson of the board, of the College Board, but ultimately our paths reconnected there. But, I remember working on that, I remember working on municipal services in municipal services cases in, in Arkansas, where African Americans in some areas had, it was not a requirement that they have indoor plumbing and hot running water and the services that many people took for granted. There were some other things. I provided services to [U.S] Congress at the time John Conyers [HistoryMaker John Conyers, Jr.] was ranking or certainly moving up the ranks of the constitutional rights committee [Subcommittee on Civil Rights and Constitutional Rights] and we were looking at how to use the early Ku Klux Klan [KKK] legislation to provide equity, to provide, to provide access and justice. I also worked, remember working on a number of cases dealing with the assault on black elected officials, there were numerous cases because, at, at the same time that I was really getting grounded in the practice of law, the Congressional Black Caucasus, the ranks of the Congressional Black Caucasus had begun to increase because of the Voting Rights Act [Voting Rights Act of 1965], because of the Civil Rights Act of '64 [1964], because of the number of things, but the ranks were beginning to swell, not only at the con- congressional level, but at the state level. And so, we, we saw large numbers of investigations, of the cases in which the media would, would participate as judge, jury, prosecutor of African American elected officials and numbers disproportionate to their white counter parts, as their numbers were swelling, all types of things, the IRS [Internal Revenue Service] was involved, but patterns of singling out African Americans, Afri- African American elected officials for harassment that would either deter them, side track them, in some instances cause them to go out of office. But a steady drumbeat of misinformation, disinformation, allegations with no proof of, of things that would, would cast the elected officials in a false light and a bad light, with the public and their constituents, and I spent a significant amount of time working on that with Congressman Con- Conyers. Story_ID: 377942 Speaker 1: You were, of course, extremely busy, active on many fronts right after law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.]. And I guess you were strengthened by something we should have probably covered earlier but you had a medical challenge I understand while you were in law school. I think it's important that you tell us about that if you would? Speaker 2: Sure. At the end of my first year of law school, I was going into the second year, I became slow, slower in terms of pace, I began to have some changes in my movements that I didn't understand, I went to lots of doctors and I was told that I was stressed out they said that it was 'cause I was a law student, well first I, because I was female and I was patted on the head and said, "Now, now dear you're in law school and you're working three jobs, you're stressed out, cut some of this out." But I wasn't stressed out, I was thriving, I was having a wonderful time and I explained that to doctors around the country, my joints became stiff, my skin texture changed, my hair began to clump out, all kinds of changes to my body, my vision became impaired and I was going to many doctors and I got the same response. My second, I entered the second year of law school and I made it through the first semester and it was exam time, the joints in my fingers had hardened to the point that I could not hold a pencil, could not take the mid-term examinations and had to excuse myself, made it back to my residence and I collapsed, was found in front of my apartment. Ultimately I was discovered to have had a thyroid disorder that was not diagnosed in a timely manner, so my body shut down, at some point I was revived, when I woke up, I woke up in a hospital, I was blind and I was paralyzed from my waist down, stayed in the hospital for six months and this was a challenge that obviously I had not anticipated and it wo- my faith was challenged in a really big way for the first time. I had my eyes set on being this advocate and running around the country and tearing down barriers and opening opportunities. But when I remember waking up, I was in the hospital, I was blind, I was paralyzed and my first reaction was, it ain't so. I would try to get out of the bed and discover that I absolutely couldn't, I had no feeling, no movement from the waist down and couldn't see. And I thought that my life as I had anticipated was over. I perhaps even wished at that time that my life would be over. Story_ID: 377943 Speaker 1: The remarkable thing was that, with the leadership of Herb Reid [Herbert O. Reid, Sr.], I, I was his research assistant, Herb came to the hospital when it became known the state I was in and he coached me, "We need you to be a civil rights lawyer, we know you can do it, you must do it and it's not an option," and Herb started coming to the hospital daily, he was my common law teacher, he was my administrative law teacher and, and sitting with me every evening teaching me my lessons. Well shortly, I had five classes at the time, every one of my instructors from Howard University School of Law [Washington, D.C.] came to the hospital and not one night, or two nights, I was out for about a six month period in the hospital, read to me because I was unable to read, sat with me encouraged me, inspired me, they made sure that I knew and I was tested on the cases. By the end of the semester I was able to go back, I was able to take my classes, I was able to pass all of them and did exceptionally well because of these caring and loving people who lifted me. It reminds me of that--the footprints poem? It talks about the point at which you can't walk, at the point of which I literally could not walk, the faculty at Howard University School of Law lifted me and carried me and they had more faith in me than I had at that time--but that renewed my faith and my sense that I was so extremely important to the legal profession, to the movement for social justice and activism for pluralism that I had to get up out of there and if I went in a wheelchair, I still had to use my brain as long as it was in tack to, to be an agent for change and to open opportunity. But it also taught me how very special HBCUs [historically black colleges and universities] are in that experience. I don't know what have happened, what would have happened if I were at another law school, but I would venture to guess that maybe a professor that I was working for would come and visit me, but certainly not all of the professors would give their time and their talent to sit with a student and to invest in the student and encourage their student and teach the student lessons for virtually an entire semester, remarkable experience. And I was sold on Howard University and this community of HBCUs from, from that point on. Story_ID: 377944 Speaker 1: As you are telling me about these experiences, I also had looked at your entire career up until this point and I wanna flash back if I can to Charles Houston [Charles Hamilton Houston]? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Thurgood Marshall. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Robert Carter [HistoryMaker Robert L. Carter], Constance Baker Motley--in what way did their historical work inspire you? Speaker 2: They laid the foundation for all that was left to do, they inspired me Because A, I saw role models, I saw people that were passionate about things, I saw the sacrifice and what it would yield, particularly with the Constance Baker Motley and, and the Gabby McDonald [HistoryMaker Gabrielle Kirk McDonald], and the other women trailblazers who had, had opened doors, and I already talked about Mary Frances Barry, it, it said that there was a community of folks out there A, from whom I could learn, who had done it, who had done the first phases of opening the doors and prodding change. There was a community of talented gifted, remarkable people who were passionate and self-less and brilliant who had done the cases. I was privileged to have one class with Justice Marshall, not a class a, a one session, he spoke at the law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.] on one occasion when I was there and I sat in on it and ate every word. But there were these remarkable lawyers who had blazed the trails and it was up to me to pick up the torch. Speaker 1: Did you have any experiences for example with Constance Baker Motley, because she just died recently, so, so did you have, were you in her presence, did you work with her in any kind of way? Speaker 2: Only to hear from her, I was not privileged to work for her, or with her. Speaker 1: What about Robert Carter? Speaker 2: I didn't work with Bob either. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Yeah. He was on Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts] you know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Absolutely. Speaker 1: --last couple of summers, so-- Speaker 2: Absolutely-- Speaker 1: --we had a chance to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) have come to know him in, in later years. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Story_ID: 377945 Speaker 1: Let's come back now to your developing career on these many legal fronts. You want to say anything more about Herbert Reid [Herbert O. Reid, Sr.] first of all, 'cause he keeps coming up, anything more about your relationship to him? Is, is he still living? Speaker 2: No, Herb died some years ago, but it was because of his relationship, he was outside counsel to NAFEO [National Association for Equal Opportunity in Higher Education] and I started working with him, worked with him on NAFEO, worked with him on numerous cases, he's a brilliant legal scholar, earned the title of distinguished professor of constitutional law, But a statistician like no other in terms of understanding, not only the legal aspects, but the strategy that would get us to where we needed to be. A brilliant writer and I learned so very much from Herb. Speaker 1: Acting as counsel to NAFEO, under the aegis of Herb Reid, what, what did that mean? Because, what kind of work did you do for NAFEO at that point, what were you (unclear)? Speaker 2: It continued the Adams versus Califano [Adams v. Califano, 1977] with the, looking at the disparities in the public, HBCUs [historically black colleges and universities] and the public historically white colleges and universities, but looked at a range of individual challenges from the legal perspective, isolated cases where, where states, the actions of states were egregious and we needed to intervene. I also had an opportunity to work with some of our presidents, the HBCU presidents who were having challenges, based on their decision to give of their time and their talent to serve at the helm of an HBCU. In a climate in which HBCUs were not necessarily understood and certainly were not embraced, nor did they at any time receive anything resembling equity, parity or fair share of federal resources. And so we spent a lot of time on fair share types of cases. Story_ID: 377946 Speaker 1: When was the, I think it was a federal decision, that talked about a unitary system. You had your HBCs [historically black colleges and universities (HBCUs)] public and you had your white public institutions. Wasn't there a major decision that required that to, to end? And when was that and where were you involved in all of that? Speaker 2: No, actually Adams [Adams v. Califano, 1977] was, although some folks would have liked to, to have seen the end result, the phasing out of HBCUs and historically white colleges and universities, but what they were supposed to do was to strengthened these institutions that had, at all times, been equal educational opportunity institutions, to make them so they were attractive to any and all students who wanted to excel in a particular dis--disciplines so that they had, and that required making a fair and equitable investment in the institutions. And so it was to, to equalize and make more competitive the institutions that had not had a fair share of public dollars or private dollars for that matter, but it's public institutions had been short changed by (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So it wasn't a-- Speaker 2: --state legislators. Speaker 1: It wasn't a situation and condition where you're gonna have an HBC [historically black college] that would vanish then, it would be? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Dissolved? Speaker 2: There was lots of discussion around that at the time and again there were those who wanted to see them disappear and there were those that, some today who want to see them disappear and I think that's because they don't understand the unique mission of HBCUs. People ask all the time, are not HBCUs relics of time gone by and aren't these schools for black people kind of a segregationist thing? And why would you want to talk about that when you so obviously feel passionate about pluralism and diversity and celebrating the richness of the cultures and experiences of all. HBCUs are not for black students only, HBCUs are the quintessential equal educational opportunity institutions. They are on average, 15 percent diverse among student bodies, 30 percent among faculty. The doors have always been open to any and everybody wanting an education on a diverse campus that is grounded in many of the African American traditions and the things that make our families strong, that make our communities strong. People talk about family values, communities' values, the African American community, you have the African American family, the African American church, and HBCUs. My, my, one of the challenges I have is helping the public to understand that not only should, is there a need for HBCUs today, but perhaps more than ever, at a time when the nation is becoming more diverse, when you have more black and brown and traditionally underserved students, but more low income white families. More students who want to achieve education and diversity, HBCUs would be a good choice for them for African American students, it's a choice because the results are significantly better than in most other institutions in America, HBCUs we're only enrolling about 18 percent of African American students going to college today but we're graduating 30 percent, that means we're graduating someone else's students, the students that are going elsewhere had they come to one of our institutions would have been out 18 and 30 percent out in the sciences, technology, engineering and mathematics in the growth areas in health professions, those areas that are in high need, we are graduating 40 percent in the STEM areas, science, technology, engineering and mathematics. We're graduating 50 percent of African Americans that go on to be teachers, 50 percent of African Americans that are faculty members in white institutions have come from an HBCU. So, where there's a need, as we talk about a national need for more teachers, a national need for more health professional, HBCUs are doing a better job than any other institutions, save a few Ivy League institutions, in turning out African American students certainly in turning out volumes of them, if we're graduating 50 percent of African Americans in the teaching profession with four year degrees and 50--40 percent in the STEM areas. So our success record speaks for itself and says why they should continue and again, this misinformation, that because they are historically black, that is a legal term a legislative term that speaks to the mission of the institutions, they are the quintessential equal educational opportunity institution and anyone who wants to thrive in a diverse environment should explore one of our institutions. The institutions themselves are richly diverse, there's no one size fits all, we have major research institutions, we have small institutions, we have land grant institutions, we have the entire gamut, two year and four year. Story_ID: 377947 Speaker 1: Dr. Fred Humphries [HistoryMaker Frederick Humphries] who preceded you as the president and CEO of NAFEO [National Association for Equal Opportunity in Higher Education]-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --in 1985, as you know, he became the president of Tennessee State University [Nashville, Tennessee]-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and that very year, he faced the challenge of bringing those two schools together in terms of, of crossing the students, the opportunities. Can you comment on that and, and he said that was a big challenge and he had to find a way of balancing that because I think he felt that somehow TSU [Tennessee State University] was gonna get the short end of it, are you familiar with that situation at all? Speaker 2: I'm familiar-- Speaker 1: Can you comment? Speaker 2: --but I was not intimately involved in that battle. And so, Fred's words should speak for themselves on that. Speaker 1: Any other sit- similar situations that you were closer to? Speaker 2: Gosh. Speaker 1: Wh- were they, were they (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, yeah I was responsible for, at the time when I was outside counsel in NAFEO, looking at the Maryland case, the institutions, the Louisiana institutions, Mississippi, Florida, North Carolina, so I saw the efforts in, I'd say about eight states. The patterns at the time were such that, when we started talking about parity and strengthening HBCUs [historically black colleges and universities], there were efforts to, to take courses that had, that were thriving on HBCU campuses and replicate them on white institutional campuses. There were efforts to, to swallow up, and the question is asked, "Well if we've gotta do all this, why do we even need to have an HBCU? Why don't we just bring them under, bring the historically white institution and historically black institution under one tent, merge them, merge the faculty?" And so doing, it seemed clear that the soul of the HBCUs would be lost, the things that make our institutions unique and successful, have to do with their smaller size, their nurturing environment, their having in the classrooms, persons who, who believe passionately in the abilities of all students, but especially students who may not have been validated or supported in their PK [pre-kindergarten] - 12 [twelfth grade] system. Some who may need to play catch up and then excel and go on in their respective fields. But it would have changed the cultural makeup and the sense of community that you get in most of our institutions that are, that are smaller in nurturing, although some certainly are very large. And Tennessee State is not one of the smaller ones (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Story_ID: 377948 Speaker 1: But that was going on across the country, ironically it's going on today, NAFEO [National Association for Equal Opportunity in Higher Education] is presently looking at six states in which we have similar tactics all over again. So, we are now thirty years later? But we're seeing the pattern resurface, most, most of the states that were under have come out of, of the first consent decree, some are under other decrees, but we're seeing in the backyard of Savannah State [Savannah State University, Savannah, Georgia] for example, Armstrong college [Armstrong State University, Savannah, Georgia] is opening and some of the areas that Savannah State is now, in which Savannah State is excelling, they are replicating courses, and pulling from the same student body and so we've gotta look at that closely. In Maryland recently with Morgan State University [Baltimore, Maryland] and Towson State [Towson University, Towson, Maryland], Morgan State is thriving under the strong and able leadership of Earl Richardson [HistoryMaker Earl S. Richardson], has established itself as, as leading in, in its engineering program and business programs and a wide range of programs. But what you see now is Towson State, that is in the same service area, being permitted to replicate some of those courses in violation of the letter and the spirit of the consent to create, I would say, we're investigating that, however, we see in Louisiana, where Southern University, New Orleans [Southern University at New Orleans, New Orleans, Louisiana] was hit by Katrina [Hurricane Katrina], Southern University in New Orleans [Louisiana] was the only public institution in New Orleans that serviced mostly low income, first generation students from the 9th Ward [New Orleans, Louisiana]. It was a commuter college, the students were older there, in the aftermath of Katrina, state legislator and the governor's office have explored and maybe exploring to this day the possibility of transforming SUNO [Southern University at New Orleans], to become a two year college. To do this will deny large numbers of students access to the quality four year education that they're getting. They cannot, many of them cannot afford tuition at a private school, we have Xavier [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana] there, we have Dillard [Dillard University, New Orleans, Louisiana], they're outstanding private institutions that are serving students from around the country and doing an outstanding job, but there's no comparison between the tuition that you pay there, the tuition that you pay there. There are the other private and public institutions but they're looking at this as an opportunity to close SUNO, and so we're fighting that battle. If you, six other states, when we look at them, we're seeing the same pattern, it's even, either replicating courses, woefully inadequate resources, or trying to transform them, put them out of business, merge all over again. Story_ID: 377949 Speaker 1: Ironically, it's happening at a time when the research shows that some of our flagship institutions are disengaging from educating the growing populations of America. Tom Mortenson, a respected higher ed [education] researcher, who was at the Pell Institute [Pell Institute for the Study of Opportunity in Higher Education, Washington, D.C.], produced a report last year that that talked about the disengagement of the flagship institutions. He did a survey of flagship institutions and these are your majority white research institutions that get the disproportionate research dollars and state dollars, and other dollars. But he did a survey of all of the states' flagship institutions and found that at this time when the states are becoming more black and more brown--they're disengaging in educating those populations. Well if you do that, the, the ultimate result is going to be that we're not gonna remain competitive as a nation. If you close the doors to educational opportunity to the growing populations and all the data suggest that the growing, in order to be competitive, we've gotta educate more of those who've been traditionally underserved. If you're closing the doors, then we will have an ignorant population, we will not be able to, to compete globally. The beauty is that in all of those states that were cited, we have HBCUs [historically black colleges and universities] that are making remarkable strides and having successes that educating these growing populations and that should be an option, but they shouldn't be an option in a vacuum. What has also suggested is that public dollars should be invested in these institutions proportionate to the numbers of high need students that they're educating. That would mean if our HBCUs are educating disproportionate numbers of low income, first generation traditionally underserved students, they should serve, they should receive disproportionate amounts of the public and private dollars. And so, that's a current issue, it's a battle that is cyclical, we did it then, we're having to do it some thirty years later. Story_ID: 377950 Speaker 1: You have been a very, very strong advocate and a voice for affirmative action, you led a team (cough)--did you lead a team before the court dealing with a case called Grutter versus Bel- Bollinger [Grutter v. Bollinger, 2003]? Speaker 2: Bollinger. Speaker 1: Could you tell us what (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: --that case was and how you were involved? Is that the affirmative action case or? Speaker 2: Yes, the last term, but know, I wish I did. There were a team of able lawyers, I, in my capacity at the College Board, I was privileged to lead the College Board team in weighing in, in support of affirmative action in admissions. The College Board is nationally respected for its tools and services, research to prepare, inspire and connect students to college and opportunity, weighed in as they should. But, as the owner of admissions tools, I think many looked toward them to say something about admissions policy and tried to create a dichotomy, between the SAT scores and the standardized test and affirmative action and somehow pit them against each other. But quite frankly, they're not at all at odds, in fact when you, when you, College Board took the position that the best approach toward considering students for admissions is to do a holistic approach to look at those things that are, are standard and uniform, such as some standardized tests. But that certainly that should not be the sole criteria that it should be viewed along with students experiences with, with extracurricular work with family involvement, with languages that they bring with the wide range of things, and that if we value diversity as a nation, then the achievement of diversity, but not diversity itself, but those things that go along with diversity in terms of dialogs and experiences and in, enriching the educational environment must be considered. So, the College Board weighed in and prepared a brief in-- Speaker 1: That's (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) support of-- Speaker 1: --so that's what-- Speaker 2: --affirmative action. Speaker 1: --you were involved with that? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Was that? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: That's what I meant, okay, I'm sorry. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: I had a little bit off on that. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Your friend of the court brief, is that? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: What would you call? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 377951 Speaker 1: Before we come to your College Board years, let me back up if I can, you talk a little bit about being counsel to NAFEO [National Association for Equal Opportunity in Higher Education]. Tell me also about your work with the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], the national legislative counsel for NAACP? Speaker 2: While I was working at the Lawyers' Committee for Civil Rights under Law [Washington, D.C.], for about 10, 11, 12 hours a day, in the evenings I was volunteering to serve as a volunteer counsel to NAACP. Althea T.L. Simmons was head of the Washington [D.C.] bureau at the time, a woman who was steeped in the Civil Rights Movement, who had grown up in the NAACP, just legendary, and I was privileged to go over in the evenings after my lawyers committee work and volunteer for her. As I was doing that, Frank Polehouse [ph.], who had served as national legislative counsel for years died and Benjamin Hooks [HistoryMaker Reverend Benjamin Hooks] who was the president of association at the time asked me to join the association as their national legislative counsel and I was privileged to do that. I was, when I was working with Althea and Mr. Hooks in the evening, Mr. Hooks was tasked to write the national agenda, the social justice agenda for the nation. Jimmy Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] was president and they had a blue ribbon panel of blue ribbon commission that was going to develop the policy agenda on a wide number of issues. Mr. Hooks in his capacity as chair of the leadership conference on civil rights [Leadership Conference on Civil and Human Rights] was asked to facilitate the drafting of that platform. And so, I was there and delighted to join the team in drafting the civil rights agenda for the nation, it was a singularly enriching experience and I did that. My passion, my research skills, my writing skills and advocacy skills were brought to the attention of Mr. Hooks and Ms. Simmons, or Dr. Hooks, I'm sorry. In that manner, and then I went on to serve as national legislative counsel. By the time I got in, the voting rights act was about to come up for renewal, and so my three years at the NAACP, I did a number of things, added teeth, enforcement teeth to the Fair Housing Act [Fair Housing Act of 1968], added provisions to strengthen the Civil Rights Act of '64 [1964], but the experience that I think was most enriching and most challenging and the one that I invested the most time on was the extension and the expansion of the Voting Rights Act [Voting Rights Act of 1965], which, as you know, we just extended in it and expanded again this past summer. But the battle then was, was a hard battle and there were many who, argued that the Voting Rights Act had outlived it's, it's time. Th- they said we have these black elected officials and, people, there are no more poll taxes, and our task was to document from around the country all of the egregious voting violations that remained manifest and we did that. And then the shape legislation, that that would ensure the expansion of those provisions, the review provisions by the justice department, we added language minority provisions that it, therefore had not been in place, to make sure that those or whom English may not be their first language are protected and don't have their precious right to vote infringed. And it was a great experience. Story_ID: 378334 Speaker 1: The Baskerville Group. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Ten years of your life? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: What was The Baskerville Group and what did you do? Speaker 2: The Baskerville Group was a group of friends who had worked together in, on campaigns, and I worked on twenty-four congressional races and ten senate races and three presidential races and I had colleagues that had become friends that were either the Joint Center for Political and Economic Studies [Washington, D.C.], they were on the Hill [Capitol Hill, Washington, D.C], we worked in campaigns who came together to start a collective that would provide legal and legislative services to clients and worked on a lot of campaigns together through that, policy and issues campaign as well as political campaigns (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Is this a law firm or not? Speaker 2: It was a legal and legislative services collective. Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: It was a collective, it was not a firm but yes, some of our practice was law, mine was, but everyone all the associates were not lawyers so we did some legal, I did legal work and those who are legal, were lawyers are--and then others did lobbying. We represented clients on the Hill, we represented clients before state legislative bodies (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) For example. Speaker 2: --a large number of higher ed institutions, some of which are now parts of NAFEO [National Association for Equal Opportunity in Higher Education], many that aren't. We represent municipalities, generally municipalities that had at least 10, 15 percent African American population and trying to help them get greater resources, federal resources, foundation resources, other resources, some corporations. Speaker 1: Such as? Speaker 2: Well, I don't wanna talk clients-- Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: --but (laughter). Speaker 1: Nonprofits? Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: Yeah? Speaker 2: Absolutely Speaker 1: Uh-huh. That was a ten year, roughly a ten year engagement was it? Speaker 2: It was. Speaker 1: As I understand it-- Speaker 2: It was. Speaker 1: --yeah. Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: So, it was successful then, I would say, it lasted-- Speaker 2: It was successful in many regards, it was successful because I worked with a group of folks that I adored, we worked well together, we played well off of each other in terms of strengths and so forth. It was successful because we did a lot of good, and it was successful because we did moderately well at it financially. We were certainly able to maintain the things we needed to maintain and some things beyond need. Speaker 1: You were based here in Washington [D.C.] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In Washington, D.C. Speaker 1: But you and your work was national in scope? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Are you still in touch with these colleagues and-- Speaker 2: I am. Speaker 1: --partners? Speaker 2: One of them just died, a dear, a brilliant political scientist, Dr. Linda Williams [Linda Faye Williams], who we buried last week, had been in the poli sci department at Howard University [Washington, D.C.], and a powerhouse at the Joint Center for Political and Economic Studies, and her last full time service was at the University of Maryland, College Park [Maryland]. Also she, she also worked at the Congressional Black Caucus Foundation [CBCF] where she did their newsletter and for us did research and writing and polling, a brilliant woman. But, the rest of us are here and doing rewarding things. Speaker 1: What were some of your major quote assignments, or things that you took on as a member of this group [The Baskerville Group]? What, what were some of the lead things that you did? Speaker 2: I, I did a lot of higher ed access, I also shaped diversity plans for municipalities, municipalities whose fire department, police departments were seeking to attain diversity. I worked with them to shape them or to monitor them or to respond to ongoing litigation. Was called in as a troubleshooter when some major corporations got in trouble in their advertising relative to the use of language or the portraying of images of African Americans. So, I did a lot of diversity counseling, developing diversity plans and the like. And then represented some municipalities and then some elected officials. Story_ID: 378335 Speaker 1: I know you don't wanna mention clients-- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: --so, I'll just mention one, if you wanna-- Speaker 2: Oh no (laughter). Speaker 1: --go on we can. Congressional Black Caucus, did I hear you refer? Speaker 2: Well, no. Actually what I did with them was the Congressional Black Caucus had to leave the Hill [Capitol Hill, Washington, D.C.] at a time certain, I was working with Congressman Walter Fauntroy [HistoryMaker Reverend Walter Fauntroy] for the District of Columbia [Washington, D.C.], and a group of members of the Congressional Black Caucus started something called the National Black Leadership Roundtable. The roundtable was their advocacy and national mobilization arm and I was privileged to serve as the first executive director for the National Black Leadership Roundtable. And that was an association of the heads of 350 African American associations spanning the gambit from international associations, media associations, political teachers, blacks in business, and oh, just a wide range, blacks in prison. So, in twenty-one categories, heads of an organizations, the social and Greek letter organization heads were there, the faith organization heads were there. It was a table at which the heads of all of these national organizations came together to agree on a common agenda and then to collectively go after it and-- Speaker 1: Well was this (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) the agenda was-- Speaker 1: --work in, in the-- Speaker 2: --political. Speaker 1: --context of The Baskerville Group or is this a separate? Speaker 2: No. This was, I was executive director of the National Black Leadership Roundtable, apart from the Baskerville. Speaker 1: That's simultaneous? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay, and what were your major achievements had-- Speaker 2: There? Speaker 1: --heading the National Black Labor? Speaker 2: Black Leadership Roundtable (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Leadership Roundtable. What did you think you accomplished there? What was your role? Speaker 2: We worked on and led the efforts and such things as the, the Martin Luther King holiday bill [H.R. 3706 of 1983], under the leadership of John Conyers [HistoryMaker John Conyers, Jr.], we mobilized the community. What the strength of the Black Leadership Roundtable was that all of these 350 national organizations representing hundreds of thousands of African Americans, each membership association had to break down its membership by congressional district. So if you have, if you are the Panhellenic Council [National Panhellenic Council], and you represent hundreds of thousands of people, each grouping, each one of the seven historically black soc- fraror- sororities and fraternities, would break down their congressional district and so we knew there were X number of Deltas [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority], or X number of AKA's [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority] in any congressional district. We could call on them through this network so it, we built a vast network of con--connected African Americans who we could call on to impact public policy or outcomes in elections where the African American community made the margin of victory. So, we did the Martin Luther King holiday, we spawned the effort to the Free South Africa effort. Randall Robinson who was then, the head of TransAfrica [TransAfrica Forum; TransAfrica], was a member of the National Black Leadership Roundtable. We brought the idea before the body and the body agreed that all the 350 national organizations were gonna line up and so when you see pictures of folks going to jail with their hands behind their backs and you see students coming out every day and on and on and on, that was done TransAfrica, as the lead association, led the coordination. But through the National Black Leadership Roundtable, the entire community was connected. Whether you are entertainers and athletes, they were represented on the roundtable or students, student bodies, all a part of the roundtable they were plugged in. We also worked on the twenty-four congressional races that I referenced earlier, ten senate races, presidential races, and under Parren Mitchell's [HistoryMaker Parren J. Mitchell, III] leadership, a former congressman, Parren Mitchell, we put together a collaborative economic empowerment plan that was designed to have African Americans amass wealth and then channel it into an investment program that we did for a number of years. The potential was tremendous, unfortunately we didn't realize the potential of it, but learned some good lessons and some iterations of that effort are being carried on. Story_ID: 378336 Speaker 1: The Baskerville Group had some longevity to it as you said, and good success, did it completely dissolve or did it translate into, to something else or? Speaker 2: It dissolved. Speaker 1: It dissolved. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Any particular reason that's significant to know or? Speaker 2: Well, I guess after ten years we each knew everything that everybody else knew, and we wanted knew challenges. Certainly for me, the things that I was doing, that I was doing well, I felt comfortable I could do anywhere and I needed a new challenge. I think most of us wanted a new challenge, one of my colleagues decided that she was going into a new career, that the public policy wasn't what she wanted and she's now in, in service in the gerontological field, and after now having done that, for the next almost ten years, it's, it's preparing for yet another career. So, I think that after you do something and max out, there's a, a desire to do something on another front. Story_ID: 378337 Speaker 1: So where did you find your new challenge? Speaker 2: Where did I go from The Baskerville Group? Was it the College Board? Yeah. Speaker 1: Nineteen ninety-nine, [1999], roughly, 2000? Speaker 2: Was it then? Speaker 1: Yeah I think so. Speaker 2: Okay (laughter). Speaker 1: Tell us about that, your, your position there and what that challenge was and what your work entailed. Speaker 2: Okay. I was the vice president for government relations and as such, I was tasked to establish the, the policy agenda and advance the policy agenda for the College Board, both at the national level and, and before state legislative bodies with a very able team of, of state staff persons. But I was also over their equity initiative, there was the sense that as with all great institutions and associations, there should be affirmative steps to promote throughout the association and externally among all that the association serves, diversity and equity. And so, we sought to and, and did build an equity initiative. I also oversaw the TRiO programs, the College Board has an Education Opportunity Center [Educational Opportunity Center] under the leadership of the very able and dynamic Pamela Lamberth, here in Washington [D.C.], expanding education opportunity mostly for adults, adults who for whatever reason may not have gotten the education they want to, but are coming back and being prepared, inspired and connected to college. We also had an Upward Bound program that is still thriving and, and that's working with your middle and high school students to prepare them for the rigors of college work, to inspire them, to help them find the resources to go on to college and I was over that. Speaker 1: That Upward Bound program was not the same as the Great Society Upward Bound program of the '60s [1960s], was it? Or was it? Didn't we have an Upward Bound program that-- Speaker 2: As a part-- Speaker 1: --came out? Speaker 2: --of the TRiO program. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: I don't know which one you're referencing, but it is, it's, it's been around as part of the, there were initially three programs designed to expand education access success. There was the Upward Bound program, that was motivational and enrichment program for middle and high school students, there were the Education Opportunity Centers and that's the one that, that focuses on, on higher education, then there's student search services for those who are in college, support services for students in college, and they've since expanded to a large, larger number than three, there's the Ron McNair Program [Ronald E. McNair Postbaccalaureate Achievement Program] and they've all expanded. But the goal of all the programs are to expand opportunity for low income, first generation and traditionally underserved students. So, it's about embracing them at the different walks of their education preparation, making sure that they have the supports that they need. Making sure that they have information that they need to plan for college, and to persist and to graduate from college. Story_ID: 378338 Speaker 1: All of your work, including working for the College Board, you did a great deal of traveling. Speaker 2: I have. Speaker 1: And, I guess you still do? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Do you like to travel? Speaker 2: I do. Not as much as I used to because of the security measures and all the hassles that go along with being shake down and being pat down and all of that. But for me I've been able to thrive in Washington, D.C. by getting out and staying connected with those in the hinterlands, I think that any advocate must stay connected with his or her base in order to well represent them and my base, the persons that I'm most interested in representing and that I've spent my life representing are those of least advantage, those without a voice and for me, to effectively articulate a case on behalf of the voice that's in those who have been traditionally locked out. I need to stay connected, find out what are the issues, talk with the people, and also let them know that I'm representing them, that I am a voice for them, that I'm here. And so, I love staying connected, I love meeting new people and representing them. Speaker 1: Well, you really are connected in representing a lot of people in your present position that you talked about earlier-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --in the interview. Story_ID: 378339 Speaker 1: You moved from the College Board to NAFEO [National Association for Equal Opportunity in Higher Education]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Why did you make that move, why did you leave the College Board? Speaker 2: I had actually decided to go back into private practice, my nephew/son [Alan Baskerville-Dockeray] was on his way to college and I needed to make some other financial decisions and one of my clients was NAFEO. I was privileged to be representing-- Speaker 1: 'Cause you, as you said-- Speaker 2: --them again. Speaker 1: --before, yeah. Speaker 2: I had represented them before and came back and then they had a transition in leadership and I was just humbled to be asked by the board of directors to serve as the president and CEO of NAFEO, the association where I got my footing, so it's a great honor. Story_ID: 378340 Speaker 1: For people's education, can you give us a little history of NAFEO [National Association for Equal Opportunity in Higher Education]? Who started it, when, why? Speaker 2: Sure. NAFEO started in 1969, by a number of HBCU [historically black colleges and universities] presidents for the purpose of giving voice to America's black colleges and universities. It's, since its inception it has served as a voice for black colleges before the, for, before [U.S.] Congress and state legislative bodies, before the judiciary, for, before administrative and executive bodies. It has annually put on a national conference on blacks in higher ed to bring people together, not only black persons but those who are interested in and working in and with and for blacks in higher ed, to talk about issues of the day, to talk about resources and how do access those resources? Talk about building the capacity of HBCUs and building strengthening and supporting blacks in higher ed wherever they are. So, if you are an African American and you're serving in a majority institution, you would have a voice and a community at NAFEO. Our primary thrust is to, to bring resources to the HBCUs and predominately black colleges and institutions to strengthen them, to help them to build capacity, to support the executive leadership, also to strengthen the other executives. So, we have leadership development institute for deans, we have leadership development training programs for business officers and finance officers and others who are in front line positions who come into contact with students and, and those areas where we generally, if we fall short in accreditation, ha- to have challenges, helping them to overcome them and position, connecting them on three sources but educating those that are in positions with resources about the strengths, the accomplishments, the challenges, the needs of the HBCUs. The remarkable past, the tremendous presence and the potential and that's what we try to do. Story_ID: 378341 Speaker 1: What immediate challenges were you confronted with when you assumed the position of president and CEO? You walk into this brand new position (unclear), but what challenges were out there for you? Speaker 2: Internal or external? Speaker 1: Both. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well internal, in, the internal challenges were that it was an association in transition and it was at a point where it had grown from 1969 to 2004, when I assumed the helm? So, the board wanted me to re-exam the infrastructure, to look at the, the policies with the board to look at practices of all of the infrastructure, whether it was technology, employment, pers- procedures and policies and all of those things. So, to do a lot of audits of personnel, technology, finance, program, all the programs and, and, and to revisit with the board, how can we strengthen NAFEO [National Association for Equal Opportunity in Higher Education]? Has it grown so large and is it trying to do so many things that we need to more narrowly focus and identify one, two, three things that will do better than any association and focus on them? Or will we continue to do a wide range of things? And the board decided that it wanted to more narrowly focus on five things that they thought were of, of most importance as a collective at this point to do that, and asked me to bring in a team that would make that happen. While we were doing that, higher ed reauthorization was upon us and in the Higher Education Act [Higher Education Act of 1965], in Title III B, there's a provision that provides resources for HBCUs [historically black colleges and universities], it is critically important to the survival and progress of HBCUs. And so, while I was transitioning in, I needed to jump in and, and be on top of that act, the higher ed reauthorization, we were not only seeking to maintain the Title III B support for historically black colleges, but because the other part of the NAFEO membership are the predominately black institutions, the board decided that for the first time, we should seek to include in the higher ed act set aside and support for predominately black institutions, not under the same section as HBCUs but in its own provision to make sure that those institutions that are educating disproportionate numbers of African American students have federal resources as well as all of the others that are available. So, that was imminent. The next cycle, cycle of the voting rights, reauthor- reauthorization was coming up and it's my position and the position of NAFEO that that is vitally important because whoever is in office will determine, as they say, who gets how much of what, when, where, how, and why. And in that what, when, where, how and why, is to what extent HBCUs would be supported with public dollars. Whether they are friends of HBCUs in [U.S.] Congress, whether they are friends of HBCUs in executive mansions at the state level and in, and in the state legislatures, so we wanted to be in on that and, and have the voice of the black college community heard on that and as we were planning for that and then there was a technology act, wireless and digital technology act that would, would strengthen the ability of HBCUs and predominately black colleges and universities who, as well as Hispanic serving institutions to deliver technology, to have cutting edge technology on their campuses, but also, to train faculty and, and how to train others in technology. Story_ID: 378342 Speaker 1: As that was going on, Katrina [Hurricane Katrina] hit. We did our strategic planning, we were poised, we were moving forward on the legislative front and Katrina hit, Katrina hit HBCUs [historically black colleges and universities] in, in New Orleans [Louisiana], it had hit our institutions in Mississippi, one or two institutions in Alabama, but did some terrible damage in Mitha- Mississippi and wreaked havoc on our institutions in New Orleans. So, we shifted gears, we called on the HBCU community to immediately receive the students who were displaced by Katrina, thousands of them from Dillard [Dillard University, New Orleans, Louisiana], SUNO [Southern University at New Orleans, New Orleans, Louisiana] and Xavier [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana], we had to find a new home base for them and a home base that was similar to the campus from which they came, a home base that would receive them and train them and return them to their, their home, host institution as soon as they were ready to receive them. All of our institutions responded in the affirmative and agreed to take students immediately or to otherwise be supportive, those who were not able to take students offered other kinds of vitally needed support. As the federal voice for these institutions, we went immediately to the [U.S.] Department of Education, we went to HUD [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development], we went to the National Institute of Minority Health [National Institute on Minority Health and Health Disparities], we went to every agency that we could think of that had resources and asked them if they could revisit there, their allocation of resources so that we can get some dollars to particularly the HBCUs that were hit in Mississippi and then the line shared with those that were actually shut down for an extended time period in Louisiana, because our institutions unlike any others, they were certainly other higher education institutions. But because their endowments are so small, because their budgets are so small, because they're already stretched to the limits, they didn't have the wealth of resources at hand to even begin to do this, they were shut down with no phones, no dorms, no basics that would allow them to, to thrive immediately. And so, we went into overdrive to make sure that all of the resources that we could amass, whether they were public or private, we went to the foundations, we went to corporations were channeled down and so many entities were so very helpful. But it is in that climate that I talked earlier about SUNO, this commuter college that, that suddenly finds itself in the position of, of after it got over the initial hump and, and students who were displaced, adult students with children. So their children are out of school--wanting to come back and recognizing in the middle of all of this, that education was the key to their thriving and the, possibly the key to their overcoming this immediate circumstance, so two thousand students immediately wanted to come back to school. In order to do that, SUNO that had been a commuter college, had to immediately ramp up and establish a residential program, it had been commuter and now it had to provide housing for the students. Not only housing for the students but the, the students' children because they had mostly an adult population. So, for the first time they're having to have a campus life, residential life, meals, all of those things that go along with it and the schools, many of the schools are still not open for their kids in New Orleans, so what do you do with the kids? You then have to come up with an education alternative for the kids so that the parents can, can continue to pursue their education. But because of remarkable people, all around the country, the institutions are all up, they are on sure footing and, and rebuilding. There's still tremendous need and we're going to continue to, to make the case for an investment in SUNO, Dillard and Xavier, and hope that people recognize an investment in these institutions is not just an investment in them. If you invest in Xavier, you're investing in, in diversity in the health professions because diversity, because Xavier trains so many persons in the health profession. If you invest in SUNO, you're investing in diversity in the teaching profession, not only in, in Louisiana, but elsewhere, SUNO has one of the only, if not the only urban education program in the State of Louisiana and it's preparing a number of, disproportionate numbers of students that are going into urban areas as teachers and teaching our children. So, it's cyclical in terms of achieving diversity on the work end, the work force end, this pipe line from HBCUs into wide range of graduate and professional programs and then to the work force is critical, critical, if you cut that off, and if you cut it off in the areas where we're producing 40 percent in the STEM [science, technology, engineering and math] areas or 50 percent in the teaching areas, you have a non-diverse work force and you have just incredibly wasted human talent. And so, we put a lot of time and energy in this, strengthening those institutions, while not ignoring the ongoing needs of all of our other institutions. Story_ID: 378366 Speaker 1: It's well documented that I think you have really challenged the foes and the opponents of affirmative action-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --over a number of decades and thinking about diversity, affirmative action is very important for diversity-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Would you tell me a little bit about why affirmative action is necessary today? And I have a two part question-- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: --I guess I can do the second part. Are there any affirmative action issues in cases coming up before the [U.S.] Supreme Court presently or in the near future that we should know about? Speaker 2: I'm sure there are, but having not focused on that in the last six months, I can't tell you about them. Speaker 1: You mean even all the focus on Katrina [Hurricane Katrina]? Speaker 2: I'm focusing on Katrina and, and-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --survival of the HBCUs [historically black colleges and universities] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 2: --in the Higher Ed Act [Higher Education Act of 1965] and so forth. I know there is the referendum in, in Michigan, I can't tell you the language of it, that'll be on the ballot tomorrow relative to affirmative action and I know there are a couple of challenges to affirmative action. But I think it's important that we not brand everything affirmative action that deals with expanding opportunities, I think one of the reasons that we lost some ground with affirmative action is that we, those of us who, who helped to shape the affirmative action allowed others, by and large, folds of affirmative action to shape affirmative action so that anything, any program, any opportunity that has to do with expanding opportunities becomes affirmative action, worse is that there is somehow this notion that affirmative action means giving some lesser prepared students or lesser prepared members of the workforce an opportunity to achieve, and that's not the case. And so, what I spent a lot of time doing is helping to define for people what affirmative action is and why it's im- important to achieve workforce diversity, to achieve all of the things that go along with diversity, not just black and brown and yellow and red faces in a room for the sake of that, but the experiences that people bring to bear, that there's lots of evidence become richer and, and enable businesses to thrive and be more competitive because they have the pulse on a much larger market share, those types of things. Story_ID: 378367 Speaker 1: But affirmative action is still important today because we've, we are not at a point in life, despite the prayer of most of us, that, that race will not matter, race does matter. It matters today, it matters, it mattered yesterday and because African Americans, Latinos, Native Americans and others who are traditionally, who've traditionally been locked out were denied opportunities to compete, were denied opportunities to participate in much of the bounty of the nation, now they've got to be affirmative efforts to include them. So on, on the, the basis of exclusion, we must include, but where there has not been an exclusion, we also know that in order to achieve an end result, you have to have a strategic plan and you have to have measurable steps to achieve that. And so, if you develop a business plan in any business, or in any association or in entity, to achieve a desired result, if it is economic competitiveness and your data show that if you wanna really be competitive and the market is growing, is increasingly diverse, you've got to have folks from all segments. You've got the young population, you have the, the seniors, you've got those from the north, south, east, west, south, southwest and you have those with, with different backgrounds and cultures and religions to whom your, your products, your goods and service must appeal. You need a workforce that reflects all of these, we also know in the services, in terms of municipal services, whether it's firefighters, police officers, and we saw a graphic reminder in, in 9/11 [September 11, 2001], that we need people that understand all faiths and religions and languages in all aspects of American life so that we can communicate with a wide range of people. We have to have not only sensitivity, but those who come from the experience, as we, as the world becomes smaller, as it becomes flat as Freidman [Thomas L. Freidman] reminds us we are at presently, we need people from all backgrounds, all walks of life with all languages and all skills, to be in the room, to be in decision making positions, to be on corporate boards, to be in everywhere where decisions are being made. But we have a special responsibility to those who have been locked out, to make sure that they are included and to do that you take affirmative steps to do that, you do not decrease admissions criteria for anything, that's just wrong information, bad information that was put out there by persons who don't believe in the theory or who may genuinely be concerned, but I'd take the opportunity to correct their understanding. Story_ID: 378368 Speaker 1: We are now coming down to the wrap up questions for-- Speaker 2: Wonderful. Speaker 1: --The HistoryMakers interview. And let me start by asking is there anything else that you would like to add to your HistoryMaker interview that I've not asked you about? Speaker 2: Yes, I would. I'd like to talk for a brief point about my personal life because we talked about me and you said one of things about these HistoryMaker interviews are that we know other than the professional aspect of the person being interviewed. And if you follow my career, doing your four year high school [Montclair High School, Montclair, New Jersey] in three years and going to law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.] and working three years and, and three jobs, that both undergrad [Douglass College; Douglass Residential College, New Brunswick, New Jersey] and law school, going into a job where I was working twelve to fourteen hours and working most of the night and other very challenging jobs, people would think that I did that and so often I did that and that was my entire life. It was an incredible part of my life, but about nine years ago, almost ten years ago, a wonderful man came into my life, and I was privileged to have a rich and exciting rewarding relationship with a fabulous man who died two months ago, Dr. Clinton Bristow [Clinton Bristow, Jr.] who was president of Alcorn State University [Lorman, Mississippi]. I think it's important to say that because we're looking at a time when so many people don't have family, they, they think you have to choose between, between doing good, between service, between all those things that take you around the globe and nurturing and developing rich and rewarding family relationships. I came from a rich and rewarding family, and after many years I returned to the rich and rewarding family life with my life partner-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --phenomenal man who was, who shared my passion for education, equity and access, who spent his career, first in the Chicago public school systems [Chicago Public Schools] where he was the, not the superintendent but over the public school system there. But he took time to create men and boys clubs, recognized years ago, the, the challenges associated with the fact that 60 percent of African American boys are not graduating from high school with their cohort. And so, he raised his own daughter [Mya Bristow], his niece, his nephew, invested in his family, but then, made time for the extra learning environment supports of others sons and spent a lot of time doing that. Went from Chicago [Illinois] down to Alcorn State University where in his eleven, ten year tenure, a little over ten year tenure, made some remarkable strives at Alcorn State University and so, his life was full and rich and mine was full and rich. But God placed us in each other's lives and I think that's so important to show because many people, when you talk about who they are, what they are, we define ourselves by our work, but that afforded me an opportunity to, to have the type of nurturing, mutually supportive loving relationship that I knew from a child and that I knew God wanted for me at some point. But I was focused on the things that had to do with social justice and change, never set out to find a man, but knew that if I was doing the things that I think I've been called to do, that if there were a mate, that was similarly called, we would come together and we did and had a wonderful relationship. He was suddenly taken from us without any sickness, was an avid exerciser, he worked out every day, did not have obesity, did not have any of the health challenges that most African American men confront. But his walk here was complete, but he was and is a very important part of my life. Story_ID: 378369 Speaker 1: How do you feel about the way you've lived your life? Speaker 2: I feel that there is so much more to do. I feel blessed to have had the opportunity to s- the opportunities that I've had to serve. I feel especially blessed to have created opportunities to meld my passions with my profession and then to make my pursuit of my passions work for me and my family financially. Some years ago, perhaps twenty years ago, Dr. Dorothy Height [HistoryMaker Dorothy Height], who was on the board at the National Black Leadership Roundtable, said to me, she was watching me as I pursued my career and for three years when I was at the roundtable, I didn't take a salary, the association was not a 501(c)(3) and the salaries were paid by membership dues, I thought it more important to have staff support there and I had worked and I was at point where I didn't perceive that I had to work and I didn't, I had to work, obviously, I had to serve, but not for pay. Dr. Dorothy Height called me aside and spent an evening with me talking about a number of things that were instructive. But one thing that stood out was that you have to find a way to meld your passions with your livelihood and so, if you're going to serve, whether you serve, you know in the community, in an association, in a faith community or in a corporation, find a way to make it work for you financially and that's especially important for women, because those women who are passionate about causes particularly when you're younger in life, you go about pursuing those causes and give yourself a 100 percent but you don't think that given the statistics, it's likely that I'm going to be a head of a household, it's likely that I'm going to live, at least into my seventies if I'm blessed, I'm going to need retirement, I'm going to need health benefits, I'm going to need to provide for a family, I may need to provide for my parents [Marjorie Henry Baskerville and Charles Baskerville, Jr.], my extended family and so forth. And so, while you're pursuing your passion, make sure that you are aware of and that you plan today for tomorrow, that was a good lesson, it was important but I, I've just been privileged to, to grow to learn and as I learn and grow to, to share with those who have least among us. Story_ID: 378370 Speaker 1: Too many of our young people do not know about the civil rights struggles-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and yet, they want to be leaders, they want to go into law, they're thinking about law and so what advice do you have to these young people in high school and college, black who are thinking about a legal avenue, what resources are they going to need, what networking are they going to have to do, what, what advice do you have? Because you have set a path, but they're others that are gonna have to come after you. Speaker 2: Yeah, young people are, regardless of, of what's your passion and which avenue you pursue will have to be grounded in, in education, they have to have sure footing. You cannot go out and lead, you cannot go out and, and teach, you cannot go out and change the world in the absence of education, education comes in all forms, so that statement is not to, to advocate a particular type of education, but it certainly helps to be grounded in the types of discipline. You've got to have writing skills, you've gotta have oral communication skills, you've got to be able to compute, you've got to be technologically savvy, so you've got to get grounded, have some education, and so there first pursuit is, what do I wanna do and what talents do I need to get there, what are my passions and what talents do I need to get there. And that's another important thing, I throw the word out, passion and I don't throw it out there lightly because in order to be the most successful at what you do, you have to be passionate about it. A person who goes out to take a job because they think they can make a lot of money but it's a hum drum job and they're not excited about, will not do the best that they can. So I say to young people early, explore a range of things that are of interest to you, but at some point discover your passion and pursue it and get the training that you need to get there, find out what opportunities are there for internships, there's a large community, those of us who, who have gone through things that they may want to go, we are there, there are national associations, there are local associations through their faith institutions, through the Internet, you can access most anybody and anything. And so, figure out what your passion is, get the grounding that you need and then pursue it. But, I believe strongly that where ever you are, you have an obligation to use whatever you have to assist those of least advantage, so if you choose the path of Corporate America, if you choose the path of an association, if you choose government service, if you choose whatever service that you provide, while you're serving there, you have to find ways to use your time and your talent and your financial resources to help those who have least advantage. So, give back to a faith institution, give back to your, your immediate family, give back to your extended family, your community, give to an HBCU [historically black colleges and universities]. HBCUs as I said, they are doing the very best jobs proportionately in terms of graduating African Americans in the growth industries and in teaching and in health professions and they need the resources of those who have resources so that they can stay open. Give to any cause that they believe in, but give something so that those who have less, those who have least among us, will, will have an opportunity to have some resources and the access is there. Also remember, that they're only there because they're standing on someone else's shoulders-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --but for someone else blazing those trails, but for someone else having been there and sacrifice and giving and had just countless sacrifices, they wouldn't be wherever they are today. And so, given where they are and given that they stand on someone else's shoulders, they have a reciprocal responsibility to ready their shoulders so that someone can stand on their shoulders and so they must do that. Story_ID: 378371 Speaker 1: What do you still want to do that you have not yet done? Speaker 2: I want to help to create a climate in, in [U.S.] Congress where we can get more resources for the least of these. I want to try to change the public policy debate so that it is once again, important about the least of these and that we're not focusing exclusively on this new, quote, unquote, middle class and working Americans, middle class and working Americans and all Americans are significant and I certainly don't mean to suggest that that's not the case. But if you listen to the policymakers today, they're playing to the, the widest body of, of voters and so they're carving out this, we must do this and that for a middle class hard working Americans, well we certainly must support middle class hard working Americans, we must also support those who have least advantage, those who because of circumstances, some of which they have no control and others which they control, those who are in circumstances that they control, we have to love them, and nurture them, support them and show them a way out of their circumstances, those that are in circumstances out of their control, we have a special responsibility to support. So, I wanna help shape policies that will do that and I want to sure up all of the nation's black colleges and universities, I wanna prepare the next cohort of HBCU [historically black colleges and universities] presidents, we have remarkable presidents who are in all disciplines. Some come from Corporate America, some are in education fields, others were in, in the professoriate and they're now at the helm. But, I wanna make sure that we have a steady stream of well-trained passionate HBCUs and that the world knows their value, not just America, but as we look at other countries that are, are strengthening their now public higher education systems, I think they have a lot to learn from NAFEO [National Association for Equal Opportunity in Higher Education] and member institutions, we're working with Botswana, Botswana is about to set up a new university and so much of the lessons, so many of the lessons that our institutions have learned will be helpful to them and so we're merging those types of relationships. Story_ID: 378372 Speaker 1: Coming down to the last two questions. How do you wanna be remembered? What do you want people to say about you? Speaker 2: I want people to say that I'm sincere and caring, that I'm passionate of those who have least among us and that I gave my time, my talent and my treasure to assist those who have least among us, to expand access and opportunity to promote social justice. That I have a particular caring for those in the dawn of life, our children, who are in great need of nurturing and support and guidance, that I've never met a child that was not my own and when people ask me do I have children? I say sure, we want to talk about which ones, but that I made a positive difference and expanded opportunity in a country where opportunity is the bedrock of, of our nation. Story_ID: 378373 Speaker 1: That's my mother and father's wedding, Charles Baskerville [Charles Baskerville, Jr.] and Marjorie Henry [Marjorie Henry Baskerville], soon to be Baskerville when she makes it down that aisle. Speaker 2: And the year? Speaker 1: That was in April of about nineteen, I'll tell you, nineteen, April of 1952 probably. Speaker 2: It's real high up, (unclear) have a record to go with that? Speaker 1: Yeah. Captions so that they can match them up. Speaker 2: That is Marge and Charles Baskerville, some thirty, thirty-four years later at my sister's wedding, Dr. Renee Baskerville. Speaker 1: Okay. We don't have any more large ones? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: We don't have any more large ones? Speaker 2: Oh, you wanna go sides? Yeah. Speaker 1: I'm sorry. You gotta watch him. Speaker 2: Yeah. Try to trip you up. Speaker 1: Okay, I'm gonna try to, he, he was testing you. Speaker 2: Yeah. He thought I was sleep already. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: This is your sister's (unclear). Speaker 1: That's (unclear) that time, I know that. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Keeping him up. Okay, go ahead. Speaker 2: That's my life partner, Dr. Clinton Bristow [Clinton Bristow, Jr.], president of Alcorn State University [Lorman, Mississippi] and me at the Alcorn State University coronation, 2004. Speaker 1: Very good, thank you Mr. Hayden [HistoryMaker Robert C. Hayden]. Speaker 2: You're not necessarily done, right on there. Speaker 1: Try to get (unclear), you know, I would rather leave a little extra-- Speaker 2: See-- Speaker 1: --on the border, and it's especially 'cause that way, nobody else (unclear). Speaker 2: Oh, you should crop it. Speaker 1: No, no. Speaker 2: Marge Baskerville and her grandson, my nephew, Ali Baskerville [Alan Baskerville-Dockeray] in about 1990, 1990. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE) Speaker 2: Okay thanks, next one? Speaker 1: Charles Baskerville at Howard University [Washington, D.C.]. He was the conductor for the Omega [Omega Psi Phi Fraternity] choir and he was wooing some lovely Omega, oh, some lovely Delta [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority] women no doubt in about 1950, '51 [1951], '52 [1952]. Speaker 2: Okay, very good. Speaker 1: There's the Delta sweetheart, Howard University campus about 1952 as well. Speaker 2: Hold on please? Speaker 1: You want that very expensive frame (laughter)? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Oh my God Speaker 1: We didn't take that one off, I know (laughter). Speaker 2: An old glitch in the system there. Speaker 1: Ahhhh. Speaker 2: Trees. Speaker 1: Those are the trees I talked about. Part of this elaborate, but you don't get the snow storm affect, that's one of the Christmases at my maternal grandfather's [Clifford Henry] house and that's my sister and me and it would be in the early '60s [1960s]. Speaker 2: Okay, hold on please? Okay. Speaker 1: What you don't see-- Speaker 2: We can just bring the-- Speaker 1: --is the snow storm and then the train that would go through that bank of snow and make a noise and circle around-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE) Speaker 1: Okay next. Speaker 2: Did we do this one? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Yes Speaker 1: How did he make a snow storm? Speaker 2: Who knows? I just, too me it was real snow-- Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) he had all kinds of props. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Okay. That's my mom, Marge Baskerville, and me probably 2004 at a NAFEO [National Association for Equal Opportunity in Higher Education] Presidential Peer Seminar. Mom went with me to every NAFEO Presidential Peer Seminar since 1979, until her death. Yeah-- Speaker 1: Hold on please? Speaker 2: --we had a ball. Speaker 1: Okay next. Speaker 2: Those are dear Baskerville family friends at Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts] at a restaurant in one of our summer vacations on the Vineyard two years ago. Actually, let me see, yeah 'cause Otha [ph.] was still alive, so that would have been the summer of 2004. Speaker 1: Okay great, next. Speaker 2: Saw that one. Speaker 1: Did this? Speaker 2: Did that. Speaker 1: Yeah? Speaker 2: That's the man, that, that's my nephew/son, Ali Baskerville and he was, let's see, probably in 1989, nope let me call it 1987, yeah, with his aunt's hat on. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: I think that's it. Okay, how awesome. Speaker 2: Go ahead. Speaker 1: That is on the left, Mya Bristow, Clinton's daughter, now my daughter, she is pursuing a Ph.D. at Alliant college [Alliant International University], Ph.D. in industrial psychology in California, San Diego, at Alliant college. I'm next to Mya, to my left is Tom Joyner, the Fly Jock, the hardest working deejay in the country who uses his airwaves to raise a remarkable amount of money for HBCUs [historically black colleges and universities] and then to Tom's left is Clinton Bristow, Jr...