 Story_ID: 106945 Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Paul Lawrence Berry, Jr., P-A-U-L, L-A-W-R-E-N-C-E, B-E-R-R-Y, Jr. Speaker 1: So the Lawrence is spelled L-E-W? Speaker 2: L-A-W. Speaker 1: L-A-W, okay, L-A-W. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Now, were you named for Paul Lawrence Dunbar? Speaker 2: My father [Paul Lawrence Berry, Sr.] was, and I was following that. Yes, I was. At that time, they were, that was a very important name in history. So my dad was named, and I had--there was another reason too. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And the other reason was that my father was supposed to be a preacher or a minister. At least that's what my grandmother [Corinne Jackson] wanted him to be. She had several, she had nine children. And she thought that this one would be the -- so he was named Paul with the expressed understanding that she would push him toward the clergy. Well, he never--he didn't make. But I was named Paul, not for the same reason. I was named Paul because my dad wanted me named after him. And I haven't made it to the clergy yet, but my pulpit has been the television studio and the camera, I guess, if I were-- Speaker 1: Now, are you a junior officially? Speaker 2: I am a junior. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: I'm officially a junior. Speaker 1: All right, and, sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: I was born in Detroit, Michigan on 15 February, 1944. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your occupation and title? Speaker 2: My current occupation is--I'm a syndicated radio-show host. I'm a journalist by choice. And I'm a retired person by years. Speaker 1: Okay, and you're well known as an anchor, right, in the--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yes, television, I was a television news anchor in Washington [D.C.] and Detroit [Michigan] for that matter and for Detroit for a couple of years, and here for thirty-some odd years. Here, being Washington, D.C. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date? Speaker 2: What is what, sir? Speaker 1: Today's date? Speaker 2: Today is January 29th, 2014. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We are presently in a downtown office building in Washington, D.C. Story_ID: 106946 Speaker 1: Okay, now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we ask as sort of a warm up, and they only require a short answer. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: The first one is, do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And what is it? Speaker 2: Pigs feet. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Yes, black. Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Yes, Christmastime. Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Yes, Nassau, Bahamas. Speaker 1: And the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Yes, "Education is the only solution." Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It's my phrase. I thought of it, and I printed it when I had my scholarship. But education is the only solution. Story_ID: 106947 Speaker 1: Okay, and, now, I'm gonna ask about your family history. I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: We'll start with your mother's side. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: My mother's full name was, is Donnella Sneed, D-O-N-N-E-L-L-A, Sneed, S-N-E-E-D, is her name. She was born Gladys, G-L-A-D-Y-S, Gladys Talley, T-as in Tom-A-L-L-E-Y. Speaker 1: Now, what is the story behind the name change? Speaker 2: She, I think my mother thought that Gladys was an old name. And she never liked the name. And when she could, later on in her life, she changed her name official--legally. And she--in Ohio, back in 1968. She changed her name from Gladys to Donnella. Her married name, of course, by that time she'd married Mel Sneed, my stepfather. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And what is her date of birth? Speaker 2: Her date of birth is the 22nd of June, 1923. Speaker 1: And where was she born? Speaker 2: She was born in Detroit. Detroit, Michigan. Speaker 1: Okay, now, what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family? How far back can you trace them, and what are the stories about them? What kind of occupations or activities? Speaker 2: Well, my, my grandmother, Annie Talley, who ended up raising me when my mother and father [Paul Lawrence Berry, Sr.] divorced, she was a domestic worker. And she was also a nurse, a--at that time, they called them baby nurses or infant nurses. But she did a lot of domestic work. She lived with families. In this case, she lived with families, wealthy families and was--would be there with them to look after them. This was after, this was after she had raised her nine children, including my mother. And going back further, her father was James Hudson, who I knew as "Papa Jim." And James Hudson was born--my grandmother was born in Tennessee. And James Hudson was a native of Tennessee. As a matter of fact, he was the first black real estate, realtor in the state of Tennessee. And one of his clients was Jesse James. When Jesse James left Tennessee going west, my grand--my great-grandfather was actually the one who had something to do with the sale of his house. And my grandmother used to tell us that her mother, who I did not know because when I came of conscious, she had died. But Jesse James gave them a sideboard as a gift to my great-grandfather. And he brought it home so to give her. And she did not like it and didn't want it in the house. Speaker 1: A sideboard? Speaker 2: A sideboard, yes. Speaker 1: What is a sideboard? Speaker 2: A sideboard is a table, not unlike this table. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And those, in those days, they called them sideboards, and you'd put it on the side of the wall, up against the wall, and you'd put your items on it. And it was a gift to, to my great-grandfather, James Hudson. And she made him move it out and put it behind the house, didn't want it in her house for--now, who knows what her reasons were other than that she-- Speaker 1: Did she know the reputation of Jesse James? Speaker 2: Oh, she knew it was Jesse. Well, that may have been part of it. She may have known Jesse James' reputation in Tennessee, and that sideboard sat out there. And obviously, the weather got it. And what I'd give to have it today (laughter). But it sat there until it just expired because of the weather. But that's one of the stories that associates with, that's associated with my [great-] grandfather. I did not know, beyond that, I did not know his lineage. I didn't know the history beyond that. Speaker 1: Would he have been like the generation, first free generation? Speaker 2: Yeah, he would have been, he was born into slavery. My great grandfather was born into slavery. And during his lifetime, of course, situations changed, and he, so he had the experience of being both a slave and a free man and went on with his education and--but he was young when he was, when--I think he was--I didn't know his birthday. It was like '56 [1856], 1855, somewhere around there. So he was not fully engaged or aware of slavery as it had affected his parents. But he was certainly, he understood the changes that the country went through. And they weren't good, but he was a strong man, a smart man. And I used to listen to him. It's like, as I say, I used to call him Papa Jim was the name that I knew him by. Everybody knew him by Papa Jim. And he was a big man, 6'3", heavy, a farmer. And when we moved to Ohio with my grandmother, he moved in from Chicago [Illinois] to live with us. And, as a matter of fact, he lived with us until he died at the age of ninety--ninety-eight, I think. Story_ID: 106948 Speaker 1: So this is in the 1950s, yeah? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And this just kind of dramatizes how close the slave experience-- Speaker 2: Around the corner. Speaker 1: --can be. Speaker 2: Around the corner, really truly, you know. It shows you how much, how we are still impacted by it, you know. And people have been raised, and it just depends on what side of that divide you're on. But you still had--experienced it. And even today, the vestiges are still so apparent in this country. Speaker 1: Did he discuss it at all? Speaker 2: No, you know, there were two things that were not generally discussed, I found, at least in our family. One was slavery because I think our parents--grandparents and great grandparents, even today, we're embarrassed that they were ever in such a situation in this country. They loved America, and it's a stain on our history, and it was a stain that they were a part of, but not a stain that they were proud of. And so it was not discussed. You could bring it up. And the other was miscegenation. The other issue was, there was so much interracial things going on in history, whether they want to admit it or not, I mean slave owners could do whatever they chose to, to their slaves. And they did. And they saw that, and so those things, those two issues were hardly discussed. A matter of fact, you were discouraged from bringing them up. Why did you wanna know? What, you know, who's asking you those kinds of questions? And, you know, then there would be the promise, "We'll talk about it later when you're older" (laughter), you know. My grandfather would, my great-granddad [James Hudson] could talk about most anything. He was a learned man and a very intell--very smart. And he was, and he had a good memory. So he would sit there with his cane in between his legs. He had a big cane, and he'd tap it on the ground when he wanted me to pay attention. And listen, now. And he would tell me some history, some stories or some experiences in life that he thought were important. And I enjoyed it, just watching him because he was bigger than a--he was bigger than anybody I'd ever seen. And he was, you know, he had, he was just a gorgeous, good-looking man. I loved Papa Jim, I mean it was great. So that was my grandmother's [Annie Talley's] father. And-- Speaker 1: Well, what kind of advice would he give you? Do you remember anything special he told you? Speaker 2: Well, he told me the importance of land. He said, "You know, you need to own your own land." He said, "They're not making any more of it." He said, "Find a piece of land and own it, keep it, take care of it, and pass it on. It's important," he said, "and it'll keep you healthy and wealthy." Another thing he would say to me was, "Never get to a train station late. Get there two hours before." He says, "One thing is for sure, you can wait for the train, but the train won't wait for you (laughter)." This is coming--(laughter) we're sitting out in the middle of the woods, you know (laughter), I mean. He's telling me to make sure I get to the train station two hours ahead of time. "You be at that train station two hours ahead of time. Don't ever wait for that--don't ever think a train's gonna wait for you." And then, of course, he'd transition into, "And that's the way life is. You know your place. And know your place in life. And don't overestimate it, don't underestimate it. Know your place." And I suppose if I reflect for a while, I could think of other things, but, you know, we'd sit there in the living room. And I'd sit there on the floor, and he'd have his cane, and he'd tap me. And if he thought I wasn't listening, he'd reach over and tap with that cane, with his cane (laughter). "Are you listening" or--and if he was serious, "Are you listening to what I said?" I'd say, "Yeah, Papa Jim". Then we'd go out into the garden, and he would go out, and he was a--he loved farming. And he would teach me the difference between--now, those are pole beans, Kentucky pole beans, he'd say, snap the ends off of 'em, and so and so. Be gentle to the plant. Be gentle to the plant. It's your friend. And take those beans off a gentle way. You know, all those kinds of things that he, were important--that he thought was important. And I'm sure, you know, I've used that advice, if not consciously, when I reach out to do something, the voice, the sound of something that he had said, you know. And he had nothing else to do at this point, but sit there and reflect on his life. And I think he also reflected on how he could make a difference on those--on the children and grandchildren and great-grandchildren. I guess his biggest frustration was that children, we didn't have time to sit and listen to him or we didn't take the time. But I didn't have any choice, and I'm glad I didn't. I wouldn't have, I wasn't so smart. I would have sat there and listened to my grand-great-grandfather. But I had no choice. My grandmother would say, go in there and keep your grandfather (laughter), your great granddaddy company. So, and I'd go. At that time, there was no television, at that time. I remember when we got our first television. We didn't have a television there. We had radio. That's the other thing that we'd do in the evenings. But that was my granddad more than my great-grandfather, listened to the radio at the time. Story_ID: 106949 Speaker 1: Now, what was your grandfather's name? Speaker 2: My grandfather's name was Plez, P-L-E-Z, Plez Talley, T-A-L-L-E-Y. And he, of course, was married to Annie Talley, my grandmother. They had nine children. My mother [Donnella Sneed] was the fourth, the fifth of nine children. Speaker 1: Oh, the one I meant, what was Papa Jim's last name? Speaker 2: Hudson. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: James Hudson. Speaker 1: James Hudson. Speaker 2: James B. Hudson. Speaker 1: Yeah, you told me before. I just--now, I see it in my note here. But that's, okay, all right. So Plez Talley was married to your grandmother. Speaker 2: Yeah, look, so I'm giving you a lot of history. So I'm not, don't--please don't feel like I think you're not listening. Go over it if you need to. I don't know how you can keep all that in your head, but anyway--(laughter)--by all means. Speaker 1: (Laughter) But, okay, so Plez Talley, what did he do for a living? Speaker 2: He was a worker. He was a, he worked at Ex-Cell-O [Corporation] in Detroit [Michigan]. For a time, he worked for the city. He was one of the few men that--my grandfather was a hardworking, strap--bootstrap kind of fellow. He wasn't a very big man, but he came from a big family. And he was, never afraid of work. And he worked hard in Detroit, raising my mother and her siblings working for the city of Highland Park in Detroit [sic Michigan; Highland Park is in the Detroit metropolitan area], one of the few people that kept his job when things got tough. But they liked granddad because he was, they could count on him. And he had a very pleasant way about him. I got to know him more extensively when my mom and dad separated, and I moved to live with my grandparents where we lived in the house. And then they moved from Detroit, from Highland Park to a farm in Ohio at the age of seven. We actually left Detroit and my mother and dad had separated. My sister and I were now with my grandmother. And they were living in a house that was, the--it was the house that the church owned, actually, the church that we would grow--we grew up in a Church of God, sanctified church out of Detroit at the time, as I knew it. And the church had this house which would have been the parish, for lack of a better name. But it was a long way from the church. And so they leased the, they rented the house out. And my grandparents had--were living in that house. Story_ID: 106950 Speaker 1: So where in Ohio was this? Speaker 2: We moved from Detroit to Toledo, outside of Toledo, a place called Swanton, S-W-A-N-T-O-N, Swanton, Ohio, about eighteen miles outside of Toledo and about sixty-five or seventy miles from Detroit. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We moved there when I was seven years old. "We," being my grandmother [Annie Talley], my grandfather [Plez Talley], myself and my sister, Debra. And at that place, we moved into a prefab, two-room prefab with an outhouse with--they had thirteen acres of property that they had there. And from the time I was seven until I was fourteen or fifteen, we lived there. That's where I got to really know my grandfather, Plez. He was, as I said, a no-nonsense, hard worker. And I was the only other worker that he had. So that's what I did. Every morning, we'd get up, and we would go out. I used to cut wood on a two-man saw, he and I. We didn't have a mechanical--at that time we had what we had. And we would cut wood and we would work the land. And he would work me until my grandmother would come out in the woods where we were, back in the--and she would say to him, "Plez, you've been out here for twelve hours or whatever." She'd, we'd take sandwiches with us to go out and sit there. And she'd say--and he'd--she'd say, "He's but a boy," talking about me. She would remind him. And, "He's but a boy. And you're going to hurt him." And he would say to her, "Oh, no, Hon, I'm not gonna hurt him. I'm just building him a back." I used to hear that (laughter), I'm just gonna (laughter). He built me a back, all right. By the time I was eight years, nine years old, I was never--no one ever touched me in school. I was built like a fire plug. I had, you know, I just--I was muscular, small. I never got over 5'7" in height, but I didn't have to be worried. I was really, you know, from working on that farm. And we did everything together. And I learned. And, of course, then my great-grandfather [James Hudson] came to live with us. And so I had both my granddad and my great-grandfather. And those two men were great influences on my life. My grandfather was not a great talker. He didn't, you know, he just--he was a rough--he used to tell me the story that when he didn't think that Hon, which, as he called my grandmother, was disciplining us enough. And he used to say that. And when he was growing up--and I don't know whether it was true or not, but he said, but he told me this. He said, "My father," meaning would have been my great--great-grandfather, on Friday or Thursday night, would line up his children and take a belt. And he would give 'em all a whipping for what they had done that week, that he knew wasn't right, even though he didn't know what it was. He knew they'd done nothing that's not right. And he was serious, telling me this. Now, whether it was true or not, and he said they, you know, they'd have to scamp and hold on while he whipped 'em. And I, I said to granddaddy, "You know, did you love him?" And his response to me was, "I had no choice." And I thought about that. I remember I had no choice, I had no choice. I guess he meant there was nowhere to go, you know. So you loved the people that fed you even if they, even if they beat you, even if they whipped you. You loved 'em because they looked after you. And I, I've never--you know, reflected in these years as to whether he was, what message he was trying to get across, but-- Story_ID: 106951 Speaker 1: But he was--so those kind of things. He could fix anything, anything, cars, it didn't make any difference. He just had the capability, so, you know, I was driving when I was seven years old. I drove the cars, I drove the tractors and whatever needed, whatever way we were needed. I remember when we got our first Case tractor, hallelujah. All of a sudden, you know, I didn't have to be on the other end of that 'cause that, we put a band on that and put a saw. And we'd cut the wood, the wood that we had cut like this for years, we now could run through this. I thought we had hit, we had hit heaven (laughter). It was just like, you know, it was great. It was, it--those kind of experiences because you really did appreciate--you really appreciated the small things. And I--when I went to the farm in [Swanton] Ohio, I thought that it was the worst thing that could ever have happened to me. I felt like it was punishment initially. I was away from my Detroit [Michigan]. We didn't have a toilet. We had an outhouse, you know, where we built an outhouse. And at night, if you had to go to the outhouse, you had to wake up one of the adults, which would always be grandma, and out you'd walk to the outhouse. And, but, you know, opportune, what an opportunity because at 3:00 AM in the morning, you're out there standing outside, well, somebody's in the outhouse or vise versa, and you talk. You know, you had time to talk and to learn some things and to listen. And, now, as I reflect back on those times, those were the best times of my life, didn't know it then. But it did teach me to love the farm. And that's where I live now. I live on a eight-acre farm, if you will, on the river. It's beautiful, nothing like--I have all the amenities I need out there right down to my boat in the back. But that--back there in those days, you know, we didn't have very much, but we had each other. Story_ID: 106952 Speaker 1: Now, you live on the Eastern Shore of Maryland today, right? Speaker 2: Um-hum, I live on the Eastern Shore of Maryland, a place called Easton which is about eighty miles outside of Washington, D.C. Speaker 1: And the Eastern Shore was the home of Frederick Douglass--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: --and Harriet Tubman. Speaker 2: Right, right there--I pass right by where much of what happened to Frederick, where he was born and they were reared, where he ran away from, and, you know, and the history is there, right on the-- Speaker 1: That's in Tuckahoe County? Speaker 2: No, it's in Talbot [County, which runs along the Tuckahoe river]. Speaker 1: Talbot. Speaker 2: Talbot County, yeah. All of this is in Talbot County. I go by the plantation, the Wye River [sic Wye House]. The Wye River is where he, he was raised part of his life [ages seven and eight]. Story_ID: 106953 Speaker 1: Well, we're gonna get back into growing up, but I-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --we were, I need to get back to your mother [Donella Sneed]-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: --and, now, what do you know about how your mother was raised and what was she like and what did she do? Speaker 2: Oh, my mother was raised by Annie Talley, who raised me. So I know how she was raised (laughter) 'cause I was raised the same way, but a little bit wiser, as my grandmother [Annie Talley] would tell it. She had eight siblings, three of whom, two of whom died in childbirth. But she was raised with the other seven in Detroit [Michigan]. My mother was raised in Detroit, and, again, what I do know is all of her children, all of my aunts and uncles graduated from high school. They were required to go to school--two things they had to do. They had to go to school, they had to go to church. And, of course, that was the same thing with me, and my--they grew up in the church. My mother grew up in the church. My mother was a great voice, wonderful singer, and matter of fact, they sang as a group with some of her cousins. Speaker 1: Now, this is the Church of God? Speaker 2: Church of God, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, and now did you mother grow up in Black Bottom [African American neighborhood demolished in the 1960s; now Lafayette Park] or on the west side? Speaker 2: No, you know, they were--it, the church was interesting. The church was in Black Bottom in Detroit. But they always lived--granddaddy worked. And so they always had decent accommodations. Now, that doesn't mean that they weren't poor. You know, they, but they had food, and they had space. They lived in a house somewhere in Detroit. They moved around a bit, but they were, they were raised--as my grandma used to say, we were able not to have to step in the kettle, meaning exactly that, that they were, you know, that they were raised close to Black Bottom, but not in it because of my grandfather's [Plez Talley's]--and everybody had to work. I mean they were--just the way it was. And so, it was a big family and-- Speaker 1: So she was raised on the east side, then or close to--? Speaker 2: They were raised on the west side of Detroit--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: On the west side, okay. Speaker 2: --on the west side of Detroit. Yeah, and at some point, they had a house over in, I think, mom said on Mack Avenue. And then, from there they moved back. And the church was over [on] that side. And then the church ended up--the church was on Hastings Streets. And they moved out of Hastings because it was--that area was changing, and my grandmother would have none of it with her children. She just, you know, she was able to--if she had to get out and work herself, she did it. But they kept them in an area--ultimately, when I came along, they were in Highland Park [Michigan], which is, you know, just (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: It's a suburb within the confines of-- Speaker 2: Within the confines of Detroit City, yeah. And, and they had, you know, that was where they were living in the parish house for many years. Speaker 1: Okay, now, did your mother have any stories about growing up or what her aspirations were? Speaker 2: Well, my mother, yeah, my mother was, had every capability. She was, she had a world-class voice, and she was beautiful. She was absolutely--of the children, she looked more like my grandfather. She had long black flowing hair. She took hair--my grandmother was part, part--my grandmother is part Kankakee [perhaps Potawatomi], part Indian. She used to say she was a quarter Indian and no more. But it was there. You could see it. She was very light-skinned woman with straight hair. That was my grandmother. She married Plez, my grandfather, who was a very dark-skinned man. And between them, the children--some look like her, some look like granddad. My mother looked more like my mother--like my grandfather, which she was dark complexioned or brown with straight hair. And she was a tremendous, she had a great voice, I mean--and, of course, they learned to sing in church. I mean they were in church all the time. But it, but the very thing that taught them a capability was also the very thing that kept them from, from using it. You couldn't do bad music. You couldn't sing, you couldn't do the devil's work. So even though my mother and her group could have sang with--they were as good as any of the popular singers, but they just were--the church said, no. My grammy said, "No, not at my--you can't do that. That's, that's the devil." Story_ID: 106954 Speaker 1: All right, so did your mother [Donella Sneed] have like aspirations to sing pop music--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, they could have sang. They did sing. There's a group. My Aunt Helen, my mother's cousin, first cousin, she had a gift for music. She could play anything on the piano, Helen Presley. She was the daughter of Carrie Presley, which was my grandmother's [Annie Talley's] sister. And she was in the group, and then there were two--a couple of other cousins that sang. And they went around Detroit[Michigan] and Michigan and Illinois, and they were singing. But they only could sing church songs. Grandma [Annie] wouldn't have it. They couldn't sing--secular was a key area, see, so. Speaker 1: Was there a name for the group? Speaker 2: Oh, no, I--I'm sure there is, there was. I don't have a clue today what that name was. I didn't, you know, it just wasn't discussed until, until my grandmother recognized that she had, in fact, done them a disservice from her point of view. And she apologized for that. She thought it was, she said, "I thought I was doing the right thing, keeping them from doing that, but I'm not sure that's true." That--she saw it as God having given them a talent, that she didn't allow them to use, to grow and to exploit it. And I suppose in a sense that is true, but as I reminded her, who knows what else may have happened. All we know is what did happen, you know. They grew up and they had families and they were healthy, and that might not have been the case had they gotten, ventured far out into what she called the worldly ways. So, you know, you try to make her feel like, you know, it's okay. It's okay. When I was in kindergarten, the kindergarten teacher, Ms. Cosgrow from Willard [Elementary] School came to the school--came home with me to my, because of my grandmother because she wanted to put me in the movies, in the video world at that time, to sing or whatever--not that I could sing but I had a personality, and I was, you know--and my grandmother wouldn't hear--not hear it. And she said to her, "But he has skills and talents that are, you know," she says "I'm a kindergarten teacher. I see these kids. She says, and what Paul has is something that could beneficial to you all if you'll allow us to exploit it," which was not her word then, "if you'll allow us to use it." But that's what she meant. My grandmother apologized to me at the same time for that. She says, "I kept you from doing, you know, you were a gift to me and to, to the scene, to the social scene. And I didn't let you do that." And I, all I could say is, thanks, mom. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And we did okay (laughter). Speaker 1: What did you mother do after high school? Now, she came out of--do you know the high school she came out of? Speaker 2: She came out of, she told me, I think--Central, I think it was, maybe Central or maybe Highland--no, I'm sorry, Highland Park High [now Highland Park Renaissance High School], a school there called Highland Park High School in the--and she graduated there with a lot, several of my other aunties and uncles, I think. Speaker 1: And what did she do? Did she go to college or did she--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: She, she went to college to Wayne [Wayne State University, Detroit, Michican], I think Wayne State for a while. But she went into nursing, and she is an RN. She got her nurse license, and she went right through the ranks in nursing. She ended up working for SEIU. She was a union rep. She was an organizer. She organized the state of Ohio nursing, along with John Feeney--Sweeney, John Sweeney, who is now the retired head of AFL-CIO [American Federation of Labor and Congress of Industrial Organizations]. But my mother worked with him in Cleveland. He's out of Cleveland, and that's where she ended up living. And she worked for the union, the Service Employees, SEIU [Service Employees International Union] or SIEU union, and she--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yeah, SEIU, Service Employees International Union. Speaker 2: And she worked for them, and she retired from that. That was her, years later, she retired. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's still one of the strong unions--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, oh, yeah, yeah. She has, she met a lot of people. She'd come through here when I was on the air years ago, and she'd visit as they were into Washington [D.C.] for various meetings, etc. Story_ID: 106955 Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so let me go to your father's side, and then we'll go back to your mother. Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: My father's full name? Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: Paul Lawrence Berry. I was named after him, P-A-U-L, L-A-W-R-E-N-C-E, B-E-R-R-Y. Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: He was born on June 12th, 1918. Speaker 1: Okay, and where was he born? Speaker 2: In Kentucky. And I can't tell you whether it was in Paris [Kentucky]. I presume it was. I don't know that. Speaker 1: Well, somewhere near Paris. Speaker 2: Yeah, he was, it was somewhere down there. Speaker 1: And Paris is near Louisville. Speaker 2: Yeah, in or near Paris, yeah. Speaker 1: Now, what can you tell us about the ancestors on your father's side? How far back can you trace them, and what were they doing? Speaker 2: I can trace my father's side back to my, my father, my grandfather, Joe Edward Berry and my grandfather's father, my great-great-grandfather, in Kentucky. And my great-great-grandfather was a free man. He was a--he had been a slave, and he was educated by Tom Berry, and that was the name, where the name came from. And he was one of the few free, at that time, free black men as they were called in Kentucky. And his education was important because it opened doors for him, obviously. He was born about the same time, but it was obvious that there had to be leaders among the, in the black community. And because of his education, he was given that consideration. He was, he was a very--he was a mixed, he was a mixture of what some suggested were Irish, and others say were German--can't decide which one it is. But he was the son, my--he was--both his mother and his father were half black, half white, and he looked it. And this is my grandfather--Ed Berry. His mother and father or my great-great-grandmother, great-great-grandfather, they were married. And I have some picture of them, and they were both from mixed lineage on both sides. So he was a very interesting-looking man, very light skinned, straight hair, heavy eyebrows. You knew when you were in the presence of Ed Berry, my great, my grandfather. Speaker 1: Okay, so-- Speaker 2: They had nine children. My father had nine brothers and sisters. My grandmother, Corrine Jackson was her name, Corrine, C-O-R-R-I-N-E, married Ed Berry, my grandfather. She was a very dark-skinned woman. He was a very light skinned man. And their children came out like this. Some were very light (laughter), some were very dark. For instance, my father is 5'6" and brown skinned. My uncle, Charles, who was his oldest brother was 6'2" and very light skinned. You would never think that they were brothers, but they--except that if you look at their features, you could see the likeness. And that was the case through the entire family. Half of them looked like mom, Mother Berry, half of them (laughter) looked like Papa Berry or Daddy Berry, as we called him. I knew them both 'cause we used to go visit them, and they had this farm in Ohio--in Kentucky. And I would go down and visit and learn to meet and learn and love my father's brothers and sisters. Story_ID: 106956 Speaker 1: Okay, so, now did your father [Paul Lawrence Berry, Sr.] have any stories about growing up--now, he grew up in Paris, Kentucky? Speaker 2: Yes, yes, he did. He grew up in Paris, Kentucky and migrated to Detroit [Michigan] to pick up--at that time, the draw was the auto industry and jobs. They would come up through Cincinnati [Ohio], up through Dayton [Ohio], up through Cleveland [Ohio], and then Detroit [Michigan] was about as far north as many of them would get. Some got up to Snug Harbor [Michigan], up in the Upper Peninsula, but very few went beyond that. What they were looking for was right there in Detroit, right on the lake. So dad got in, came in to work, with he and his brother, Charles Berry. And then two sisters came as a result of that. Edmonia [ph.] was one of the sisters, and the baby sister was Gladys Berry who's still, she's one of the--she is--there're two of his nine siblings that are still alive, Gladys Berry in Detroit, Aunt Gladys, and Woodville [ph.] Woodville in Cincinnati, Ohio. Some of the Berrys migrating stopped in Cincinnati. Speaker 1: So you have the name Gladys on both sides of the family? Speaker 2: Yeah, it was interesting because my mother [Donella Sneed] and auntie, they remarked about that they both have the same name, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, so he gets up to Detroit, what, about 19--late '30s [1930s] or--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Dad got to Detroit by-- Speaker 1: --what is it? Speaker 2: Let's--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Was he grown when he moved up? Speaker 2: Yeah, he was a young, he was grown. He was young, but he was certainly a grown man. I may have some pictures of the family. I don't know if I brought them, but it had the whole family, the whole Berry family on it. Speaker 1: Now, did he come up before the war [World War II]? Speaker 2: You know, I don't--yes, I think he had, would have had to because he met my mother, and he was service. He went into, in service. And so, let's see that would have been, see, that was right about the time because, let's see, I was born in '44 [1944]. And I think, I'm just trying to remember. Yeah, but she was pregnant when she was traveling with him in the States at one point. So, yeah, he was--'44 [1944], and if he was born in 18--1918, he would have been, what that '18 [1918], '28 [1928], '38 [1938]. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: He was twenty-five, twenty--somewhere around there. Speaker 1: Twenty--(unclear), then, yeah. So he was stationed in the U.S. when he was in the service? Speaker 2: Yeah, he was stationed in the United States. He did not travel, he did not get overseas. He was, mustered in, and then they put him into--at that time, you know, you didn't (laughter), you weren't able to do very much. And my father had not really learned a trade per se. But he had grown up being taught to cook by my grandmother, Corrine. He was, my dad could cook anything and enjoyed it. He just had an affinity for that. And so the service picked that up and made him a cook at that time. And he went on to become, through rank, he became the cook that they would send to various military installations if there was a problem with the food. They would bring my father in, and he would come in and spend whatever time it was to get it straightened out. The point was that if there were complaints about food or there were problems with it, dad was called to those locations. So he went out as far as Colorado. I don't know if he ever got to the west coast with it, but Fort Dix [New Jersey], any military, army military installation. I think he was stationed in Fort Dix as his permanent, as his duty-site, as his duty station. But my mother says that he was called on to travel up to New York. Wherever there was an issue, dad would go in, straighten it out and then come back. So it was--and he loved that. And year after, I mean even--I had the pleasure of enjoying many a feast from my dad cooking, cook anything. I mean, you know, he just had that--some people just have that capability and the love of it. And then creative, he was a creative cook as well and could do it. So I know that he--and then, of course, he got out of service and went to work for the auto industry. And he worked for Ford Motor Company for thirty-some odd years, maybe forty years. I'm not (unclear). But when I knew him and throughout our time together, he was an auto worker for Ford Motor Company. Speaker 1: Okay, in those days, that was considered a good job, you know--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh, that was-- Speaker 1: --if you worked for Ford or GM [General Motors]. Speaker 2: Yep. Story_ID: 106957 Speaker 1: And dad [Paul Lawrence Berry, Sr.] was smart. And he, in the UAW [United Automobile Workers union], he was a UAW--I remember sitting on the floor at the UAW office building in Detroit or wherever it was, and Walter Reuther [UAW leader] rubbing my head. I didn't know who he was, obviously, (laughter), but here was this, you know, guy. And Walter Reuther would be there, and then he and dad, they'd have their conversations, and I'd be sitting there on the floor. This was before I headed to Ohio. This was during that period of time, the time when I would see him. He'd come by my grandmother's [Annie Talley's] house and pick me up and take me to, with him to something, including to the beer gardens. He used to--they called 'em beer gardens there. I remember going to a beer garden, coming back and my--and he said to me, "Don't tell your grandmother, now, don't tell your grandmother." And I said, okay. First words out of my mouth when I hit the, hit the (laughter), hit the house, "Grandma, we were at a beer garden." (Laughter) Then she called, "Paul." And I knew, I realized I'd got him in trouble. I hadn't made that connection, you know. "Don't you ever take him to a beer garden." "Oh, he was just sitting in the corner." he was having a beer (laughter). I remember that. Story_ID: 106958 Speaker 1: Now, is there a story about how your parents met? Speaker 2: You know, yeah, there--I think they met in church. I think my father [Paul Lawrence Berry], I think it was mutual. I mean she [mother Donella Sneed] used to call him, "my Paul." She was very madly in love with my dad, and I think, I believe their meeting was in a church. Dad had come up from Cincinnati [Ohio] from Kentucky. He came from Kentucky to Cincinnati and Cincinnati to Detroit. And in the, at some point there, they met in church, I believe. And, you know, that was the--I, I dare say, he was probably was, at that time, the only man my mother knew because she was held rather closely by my grandmother [Annie Talley]. And she was very much, you know, taken by my father. He was a good-looking man, very, you know, very slim, not very tall, but very about himself, wore excellent clothes, the best--you know, he just cared about his look and about his style. I've seen some pictures of him back then, and he was quite the dude (laughter), he was quite the dude. And he always was that way. Through the years that I knew him, he was always well dressed, always well shaven, a clean shave and a haircut, kept himself, shoes, everything matched up. You know, dad was always that kind of fellow. But he was a poor husband. He was just, he had, he had demons that kept him from doing and being what he could have been. And as a result, our family life was disrupted, not by my mother, but by my father. No question about it. And he admitted that later in life. He, as a matter of fact, he said to my mother, "I--if I could do it again, I'd marry you again and I wish we could, it hadn't happened the way it happened." They ended up being friends because of their children, because of me primarily. You know, I required both of their--attention from both of them. And I forgave them. I didn't forget it, but I did forgive them. And I said, you know, and they both agreed, you know, we could have done a lot together. We just didn't have that chance. Speaker 1: So they were married until you were about seven years old? Speaker 2: They were married till I was eleven. I think mom got her divorce when I was eleven years old, ten or eleven. But they were, that--they just didn't get a divorce, you know. Back then, it cost money. You had to have attorneys. Speaker 1: But they split up when you were about seven? Speaker 2: Yeah, they were split. I mean that's when I came to live with--I was three years old. So it's clearly, I turned three, and my mom and dad separated at three years old. And I went to live with my mother and my grandmother in my grandmother's house. And I lived with her until we moved from that house in Highland Park [Michigan] to Ohio at the age of seven. Story_ID: 106959 Speaker 1: Okay, so, well, if you think about--now, you've had a lot of influences. I usually ask people if they take more after their mother or their father, but when you consider, you know--I know you were raised by your grandmother [Annie Talley], and influenced by your grandfather [Plez Talley] and your great-grandfather [James Hudson]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And, but when you consider all these influences of the dispositions of the people, their-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --talents, their, what they look like, who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: I'd like to believe it's my grandmother. She had the largest influence on my life. She caught me from a failed marriage. She was truly a, an example of the, "It takes a village." She didn't need a three-year old. Hell, she raised nine kids. What did she need with me at this point? But, by the way, I'm the oldest of her fifty-four grandchildren. So I was special to her in that reason, not so special that she said, "I'll take care of him." But I was her grandson, and here was a--there was no question in those days that family was gonna look after family. So, you know, she didn't feel like she had a choice, not that that's why she did because she didn't have choice. She did it because she was caring, loving woman, and here I was. And, you know, and she often said to me, "You were different than any child I'd ever raised." You were, you know--we used to talk from the time I was seven years old like adult-to-adult. We'd talk about anything, and she'd say to me, "You shouldn't know that. How do you know that?" Or she'd say, "Don't--no, I'm not gonna talk to you about that. You're only so old, you know." And I'd say to her, "But if I know, I know (laughter)." And she'd say, "Yeah, well, just keep it to yourself." She'd say, well, "The time will come, by and by, boy," she'd say, when we can talk about that. But I'm not gonna talk to you about that right now. I'd say, "Okay." You know, she told me something, and I'd explain why it happened or what was going on in life. "I don't know how you know those things. You can't say you're smart. You just knew." I just--and we had many--and it was just the two of us. Aunt Debra went on to live with my aunt, my mother's [Donella Sneed's] sister, Armentha [ph.]. And I stayed with--we tried it. We moved back--the two of us, Debbie and I moved back to the house, back to Ypsilanti, Michigan. My mother was nursing at University of Michigan in Ann Arbor. And we lived in the projects, up in Ypsilanti, whatever it was called. I don't know if we know they were projects. And we were there a couple of years. But my mother couldn't cook, and remember we'd had the joy of being with our grandmother for the, who could cook anything and did, you know, and kept a house the way she did. My mother couldn't cook. She couldn't, she had, you know, she just wasn't cut out to be at that point a mother or a housewife. She just wasn't. She was working everyday as a nurse in Ann Arbor, and trying to live her life as well. And Debbie and I were--found ourselves not very happy. And I then moved back to Ohio to the farm with my grandmother, and Debbie moved to Detroit with Armentha with aunt--we called her "Aunt Toe" [ph.]. And that was about probably at eight to ten or eleven years old. But she was the woman that influenced me most. Story_ID: 106960 Speaker 1: She [grandmother Annie Talley] had me--I would go to church on--we'd go to church, I'd go to church, a little church in (laughter), on Irwin Road and Old State Line Road, a little Church of God with Reverend and Sister Jackson. He was a minister. And we would go to church Tuesdays, Thursdays, Saturdays and Sundays, whether we wanted to or not. I remember at eight years, I was teaching Sunday school. I could read from the age of, I think mom says three and a half or four years old. I was reading, reading the Bible, you know. And so my grandmother would have us--and at that time, Debbie was still with, was still--we'd go to church and we'd be sitting there. And in the church would be Reverend Jackson, his wife, my grandmother and Debbie and me. That was it in the church at that--and there's, you know, they're singing and we're singing. Debbie and I look at each other and then Reverend Jackson would get up, and he would preach. And he'd do the service, and Debbie and I would look at each other because we knew that my grandmother knew more Bible than he knew because (laughter) she had studied the Bible. So we knew. So who was he preaching to? Debbie and I didn't care (laughter). We didn't wanna hear it. And he would, and then he would say this--and this, and (unclear) (laughter), "Now, pardon my digression." And we, oh, God, that meant, here's a ten minute loop about--oh my God. And my grandmother would look over at us and throw her finger at, which meant, you didn't misbehave. Or she would, if you did, she would walk over with her hand held high, coming across to where we were sitting, and reach over and grab you on the arm, right here and turn it and dare you, dare you to say a word. You'd better not yell. She'd just turn it, pinch you. And she'd turn you loose and walk back. And that, now, she was known for it so much so that her younger sister, Carrie Presley, that was her nickname. She used to call her "Pinch," (laughter) because she used to pinch. You didn't wanna get pinched by our grandmother, but she would come over and she would, she'd wrap you up, boy. And we'd sit there, and, you know--and it was good. I mean I, I learned the things, and I would teach Sunday school. Then I traveled with the Reverend Jackson. We went to different--she felt comfortable that he was a good man, a good and decent man. And what I learned later was what she meant by that, she wasn't worried of turning me loose with this guy. She thought he was--and he was. He, there was never, ever any, a hint of anything at all. And I would travel with him, and it was great. And then, you know, he'd take his eight, nine-year old parishioner with him to, to what they used to have those conventions, church conventions here and there. It was great. I got a chance to travel. Then when I got back to--I was home at, I think about the age of eight or nine, my grandmother called me in one day. And she said, "Paul, I want you to learn to cook." She says, "You gotta take care of yourself." She said, "So from now on, once a month, I want you to plan a meal, go shopping with me to get it, come back and fix it, cook it, clean up." She said, "I want you to do that once a month. Would you do it?" I said, "Of course." When you're eight years old, that sounded like a huge assignment and wonderful. So we used to go into the A and P, when we--when I went with her or Kroger's at the time. I think it was an A and P Store. And we'd buy, she said, "What do you want?" And I'd tell her what I was gonna cook. And I would come back and I would cook that meal. And it was a wonderful learning experience. But I grew right--and I did it every year, eight, nine, ten. When I came back from--at eleven, twelve, and then probably at my twelfth or thirteenth year, and I don't know which one, I was outside playing. And I had boasted about the fact that I cooked, and I knew how to cook. And my friends, Tommy Sorminsky [ph.] and Mike Soransky [ph.] who lived across the street from us, they laughed at me. "Why are you laughing?" "You, girl--boys don't cook. Girls cook." That's what they said. And I remembered that. So she called me in one day. She said, (laughter) "Paul, come (unclear), it's time." And I was upset because we were playing out in the field or whatever we're doing and I gotta go shop and all that. And I said it to her. I said, "Mom, I'm a boy. I'm not a girl. I'm a boy. Why do I have to--girls cook." "Oh, Paul," she said, "really?" She said, "Now, where did you hear that?" I told her. She says, "Well, let me tell you something." She says, "I raised nine of my children," and she says, "I raised them so dumb in the kitchen that they didn't know how to boil water. I did it all." She says, "But with you I got a second chance, Paul. And I'm making full use of that." She says, "Now, you're gonna cook." And she says, "I'll tell you why." She said, "At one day in the future, you're going to grow up," she says. "And you're going to want to get married." She says, "But one of the reasons you'll get married is not because you're hungry. You'll know how to cook." And that was, and I looked at her. She said, "So go out. I'll do it," she says, "but you're gonna cook." She says, "You'll get married for all the right reasons, but you'll know how to take care of yourself." And I remember that to this day. "You know, you'll get married for a lot of silly reasons, but one of 'em won't be because you're hungry." Story_ID: 106961 Speaker 1: Now, you have a sister? Speaker 2: Yes, I do. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: One sister, Debra. She's two years my junior. And she lives in Richmond, Virginia. She is also a nurse--or was a nurse. She got hurt by a patient, was hurt, one of the patients that she was looking after. She worked psychiatric ward, and she got tossed around pretty badly. And she's unable to do that, but she's functional and enjoying her life and she's living just about twenty miles outside of Richmond. Story_ID: 106962 Speaker 1: Okay, now, do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: Of what? Of-- Speaker 1: Of anything. The first childhood memory, the earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: The earliest childhood memory, yeah, I guess the earliest childhood memory that I have is (laughter), going to the hospital, to Herman Kiefer Hospital [in Detroit, Michigan]. I guess that's the first time I was aware that I was somebody or anybody, meaning that I was alive, that I was--when you start to look around beyond yourself, okay. Things happen. But in this case, I ran out into the yard, in the backyard behind our house on 96 Kendall and ran this knee into an oncoming car. And it, and it hurt like the dickens. And I, the--they, you know, they took me to the doctor. But, you know what, that wasn't--yeah, and I was okay with it. But what really, the first memory, I guess, and the one that takes me to where I was going was the one that happened on the slide in the backyard at 96 Kendall. And that's why it's probably confusing. But we used to have a wooden slide in the backyard. And my grandfather [Plez Talley] had gotten it somewhere, and then it was always used. We never had anything new. We always got something secondhand. But secondhand was new if it was yours for the first time. And that's the way the childhood was. We didn't, you know, we--when you saw things advertised to buy something new. You didn't do that. You always got somebody else's, from clothes to whatever, hand-me-down's; a way of life, you were glad to get it and so and so. So this slide was old, and it was wooden. And as it, as the weather had worn it, the board that you slid down was which was wood which was polished, had bowed out a little bit, the board. And I came down that slide and got my penis caught between, and I was hanging upside down by my penis which had gotten wedged in that, in the board on the slide. And I'm just yelling to be there hurting. I mean I was just, you know. So they came out and they, I mean, oh, they--I remember everybody was going crazy. And I mean the family members because obviously, and they called the ambulance. And the ambulance came, and they lifted me out and took me in and took me to Herman Kiefer Hospital. That was, and at Herman Kiefer Hospital I remember being in there, and, of course, I was hurting and sore and still crying and everything. But, you know what I noticed? People were, what's the big deal? I only use it to pee with and, you know, and so I mean as far as I was concerned, honestly, I had no concept of anything. I was six, seven years old. And people were walking around like I was dying, and I was--it scared me because they, what, you know, you--I just could feel the tension. Well, obviously, the adults were concerned that I had hurt myself far beyond just the physical hurt. And it was, I had--there was a long gash on the side and everything. Well, the bottom line is that I had to go back several--I remember the smell of the hospital, and they were wrapping up the penis, and they were doing--and it was it no big deal. I use it to pee with, and as long as I could pee, I'm a comfortable soul, you know. But they were concerned about the impact that that would have. And it did have an impact. And later on in life, we understood I had actually pulled one side of the, whatever tubes they called, to the sperm tube. So they thought that I would never have children, and they were right, for the first forty-three years of my life. That was an early memory that I reflect back on because I remember the pain, and I remember watching people react. And I became aware that, you know, what is this about? What is living about? What's going on here? It just, it called into question all these doctors, you know, at the hospital, and the smell, the antiseptic smell, the concern on the face, my mother [Donella Sneed] crying, my grandmother [Annie Talley], (unclear) Felix saying something to her like I'm so sorry, I didn't, you know. And my grandfather coming back and tearing that, you know, chopping it down. He just took an ax to the-- Speaker 1: He chopped the sliding board down? Speaker 2: Yeah, took an ax to it. I think that's the first time I saw my grandfather with any real emotion, you know. Speaker 1: People could, if they could see me, they would see me on the verge of tears. Story_ID: 106963 Speaker 1: Just thinking about this. This is-- Speaker 2: Oh, I--my grandfather [Plez Talley] had tears in his eyes. He came in to--you know, and again, I, I'm okay. What's the big deal? Well, they were right. There were, there were consequences with that, and I had quite decided, after, you know, I don't know, years later, didn't worry about it, didn't have any concerns about it. But as I grew older, they did more tests to see. And sure enough, my sperm count was so low that the doctor had taken the position that I probably would not have children. You know, the interesting thing about that, twenty years later or whatever it was or fifteen years later, there was no one to hold accountable. So, you know, who cared about that, but me, you know. I mean there's nobody to care about it, you know. My mother [Donella Sneed]--my grandmother [Annie Talley], if they had concerns, and I'm sure they did, they didn't talk about it. You know, just one of those things you just didn't talk about. As long as he's not complaining and, we hope he's okay. And I know they were, you know, nobody ever forgot that. So that's probably my first memory of, the occasion to be somebody, to be aware that there was more to this life. I mean there was, you know, what am I here for? And why do people care, and how do they respond, and who are you and what are you about? And all of those things kind of, you know, it just--you just start to awaken and look around and see more than what, more than the toys you play with or more than the room you're in or more than Christmas. I remember that. It just, somehow I knew that this was bigger than me. Story_ID: 106964 Speaker 1: Do you have any memories of Highland Park? I mean the early, I guess--you weren't there that long, I guess? Speaker 2: No, I was there from that point until seven or--I don't know, six, seven or eight, whenever we moved. I haven't gone back to coordinate dates, but I can assure you that I used to go to Mike's Store, which was the next street over. And he had, he knew my, he knew my grandmother [Annie Talley] and the Talley family. I remember Joe Louis [Barrow, heavyweight boxing champion] being a friend of my uncle, Uncle Kenneth. And he would come to the house. Speaker 1: Joe Louis would come to house? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah (laughter), yeah. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Joe Louis Barrow. Speaker 2: Joe Louis Barrow would come to visit--by the way, Uncle Kenneth just died. I was down in Tennessee two weeks ago at his funeral--or four weeks ago now, I guess. I forget which date it was, but he died. But he and my uncle were best buddies, went to school together, you know, played together, hung out together. And I remember Mike's Grocery Store, which was the next street over on Labelle, on Labelle. And we used to go there and shop. We'd go over there as kids, you know, you'd take two or three dimes or whatever, pennies, and you'd buy stuff. And I remember going into that store, and I--this was a time when you, as a young boy, were responsible not only to your grandmother and the people in your house, but everybody up and down that street. You were Annie Talley's grandson. And everybody knew that, and you knew that everybody knew Annie Talley. So you behaved. You didn't have a choice. I mean, you know, she--God forbid somebody call her and say you did something that was not right. And I remember going into Mike's Store, and all these--they had these little pies. And they were sitting right out there, and, of course, like most kids at the time, I was interested, didn't have anything. And so at one night, I remember I took a pie, put it in my pocket and went out with the pie and ate it before I got home. You couldn't enjoy it (laughter) because you couldn't go home (laughter) with it. You know, and I got away with it once or twice, and maybe on a third time in that store Mike looked over at me, and he said, "I'm gonna tell." And I looked at him, and I said, "What?" He said, "I'm gonna tell." [Taking deep breath] And he did, told my grandmother that I had stolen a pie out of the store. Oh, my God. I was first of all, the first thing she would do is just, she would just purely and simply ignore you, just act like you weren't there anymore, which was the biggest hurt and make you feel like you had done the worst thing in the world. And she said, if there're any two things--I remember this, "Any two things I hate in this world, stealing is both of them, yeah, any two things I hate in this world." Now, later on, there were a lot of other things were both of them, but that was it. She said, "You don't steal. Nobody steals around me. I'll not have it." And then she sent me out in the backyard and said, "Bring a switch here, bring in a switch. And it dare not break," she said. And I went out in the backyard and found a switch and brought it to her. And she took it and she said, now, "I'm going to spank you. I'm gonna beat you." She said, "Thieves I will not tolerate in my life." (Laughter) And I got the beating of my life, you know. She didn't beat me that day. She waits, she let you--(laughter), she could be just merciless. She'd just, you waited, and then when you least expected it, when you had kind of gotten it out of your mind, and you'd gotten away from it, she called you in. It's time. And she just wore me out, boy. I'll tell you what. I never stole anything else. I got the message loud and clear. She says, "I leave money around this house. You don't steal here." And it, that was a wonderful lesson, you know, that she taught. Somebody cared and made you care about who you were and the quality and the--it was about--you know, it's so important that you learn to be accountable to yourself, not because somebody's watching, for the reason that they're not watching. But you are you, and you have to be accountable to yourself. And that was a lesson I learned that, you know, it wasn't about Mike, it wasn't--it was about me. Do I wanna be thought of as a thief? Am I? No. Yeah, just didn't need to do that. So, yeah, you asked me who was the most influential person in my life. Easily my grandmother in so many, many ways, the things she taught me. You know, the love she showed me. I could never repay her. Story_ID: 106965 Speaker 1: Okay, that's a good story. I just wanted to bounce back to Joe Louis for a minute-- Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: --because, do you--now, he was a, I mean he was like Michael Jordan or Muhammad Ali in those days. He was the big star. Speaker 2: Not to me then (laughter). He was just my uncle's buddy (laughter). Okay, you're right. Hey, what do I know about boxing or who this guy was, you know? And I don't know where he was in his career at that point. And I don't know whether it was reflected to me later on because he did more. But what I, what my point is, when I knew him, I don't know how big--whether he was a big star or not. I just knew that he was Uncle Kenneth's best buddy. Speaker 1: Yeah, he may--I know he was past his prime probably by the time you were aware of him. Speaker 2: Well, this was, I'll tell you what. It was--we can do the years. It was, it would have been forty--it would have been '50 [1950], '49 [1949], '50 [1950], '51 [1951], somewhere in there, I think. It was before we moved to Ohio, and yet I was old enough for, in the consciousness to know, you know. So, I don't know. Maybe he was. I just know that-- Speaker 1: Yeah, I think he tried to make a comeback at a certain point at that--and he was really too old at that point. Speaker 2: Yeah, I really can't-- Speaker 1: But he had been so great before. Speaker 2: How old was he then, do you think? Speaker 1: Well, his prime was in the '30s [1930s]-- Speaker 2: Was it? Speaker 1: --and the early '40s [1940s], yeah. Speaker 2: In early '40s [1940s], okay. Well, this would have been after. Yeah, because Kenneth, Uncle Kenneth was in the war--well, no, that was--I think he was in the Korean War. I don't know. I just remember--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: I think he had lost a fight to Jersey Joe Wolcott and then-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I, you know, I remember more than one time, having him come to the house. And I don't know whether it was before or after Kenneth, Uncle Kenneth was in the service. But I remember them. And he'd come--they introduced him, and I, you know, you know, he shook hands and said whatever you say to kids at that point. But they were friends for a long, long time. And-- Speaker 1: There's a, you know--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: As I said, Kenneth just died the first of the month. I went down to Tennessee for his funeral with my mother [Donella Sneed]. My mother who lives with us, by the way, Donnella lives with us, lives with me now (unclear). But anyway, yeah, go ahead, I'm sorry. Story_ID: 106966 Speaker 1: Well, you started school in Highland Park [Michigan], I guess, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, I went to Willard [Elementary] School in Highland Park. I went to--I went from the kindergarten through the second or third grade, as I recall it. And then that's when we moved from Ohio--from Detroit [Michigan] to Swanton, Ohio. Speaker 1: Now, what was the--that's, well, it's kind of unusual, and, you know, to think that a family would leave Detroit in those days--(unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Had no choice, had no choice. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: Remember, I was living with my grandparents. The church had reclaimed the house that they were living in. The only thing that they had, and the only place they could go was to their property that they invested in, in Ohio. So, the reasons we moved there, they had to have a place to live. My grandfather [Plez Talley] was now retired or at least so we thought he was. And here he had me and my sister, my sister and I. And all of his children were grown, but they had to, you know, they had to provide, they had to have a place to live and to provide for us. My mother [Donella Sneed] was paying them, and my father [Paul Lawrence Berry, Sr.] was paying them, whatever they could afford. And that was important to my grandfather who said, you know, "You pay your way, and if you didn't get paid for it, you wouldn't be here." And I know now it was just his way of trying to say behave and take care. But we had to go some place, and that's where they went to this thirteen acre farm. They'd put this--it was gonna be their retirement home. It was where they were going to retire and-- Speaker 1: Had they ever lived there before? Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: They had fixed the house and put a house on it, you know. As I said, there was no plumbing, you know, in the house, and not until we moved in that we start to put the plumbing in. You know, I remember the pump, we had a pump there that got the water. We had a potbelly stove that we were able, that was put into the house when they built a concrete addition to the, on the back of one wing and opened up the back side. And that's where we used to boil water to--when my grandmother [Annie Talley]--we'd bring in a tub of water and put it on top of that thing. And you'd boil that water, get it hot, and then you'd pour it into a #10 [wash] tub, whatever it was, and that's where you would shower, you would take a bath. Speaker 1: In this galvanized tub. Speaker 2: Yeah, big galvanized tub. You'd climb in there, and pour a little hot water and, you know, it was--that's one of the reasons I hated it, was that it--here I was living in Detroit in a house with (laughter), you know, with tubs and a second floor. And all of a sudden I'm taking a bath in the kitchen in this little area, in this thing (laughter). What did I do? (laughter) What did I ever do to deserve this (laughter), I thought, you know. My mom, where are you, you know. Speaker 1: So this is, was there a black community in Swanton? Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They had found--my grandmother and grandfather were looking. They liked the place. They liked the--they wanted to get out of Detroit for retirement. They wanted to get out of Detroit for retirement. They were looking for the right place, and they found this property. And back then, just like today, there was, it was advertised. You saw it, you know, buy, buy on the lake, buy, you know--and so they got thirteen acres of land. It occurs to me that another--Uncle Johnny, my grandfather's brother or somebody else had some property, at one point had bought some property, and then sold it. So I think that's what drove my grandparents to that location, is that a brother or a sister or somebody else had bought--again, they were the same people we are today. Where are we gonna retire? How are we gonna live? You know, what little bit they had saved up, and they thought they could afford it. And so they bought those 13 acres of land. Now, it provided them a proximity to the city, but it also provided them land to work. Remember, these were farmers by life, coming out of Tennessee or wherever, you know. And in my grandmother's case and my--Annie's case, she was from Tennessee, and they were farmers there. My grandfather was also from Tennessee, and, and--this is on my maternal side. And so they came up from Tennessee, and they understood farming. So land was important to both sides, both my maternal and paternal side. Story_ID: 106967 Speaker 1: Okay, so there's no black community there as such-- Speaker 2: Un-un. Speaker 1: --but, now is Swanton [Ohio] between Toledo [Ohio] and Detroit [Michigan] or between-- Speaker 2: Between--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --on the other side of Toledo? Speaker 2: Actually, we were, to tell you, we were outside of Toledo, eighteen miles out, south of Toledo, which would have taken it away from Detroit. And it was between Holland [Ohio] and Swanton, is where the property was. Speaker 1: Okay, so that's like going towards Bowling Green [Ohio], you know, I mean--(unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Going toward, actually going, if you would, more toward Chicago. Speaker 1: Oh, going that way. Speaker 2: Okay, yeah, you'd be going more west, and wee bit out of there, okay. That's where their property was. We were on the Chicago [Illinois] pike. We were about a mile inland from the Chicago pike, right near the Toledo Express Airport. If you ever look it up, you can see the airport. I actually looked at the property on Google, Google Land [sic Google Earth]. I went right and saw the house or at least the property. The house had since changed where we lived. Story_ID: 106968 Speaker 1: Eighteen miles, all right. So, now, was there a Church of God out there? Speaker 2: Yeah, there was a, not the same, you know, the churches like they had--you had different, this was the original Church of God, which was a, a split from out of Tennessee. The Original Church of God. Now, you had other Churches of God that were, you know, and this church was a Church of God by Reverend Jackson. It wasn't of the same split as was the Original Church of God. But the practice was the same, the religion. The dogma was exactly the same. Speaker 1: Okay, but was it in Swanton or-- Speaker 2: It was between Holland and Swanton. Speaker 1: Between Holland and Swanton. Speaker 2: Yeah, it was around the corner. It was a mile around, less than a mile around the corner from our house on Old State Line Road. It just so happened, and that was just happenstance. The, you know, the property wasn't there because of that. We found the church was in the, was in that place. Speaker 1: Okay, and you said, often, it would be your family and the Jacksons? Speaker 2: Oh, most of the time it would (laughter). Certainly, on Tuesdays and Thursdays. Remember, I was in church Tuesdays, Thursdays, Saturdays and Sundays. And when I said to my grandmother [Annie Talley], "Why do we go to church so much?" She said to me, "By and by, boy, by and by, you'll understand." And I do understand why we were in church. You know, I do understand the difference. When I look around and see my buddies either dead or in jail, you know, I understand the difference. I understand why she had us in that church when nobody else was there but us. She knew where we were, and she figured that maybe something would sink in, okay, maybe so. And it did, it made a difference. Look, I couldn't go outside (laughter). Let me tell you. In order to go outside to play and you know that this is true, I couldn't go outside until I said, "Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, Deuteronomy, Joshua, Judges, Israel, Nehemiah, Esther, Job, Psalms, Proverbs, Ecclesiastics, First and Second--I had to do the whole Old Testament, in order, if I wanted--I wanna go outside. Let me hear it. Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Number, Deuteronomy, Joshua, Judges, Ezra-Nehemiah, Esther, Job, Psalms, Proverbs, Ecclesiastics--every time, every time I wanted to go out and play, I had to say those books of bible (laughter), all right. I got to the point where she said, I just rattled them off. Okay, and she, and so one day I was there, and I said, I wanna go. She said, okay, let me hear it, backwards. That's what she said. I said, what? (Laughter) Let me hear it, son, backwards. I said, Ma, I don't know it backwards. You wanna go out and play? Yes, ma'am. Learn it backwards. Do I have to learn it right now? No, you can go out this time, but the next time you ask me to go out and play, backwards. But she was that fair. She could have said, yeah, but, you know, and so I went out to play, and I'm like, backwards? So I learned 'em backwards. And the New Testament, Matthew, Mark, Luke, John, First and Second Corinthians, I--you know, it was wonderful. I didn't get it then, you know. There was a discipline here, you know. There was a discipline. There was also the--she taught me, and I had to learn something. She taught me how to learn and what to learn and to pay the price for what you wanna do. I mean you can go through a litany of things that I was learning in what I thought was punishment of some sort. Today, I fully understand what she was teaching me, that it wasn't just happenstance. There was a method to her madness, and that madness drove me to sanity. Speaker 1: Well, I can hear the, I guess the introduction of you, said, this is my grandson. He can do the books of the bible forward and backward. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: And you were also like the protege of the reverend on the road, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: He took you on the road. And-- Speaker 2: Yeah, she would have been very happy for me to be a minister. I think she thought that whatever talent God had given me in terms of what I had, that it should be used in that way. And I know that's true because later on in life when I was (laughter), we were living--she would come in, she lived in Cleveland [Ohio]. She had an apartment in Cleveland with--my mom was there. And my, when my mom couldn't take her any longer, she'd ship her to me here in Washington [D.C.]. And I had a beautiful house on the lake, Lake Barcroft that she loved, I mean huge place. We were right on the lake and we'd go out on the boat. And I'd keep her. She had her own room. She had her own space. She had her own credit card that I gave her--(unclear) took care of, and she could fly anywhere she wanted to, anytime she wanted to. And she would, you know, (laughter) she would come in, and spend time, you know, and see my lifestyle, some of which she appreciated, some of which she didn't, you know. But the lessons that she taught me were, you know, are there. I mean you've gotta get it in there. How do you get it in there? And, again, I had the benefit of her raising her own nine children, you know. It wasn't that she was so smart. She was not a learned woman. She was not a, she probably got through 10th or 12th grade--10th or 11th grade, if that high, in school. But, boy, what she had learned and what she knew was just phenomenal. And I had benefit of that, of her teaching me in her own way. Story_ID: 106969 Speaker 1: Now, you said you had a radio in those days out there in Swanton [Ohio]-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: No TV at this point? Speaker 2: No, no, no (laughter). We didn't have a television, not at that point. We finally, we got a television, but we had a radio that sat there in the room. And of all of the things that we had or didn't have, the radio was the one thing that both my grandmother [Annie Talley] and father-grandfather [Plez Talley] thought was important because it was their only connection to the rest of the world in its way. And granddad and I would go out all day and work in a field, and (laughter) come back and clean up, get cleaned up for dinner and have dinner. And at seven o'clock we would all go into the living room there, and the radio--nobody was allowed to touch the radio but my grandfather, by the way. You didn't even look, we crept by it because if you got too close to it, you were gonna get killed. And you just knew that. Don't touch the radio, don't play with it. Don't do anything. That was the rule, and you abided by that rule. But at seven o'clock, there was a guy that would come on every night, and you, you know, I'm not sure you're old enough to know him, but he was--we would listen every night to a guy by the name Gabriel Heatter, Gabriel Heatter. And one of his favorite savings was "There's good news tonight." And we loved Gabriel Heatter. I mean, my goodness, you know, we learned the news. We--whatever it was, and my grandfather just absolutely adored Gabriel Heatter. And thus, I listened, and I learned to enjoy listening to him as well. Speaker 1: His was a news broadcast. Speaker 2: A news broad--yeah, he was a-- Speaker 1: I've heard his name, I, you know-- Speaker 2: Yeah, he was the Paul Harvey of that period. He'd take the news, and he would distill it and he'd tell you what happened. And then he'd add his, you know--you know, back then you could do that and it was acceptable. You wanted, not only to hear the news, but what it meant to you, or what it should have meant. Now, was it opinionated? Yes. But, you know, the fact wasn't opinionated so much. As they'd tell you, here's what happened, and here's what we think about that. So, you know, it was an important part of my history, the radio, in that time. Story_ID: 107237 Speaker 1: Alright, we were talking about, you know, Gabriel Heatter. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: There's another guy named J.C. Kaltenborn [sic H.V. Kaltenborn], I think-- Speaker 2: I remember the name. I don't, I didn't--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --and other radio personalities. Speaker 2: Yeah, he wasn't a favorite of granddad's, but anybody that was a favorite of granddad's or my grandma, you know, we would listen to. And there was "Dragnet." There was "Gang Busters," all of these shows. Now, my grandmother [Annie Talley] pretended that she didn't listen to them because they were worldly, but she listened (laughter) to them. She loved them, (laughter) she loved listening as did my grand--and we would, you know, they monitored what you heard, you know, on radio. I mean, you know, there were certain things you could hear and certain things you couldn't hear. And then low and behold, my goodness, guess what? Television comes along, and, of course, the buzz was about TV. That didn't mean we had one. That meant that we understood the buzz about it. And it was several years later, probably fifty--I don't know, '55 [1955], '54 [1954], '55 [1955], I--before we, you know, we actually got a used television. And the used television was the thing. It had a special place in (laughter), and you didn't touch that. But, you know, you realized that this was technology. Speaker 1: Do you remember what it looked like and what kind-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, just a little funny--I remember wood, brown or kind of a--it probably was fake wood cabinet around it, you know, rabbit ears antenna sticking up like that (laughter), terrible picture. But you could see it, you know, and you could hear it--(unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Do you know what it was? Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: Do you remember the brand it was? Speaker 2: Yeah, as a matter--a Zenith-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Zenith. Speaker 1: The lightning bolt. Speaker 2: Yeah, the lightening, I remember the Zenith. It was like this is a magical machine. This is a wonderful thing, you know. Are you kidding? Not only can you see--hear it, but there's a picture there. And there was no such thing as a bad picture then. Today, you know, you wonder how you saw it, but then, ah, you just see the image of it. And that was just amazing. And my grandmother, she said (laughter), "Tool of the devil, it's a tool of the devil (laughter). This is no, now, it's bad enough we can't get you--now, you're gonna, oh, tool of the devil. And my God, what are you likely to see on this thing. And who's controlling that?" And, you know, there wasn't a fight. My grandmother was curious, but her (laughter), her-"Plez, why did you bring this thing in here? What is--now, now, what did you--this is a tool of the devil (laughter), you know." "Oh, Annie, oh, Hon, it's the thing." You know, we--and, of course, he was smart. He says, "You can watch church service." "What church service," she says. There's no church service on (laughter). I think I can remember us watching--I know we watched the pattern. You know, they used to have the pattern that would come on? Speaker 1: With the Indian? Speaker 2: Yeah, you remember that? With, and it was like, oh, well, look, you can see that thing, you know, (laughter). That was, I was fascinated. I was absolutely fascinated by television. Story_ID: 107238 Speaker 1: How many stations did you have? Speaker 2: Maybe two, NBC. Then the next station was, I think CBS, yeah. And then somewhere down the line came ABC and FOX, but there were just those two, I mean that were, you know, that you could see, that you could, you know. And, of course, I had, I'd had the pleasure of actually being on television in Detroit. This was in the second grade. I, in the kindergarten, first, second grade in there somewhere, Mr. Cornfield was the teacher at Willard High School--Willard Elementary School [Detroit, Michigan]. And there was a program there that--they were looking for, for kids, and they took us to this television studio, his class. And we were sitting there. I don't know what the show was. I don't know what the program was, purpose. But, wow, to be in that television, and see those cameras and lights. Then we were using image orthicons [video camera tubes] which required all the light in the world to see. You know, you had the image orthicon tubes, and the lights. I mean it was just lit up like a, you know, so it was fascinating because all of a sudden you were in this created domain, this created area. And then these huge cameras, I mean huge, you know, looked, they looked like, they looked like some kind of animal, you know, I mean just the behemoths that, you know, God, just fascinating. Speaker 1: Yeah, the cameraman had to push around the cameras by tripod (clear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: They're huge, he had the dolly and tripod around and this big camera sitting there with, you know. That was like, ah, this is it. I've come to heaven (laughter), don't ever wanna leave. And I appeared on the show, I guess, never saw it with the other kids. But that was probably, it had more to do with influencing me in what was gonna happen than anything else. Speaker 1: Is that when the teacher recommended, was trying to-- Speaker 2: This was, no, this was five, six, probably a couple years after. I had, I was in kindergarten. Ms. Cosgrove got nowhere with her request to my grandmother [Annie Talley], and the only reason why I was able to do this with Mr. Cornfield is because of my mother [Donella Sneed]. She interceded on my behalf. She'd, oh, mama, come on, you know. It's 19--(laughter)--50 [1950], whatever it was. Let him do that. It's not gonna hurt anything, and he's not gonna--so she interceded on my behalf. And I was able to do it. But it was, it was well after. Speaker 1: Okay, so you were designated early as a personality, as a talent, as a--you know, as a personality? Speaker 2: Yeah, I, the--whatever she saw, and believe me, I had no idea what Ms. Cosgrove, but she was, you know, she was again, a learned, experienced teacher. And what she said--and I was there sitting at the table. And she said to my grandmother, "He is unlike my other children that I have." She says, "You have to"--well, she didn't say "you have to." She was, and I--her message was, "You must let him do this." This is--she wasn't having it. And my grandmother apologized to me about that. She said it was terrible that I didn't, "I just didn't know, Paul." I said, "Mom, I don't blame you for that, you know. I understand that." I just feel, she says, oh--I said, the only thing I'm sorry about is that I didn't make a lot of money so I could take care of you. I used to promise her from the time I was old enough to talk that I was gonna take her around the world one day. We were gonna travel together, that I was gonna pay her back and take her places she'd never been before. That was my promise to her. And she'd say, "I know, I know, I know". Speaker 1: So you were able to take her around later-- Speaker 2: I did, I took her to London [England], Paris [France] and Rome [Italy] on a trip that I'll, just was fascinating, phenomenal trip. Story_ID: 107239 Speaker 1: Well, let's go--now, what was the name of your school in Swanton [Ohio]? Speaker 2: Irwin, Irwin School. Speaker 1: E-R-- Speaker 2: I-R-W-I-N-- Speaker 1: I-R-- Speaker 2: --Irwin School, and I went there. And then I was transferred from there to--there was another school that was a part, called Sharp--Sharple, S-H-A-R-P-L-E, Sharple School [records show that Irwin School became Spencer-Sharples High School] for the fifth grade, fourth or fifth grade. And I was double promoted from there. And I ended up going to Anthony Wayne--now, Anthony--this was in [Whitehouse] Ohio. Anthony Wayne High--Anthony Wayne School, which was an attempt at integration. I was one of several kids that was, that was sent to, by car out of our area to a basically all-white school. I think there were-- Speaker 1: Now, Irwin, was that a-- Speaker 2: That was a local school, a neighborhood school? Speaker 1: Was it, I mean,--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Public. Speaker 1: --but that was mostly white too, wasn't it? Speaker 2: It had, it was just outside of Toledo, so it had a fairly good mix. I, I don't, I couldn't tell you today what the mix was, you know, but there were whites and blacks in that school because the school was in an integrated part of Ohio where we were. There were a number of white families, farmers living in the area, a number of black families working those farms or owning-- Speaker 1: Was Sharple about the same? Speaker 2: Sharples was the same, yeah. It was right in that same area. It was just five miles down the road. Speaker 1: And then Anthony Wayne, named after Mad Anthony Wayne, right? Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: Wayne State [University, Detroit, Michigan], and Wayne County [Michigan]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Now, this school, this was in Ohio. No, this was--you know, I don't--yeah, it could have been. It was the-- Speaker 1: This is the same one, I'm telling you--(unclear)--in Dayton, the same-- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: We got Wayne Avenue. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's the same. And-- Speaker 1: The same, yeah, Anthony Wayne. Speaker 2: Yeah, I went to that school, and I think we were one of five kids, blacks bused in on a daily basis. I don't know why my grandmother [Annie Talley] allowed them to do that. I'm not sure whether I wanted to do that or not, but I did. And I was able to deal with it. I mean, you know, it always about getting people to like you and care, and I think that's probably the argument that they made, is that Paul will make more friends than enemies in the new school. And it was true. I did, you know, I did. I made lots of friends at that school. Speaker 1: So you're doing well in school. You're being double-promoted. You're-- Speaker 2: Yeah, and I would never let my children be double promoted because it's just a--you can, academically, I could compete, but socially, I was a year or two behind. And there's no greater (laughter), there's no greater aggravation to another kid than to have a smart aleck kid (laughter), younger than he or she in the class with them. Now, I remember at Sharples, they double promoted me, and I would sit there, and I knew the answers (laughter), you know. I knew the answers or if I didn't, I could figure it out to the questions, right. So I was, you know, I was, and the kids started to resent me. No greater resentment than kids will have for you. And so I started backing off, you know. If I, even if I knew the answer, I wouldn't give the answer. And it started to reflect in my grades, obviously, and so when I, report card came--it was the first time my grandmother looked and said, what's going--I said--the second time, my card came in or the call came from (unclear). She called me and my grandmother called me, and she says I know what you're doing. She said, now, here's--let me tell you what your equation amounts to. You can either deal with those kids and get over it or you can come and deal with me and you won't (laughter). She said, so, (laughter) don't be down here. She says, you know, you're a big boy. They may not like you, but you won't like me if you don't make your grades. I got the message loud and clear though, you know, I zoomed off and did okay. And, but she made it very clear that the worst price that I would pay is her if I had to deal with her 'cause she figured it out right away. She said, you don't get dumb all of a sudden (laughter), you know. And that's what I was trying to do, just so I could be liked and be a part of the group. I would never let my children--Talley, my oldest son, who I love dearly. He's smarter than I'll ever be, and he was, all of his life since he was three years old; never asked me a question I couldn't answer, if he knew the answer--even if he thought I didn't, and he wouldn't ask. He speaks four languages fluently today. He's teaching English in Thailand. We taught our children to give back. We taught our children to be thankful. We taught them to be appreciative, you know. And it pays off. I mean our children care about others, and that's what we wanted. That's, you know, that's one of the things I had learned, I think, from her as well, to be thankful for what you have and share what you have. So, you know, I went off to school, off to that other school, and met these kids and got them to like me. And, but it wasn't, you know, and it's not easy. I mean I'm not a sociologist. I was a student, and here I'm thrust into this experiment, if you will, you know. And that did hurt my grades. I mean I made it. I was C-plus or B, but I wasn't the A student that I'd always been--and I wasn't ever gonna be an A student. I, if I had written the school books (laughter), I'd have still gotten a C. Story_ID: 107240 Speaker 1: So, you're saying that there was a prejudice? Speaker 2: Oh, my goodness, of course. The kids, the teachers. Why are we teaching? Why are they here, you know? I mean, all of that. You'd know. You walk into a room. You've, you know the hostilities from the teacher, you know. No, I, you know, the hard part was explaining that to my grandmother [Annie Talley], you know. Oh, don't be silly. You know, they care about you. They, this--you're just letting--okay. Speaker 1: Is there a story about how they--I mean how you were treated that you can remember? Speaker 2: Oh, little things, don't get called on. Your answer is not right, even if it was. You excluded so and so, okay. You sit over here on this side of the room, over here, okay. I don't mean by yourself, but at the end or, you know, in other words, you didn't have, I didn't have the choice of that. You, somebody's misbehaving and Paul, I think you're in a part of that. So you stay here and do lesson plans or I'm gonna, threatens to call, you know, all those kinds of things, little things that add up in the mind of a child, the aggregate is, it's huge, especially if you're there to learn. And that's what I was supposed to be doing, learning. But instead of learning, I was teaching. That's not the role of a child. I'm, you know, integration, yes, I'm all for it, but I mean we put kids in situations that are just, in my case, it was just untenable. Fortunately, there were always those people you could reach out to who understood what was going on and who would be helpful and teachers included in some cases. Speaker 1: Who were some of those at Wayne? Speaker 2: Friends, people that I met, you know, at the time, and classmates, boys, girls, you know, who--look, you can't fool (laughter) these kids, you can't fool kids. Kids know, you know. What's the question is, are they gonna do anything about it? You know, how do they react to you? Do they walk away and not, or did they, some of them would come up and say, "I'm sorry, that wasn't right." You know, that wasn't right. What don't you understand? I'll help you understand this, you know. I even had one young lady at the, at Anthony Wayne who challenged the teacher, challenged the teacher. And she was called out, and I was called out, and now, we went down to the principal's office, and what happened? And, you know, and the principal knew right away or the dean knew right away, or whoever she was. So they, you know, sit down, everybody cool out. Get back to work, you know. You're gonna grow up whether it's good or bad. And you're gonna grow up, so get on with it. And you, there's a lesson you learn, you know. I didn't make the world this way. It's that way. I'll try to change it, but I still gotta grow up, you know. Speaker 1: So how old were you at Anthony Wayne? Was this like middle school? Speaker 2: Yeah, this was, let me see, I would have been 12, 13, 14, somewhere in there. Speaker 1: So this is before high school then, right? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, no, this was before high school. Story_ID: 107241 Speaker 1: Now, I have a note here that you graduated from Commerce High School in Detroit [Michigan]. So did you move back to Detroit at some point? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, we moved back, and at the age of fourteen or fifteen. I forget which--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: So your grandparents and your-- Speaker 2: My grandfather had died. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And my grandmother [Annie Talley] and I moved back to Detroit. And my sister, again, was living with my aunt. Speaker 1: Now, was your grandfather ill or was it unexpected? Speaker 2: No, I'm sorry, that's not true. What happened was, for a variety of reasons--no, no, that's not. I'll tell you want happened was, at fourteen or fifteen, whatever year, I wanted to live with my father. And I'm not quite sure why I did or what precipitated that, but I did want to live with my father. Speaker 1: Now, had you been to Kentucky with him? Speaker 2: Five and six years old. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Okay, never had--had not been with him since then, and now I'm fourteen or fifteen years old. And I was entering high school--I know what happened. What caused this, was I was entering high school or, yeah, I was entering Central High School, I think, or at least I had been accepted, and I was at that age, and so, my grandmother may have thought it was good for me to go to high school. Maybe she saw something, you know, at that Wayne or whatever. Anyway, she wanted me out of the environment or I wanted to be out of the environment, and I'm not sure which one it is. But I ended up coming back and moving in with my dad and his--and my stepmother. And I went on there to Central High School [Detroit, Michigan] and was transferred from Central High School down to Cass Tech [Detroit, Michigan] or to--Cass was a technical school and Commerce was the business school. And I was a, I was enrolled in the business, in the business school. So I actually went to--if you look under Cass Tech, it was just the big umbrella. But I went to High School of Commerce, is what it was called-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --High School of Commerce in downtown Detroit. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I went there, and initially, I just don't remember whether my grandmother and grandfather moved [sirens]-- Story_ID: 107242 Speaker 1: Yeah, I don't remember why, but anyway, I got back to Detroit [Michigan]. And I moved in with my father and my stepmother. And I lived there with them until my mother--stepmother died. We were living over off of Lynwood and the street right there--and Davidson. And then when my stepmother died, my father and I moved over to an--dad was looking after an apartment complex off of Mack Avenue on the east side. But anyway, the experiment with my father and I didn't work at all. I mean we were--my father was still unsure of how to be a dad. He didn't understand that he was--he thought parenting was disciplining. He had no idea how to relate, didn't have any of that capability. And so I realized that I was unhappy, and I didn't wanna fight with my father. I just wasn't raised that way. So I, my--by that time, my grandmother [Annie Talley] had--and my grandfather was still alive, by the way. He was living on the farm, I think. But she had moved up to Detroit. They had--they didn't call it separation, but I guess they, you know, I mean she was sixty-something, whatever, and--or older. Anyway, he lived there on the farm. She moved up to her sister's house, and I moved in with her. So I ended up back in Detroit on Blaine Avenue, Blaine Street with Aunt Dora and my grandmother was either there or was coming. I can't remember. Maybe she hadn't moved in there yet. I'm just trying to remember. But anyway, I graduated, I graduated from high school in 1961, in June of '61 [1961]. And I was, I was very, feeling very displaced or misplaced or no place. And no one had gone to college in my family. My mother [Donella Sneed] had gone to nursing school, you know, but--so I had no example, no role model, nobody to talk to, didn't understand, didn't know about all the things you would need to know about. Obviously, we had no money, nobody there, but so, you know, I thought about my choices. And at that point, I thought the service [Military Service] was my choice. Speaker 2: Now, did you have any counseling in high school? Did they give you counseling about college or anything? Speaker 1: No, no, no. Speaker 2: And were your--did your grades ever get back up to where they were before? Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, I had good grades. I had, you know, I had good grades. I mean people talked about going to college, if you should go to college, you know, my grades, my grade average was B-plus, B or B-plus. Speaker 2: I just wondered 'cause that's a lot of disruption for a high school--(unclear)-- Speaker 1: You know what it was, yeah, it was a lot of disruption, and I'll tell you. Interestingly enough, when you move around like I did, you lose contact with friends and relations. I didn't have any school buddies. To this day, I don't have any school buddies. How could I? You know I was in and out of people's lives. I was here, I was there, you know, from Irwin School to--well, follow the track. I, what relationships did you make? You know, then--at high school, I went there for two years, I guess, three--I don't remember now. I can't tell you. Not only did I not have friends, but I didn't make friends because why make a friend that you were gonna leave? That was my legacy, you now, so, you know, and again, I was, again, remember, a year early. So I was younger than my classmates, for the most part, a year younger than. And I was new, I was a newbie. So, you know, they didn't make friends with newbies. You've gone from kindergarten through the tenth or twelfth grade with this kid, that's your friend. You've gone through the tenth grade with this dude who's a year younger, that ain't your friend (laughter), you know. That was the reality of it, you know. I wasn't smart enough then to figure that out, but, but so I graduated in June. I guess I was, I think I was still living with my father when I graduated. Then I think Fannie [stepmother] died, and that's when I moved out and, because it was that period from June of '61 [1961] until November of '61 [1961], I really felt lost, you know. So I just wanted to get out. And so I applied for--both mom and dad had to sign for me, and they both did because I was sixteen, and you had to have a parent's signature at that point. But I couldn't wait to get out of there. Story_ID: 107243 Speaker 1: So, why the Air Force? Speaker 2: 'Cause I wanted to fly. I was fascinated by airplanes. I had always been totally fascinated. Next to television and airplanes, loves of my life. I used to go to the airport in--I used to walk to the airport (laughter) in Ohio from the farm. It was a four-mile walk from my house to Toledo Express Airport. And I would walk to the airport and just find a place out there and just sit and wait for the next airplane to come in or take off. And my grandma would say, "What did you do at the airport?" I said, "Nothing (laughter)." "What do you mean? You just went to the airport?" "Yeah." "Did you go in?" "No." "What did you do?" (laughter) Nothing. I just watched the airplanes go, you know, watched them. I remember those big constellations that used to come in with the three tails, three tail--the rudders, three rudders on the, on those airplanes. And I used to, you know, United [United Airlines] was flying it--and now, that was a big airplane, and they were flying 54s, I think, at that time with what we call in the Military, C-54s. Speaker 1: Those are big planes. Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: That's, I mean the Hercules, you're talking about? Speaker 2: No, no, no, these were--remember this is back when they--we didn't have anything-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --like that size. This was, this was what--they were flying what we called Gooney Birds, which was a C-47, 54s, and then the Const came in, the Constellations. Eastern, Eastern Airlines flew those. United flew the 54s which were then McDonnell-Douglas, I think was the manufacturer. But I knew all that stuff, you know. I knew everything that you could know, I thought I did, because all I wanted to do was fly. And I was, I was vague enough or arrogant enough to think that if I could just get into the Air Force, I'd work my way on a jet. Now, it was clear you had to have a degree. They said it. You know, if you wanna go to flight school, you can go to flight school, but you gotta have a degree. But I figured I could work around (laughter) that. Speaker 1: A college degree, right? Speaker 2: A college degree. You had to have a college degree. But I figured I could work around that, okay. And so I signed up, and they said, "Well, you can't fly." I said, "Oh, yeah, I'll fly." And (laughter) I joined the Air Force in November of 1961. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I graduated in, in April or May of '61 [1961] and went in service, left here and went to Lackland Air Force Base in [San Antonio] Texas, is where I was assigned in November of '61 [1961]. From November until January or February, I was then moved from Lackland--I was assigned to Gunther Air Force Base in, in Montgomery, Alabama. Montgomery, Ala--yeah, through, went through Birmingham, to Montgomery, Alabama. I went down to this air base. I went down, had my uniform and had gotten my training, going down for dental school. That shows you how close I got to flying at that point. They put me in the medical--you know, it was always med, matching up. My mother [Donella Sneed] was nursing, medics, I understood it. So I was assigned as a medical tech, and I took basic medical training, which is the last thing I was interested in. But I could do it. And then, from there, I had some options, and one of the options was to go to dental school. It wasn't an option. That's what they assigned me to go to dental training and to be a dental technician. So I said, okay. And I remember the trip to there, we met up, four of us, who were from Detroit, heading south. And we headed south, my first time south, other than to go to Kentucky with my dad when I was five. And we got down there, and my grandmother [Annie Talley], she was so concerned, she cautioned me. She said, be very careful, Paul. So I said, okay, mom. And I headed down. I'm very proud of my uniform. I wore it with, you know, with distinction. It was a wonderful thing to have. Story_ID: 106977 Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: We left Detroit [Michigan] heading to Gunther Air Force Base in Montgomery, Alabama. I'd never been south before. And we headed down there, there were four of us. It was three guys, three white airmen and yours truly. And we were full of ourselves, all in uniform, heading down for our next phase, excited about the--and this was in '62 [1962]. And we got down to Birmingham, Alabama (laughter), and we got off the bus in Birmingham, and I remember the four of us climbing off and that. And we went to, went to an inn and there was a sign that said, "White Only" and we all looked at each other, and you know, we just, none of us were from the South before, had been in the South. And they looked at me, and I'm--the first thing we all felt was embarrassment. I was embarrassed that I was not being allowed in, and they were embarrassed, and we didn't know what to do. Here we were together, airmen, in the service, in uniform, and what were we supposed to do. So we just climbed back on the bus, all four of us. Nobody went in. Now, this was one of those scenic cruisers. And those scenic cruisers had a toilet in the back on these buses. This was big stuff then. So nobody went in. And to their credit, they wouldn't leave me. There was a Colored, whatever they called it over there, and the water, everything. I'd never saw that. I mean I'd heard about it. I wasn't ignorant of it, but never been confronted. Speaker 1: Now, did you know about, either before you got there or shortly afterwards, the Freedom Riders--I think the Freedom Riders went down through there in '61 [1961]. Did you know about the Freedom Riders? Speaker 2: Yeah, yes, yes. Well, I--but, you know--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: The tremendous beatings that people received for going in the wrong section of-- Speaker 2: It was what was reported on television. That hadn't happened to you, hadn't happened to me. So, yeah, I saw that, but that was what happened on television, didn't, you know, was it really? I mean you-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --see it and you understand it, but, you know, remember, I'm seventeen years old at this point. And so-- Speaker 1: Okay, but you didn't have a sense that that was the same bus station where all this took place (laughter)? Speaker 2: Didn't cross our minds like that. Here we were, or we thought it was better, or we thought things had changed. I don't know what we thought, but we were surprised. We had heard about it. We knew that the South was still segregated, but we had not experienced that, never had been thrust into a situation where you had to draw back 'cause you couldn't go into a place. So we were naive as all get out, you know, as we were standing there. And we didn't know what to do. So we climbed back on the bus, and the bus driver (laughter) didn't say anything. He just looked at us. And the ride over to Montgomery was, I don't know, a couple of hours or whatever it was. And we pulled into the Montgomery bus station, still kind of, you know--but I think we all thought the same thing. We had the Air Force around us, and we were together. So we get off the bus at, in Montgomery, Alabama, and we hailed a cab, and we threw our duffle bags in the back of the cab, and prepared to go from the bus station to Gunther Air Force Base, which is maybe, I don't know, a fifteen minute ride. So as we were settling into the cab, we looked back, and there was a duffle bag that was out of the cab. And the driver was kind of waiting, and we said, somebody said, hey, there's a--all bags are going. And he said, well, not that bag. Now, remember, I had my name tag on, Berry, in big bold letters across the back on my big, blue duffle bag said Berry. Everybody got a duffle bag, a military bag. And we said, so we got out, and we said, what--and he came over, and he said, "Now, don't get upset boy, said, but I can't haul you." I'll never forget those words. He said I can't haul you, boy. He says, "You got to go over to the other side, then catch yourself a Negro cab." And there was just this hush. And I said, "What?" He said, "Now go on, get your stuff out and go on over there, get yourself a Negro cab." Well, it just knocked the tears out of my eyes. I'm standing there, you know, and the other guys are, you know, I said, okay, you guys, you know--I picked up my bag and my satchel, and I walked over at this bus station from that spot, over to the other cabs. There were some other cabs lined up. It seemed like a mile. It was probably thirty yards, I don't know. Story_ID: 106978 Speaker 1: And I got over to the other side with my bags, and as I got close to the driver of the cab there, he opened the door, and he got out. And he said, "Put your stuff in the back, boy, throw it back there." He says, I--he says, where you from? And I said, from Detroit [Michigan]. He said, "Well, this ain't Detroit. You in the South now, nigger, act like it." Never forget those words, "Act like it." I threw the bags, (laughter) climbed in the back seat. You know, I don't even--the-- I know I, I mean tears were in my eyes. I was just, think, how, what, you know. Speaker 2: Now, this is interesting because there are some stories from the Civil Rights Movement, well, the books. They write about how people in the North were out of touch with what was going on down South. Speaker 1: Living example. Speaker 2: And so even black folks from the North were out of touch with what (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Living example, living example. You know, I mean I was just, never had that happen, you know, never had such, in-your-face, you know, racism. And so I, the guy took me out, and he tried to make some conversation, but I think he knew I was just stunned. So we pull up at the same Air Base and the same barracks with the guys standing there, kind of like, you know, didn't know what to say. We didn't know what to say to each other. So I took my bags inside, and I called my, got to a telephone--we didn't have cell phones (laughter). I got to a phone, and all I could think of to do was to call my grandmother [Annie Talley] 'cause I was looking for some direction here. This was, this was a frontier that I had never crossed before, not that way. Now, don't misunderstand. In Detroit, in school, I knew what discrimination was, but, you know, no--it wasn't blatant. It wasn't in-your-face. It was just, you know, that you're, I mean just very subtle. But this was, you are a nigger, and you gon' be a nigger down here, and don't forget it, and not only from the white driver, but from the black driver. So I called her, and I told her what had happened, and I was just crying to beat the band. I was not, I wasn't crying out of fear, I was crying out of anger. I was just crying out of--"How dare you? I'm a, Air Force, I've got on a uniform. I'm a man, and here I am embarrassed in front of these other people. How can, how could this be?" And she said to me, "There are some things I just never taught you, some things I wish that you never had to learn." But she says, "You have to learn these things about the world we live in." She says, "Now, promise me one thing." All right. She said, "No, no, promise me one thing." I said, "Okay, mom, I do." She says, "Don't leave that base. Don't you leave that base." I said, "Okay." I never did. I left the base when I was leaving on my way to Germany. Story_ID: 106979 Speaker 1: How long were you there [Gunther Air Force Base, Montgomery, Alabama]? Speaker 2: Probably three months. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: For school, for training, yeah. Speaker 1: So you were sent to Germany, yeah, Bitburg [Air Force Base], right? Speaker 2: Bitburg Air Base. Speaker 1: Bitburg, Germany, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: So you were a dental assistant? Speaker 2: I was a dental assistant, yeah. Speaker 1: Now, this, I don't know, you're in a profession where you use your voice, but you start with the dental (laughter), dental tech-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --how to take care of mouth (laughter). Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I did. That's exactly right. I have, I'm very proud to say, I have never had a cavity. I've never had a filling, ever. I had--the only thing I've ever had done to my molars, my wisdom teeth removed. But other than that, I did learn how to take care of my mouth (laughter), and I did. And I take care of it to this day. And it was a wonderful thing to learn. I mean I knew nothing about that, the business and the field. And so I was in the dental field for, let's see, four, four years--I came out of--yeah, I came out of--I was in Germany for three years. I came home in '65 [1965], headed--I was assigned to an air base in California, which was a wonderful opportunity out at George Air Force Base in [Victorville] California. And I got to George Air Force Base in California. I was there for, I don't know, maybe a year or so, working in a dental clinic, working as a, as a, you know, corpsman there. And from there, I still hadn't done any flying. So that's when I started learning, I went to--they had a, not flight school per se, not official. But they had a on-base flight training, and I started flying. But then I was assigned, left there, and I was assigned to Sheppard Air Force Base in Texas. And I don't know whether I, it's in my resume, but after a year at George, I was assigned to Sheppard Air Force Base in Texas. And I went there to work in a clinic there. What distressed me more than anything else was that I was away from my flight school that I was learning. And I was flying by that time. And while I was there, along comes the announcement, and this was in 1967 or maybe '67 [1967] or '68 [1968]. Anyway, they, the Pentagon sent out an order, sent out a directive at the Pentagon level. So we were dealing with the Secretary of the Air Force. And the letter said, we need to integrate the American Forces Radio and Television Service, AFRTS. To do so, we would like to glean those with a certain talent or with the talents to join, to volunteer for the service. You may volunteer for this service out of any career field with the exception of air trafficking control or pilot training. Anybody else is eligible, okay. We're looking for minorities and we're looking for some females because the purple flight, as it was called then--that was a mixture of all of the color uniforms. And this was a joint service effort. It was all white, so those who ran these installations and radio stations around the world, it never occurred to the services to integrate them. So they were all, everybody, you were white. They were all white. And so I applied out of what is called a closed field, the dental field. You couldn't get out because of the training that was involved supposedly. But I wanted--and they said, so I said, I'll take them at their word. I'll try it, and I applied for it, and low and behold, I was selected. Orders came from USAF, United States Air Force, that I was to report to Fort Benjamin Harrison, Indiana to the Department of Defense Information School, go the equivalent of three years of college or so in the radio and broadcast. And it involved all kinds of training, obviously, in radio and TV. But they, but my commander wouldn't let me, would not let me leave. So he said, you won't leave the clinic. We need you and so and so and so forth. So, you know, he refused my order and refused to let me leave or so he thought. But what he forgot was this was a DOD, Department of Defense, Pentagon order. (Laughter) And, boy, they just raised holy hell with him because he had, you know, had delayed my departure. So he backed off (laughter). (Unclear) He's a colonel, I'm fired (laughter), you know. And he came to me, and he said, you know, I, I--it seems like you're a traitor. What'd he call--you're a traitor to--I said, no, I'm not. I'm just looking for training, and you'd do the same thing, sir, if you had the opportunity. Well, wish you well. So off I went. Story_ID: 106980 Speaker 1: So you had, at this juncture, you'd been in the Air Force, you joined in '61 [1961]-- Speaker 2: Sixty--yeah--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Sixty-one [1961]. So you--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: November '61 [1961]. Speaker 1: So you re-upped [re-enlisted] at some point, right? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, over in Germany. I--coming back. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, because, again, I still wanted to fly, and I had gone to school over there. I'd gone, I'd taken college courses, and I was working--while I was in Germany, I went to the University of Maryland Extension Institute, and I did everything. I'm just trying to get my degree so that I could qualify for flight school. That's what I really wanted to do. And I, to the extent--and I was still--remember, I was just twenty-one at that point. I was still a kid, you know, and 18, 19, 20, 21. So I re-upped to, I figured if I could do another four years, I would be twenty-five, perfect age, maturity and go to flight school. Speaker 1: Okay, so you're at the Department of Defense Information School-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --at Fort Benjamin Harrison [Indiana]? Speaker 2: Yeah, Fort Benjamin Harrison. Speaker 1: Sixty-six [1966], I guess or '67 [1967]? Speaker 2: Sixty-seven [1967], I think, '67 [1967] or '68 [1968], yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, I was there for, I don't know, half a year, year, or whatever the school required. But it was the best opportunity I had ever had come along. It really was. I went to school--you remember, I remember (laughter), the class was forty--well, the end--first, I ended up, I graduated third out of forty-four people, out of this school. And I found out where all of the sons and daughters--well, the sons of Hollywood people go (laughter). That's where they, that's where they--you remember "Leave it to Beaver?" Remember Wally? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: That was one of my classmates. The other kid on the "Big Valley--" Speaker 1: Tony Dow, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, Tony was there, and the guy from the "Big Valley," Barbara Stanwick, when the young kid that played on--he was there. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: There were several other notables that were going through the school, you know. And, of course, the Mili--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Is that Lee Majors or-- Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: Lee Majors, is that the one or-- Speaker 2: It wasn't Lee Majors. What was his name, like Lee Majors, looked like him, could have been Lee Majors [it was Lee Majors]. I have to check and see. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. We'll go on. Speaker 2: Yeah, I don't remember, but it was the class. So whatever class, so the names are available to us. Speaker 1: So Tony Dow's in school with you, this guy from the "Big Valley-" Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. And it was a couple of other people, you know. But it was such a great school. I mean everything you wanted to know about radio and TV, you know, I mean English--all the things. It was college crushed, you know, compacted into the school, the things that they thought you needed to know if you were gonna be a journalist, if you're gonna be, if you're gonna be a radio or television personality. So it was a wonderful school to go to. It was the right choice that I had made, and so, the only, the only downside side to that school, and that was when I graduated, I learned at that point that I was going to Vietnam. Story_ID: 106981 Speaker 1: And this was right in '68 [1968], Tet [the Tet Offensive]. When I arrived in South Vietnam in what was then Saigon City, it was a day after Tet, a day after they had blown this huge hole in the airport at Tan Son Nhut. That was my arrival time and a huge hole in the airport. So far, so badly that they had to park our jet a mile or so away from the terminal in case they were sending in more stuff. So we had to walk with our bags from there over to the terminal. Speaker 2: That was a big Viet Kong offensive, the Tet offensive--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yeah, the Tet Offensive was right there. I arrived there the day, the day after it had started, okay, yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And once again, you know, you don't know--it wasn't John Wayne and (laughter), and TV war. This was real, and you realized it the moment you got on the ground and you could feel the tension in the air. And you don't forget from the moment you get there that somebody out there is trying to kill you, and will kill you if they get the chance. That is a sobering, sobering realization for, I don't care whether you're twenty or forty. For the first time you get that, and you get it, you know. And that evening, I hadn't been in the country twelve hours and because of my rank, I was in charge of this detail to defend this building that we were up on top of. So at three AM in the morning, I'm up, standing up there with a [M] 16 and (laughter) whatever else I had, I don't know, watching the Gooney Birds [planes] shoot down into certain suspected parts of the city of Saigon. It was sobering, sobering (laughter) moment. Speaker 2: Okay, so the Air Force Base you were at was Tai Wa? Speaker 1: Tuy Hoa. Speaker 2: Tuy Hoa. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, I went to Tuy Hoa. I went up country right away. As a matter of fact, I went in and said, look, you know, I'm--there's a need for me up country because we didn't have a commander at the time in place, and I had been pushed over there for this role. And they said, well, we can get you up country officially or you can take, you can get up there, can you get up there? I said, yes, sir. I can get up country, and as long as, you know, you got your orders. Give me your orders, cut him orders. He says, he's (unclear) Tuy Hoa--he's authorized to be in place as soon as possible. And so I took a flight into, found a flight going up, a C-130 heading into Tuy Hoa, I think the next afternoon of the second day. And I flew into Tuy Hoa, and I stayed in Tuy Hoa for almost a year. Speaker 2: Okay, now, this is an eventful year in the history of the country. You got, like Dr. King's [Rev. Martin Luther King, Jr.] assassinated in April--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Oh, God, oh, yeah. Speaker 2: So what was that news like reaching Vietnam? Speaker 1: Well, you know, it's, it's, you've got to--well, to understand my position at that point, I was at Tuy Hoa, which was a Class B facility, as opposed to Class A facilities where there was radio and television. Okay, all of our shows, all of our TV shows were in the can, which meant that they were five or six weeks behind, actual delivery--actual on-air delivery at the installation, okay. So if something happened today, you wouldn't see it or hear about it until five or six weeks later. We were not, and again, we were not a Class A facility, so we didn't have a daily newscast there. It was no such thing. There was no radio, so you couldn't broadcast. And the other thing, important thing to remember, everything in Vietnam was censored. Everything went through censors in Saigon. That's the way it worked, okay. So you could shoot me in front of God and everybody, and I couldn't report it until the censors said I could do that, okay, except for one thing. I started the first FM radio station (laughter) in Tuy Hoa. I mean, you know what? Again, probably just not really appreciating all of the rules and regulations, I don't know. Anyway--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: So this is independent of the Air Force? Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, this was an independent station. Story_ID: 106982 Speaker 1: It was independent, no, it wasn't independent of the Air Force. It was independent of AFVN, Armed Forces Vietnam Network, which is controlled by the Air Force, okay. Now, how do you do that? Well, we went down, and there was a guy named [Adrian Cronauer], from the movie "Vietnam." He was still in, down in Saigon. And I didn't have a chance to meet him directly, but I did have a chance to ask him for supplies. So I took a Gooney Bird down, [Douglas C-]47, and picked up equipment, turntables and tape machines and a gateway board and all this stuff. Speaker 2: Are you referring to--the movie you're referring to is the Robin Williams movies-- Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: --"Good Morning, Vietnam". Speaker 1: Yeah, "Good Morning, Vietnam". He was there, he was down in Saigon. I was up country. I was in Tuy Hoa. Speaker 2: Okay, all right. I thought about this when I was reading it. Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: And I wondered if there was any kind of way--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, he was the connecting--I talked to him a couple of times before he left. Speaker 2: So this is the person Robin Williams portrayed in the movie--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: That's right, who now lives in New Jersey, by the way, okay. Or, yeah, in New Jersey. Somebody at the station, or somebody prior to my being there had confiscated a 50-watt Army trans-receiver which was a, the same--a radio receiver, okay. We just, we tinkered with it and fixed it so we could send out a radio signal, all right. And we built two connexes (ph.) together, too big areas to make our station behind the Class B facility. And so, which just had, was just designated by the Air Force as a Class B, no radio. So all the radio you would hear would come up from Saigon. We built our own radio station there, and we used facilities--equipment that we confiscated. And we went on the air, you know, as FM-Tuy Hoa, and that's what we were (laughter), FM-Tuy Hoa. And I went out, and I trained guys who were on the base, who wanted to do this and brought them in and put 'em on the board. And, fortunately, there were a couple of guys who had some radio experience, D.J. experience, etc., and everybody liked to do it. And we went on the air with our own station. Now, because we were not, we were not a Class A facility, we were unable to use the records. They wouldn't let us anything because we didn't have the authority to use 'em. So what I did was, I wrote to every radio station I could think of in the [United] States, and asked them to send me their records and to send me tapes of their shows. Now, that's what made my show popu--or at least the station popular. We put on tapes out of New York of a two or three-hour show, just as if you were there. It was six weeks later, but you think the guys cared about that? They heard the commercials. They heard the music, they heard everything, just like it had broadcasts before on, on commercial radio in New York or whoever we got the tapes from. And these guys were generous. They, I'd get packages, boxes of records, of everything I'd requested in tapes, including we had the opportunity--to answer your question about the shootings, we had these two big receivers, radio receivers that we could get in news reports or any broadcast from anywhere in the world. And we'd tweak them up, and we could pick up a signal-- Speaker 2: A shortwave-- Speaker 1: Well, it wasn't shortwave. It was like shortwave, but it was, it was radio quality. I mean it was--yeah, it was shortwave in the sense that it was electronic. It was through the air, and I guess you'd--it may have been. I don't, you know, but for instance, AP [Associated Press], their radio signal. There's an international signal that I can't think of right now. The name--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: "Voice of America", could you get that? I mean- Speaker 1: Yeah, but that was also, believe me, that was censored Speaker 2: Censored, okay. Speaker 1: These were all uncensored, commercial radio networks that are out there in the air all the time. Story_ID: 106983 Speaker 1: And so when King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]--I don't know whether it was King or Kennedy [Robert Kennedy]. Who got--King got killed first. Speaker 2: First, right. Speaker 1: When King was killed, it was censored out of Saigon, censored. I mean until they figured out how to broadcast. But you know where it wasn't censored on FM Tuy Hoa. And we broadcast--now, again, we weren't doing it as anti anything. We were just saying that the troops, here was the news. We picked up the signal. We got the reports, and we played that report right on--"[Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King, Jr. killed, assassinated, or whatever they called it, and we broadcast that thing. Now, to understand the structure, the radio station was controlled AFVN [Air Forces Vietnam Network]. Our radio station, our little FM Tuy Hoa was controlled by the base commander, okay. So if I reported to anyone, I reported to him. He was the commander of Tuy Hoa, okay. And this was a installation that was sitting on his facility. So he was commander of it. But we weren't thinking about that. We, that was just a structure that we had to have in place because we were on the base. And sure enough, we broadcast the assassination of Martin Luther King. All hell broke loose because somebody heard our broadcast and the censors in Saigon went absolutely ape, and upset, and boy, we got, you know--you will not, you'll cease and desist, and you'll so and so, and that is, you know, it's unauthorized. And you don't have, and I mean, and we were like, "Well, Jesus, what is this? You know, I mean we were just giving out the news." Our theory was Americans fighting had to know what was going on at home. So we--and it's a good thing it happened then because I then had to explain. The, the--we stopped with the broadcast because we were told to stop. And at this point, we didn't know what to do. The commander of the air base at Tuy-Hoa listened to FM Tuy Hoa. It was his radio station, so he called me down to his office. "Lieutenant, what the heck's going on?" Why, you know, I told him what happened. And he says, "What?" I said, "Yeah, apparently--well, not apparently, sir, the, you know, the Air Force wants to, wants it censored information." I says not Air Force because AFRTS [American Forces Radio and Television Service] was a combination of all services, Armed Forces Radio Television Service. He says, "Well, how does that apply here?" I said, "Well, the commander-" He said, "The commander is not in charge of my facility. That's my radio station." And he says, "And you are now ordered to put--you go on the air with whatever you choose." He says, "As long as it's in good taste, the American soldier has a right to know. Thank you, sir." So, it got quiet. We went back on doing our broadcast, doing our written newscast. And then up comes the death of Robert Kennedy. And we were first--Reuters is the other news services that I was talking about, okay. Speaker 2: Right, out of Britain. Speaker 1: Reuters was the news service. Story_ID: 106984 Speaker 1: Okay, so you-- Speaker 2: Yeah, so, now, shortly thereafter, Robert Kennedy is assassinated. And, now with the authority of the base commander, you know, we had no hesitancy to go on the air--and by the way, we were first to reporting it in Vietnam, that Robert Kennedy had been assassinated, such and such, data, data-do and so on, so on, so forth. Now, remember AFRTS or Armed Forces of Vietnam Network, which everybody hears in Vietnam, it hasn't said a thing about the Kennedy assassination. So those who could hear us, we were like a 50-mile radius heard it, they were calling Saigon to say, what the hell, you know, they're reporting, Reuters is reporting and they were saying, well, how do you know that? Because it's all censored. They're sitting there figuring out (unclear), well, we heard it on AFM Tuy Hoa. Well, (laughter) then at that point, the, my captain came in. (Unclear) "Jas, what the hell? I'm getting--they're gonna, I'm--they're gonna move me to--"(laughter) so he was going crazy. What are you doing? I said, you know, this, I said, you know, this is--oh, God. He says, "We're in trouble, Paul." He says, "You know, this isn't--he says the commander, AFVN [American Forces Vietnam Network], is coming. He'll be here in the next day or two." (Laughter) So, and he was coming up to take us off the air. That's, and he made it very clear to the, Captain Ross, was an Army captain. I'm an Air Force lieutenant at the time. And he was--was I a lieutenant then? I think so, yeah--he was (laughter), he was in another world. So I said, okay. So we got prepared for the commander coming up. And sure enough, two days later--of course, he had to call to alert the base that he was gonna make a visit and that the purpose of this visit was to get this freakin' station, you know, and this--I told them, and I (unclear), so and so. So I said to the commander who called me, and I said--he says, I'm gonna, he says, "Your commander, your AFVN commander is coming up here, Paul. And we're going--we'll meet with him in a couple-" I said, "Sir, I--" He says, "Paul, not to worry, not to worry." I said, "Okay, sir." So, sure enough, two days later, up comes--he had a mustache. He was a good guy. I mean, but he had his little, you know, he comes up and then we take him through the facility. "And first of all, what records are you playing?" "No, sir, we're not playing any records from AFVN because we're not authorized to." "Well, it's a lot of things you're not authorized to, but you're doing it." And then he looks, and he sees our machines with Reuters and all these other news agencies coming in. "And who authorized that?" And with him was the base commander because they're both Eagles. Both were colonels, full birds, right. And he says to him, "Bud, I did." And he looks at him, "You--what do you mean, you did?" He said, "I did." He says, "I--this facility, this is your facility. And this is my facility, and my facility is the AFM-Tuy-Hoa. Your facility is AFVN." "Well, I--"he says, "Bud, let me say something to you. I outrank you. I graduated a year before you did." They were Air Force birds. He says, "So, we're gonna do this 'cause I wanted to do it. This is my station." So then he says to--and he looks over, and he's (unclear) just, you know, he was having a cow. And he said, "Well, they're my people." And he was right. We were his people. And he says, and "Bud--"and he says, "They're on my Air Force Base (laughter)." It was wonderful. He says, look, he says, let's go talk about this away from everybody here 'cause the station's gonna stay on the air, and I believe your people are gonna keep it on the air. So they went away, and they talked. And they came back, and the only requirement that I had then was to, if a news--something like that broke, before I broadcast it, it was censor, I had to call 'em and say, this has just happened. May I go with it? Okay, and I was willing to live with that. I mean, you know, I already knew where his head was. He never provoked us one time from--and AFVN had no choice. I mean, you know, they couldn't control his radio station on his Air Force Base. And that's the Tuy Hoa story. That's how we did it. And we were on the air, and we played twelve hours a day, music, mostly records, whatever we got in, you know. And ultimately, the AFVN said we could play their records, and which was great. And we--if we used 'em, we could. And some of them, we did, you know. But it was a wonderful opportunity to serve--you know, I jokingly tell people that every now and then we got a call from Charlie out in the field who was listening to the station with a request 'cause we took requests, you know. And-- Speaker 1: Those are the Viet Kong? Speaker 2: Yeah, the Viet Kong, Charlie was a Kong out there, but we--he was listening to us because he could hear us, you know. There's no question about it. So we used to joke and say, "And this request is from Charlie. He wants to hear "Yankee Go Home" (laughter), you know, we'd play some crazy tune. It was a great experience. And I was very proud of that, of that effort. I really was. Story_ID: 106985 Speaker 1: So how long were you in Vietnam? Speaker 2: I was in Vietnam from January until September or October-- Speaker 1: Of '67 [1967]--of '68 [1968]? Speaker 2: Of '68 [1968]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: Yeah, of '68 [1968]. Speaker 1: So was that end of your term, '68 [1968] or-- Speaker 2: No, I actually came back from Vietnam and came back to Sheppard Air Force Base [Texas]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And it was time for me to consider re-en--to reengage again. And in '68 [1968], I came home from 'Nam [Vietnam], at the end of the year, and then I came back to Detroit to visit my dad and to be home for three or four weeks before I had--I was at decision time. I was going back to re-up, and that's when I was second, I was--no, I was a E-8, E-6, E-7, and the Air Force was offering me the first lieutenant, first lieutenant because of my rank, my education and experience if I were to sign up for four years or six years, whatever the time was. I planned to do that. That was my intent. I came home. I visited home, and one day while I was there for the, for Christmas of '68 [1968], I wore my uniform, and I went downtown to WWJ, the Channel 4 station, the NBC station in Detroit [Michigan]. And I just wanted to see. I mean I felt I was part, in the business and, you know, I was using the uniform to try to get through the door if I could. And it was right about air time or maybe 3:00 or 4:00 in the afternoon and they wouldn't let me up. And I said, okay, and I was about to leave. And a guy by the name of Williams came in, and he looked at me, and he says, "Hey, soldier, what's up with you?" And I said, you know, he saw my--he said, "The Armed Forces of Vietnam at work." I said, yeah. He said, "Why are you here?" I said, oh, I wanted to see your--he says, well, come on up. I'll take you up. So the guard said, fine. So we walk up to the newsroom, and he says, why are you here? I said, well, I said, you know, I just wanted to see how it works on the commercial side. I said, I'm Air Force and so and so. He said, okay. He said, you got a resume? I said, no. He says, can you type? I said, yeah. He says, type a resume. I said, really? He says--and that time, we're using the five partners, you know, different colors. So I sat down, and I typed the resume out, and the so and so and so and so and so. He took a look, oh, that's pretty good. He says, I'll be right back. I said, where are you going? He says, I'm going in to see a new director. He said, we need people like you. He said, you got experience and, you know, he--after we had talked awhile. And he said, let me see. So he comes back out, and he says, well, he didn't have anything here, he says, but Channel 7, the ABC station, WXYZ is looking minorities. He says, they don't have anybody on air, and they're trying to find somebody. And this was December of '68 [1968]. Now, I said, okay. He says, and he says, go over and give 'em a copy of your resume and see what happens. Now, if you know Detroit, you know that WWJ [CBS] is downtown and Channel 7 was out of Southfield, which is about sixteen, seventeen miles out. So as I'm walking out the door, Jim Williams, Jim says, hey, Berry. I said, yeah. He says, go there 'cause he knew I wasn't (laughter) gonna make that trip, no, no. I was heading back home 'cause the next day I was leaving for--or the day after, two days I was leaving for Texas. And I was gonna sign up for, get my commission fully established and so I said, okay. So I did. I went out and I left a copy of my resume, folded up, give it to the desk, 'cause it was five o'clock, six o'clock, and nobody was gonna see me at that time at Channel 7. So I go home. And I told my father [Paul Lawrence Berry, Sr.], you know, what was going on 'cause I was staying with him. Ah, he said, oh, oh, yeah, he said, good, good, good. So the next morning--it was the next morning, and I was preparing to leave. I got up and I said to my dad--he said to me, did you, are you going out there? And I said, no, just a waste of time, dad. I said, I'm heading back to Texas. He said, no, they asked you to go. He said at least, he says, have you called 'em? I said, no. He said, well, have they called you? I said, no. He said, did you leave your number? I said, I think. He says, call 'em. Story_ID: 106986 Speaker 1: I said, okay. So I get on the phone and I call out to the desk, front--the desk, WXYZ. And she says, who is this? I said, this is Paul Berry. I'm looking to talk to the news director. Oh, Mr. Berry, he's been asking about whether we got a call from you. I said, really? He said, yeah, Frank Bennish [ph.] is his name. I said, yes. He says, okay, I'll hook you up. So he connects me to Frank Bennish. I said, hi, this is Paul Berry. He says, don't ever leave a resume at our--here without a telephone number or a way to contact you. That was his first words, by, oh, did I do [that]? He says, yes. He said, yes. He said, we've been trying to reach out to you. We got your resume. He says, can you come in and see me? I said, I'm twenty miles away. He says, and? I said, okay. So I said, okay, so I get off the phone. My dad says, what's up? I said, no, you know, they were looking--I'm gonna go see--he says, good. Go out there and see him. So I go out to the WXYZ Southfield [Michigan] station. I meet with Frank Bennish, hires me on the spot, right then and there. You know, just says, hey, here's a job, how much money you make in the Service. Here's what we'll pay you. And I'm like, whoa, whoa, you know, this was 150 bucks a week. Jeepers, or whatever it was at the time. It was a lot of money, and then he (unclear). So I come back. I say, okay, you know, I mean I had the choices at that point. I've got a job for a station at my hometown, you know, television--with a promise to get on the air if I'm good enough. What else would you want? I shake his hand, sign--I don't think I signed a document. I just, you know, said okay, I'll come back. And so I leave there driving home just like overjoyed. I mean my goodness. I get home, and this is classic dad. He says, well, how'd it go? I said, dad, it went, it went great, unbelievable. He said, what do you mean? I said, they hired me. He says, they hired you? I said, yeah, they hired me. They want me to come back to start January 19th of next month. Are you out of your mind? You, you're taking this job? I said, dad, yeah. He says, you've got seven years in the Air Force. You gotta a great career going, and you go out there and you sign up for this job? I said, what are you talking about? You told me to go. He said, but I didn't tell you to sign up (laughter). I said, no, you didn't (laughter). He was very upset. And it was, you talk about confusing. I'm like you told me to go out there. I go out there. They hire--offer me a job, and now you find fault with that. Nobody just throws away seven years. You got seven years of--it's a good, you know, and I'm trying to figure him out, and then I realize he was, you know, he was concerned about, you know. He was, my being Service was comfortable for him until I wasn't. Then what do you do? You know, and he lived in a world, he lived in Detroit. He knew what was happening in the world out there. I didn't let that deter me, even though he was very upset about it, and he was. And so I went, I left, headed down to Texas, went down and got all my stuff and said, thank you very much, told a lie or two about what kind of salary I had and what I was gonna do, you know, as you would do. And I headed back to Detroit and I went to work in January of 1969. And my first on-air appearance was April of '69 [1969]. And-- Speaker 2: Now, what did--so did they train you during this period? Speaker 1: They had no training. They, they all claimed they--look, there was, they were being pressured by the FCC to hire minorities, and here they had somebody that could say his name, and he didn't seem to be angry. And so, you know, I was a perfect guy, and I had experience. So, yeah, this is what they were looking for. So they put me into a--and I could write. That was my gift of writing. I could write, you know, and I understood. And that was very important because for the first month or two, I sat there and wrote copy. And they're reading copy for a lot of different reasons, truth, anger, frustration--whatever was in that copy. You know, I wrote it, I played it straight and got to have friends, you know, in the newsroom and learned. They taught me film editing, commercial film editing, you know. Frank would sit me down and go through the camera, understand, you know, all of the pro--all of the things that he thought I needed to know that I might not have known about being out on the street. And I, and there was tons that I didn't know. And I was assigned my first story with--Ron Little and Lad Carlton were my, the cameraman and sound man, and we went out and did this story. And I was shaking like a dog shitting persimmon seed 'cause I was so nervous, you know. I don't even remember the question. I think one of the cameramen gave me the question that I asked the question, and (laughter) that, that evening on the six o'clock news in April of '69 [1969], I appeared asking a question, didn't do a standup because I couldn't have done it and they didn't ask me to do a standup. Just do the, just do the interview. And I got their reversal shot. And I showed up on television in front of all 500 of my cousins and nieces and nephews and everybody else I'd gone to school with, and the place went wild. There he is--and remember, I was the first black reporter that they had there. They had one black reporter on Channel 4, a great guy, loved him dearly. And I don't think Channel 2, CBS, had anybody. But it was a glorious evening. The phone's ringing off the hook, and, you know, and the very people that said, you know, it wouldn't happen (unclear), and I was very--and my father [Paul Berry, Sr.], (laughter) dad was, all of a sudden his story was that, after that, "This is my son, Paul Berry, Jr. You may have seen him on Channel 7. I encouraged him to take that job and to--I knew he had--"(laughter). I said, "Dad, thank you very much (laughter)." He was a very proud papa, and I was a very happy son, and, you know, the rest of it was just career taking and tracking. Story_ID: 106987 Speaker 1: Now, when you went on the air, was Amira Macobsen [ph.] on the air? Speaker 2: Who? Speaker 1: Amira Macobsen [ph.], she-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. She--(unclear) (simultaneous)-0 Speaker 2: Wasn't on the air in Detroit [Michigan], hadn't been up to that point. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: There--Bob, I almost said his last name. He was the only black reporter at the time. They--Channel 7 had hired a guy who was black, but he didn't, wasn't a newscaster. I mean he wasn't a journalist. He was a talent, on-air talent. And they were trying to mold him into what they wanted from a standpoint of a journalist. Well, he didn't have those credentials. He, that's not how he thought, you know. He was, he was a talent, you know. Speaker 1: There's a difference, isn't it? Speaker 2: Oh, it's a big difference, trust me. And--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Reporter and a-- Speaker 2: Yeah, there's just a-- Speaker 1: --news reader. Speaker 2: Yeah, there's a big difference between people who are journalists, who have, you know, who enjoy their craft and know the rules, the canons of good journalism (unclear), but that isn't--just get me on the air and show my pretty face. And that's too many of 'em. You know, they had no idea, you know. They didn't pay the, they didn't pay the price. They had, I, you know, I've been chased down the street in Hamtramck [Michigan], in fear of our life. But for a cop there, I wouldn't be sitting here today. That's experience, you know, working out in the cold, feeling the stories, the passion of people that you tell about and you talk about. That's what a journalist does, understands the story and tells it in a way that it makes a difference in the lives of the people you talk to you and the people you talk about. Speaker 1: Now, you entered into the field at a time when Detroit had just experienced a lot of violence associated with the death of Dr. King and other issues in-- Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: --they had a riot in '67 [1967], and-- Speaker 2: Yeah, '68 [1968]--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --it was, things starting to boil over in Detroit. Speaker 2: And I was one of the pacifiers. They put a black face on TV and somebody with compassion who would listen to people. You know, the thing that you learn about us is that we are so tired of not being listened and heard that we're frustrated. We don't believe anybody will. And I'll tell you the difference with me that--I'd get on a telephone, and they'd call. Some brother or sister calling, talking to me, and they're talking fast. You know why they're talking fast? 'Cause they know they're never gonna get to the end of that conversation before they get hung up on, okay. And I would say to them, well, take your time. I'm gonna listen to what you have to say. I may not agree, but I wanna hear everything you have to say. You mean you're not gonna hang--no, no, no, you know, what's on your mind? Well, I--the last person talked, they were--I said, yeah, they listened to you. And it sounds like you're angry, and no reason, I said, so why would they listen? Oh, I didn't think about it like that, man. I said, well, think about it. What's your message? All right, strip away all the other stuff. What's the message here? I want your passion, but what are you talking about? And if I thought--if it made sense, I said, okay, I hear you, brother. I'll see what I can do with that, okay. Or that doesn't, no, I, you know--I knew it. You're just like all them other white folks at the station. I said, well, that may be the case, I said, but at least I listened to you. Yeah, well, you--okay. But that's why we talk fast and quick and get our--because nobody listens to the end of our conversation. At that time, that was the case. As far as they--that's just some other black, angry dude, you know, who--or woman, you know. And I used to say to my colleagues at WXYZ, I'd say, I said, listen. Get past that, understand. I said, their frustration, and he--he doesn't live out in your neighborhood. His neighborhood's been burned down. Ah, yeah, well. Some heard that. Others just wrote me off (laughter) as a biased individual. But that's okay. But part of my learning and training was also to train and learn and to teach. And I was able to do that. I was there for four years, totally unready to be a news anchor beyond the set, but they needed to show my face, you know. It was, again, the pacifier. Story_ID: 106988 Speaker 1: So were you initially a reporter or an anchor or did you do both? Speaker 2: I was a reporter. Speaker 1: Reporter, okay. Speaker 2: I reported for--from '69 [1969] until '70 [1970]--'69 [1969], all of '69, all of '70 [1970]. And then in the middle of '70 [1970], in the middle '70 [1970], at the end of '70 [1970], I was asked to do the weekend news, and, you know. And, again, you know, un--I was unaware of the politics, didn't really care about that. I was working at a job. I understood where I was, and I understood the importance of what they were doing. And so I declined initially, although I was impressed with the fact that anchoring, but I also knew that I was still not comfortable like I should be in front of the camera. But, you know, they weren't--they were willing to deal with that to get my face on the air. And so I started anchoring the weekend news well before I was ready to (laughter) anchor the weekend news, but you learn. You get--you're tossed in the fire, you learn how not to get burned. Speaker 1: I guess I didn't ask about this, but you were--I took it for granted, but I didn't ask. Now, you were an on-air personality in Vietnam or when you were in the service or-- Speaker 2: I was a--I did the sports in Vietnam. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, I was an on-air sportscaster. Fortunately, we had Reuters, and so I could update sports, keep them apprised of what was happening in sports. And that worked, wait the six-week delay. Remember the, we tape it in January, (laughter) you see it February 15th, you know. I mean that was just the way it was. We were using kinescopes and film and all that. So we didn't have today's technology, so everything that came to us--the whole month's programming, I think it came in on a four-week cycle, was all on tape, all on film, all on tape even. So we had to run the tape through the kinescope to show it. That's how you did it, you know. I don't think we had any tape at that time, though. It was all film, all kinescope. Speaker 1: As far as you know, did any of the celebrity classmates of yours, you know, go to Vietnam too? Speaker 2: You know, I don't know whether they did or not. I'm sure--I'm sure that some might have. I mean they would have. I just--you got to know them, and they were, you know, mom and dad might be celebrities. They might have even had some celebrity attached, but they were just regular folks, you know, when it comes down to serving in the military, they were there. Whether any of them actually ever got to Vietnam, I don't know. I knew that I was assigned there after, right out of school, right directly, nonstop to Tuy Hoa. Story_ID: 106989 Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so you get on the air towards the end of 1970? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: It seems like it'd be something that--well, you got, you have the voice for it, and it seems like you had the presence for it. So how--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I'm not sure I had either then, to tell you the truth. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: I really am not sure. I know very well that I wasn't ready, or at least I didn't feel like I was ready. But there was the need. I was there because of that need to show diversity, to reflect the look of the city, Detroit. I mean, how can you have a--Detroit was 40-some odd percent black, and no black face on television. I mean that's just ridiculous, and/or women. And so that was the, and there was a first of that. But, but you learned, you know, and fortunately, my audience there learned with me. I mean my--through my mistakes and my nervousness and whatever else, you know, God forbid something go wrong, you know, you're sitting there in front of--but, you know, I got through it. And I recognized when I had not done well, and I recognized when I had. I recognized when I was not comfortable, and I recognized when I was. And finally, in 1972, Tom Cokely [ph.], who was then the general manager of W--then WMAL, now WJLA, came looking for that guy I told you that was on Channel 4, Bob Bouan, Bob--can't think of his last name. Anyway, Bob, I could have told him to save his money. Bob wasn't gonna leave Detroit, but I was ready to, and he saw me on the air and called me and asked me if I would talk to him. I did, and he offered me a job in Washington, D.C. That's where he had come in from, looking for a black reporter. And he found one. Story_ID: 106990 Speaker 1: Well, it seems like they could have found one in D.C. You would think in this area with so many black people here. The city is--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Well, the problem was not, the problem was finding an experienced--there's a difference. They were looking, he was looking for a journalist for a, not a reporter, journalist. He wasn't--yeah, there were a number of people. He had one on the air here that, God rest his soul, that he wasn't happy with. And he was, he as a talent, he just wasn't a journalist. You know, that's not--the canons of journalism, the rules, that's, that wasn't what he was about. Speaker 1: That was the criticism of Max Robinson for many years. I remember they--reading that--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah-- Speaker 1: --criticism in the Chicago paper. Speaker 2: Yeah, and I think that was an unfair criticism. I'll tell you why it was unfair criticism. What tends to happen, didn't happen to Peter Jennings. It didn't happen to Harry Reasoner, but anybody black, they go back and search the--they go back and look at the record. Oh, you don't have any college here. You don't have any so and so here. Well, neither did Peter Jennings. You never heard that criticism of Peter and neither did Harry Reasoner. He didn't go to college, as I recall it. And if I'm wrong, Harry, God bless you wherever you are, but I believe he didn't have any college. They could do the same thing to me. They can go back and look at the record. Well, you don't have--I said, I have a lifetime of college. I live college. You've had the joy of sitting in a classroom. I sat in the battlefield. You had the joy of sitting and doing some part of--I was on the street. Now, do I think that that's the replacement? No, and would I have preferred to be in college? Yes. But I couldn't afford it, had no role model. So you dance with the one that brung you. This is what brung me, and this is what I used. So, the criticism, and Max had a degree, had gone to college. But he didn't--did he have any practical out-in-the-field experience? Did he do a lot of that? He didn't have to. The man was gorgeous, had a great voice, had a tremendous mind, on-air presence to die for. You know, so go back and look and say, yeah, but you didn't, you didn't, you know, you haven't been through this or that. Who, look at 'em today. How could you criticize? You see these people on the air today, my God. It's just, it's--some of them hardly know who they are, other than to smile and look pretty and dance around. Hand them a mic and get 'em on the street and see if they can interpret the story. See if they can find the answer, find somebody who's gonna talk to 'em. Max didn't have to. Max was--and, yes, they were looking for somebody, a minority to put in there, and Max was the choice. Was he the best choice? I don't know that, and by the way, truth be told, and let me, let me set the record straight. Max Robinson was not the first black network anchorman [Robinson began anchoring World News Tonight in 1978]. Do you know who it was? I was. I was the first black, network anchorman, hired by Bob Johnson on BET to do network news, no question--and Max would come in and say, I'd bow to the very first. I was the first black, and nobody can douse (unclear) that. But I did the stories. Some of my reporters was, you'll see them, and now they're still with the network. But we had a, we had a network news show that Bob Johnson put on the air, right from here. Speaker 1: This is in--this is prior to Max Robinson being on the air--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: --ABC? Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: Okay, and what was it--what was this-- Speaker 2: BET News. BET, Black Entertainment Television Network news [BET launched in 1980]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I was hired by them to do their network news. And we did it. Story_ID: 107244 Speaker 1: Okay, all right, this is 1972, I think it is? Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy-two [1972]. Speaker 1: (Unclear), right, Washington, D.C. Speaker 2: Yep, in August. I left WXYZ. I got an offer from Cokely [ph.] to come-- Speaker 1: Well, was it hard to leave WXYZ [ABC-owned]? This is your hometown, and your family is there? Speaker 2: No, you know, no--I appreciate the question because being more than the reporter or a reporter in WXYZ, and being more in terms of the profession and being a journalist and moving up was rather like the shoeshine boy trying to become the president. Everybody remembered when you started, okay. Everybody remembered when you--that's what you get. Well, I remember when. So there was some baggage attached to the beginning because the beginning is the beginning, and people don't forget that. So my trying to move up--that's, that was how I saw it, in terms of being more, and Detroit was rather like, as I said, the shoeshine boy becoming company president, you know. Nobody could forget when you were the shoeshine boy, which is not a bad thing. But it doesn't help you (laughter) in motivation, in upward motivation. Speaker 1: It's good in politics, but not in (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, absolutely. And so it wasn't difficult to leave. As a matter of fact, I was excited coming to the nation's capital. I had brought my grandmother [Annie Talley] here, and we were, we both loved the city. And so coming was, was--I was excited. And I was, rightfully so. And I'm still excited. First of all, I was getting out of Detroit that (laughter), the weather, and the clouds and the gloominess of my hometown. And secondly, I was, I thought, a lot closer to the power, you know, and I was gonna come in and do things and make changes and so on, so on and so forth. What I didn't count on was the politics here. I didn't count on the diversity of media. That is to say, not only do you have local media, you've got national media and you have international media. And of those media, the one that's thought less of is local media (laughter) because you're behind the political, the national politics and the people there and the international politics and media. So local politics is exactly that, local politics. But it's still in Washington, D.C. And of all the cities that you can be in, this is one of the only cities where you can talk to the president, every night on air. He, or she, may or may not be watching, but you can't say that anyplace else. You can talk about the mayors of cities, governor, so and so, but not the President of the United States. So I think, you know, there was a great deal of awareness of that, pardon me [coughing]. So when I came in [to WJLA-TV], I was gung ho. You know, I was coming in with my techniques and my approach, but the city was more restrictive, in terms of what you could do or what your media brethren, brothers and sisters would let you do. I remember I did a story on the mall, and I actually dressed up in a Abe Lincoln outfit, as I would have done in Detroit and portrayed this. And, oh, my goodness. Who is this guy? What does he think he's doing? How dare he--I mean it was just, you know, that kind of reaction to it. I was very, quite frankly, I was surprised. So I stopped doing things out of the ordinary, but not my stories. I still was after stories and portraying them. And one of the first stories that got me into big trouble was a story on Howard University [Washington, D.C.]. This was during the days of Rhodesia when Henry Kissinger was traveling back and forth, and they were searching for self control government, self government. Story_ID: 107245 Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And I went to Howard University [Washington, D.C.] to do the story on what the graduating students, those coming out of college, the seniors who were moving into the real world, what they thought of what was happening in Rhodesia, what they thought of what was happening in South, in South Africa and that part of the continent. Well, the surprise was they weren't doing anything. They weren't even teaching yet about this. They were not even exploring this, and when I talked to students, they didn't know where Rhodesia was. And I said to the, but interestingly enough, when I talked to students from the continent or international students in these classes, they were aware of Rhodesia and what was happening. And so we did the story, and I concluded with words to this effect, "There are more than just geographical differences between American students--African American students at Howard and their international counterparts." And I said, and that difference suggests how little we really are prepared to deal with the rest of the world. They don't even know where Rhodesia is and its relationship to any of the countries around it, etc. I mean it was right on target. It was right on point. Nobody here in Washington, D.C. had ever criticized Howard University or at that time, it was President [James]Cheek, and it was the ministers and everything else. The story goes, runs on the air, and all hell breaks loose. And I'm like, what? What did, you know--Paul, you talked about--you know, and I had one of the--by the way, I had one of the professors at the school who kind of reiterated that who said something to the degree, I would love to be able to teach that, but that's not part of our, you know, we're not obliged to do that. So I mean it was a straightforward, in-your-face, here's the problem here, okay. Or if it is a problem, fix it, and if it isn't, okay. Well, they had absolutely a fit here. I mean the television, the news director's telephone was ringing off the hook. People are calling, quote, unquote "people", some people are calling to complain that the story is, you know, was just exposure. It was ugly. It was anti-college. It was all this. I mean it was just a mess. And I'm like, what are you talking about? This is a college that's educating our young, black men and women. They have to know where Rhodesia is or they should know. Well, anyway, about three--and this is a true story, truth as I can remember it for you. About 3:30 in the morning, my telephone rings. And, you know, I wake up, and I'm in the bed with my wife, and I'm--so I answer the phone, hello. Yeah, hello. "Paul Berry?" And I said, yeah. This is Max Robinson. I said, hey, Max, are you okay? How are you doing? We hadn't had a very--I don't know if I'd even met him by then. I'd seen him. No, I'm not okay. I'm calling about the report that you did on, on Howard University. I said, well, what about the report? We don't expose, we don't talk about--we don't share our sins or our problems with the world. That's not what you're here to do. And I want you--you report tomorrow, be at eight o'clock at such and such a place. And, you know, by now, I'm waking up. I said, what? You report to such and such. We're, there's a--we have a panel of people that will be meeting with you tomorrow at 8:00 o'clock in the morning at so--and I'm gonna get up and be there, and I expect you to be there. So, you know (laughter), I said, is this Max Robinson? Yeah. Yes, yes, it is. And you should know me by now. I said, well, I don't really know you. I said, but let me tell you something. I don't know you well enough to call me at 3:30 in the morning. And I said, how dare you get on the telephone and call my house at this (unclear) ugly, and then tell me that I've gotta be where? I said, who the hell do you think you are? What the hell are you talking about? I don't work for your network, for your station. I don't know what you're talking about. I don't appreciate it (laughter), I said to him, and then I said, as long as you're black, and I hope you never turn white, don't you ever call my house again at four o'clock in the morning, telling me I gotta be someplace. And so I was just indignant and angry. By this time, I'm, you know, I'm starting to really kind of gather my thoughts and understand. And I hung up. And (laughter), my wife said, who was that? I said it was Max Robinson. "The" Max Robinson? I said, yeah. She said, oh, my God, what was that? And I told her. So she said, what are you gonna do? I'm gonna call the news director. Story_ID: 107246 Speaker 1: So I called the news director at six o'clock. I waited a bit, and I called and told him what happened. And he says, you're kidding. I said, no. He said, you're not going. I said, no, I'm not going. He says, well, we got a meeting--we've been called to a meeting, meaning the news department. And the editorial director and the station manager, and they were called to a meeting to explain why they allowed me to do such a story on the air. And to their credit, they, they said, you know, this is not something--we stand behind the story. Tell us what's wrong with the story. Well, nobody wanted to say you don't--except Max (laughter), you know, we don't, we don't weather-- Speaker 2: Air our-- Speaker 1: --wash our, you know, in public. So they couldn't say that. And so what they did was, they demanded an opportunity to make their point, which I didn't agree with. I mean this is, you know, this is a news division--(unclear) you wanna do a news story, and I couldn't cover it. And to his credit, he said, well, if Paul can't cover it, then you can't say a name, you know. If you're unhappy, he'll cover the story. And, of course, they don't want me to cover the story (laughter) 'cause, you know, I'd done the story that they were most unhappy with (laughter). So they agreed that they could have--I don't know, I guess it was a commentary. But I could not be named. They could talk about stories that were presented on, and they did that three times, I think the same number of times the story ran. And the result of that was, was--this is shortly after [Henry] Kissinger, secretary--then secretary, called all of the reporters in town down to his office to talk about the breakthrough in Rhodesia, okay. And there was one reporter that was not invited. I was not invited to this thing, but to my news director's credit, guess who he sent down to cover the story? Couldn't deny me that. They didn't invite me in, but he sent me down, and I covered that story, you know, which was what--I'm there with working camera, and all these other guys are down there. They enjoy the canapes and the drinks (laughter) and everything, and it was obvious to everybody, oh, my God, you know. So it went away. We moved on. It was a learning experience, I mean about Washington. That would never have happened in Detroit in any form or fashion, but here the politics were so different. And that's how it was for a long time. The people that were on the air were people, friends of, friends of, whether it was the president of the university and so on. And they had control. I, they had no control over me, and they had no way of getting control over me. The only way they could control me was through the station, and to their everlasting credit, you know, they had found a journalist, if I may be so bold as to suggest, and they weren't about to muzzle me, you know. And they just asked that I do a story fairly, and they'd stand behind me, and they did. And months later, I don't know, at some event, several months later, I was asked by someone in the business if I would accept a call from Max Robinson to apologize and to take an (unclear). I said, well, I won't answer that yes or no, and if Max wants to know, have him call me. There's one way he can find out whether I'll accept his call. And that's if he calls me, and sure enough, he did call. And, of course, I accepted his apology. He said, I was wrong, you know, he was gracious. And he said, I said, Max, that's then. This is now. Let's move forward. And we did, and we became from that, much better friends. I think we were friends. You know, Max was a hard guy to get to know. He gave me the most beautiful painting ten years ago out of, he just--you know, it was presented to me from him. And I suspect it was his way of saying, you know, thank you for getting past that and not having it impact us in any way, in a negative way whatsoever. Story_ID: 107247 Speaker 1: Now, a couple things. Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] at that time and still does have an African Studies Department and probably was well versed on that, but they--it doesn't permeate throughout the school, necessarily. Speaker 2: Well, no, it's, but the other thing is that Max is a--Robinson was a great oil painter, and a lot of people don't know that. It may have been--you think it was one of his own paintings? Speaker 1: That he, it could be. I think it says, it's a beautiful painting of two, these two--in vernacular, it would be almost bums standing on the corner having a conversation, you know, colorful, and it's beautiful. And you see the expressions. And they're talking about something, and you wanna know what they're talking about. And, you know, I've never thought about that until you raised the issue. I know that he painted. And I looked for the artist, and it said, "unknown", I think as I recall. I framed it. It's sitting, it's hanging at home. I'm gonna go home and pull it out and take another (laughter) look at this because it may have been something that he did himself. It never crossed my mind about that until you just said it. And he was a very good painter, an artist. Speaker 2: Yeah, and you said too that over the years that he consulted with you about his own-- Speaker 1: He has called me from--you know, and I'm very proud of that, not because it showed any weakness in Max. It just showed his appreciation of my judgment, but whenever he came to Washington [D.C.], and sometimes when he wasn't coming--sometimes when things were rough there in Chicago [Illinois]--and I knew what he was going through, he'd call. And I'd talk to him, and I--Max, you're doing fine. You're the best on the air. You're so--I gave him what he needed. And that was assurance that he was as good as he looked and as he sounded, and he was very good in that. But he was, you know, he had his self doubts; don't know what caused that or where it came from. But I learned to love him, and I love his--he had a certain spirit, a certain style, you know. And I miss Max, I miss Max [Robinson]. And I miss the relationship that we had, you know. And he knew that I was the first one, and he'd said that. You know, I'll tell 'em. I said, nah, you know, it'll find its way one day. But that's true. I was truly the first black network news anchor in the United States. Story_ID: 107248 Speaker 1: Now, tell us that story. Now, this is--I don't, I think Max Robinson hits the airways around '76 [1976] or '77 [1977] for ABC national, you know, as a-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I don't remember what year it was, but it was a year after Bob Johnson of BET, Black Entertainment Television, they had, they were really rising and going places, and Bob, I had known Bob when he was working on the Hill for the congressman, whose name escapes me [U.S. Congressman Walter E. Fauntroy], of the district--it'll come to me. And he said, Paul, I'm, you know, we wanna do a network newscast. I'm gonna have somebody call you. It may have been Debra Lee. It may have been Jeff Lee [HM Jefferi Lee]. I don't know who it was that called after that, after he broke the ice and said, we wanna do this show. Would you do it? I went to the station. It shows you how people don't look ahead. And I said, I've got a request from BET. Now, at this time, I was doing the weekend news, I think, or maybe the anchor. I'm not sure which. And they want me to anchor their news. And the position was--who is it, BET? Go, no one cared. Now, imagine (laughter), imagine that. They're saying you, as our property, as our anchorman, our little, whatever I was doing, yeah, go do their network news. They don't, you know, because they thought, it's Black Entertainment Television. What harm, where are they going? Well, they found out soon enough, and they called me and stopped it. They said (laughter), you can't do that anymore, you know. And this was, I guess a year later. I don't know how long I did their show. Speaker 1: Now, these are beginning days of cable television. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. And that's when--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: When Bob Johnson--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, Bob was teamed up with John Powers [sic John C. Malone], I guess, his name, out of Colorado, and they put the network on. And it, BET was in its infancy. And Bob Johnson had the foresight to understand the importance of news and information. And he was looking for a journalist that could give it credibility and lend it credibility. And I don't say that to (unclear) minorities, but that's what he wanted. And so I was tasked to do that, which I enjoyed. I, I really enjoyed it. Most people have no idea, don't know that. But, you know, what is the old saying? "Truth crushed the ground" (laughter) (unclear). [Cough] Pardon me. Speaker 1: Okay, okay-- Speaker 2: I think, I think this is the first time I've told anyone that, I think, you know. It just, that's not what was important. What was important is that we had people who were qualified and who were doing it. And Max [Robinson] led the way. And that, to me, was a lot more important than me saying, oh, I was first. He was first in that, at that genre, at that level, and I think he did a marvelous job. Story_ID: 107249 Speaker 1: So this is, so in the mid-'70s [1970s], the early '70s [1970s]--well, the mid-'70s [1970s] here in D.C., Washington, D.C. was known as Chocolate City, right? Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: And we have a 80 percent black population. Speaker 2: Somewhere there--(simultaneous)--they thought, yeah. Speaker 1: In that time. I mean things have changed a lot since then, but it was-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, sure have. Speaker 1: I think this is before Marion--was [HM] Marion Barry the mayor when you got here? Speaker 2: No, he wasn't the mayor when--he was elected. Walter Washington was the mayor when I got here, and Marion came on to be the mayor (laughter), sometimes thereafter. He was, at that time, he was City Council--he was D.C. School Board, was his first shot, and, and those in the city had to be concerned. He was a brilliant and is a brilliant man. He is a brilliant man, and a tactful politician, and he went from there because that was the only elected office that you could be elected--you could hold, was a school board. And then the next office that he could hold was the D.C. Council. And obviously, he shot and rose to a position in the D.C. Council. And from the D.C. Council, he went on to become the mayor several times (laughter) and made significant marks and significant messes. But what anybody will tell you that knows him and knows of him, they know that he was a significant player, a brilliant politician and tactician and all-in-all, a good man. Now, I say that against this backdrop. I watch the news, local news media, not me, and not so much others as the "Washington Post," go after him in ways that they hadn't gone--they didn't--they didn't follow anybody on their vacation. They weren't following cars around. They didn't do that, following around politicians that way. And if they wanted to do it, they had a whole lot of folks up on the Hill. If you wanted to find smoke, drug use, cocaine use, not that crack wasn't in form at that time, but they--go up on the Hill. There were 500-and some odd people up there, and you would have had a choice of a few of those, not all, not--I'm not demeaning the, the national political staff. I'm saying there were folks there that were doing that. If you really wanted to--but they wouldn't touch them. They went after this mayor because he was arrogant, because he was in-your-face, okay. But if you went to any businessman, and I know this for a fact in Washington, D.C., not the Chamber of Commerce, 'cause that was all black, and that wasn't really the (unclear)--the other organization here, it'll come to me, ask them what they thought about Mayor [Barry]. They loved him. You know why? 'Cause he understood business. He knew what they needed, and he made a way, and they cleared a way for him. And they're the ones that funded them and kept him there because they knew, Marion Barry understood what was happening. So, you know, I'm really sorry that he did the things that he did. But an interesting thing about Marion Barry, and you can check it out, not one time has he ever been accused of taking a dime, of nepotism, never happened, never. Nobody ever accused him of doing anything, stealing money, never happened, not one time, not one time. Yeah, it's an interesting story, interesting history. Yes, you know, he smoked crack--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: I think that's right. Speaker 2: --he did what he did, he went to--but no one has ever accused him of any of those crimes. These were all personal things. And as a leader of the city, he was remarkable. He was remarkable. Did he do everything right? No. But I covered him. And matter of fact, I was the first reporter. When they, when he was elected mayor, he was at the Howard Hotel--Howard Inn, I think it is-- Speaker 1: Howard Inn, yeah. Story_ID: 107250 Speaker 1: Yeah, I think he was upstairs with Effi [Slaughter Barry], and he [HM Marion Barry] wasn't talking to anyone (laughter). And nobody could get an interview--get a statement from him, nobody could get in. And I was covering it. And so I went to an aide, and I said, tell Marion--if you can get a word to him, tell him that I'm here, and that we remember everything. And the guy looked at me like that, and he said (laughter), okay. So a few minutes later, he said, come into the lobby here. I went into the lobby, and the phone rang--I rang up the phone and the mayor was on the other end. And, Paul, how you doing? I said, I'm fine, Mr. Mayor, how are you? Congratulations, great. He says, what--he says, I know you--I said, give me something. We're relaxing. We're proud to be so and so. We're so and so. And dah, dah, dah. I said, promise me you won't talk to anybody until 11:30. You got it. Hung up the phone. I went outside, and we went on air with the only (laughter), the only quote, we were the only one that could say, "We spoke to the mayor minutes ago and so" And everybody, how did he do that? (Laughter) You know how I did it? I did it because I was loyal to him as a reporter. He tried many, many times to pull me in. That would have compromised my effectiveness as an objective reporter. We weren't friends. I used to say to him. I'm not here to be your friend. I'm here to cover you, you know. I love you, think you're a great guy, but you're not my friend. I can't be your friend and cover you, can't do both. My colleagues sometimes forget that, you know, they wanna--you can't be friends with the people you cover. You can't. You just can't do it. Story_ID: 107251 Speaker 1: Now, I'll ask you more about [HM] Marion Barry later as we get toward those days. But now, was--were you--another celebrated figure in town though not a politician was Petey Greene. Speaker 2: Petey Greene (laughter). Speaker 1: He was involved in media. Did you-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --did you know him? Speaker 2: Yeah, I knew Petey. Petey was just a little bit ahead of my, ahead of me in terms of being here and being involved. When I got here, I had to go through as I should have done, an apprenticeship in terms of moving up to be appreciated or at least to be respected or to be noticeable by people. Petey didn't need to know me. Petey was doing his own thing and doing it quite well. And so I wasn't anybody that was in his, his regimen, his regiment. He didn't see me that way and nor should he. And I didn't go out in search of Petey because I needed to do my own thing. You know, I was doing what I was doing. I certainly loved his (laughter), you talk about personalities. You talk about a real personality, somebody that really had so much going on. And the beauty of him was that it was so down home, so honest, so basic, you know. Petey realized to rise high, you stay low, you know. That's what you do, and you kind of let things happen. And they, and people recognize you, and I understood that. You don't elevate by elevating yourself. You elevator by people saying, you deserve the attention and you deserve to be recognized. That's the difference, and you work, you do the work. You know, it ain't easy out there on the street. Petey knew that, and he stayed on the street. And he never forgot the people that were on the street. I admire people like that, to say, okay, I can do this, but I'm never gonna forget where I'm from, you know. Story_ID: 107252 Speaker 1: I remember--I'm a car guy. My dad and I loved cars, when we were together--and that's the one thing we had in common. And when I came here, a friend of mine had a 1962 S-2 Rolls Royce, a Bentley, it was. And I had, I road--when I got in town, I came in town in a Jag XKE. That was my red roadster. I was noisy, I was Detroit noisy coming into the town, into Washington, D.C. The car never ran right, and I finally sold it. And I had a Lincoln, but then I finally bought this Rolls Royce, and I--it was a beautiful car, XKE, and it had 100,000 miles on it. I fixed it, paid a lot of money to get it squared away, painted it a beautiful white, changed the color combinations. And it was my car, and I would--that car was known as much as I was. People knew. Now, a lot of people had different reasons why I had it, you know. It's funny how people attach their interpretation of why. Ah, you know, he's a big heado. And there was one guy by the name of Nicholas Von Hoffman who wrote for the "Washington Post." And I passed Nicholas Von Hoffman one day on the road, on Connecticut Avenue, going up Connecticut Avenue (laughter). And for whatever reasons, he chose to write a column. And his column said, and it's interesting how some reporters come into town and make a success for themselves and then need to ride around town in, in Rolls Royces and so and so and all of this. I mean he just, you know, and it was obvious that everybody who he was talking about. And I called him, and I said, Mr. Von Hoffman, what difference does it make what car I drive? I said, why don't you talk about the stories I do? That's what I serve to the public. I have a right to buy and have what I want, if I do my job right. Are you suggesting that I don't deserve the car? Oh, well, no. I said, well, then what are you suggesting? That's my personal car. I don't drive that car on television. I drive it in the city, around the streets of Washington, D.C. And yet you disfavor me with a story like that, that has nothing to do with my intent. And before he died, he apologized for that story because he knew why he wrote it. It was jealousy, you know, here he is writing his life away on the "Washington Post", and (laughter) I'm cruising down Connecticut Avenue (laughter) in a white Rolls Royce. I guess, I guess (laughter)-- Story_ID: 107000 Speaker 1: Okay, so as we get into the '70s [1970s] here, I was asking you about Petey Green. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: And, now, this is the Jimmy Carter Administration [President Jimmy Carter], but-- Speaker 2: Yeah, Carter was in then, I think, and--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: I had met him, I had met him in Detroit [Michigan], I think and then here. And I don't know if we ever--I was promised an interview. I'm not sure I ever got that back then. But I was invited to the White House for some function. I--but, yeah, he was then in the White House at that time. Speaker 1: Yeah, so you were also here for Watergate, I mean during the Watergate days, and--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I was. Speaker 1: --how did that story affect the local news and what you were doing? Speaker 2: Well, you know, all--to play on, in other words, on an old saying, "All words, all news is local", (laughter) you know. And no more so than in Washington, D.C. And that's the, that's one of the beauties of this town. I don't care whether you're the president or you're the pimp, you hear the siren go off, you wanna know where it's going. You know, what's on fire? What's burning where? Same thing in terms of the local news was national news. National news is local news if you're in Washington, D.C. So the Watergate story was--with national implications, was a local story of huge dimension, happened here, here's the business, here's where it happened. They--those involved used those streets, ran up the stairs, those--up and down the stairs in those buildings. And then the national affected our politics. It was a huge story. As a matter of fact, I'll tell you and it's interesting, but after I think about it because my first assignment was the, was a district building. And I would go down to the district building and cover the stories and what was happening with the City Council or not happening, boring assignment 'cause generally they sit there and talk for hours, and they pass these little whatever, whatever you're doing. Who cares? And, you know, nothing--until something comes up. And on occasion, Bob Woodward and his partner--you know who I'm talking about--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Bernstein. Speaker 2: Carl [Bernstein], they were assigned the same--we were all in the same room, in the same media room. And we would exchange, sometimes we'd say, okay, you cover, and if there's something, they'd wake us up or vice versa. So we were working the same beat. I, for television, they for the "Washington Post." And I was, we were covering the stories at the time the Watergate broke. Now, they didn't call me and say, hey, we got a story at the Watergate, so I didn't know anything about that. But they went off to cover the story, and I remember it because it meant I had to cover, I had to go and sit--there was nobody that I had a relationship with, of the same org--and I should call it--it was, we knew, and we could, you know, we trusted each other. If something comes up in there, call me or vice versa. And so they headed off to cover this break-in at the Watergate. That was the beginning of Watergate for them. And I was affected only because I lost my co-conspirators in covering the City Council (laughter), the D.C. City Council. And so I've known them, and they've been very (unclear), both to me. I mean when I've called them to be on my show or do things, if their schedule permits, they always agree to do so because they remember we both were in, while we were all--we were all three very poor, and looking for the next best story. Speaker 1: Okay, there is a tragic kind of a local story that took a tragic turn, and that's the story of Frank [Wills]--and I can't think of his last name, the security guard who actually untapped the door. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I know who you're talking about. Speaker 1: And he caught the--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I know, I, you know, I--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --burglars. Speaker 2: I don't remember whether I covered, ever covered him. It seems like we, I had a chance to meet him on one or two occasions. I don't remember, but, yeah, it was unfortunate-- Speaker 1: I know his first name was Frank, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, it was Frank, and he was, he was left out, you know. And-- Speaker 1: He couldn't get a job afterwards--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: No, I don't remember all the details, but I remember that he fell on difficult times, hard times. And I don't quite remember all the details. I think I met him once or twice in terms of coverage. You know, we would be assigned. We would be assigned out of the newsroom if there was something local happening. If you weren't on an assignment and you were sitting there, hey, go down and see what's going on. There's a news conference with this person or that person. Somebody's trying to help 'em, you go down and you cover it, and so okay. And the story is the same, poor guy, you know, I mean just--but, yeah, you're right. I don't remember all of the details, but I do remember meeting him on at least one occasion and maybe more than that. I, you know, I covered so many stories over the thirty years and, (laughter) you know, it's just hard to remember everything that you did. Story_ID: 107001 Speaker 1: Well, there's one thing that you did in '78 [1978] that's really resounding 'cause I've heard this name now at least twice in two locales where I've lived, in Chicago and in Dayton, Ohio, "7 on Your Side". Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: Every Channel 7, I don't know if every Channel 7 uses that now or-- Speaker 2: Well, they do, and I wasn't smart enough to--I started it right here, started "7 on Your Side". I wasn't smart enough to patent it or to trademark it or whatever you do. You know, I--my head just didn't work that way. I wish it had. I mean I consulted with several stations that did it, and I felt, hey, it belonged to a station, you know, and--so I'm more than happy to give them details, and my news director would call me in and say, we've got somebody coming in from so and so. Would you talk to them about how to do the program or what makes it work? Yeah, and I'd give them, you know, I'd give what they wanted to know. And now here years later, "On Your Side," "7 on Your Side" is a station theme and has been. Now, there's a good side to that, and that is that it's kept my legacy alive in town. It's very difficult for a station not to recognize, even though they've tried hard not to. You know, once you die, you're dead as far as they're concerned, you know. People were, what happened to him? Nobody knows or no (unclear) doing (laughter). Fine. But "7 on Your Side" was a powerful vehicle that I was pleased to start and to do and to make happen. And then I see it, I was in Tennessee (laughter), and I turned--"On Your Side." Really? (Laughter) Really, you know, and I'm sitting there like, they don't have clue, would never know, and here I am in, yeah, and they're doing--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: And WLS in Chicago [Illinois] uses it. Speaker 2: Doing my stories-- Speaker 1: And WHI on Dayton [Ohio], I know for real those days, and I think I've heard it in other cities. Speaker 2: There was a guy, I think my news director at the time was a guy by the name of Mel Kampman, K-A-M-P-A--I think it was Mel Kampman who had--was instrumental--it may not, it may have been somebody else. But one of them was instrumental in my doing "On Your Side", "7 on Your Side". I don't think the name started--as I recall, "7 on Your Side", I don't remember how it was started. I really don't. It may be a--it may have started somewhere else or we may have taken the name from some, one of the stations that was doing it. It wasn't, didn't have the success that we had with it. And I wanna make that--I just don't remember how that happened, but, yeah, the success of the program--nobody was doing what I was doing. Let me just say that, the way I did it. Speaker 1: How did you do it? What was "7 on Your Side"? Speaker 2: How did I do it? Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: Well, the idea was to understand what the audience wants. Okay, that was my theory. First of all, they--why does a person write to a television station? Of all the different things that you can do, what makes you decide that in terms of solving your differences, you turn to the television station, and you write to a program or write--and we were getting a number of letters. This was before "7 on Your Side" was even, you know, thought of. Channel 9 had been doing a program where people were writing in and, I don't know, I think J. C. Hayward was the, was involved with that. I don't remember. But we didn't have a program. And I went to whoever the new--I said, we, you know, I'm getting letters. You get letters. Why don't we do something based--okay, well, how do you wanna do it? I said, well, I wanna do it from a, from a--the standpoint of solving the problem and educating. I said those things seems to me to be important that we tell people how to stay out of it, and then we give them the satisfaction of somebody saying, okay, thank you very much. I said, that would accrue to our interests. And he said, okay, work it out. So the way I put the program together was to be able to educate by sharing a problem, by being honest about what we did and what we found, about ending the program on a plus with a, this person, so and so, and here's what you should do and so and so. Story_ID: 107002 Speaker 1: And we just reworked it. I mean it was a lot of different ways to do it, but we worked at how we could get that into anything from two minutes to five minutes to tell the story, but real-life experience. And so, and always making sure you're monitored. My position was, we should never tell--if a company--and this is where we had some difficulty or at least some difference of opinion. I said, if a company helps and solves the problems, let's not down the company, okay. Let's not talk about how--let's just simply say, we met with so and so. We explained their situation. We explained it, and after consideration, they agreed, okay. And they went ahead and did so and so. Oh, thank you, so and so. We really appreciate what you did. And then I'd come back and say, and remember, if you get in this situation--if it sounds too good to be true, it generally is, okay, and our thanks to company so and so, and our thanks to so and so. And (unclear) somebody, how could you say things--those people made you, sir. I said, hey, what those people did was we solved the problem, okay, and that's--"7 on Your Side" has to win, you know. We have to win. And we, that's how we did the story, so that we were the, at the very last, we were the one thing that you could count on to get the job done. And we handled about fifty-some odd thousand cases. I don't, you know, we didn't win every case. And in some cases, when we didn't win, or if the consumer was wrong, we'd say it on air. We'd say, no, that wasn't, you know, I said, you know--I remember this one story where the lady called these people everything but the name of God, and I got on the air, and I said, you know, you can't talk about somebody's mama and then expect (laughter) them to (unclear) (laughter). I said, very--and, you know, it was funny and people laughed, but it was true. Here you're gonna, you want them to help them, and you just call them, you know, talked about their mama. It ain't gonna happen. So that was the honest reality of making people touch base with what was happening. It happened to you, it happened here, and we would put that on the air. And once the station realized, that's okay. People accept that and they like it. So then I was free to do pretty much what I wanted to do with it. Speaker 2: Was there ever a situation where the business was so bad that they really didn't cooperate with you? Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, we--the only time, it happened--people loved that 'cause I had to, walking with the cameras rolling. Now, they loved it. I hated it. First of all, it meant that I wasn't able to negotiate. Secondly, it's a dangerous situation, okay. Third, you, you're showing a confrontation, and you gotta be careful 'cause you're controlling. I edit the base (unclear) and everything and with it. So I tried to strike a balance in that. And I always felt that the important thing was to be able to give the viewer the satisfaction of something being resolved or solved. That made Channel 7 look very good, okay, yeah. And people would say--now, I got as many letters, and this is truth, I got as many letters after we had done this from people saying, "Thank, 7 on Your--I threatened somebody to call you, but I didn't have to call. And they made it happen. Thank you for being a weapon that I can use. And our answer to that was, "The airwaves belong to you. You should be able to use them." And if you're right, you certainly should get, you should have resolution. If you're wrong and number--any number of times in a year, we would do stories where we'd simply say, hey, you're dead wrong. You know, you're just--can't solve that. And if you find yourself in this situation, don't expect this to happen 'cause it's not gonna happen, you know. So that's, that was--I think the success of "7 on Your Side" was the honesty of "7 on Your Side." Story_ID: 107003 Speaker 1: Okay, well, there's another one called "Crime Solvers"-- Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: --which was similar. Now, how did that work? Speaker 2: Again, I operated on the premise, and always did, that the airways belong to the public. And so I would get lots of suggestions on what you should do, and I listened to everything. And this particular time, I got a suggestion to an officer, two officers in Montgomery County [Maryland], George Luddington (ph.) and a George Heinrich. These two Georges. And they were both patrol officers in Montgomery County. And I got a call from the Georges. And they came, can we visit? And I said, yeah. They said, Mr. Berry, we've been trying, we think, you know, that television can be an instrument to help us solve some of these cases if we can remind people what happened and how it happened. And I said, okay, what do you wanna do? And they told me what they wanted to do. And so we structured the program, realizing that there were three elements. There was a television station or the media. There was the police department and finally, there was the audience, okay. Now, the police, television and the audience. And how could we structure a program that would make it work in terms of getting people to be involved. We knew dollars had to be involved. And so we--then there was criticism about pay. And we reminded folks that the police had been paying off for information since the word "police" was invented. And then there was a concern about people turning in their relatives, and we reminded the people that people turn in their relatives for dollars, they'll do it just they want, because they've committed the crime. And so everybody stayed in their role. The police did the police work. The media reported that, and we dropped the dime on the audience saying, "If you know something, call this number." And initially there was all kind of resistance. The-- Speaker 1: Yeah, we were talking off camera. So you paid--how much did you pay for-- Speaker 2: Well, we--again, the television station paid nothing. We aired the story. The police department did the investigation, and then the people, we had a committee of people, okay, of citizens, and they would collect whatever monies they had. Or there would be a reward or whatever for information. And we just publicized and made that information available, you know, and the "Post" in its criticism was talking about people, you know, paying, could turn in their sons. And the one woman stood up in the meeting and said, of course, I, it's the only time I've ever made any money on this kid (laughter). He's costs me nothing but money, and he's a criminal, and he deserves to be in jail, and I'm pleased to tell the story." End of--you know, it happens all the time. And so we just publicized that. Now, it's nationwide, the "Crime Solvers" program or "Crime Stoppers" or "Crime Solvers", whatever you call it. It's all based on the same premise. Again, we set the matrix up. Here's how it ought to work. And are there variations on that? Of course, but the concept is sold. The concept of "Seven on Your Side" is sold. The concept of "Crime Solvers" is sold. Now, this new station, this old station in town, I just saw it the other day on the tele--is doing a story that I did, and again, was criticized for it initially. And that was, I would, I had the "no-no" list. Every week, when I first got, we put out the "no-no list." And that was the name of restaurants that had been closed by the Health Department. Well, now, that's--it should be public knowledge. Nobody knows. And if nobody knows, do you think they cared about cleaning up their act? Of course, not. But the moment I went on the air and said, (laughter), you know, I said, "Fat rats at Fat Al's", I got sued for that. That was a little bit over the top (laughter). But the place--and the issue from the report, from the lawyer was how do you know Fat Al's rats are fat? We couldn't prove it so we paid 'em off (laughter). But that concept is now, and they're doing it now as if it's a brand new concept on Channel 9, but that was my program that we started. So for me, it's a great feeling to see that these concepts, these approaches are working, were solid then and they're solid today. Speaker 1: Now, was there a, any memorable cases from the "Crime Solvers" activities? Speaker 2: I'm sure, you know, I haven't thought of it. It's been so long since--we used to do the reenactments. This is--I think you'll find interesting. We would reenact a case, and then all of a sudden the union came down to--people were, and it wasn't that the--it was that my competition was upset about how do we stop this. So then we, we have to pay the actors. You can't use actors. You can't use--I mean every stumbling block you could think of, they tossed in there. And so finally, we stopped doing the reenactments, which were really great television, you know. It was, it was (laughter) some of it was pretty shoddy 'cause the cops would be--are we using their, whomever, to do, but you got the message. Here's what happened. So we stopped doing that, but we didn't stop doing it. We just told the story, and, you know, showed the location and did it a little bit differently. And if we needed to do anything else, we used the cops to help us in the reenactments. But even then, they wanted to cops to be paid, our union, quote, "Union wanted the cops to be paid." So any way that they could stop the program, which is always, you know, I'm so naive. I thought if you did good, everybody would clamor around and say, yay. That's not the case at all, is it? Story_ID: 107004 Speaker 1: Okay, so, now, you were recognized for, with an Emmy and in '82 [1982], Mayor Barry [HM Marion Barry], declared Paul Berry Day in the District [Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 2: They had two separate things, where they--the Paul Berry Day was, had nothing to do with the Emmy. I think I won, I've won nine Emmy's over my career that, it just happened to be around the same time. But I do have the pleasure of having had Paul Berry Day happen twice, one by Mayor Barry and the other by Mayor Sharon Pratt Dixon [HM Sharon Pratt]. So I've had two Paul Berry Days in my lifetime (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, so is your--tell us about the Neediest Kids Charity? Speaker 2: That was one of the most important things I've ever done in my career. "The Neediest Kids" was a charity that was started by Tom Cokely, who brought me in from Detroit. After we had been here a while, or I'd been here a while, he came to me and he said, you know, I know of your love for children and our concern and your love of golf. He says, and let's combine those things, Paul, and see if we can't raise money for our, for the charity. He'd already started the "Neediest Kids" which was designed to bring the needed items to children in the classroom, without any fuss or favor, just to be able to get it to them. So then the question is, how do you pay for that? How do you pay for those items? And I'm pleased to say that after 24, 25 years, we raised over three million dollars. We had eight school districts that are involved, that were involved, and one--we put together a golf tournament, which was one of my passions. And we would invite people to come play and charge 'em an arm and a leg. And we made sure that every dime, and I repeat that, every dime of the monies that we raised went to the charities. And the reason we could do that is because Tom Cokely and the station would pay for the expenses. And the people that ran it or the administration folks, were all station employees. So it was a wonderful charity. And then we invited the board of both, of business and civic leaders--minded people to serve on the board, and to decide, you know, what would be given to these kids. And so we've given out, you know, thousands of coats, shoes, haircuts, you name it, anything that would impede the education of a child in the classroom. I'm very proud of that work. I did it up until 2010, and I moved--when I left Channel 7 in 2000, the station gave me the charity. They thought it would die and go away. But I moved it to Booz Allen Hamilton. At that time, the leadership at Booz Allen saw the wisdom of taking the charity on. And they did so and kept it alive for another 10 years. And we helped and grew the charity and had a great, great opportunity to make a positive difference in the life of the child. And that's, that took every summer from January till June or July, I was putting together the golf tournaments. They're not easy to do, and especially make them successful. But we were. We invited, we invited celebrities, both in golf and politics, whatever, to join us. And we used companies to pay these enormous sums to play golf, which I say, you know, it was reasonable, but it was expensive. We chose the best venues. We invited the chefs, one of the top chefs in the nation to come and cook our meals at the charity. We used top musicians, Freddy Cole, Nat King Cole's brother, never missed but one year in 20-some odd years, coming to my tournament. Harold Mann was a drummer. Our good friend, the base player, we're trying to remember his name, God bless him. And it was a party. But it was an elevated--it was wonderful. So everybody wanted--and we gave away the best goody bag you could probably get. You couldn't--we were known by our goody bags. People would come and take the goody-bag and leave just because they get the goody bag (laughter). It was a wonderful opportunity to serve children. And how many children? You know, I go down to, and I've done it many times. I've stopped outside of a school, either here in D.C., Maryland or Virginia, and I looked through the playground at kids playing, have no idea who I am or should they. But I know that I've helped one of those kids. I know that we've made a difference in the lives of one of those children. And that to me, that's recognition enough to be able to look there and say, hey, I did something for this young person. You know, they'll never know that I did it nor should they care, but I know, you know. And if it makes a difference in them making a turn to the right as opposed to the wrong, I'll take full credit for that. Story_ID: 107005 Speaker 1: Okay, in regards to youth, I know that the D.C. School Board has been like a protracted struggle, always in the news, locally and nationally, you know. I remember when [HM] Barbara Sizemore was the superintendent, Ruth Love, you can go on down-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and Michelle Rhee, you know, all these different superintendents--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: --over the years have come in, and do you have any thoughts about that as a news story, and-- Speaker 2: I met with each one of them. We covered the stories. We covered every news--remember, I was dealing with school districts. So when somebody left, we had to go back in and explain how these kids worked, why I wanted these--well, every year, by the way, for the 22 of the 25, 23, I had a school at, here at the golf course. And I would bring in these young people who'd never played golf before, and train them. I used golf professionals to do that and to get those kids--and this was in the D.C. school system, and to get that to happen, [cough] to get that to happen, I had to go to see the superintendent of schools (laughter) in D.C. every time they made a change. I'd have to go in and explain why I thought it was more important for the kid to spend an hour on a golf course than it was in a classroom. It's an easy argument to make when you think about the things that they learn in terms of competition, honesty, the skill of the game. You know, I was twenty-some odd years old before I ever picked up a golf club. And that's what was driving me. I want these kids to at least have a chance, pick up the club. You may not play the game. You may not like it, but you ought to experience it, school, S-C-H-O-O-L. To me, it means Students Can Have Opportunities and Opportunities to Learn. That's what school means to me. And if we're not making that happen for every kid, we're failing the ones that we don't make it happen for. Golf is an opportunity. Make it available. So we paid over the year, by the way, I've paid over $120,000 to train, to give these kids training. I pay $5,000 a year, and you do the math times 20, times 23. So I had to deal with these students--I had, to get these students to come, I'd have to go in and sit down with Ms. Sizemore, Michelle Rhee to talk to them, and reintroduce them to what programs we were running, simple as that. So, yeah, I'm keenly aware of the changes 'cause every time there was a change (laughter), I'd trot down to the School Board, hold my hat out, thank you very much. I got a program. I'm giving you this and that. And all you have to do is make sure I have kids and provide a bus to get them over and back. Speaker 1: Seeing so many of them come and go, you know, and do you have any thoughts about what would be successful in D.C.? Speaker 2: No, I think it's--look, the issue of our school system, our approach to education is, is riddled with lots of holes that don't work. It doesn't work anywhere in the country, in terms of how it could work. That's why we ended up 27 to 28th, in terms of world-wide compared to education, in terms of reading and writing and all those other important things. When you start well behind other districts because you didn't have the freedom. You didn't have the votes, you didn't have the school boards, you didn't have--as a matter of fact, we're still controlled by Congress. And with the exception of two people, none of which have a vote, they could care less about what happens here. At least from the standpoint of us compared to their home districts. So now, you get a local school board, and a local school government that is still controlled by the Congress. Is there any wonder that they're behind the rest of the nation in terms of development? No. You don't have people who are educated making educated decisions. Fortunately, that's changing and has changed. But I think I see the light at the end of the tunnel. I think we have educated people in place, and I think it's getting better. Story_ID: 107254 VIDEOGRAPHER: Go ahead and tell us about this photograph. Speaker 2: My three children, Talley--well, you said left to right, right? VIDEOGRAPHER: Um-hum. Speaker 2: All right, these are my three children at ages five, seven and eight. Paul Hunter Jackson, my daughter, Lauren Hudson and my oldest son, Talley Marshall. Speaker 1: It's 1998. VIDEOGRAPHER: And what was the occasion? Speaker 1: A 1998 graduation ceremony. I was a speaker. VIDEOGRAPHER: Okay, graduation, where? Speaker 1: God, I don't know, probably in [Washington] D.C. I don't know. Speaker 2: Somewhere in D.C. Speaker 1: Somewhere in D.C. I did 212, I think, graduation speakers in thirty years. So, hard to know. Speaker 2: Okay, September of '61 [1961]. Go ahead. Speaker 1: Actually, June of '61 [1961], graduation from high school. Speaker 2: So the picture stayed in the camera till September (laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah, I found it in somebody's camera or they found it. VIDEOGRAPHER: It looks like you're reporting a story? Speaker 1: Yes, on assignment for WJLA, Washington, D.C. VIDEOGRAPHER: Okay. Speaker 1: Myself, an award recipient from the Red Cross with then Red Cross director, Elizabeth Dole. VIDEOGRAPHER: Okay. Speaker 1: Nineteen eighty six [1986] Neediest Kids, some of the children that we worked with. VIDEOGRAPHER: You can go ahead at any time. Speaker 1: (Unclear) Speaker 2: Does it have a date on there anywhere? Probably not. Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: Okay, that's all right. VIDEOGRAPHER: Okay. Speaker 2: WGLA Station shot, 1988. Speaker 1: You can talk while we're shooting. Speaker 2: Okay. VIDEOGRAPHER: Yeah, as soon as the picture is up. Speaker 2: When the picture comes up, you can start talking. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Lee Elder golf tournament, an award winning. Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-one [1961], my graduation from high school with my date who was a few years older than me, to chagrin of my mom and dad (laughter) who were dying, oh, they were having a fit. She's too old. I said, hey, hey, hey. Speaker 1: What is that in there? Is it a crack on it or what? Speaker 2: It's torn, actually. Speaker 1: Oh, is it? Okay, did you? Can you use--I don't think you can use it, can you? Speaker 2: Yeah, just describe it. Speaker 1: Okay, picture with my mom hugging me. Speaker 2: Detroit, Michigan, 1963. Speaker 1: Now, this is '55 [1955]. Speaker 2: Okay, yeah, our farmhouse in Ohio, 1955, outside of Toledo. I don't know who's in the picture. I have to put on my glasses, I guess. Speaker 1: My sister, Debra, my mother and me in Detroit, 1952. Speaker 2: Myself, my sister, my cousin and my grandmother holding the baby, Annie Mae Talley, holding the little baby. Speaker 1: The great and powerful, Papa Jim. I told you about--there he is, that's him. That's Papa Jim. VIDEOGRAPHER: Great and powerful. Speaker 1: Yeah, he was a powerful man. Speaker 2: Home from the Air Force, 1968. That was a, remember I told you I went down to see the military, I mean see WWJ, (unclear) see that, that was '68 [1968]. Speaker 1: Me and my grandmother, Annie Talley, on our way to a trip, a three-week trip to London, Paris and Rome, haven't lived till you take your grandmother on such a trip. Speaker 2: My mother and me. I think it is. Let me just take a look. Wow, I gotta show her that picture. Speaker 1: Annie Mae Talley, 1956. Speaker 2: Paul Berry, Highland Park. I was all of three years old, maybe four. Speaker 1: Washington, D.C., Mary Wilson of the Supremes. We went to school together. Speaker 2: She was the finest one. Speaker 1: Um-hum. This is 1991 in Ireland and with, at Uncle Tom's cabin. I'm holding my baby daughter, Hudson, and Uncle Tom is holding Tally. Speaker 2: Association with known Uncle Toms (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) 1969, 1970, WXYZ Detroit. Speaker 2: I've seen you in Detroit too. You looked really familiar. Speaker 1: Twenty ten [2010], some of the crew, including right behind me, Frank Herzog who was the voice of the Red Skins for many, many years. Pat McGraff (ph.) is on the right side with a white carnation, looking at us. His daughter is now a reporter on WTTG. Speaker 2: Fifteen months old, Detroit, Michigan. Speaker 1: Still fifteen months old, Detroit, Michigan. Cute little fellow. Yeah. Speaker 2: That's six years old, Detroit, Michigan. Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty-one [1961], Detroit, Michigan. Speaker 2: Barbara and Joe Albritton (ph.) who owned WJLA, yours truly and Norman Lear, producer of "All in the Family". Speaker 1: A fundraiser, a call-in, probably 1980. Speaker 2: Nineteen eighty-three [1983], the photograph associated with the Ted Yates Award. Speaker 1: Yours truly, interviewing Warren Beatty, actor Warren Beatty, I guess I should say. Speaker 2: Most likely 1980. VIDEOGRAPHER: Okay, is that it? Speaker 2: We've got one more. I think we can do this one and (unclear)-- Speaker 1: All right, this is the family picture taken in 2010, leaning on my tractor (laughter). VIDEOGRAPHER: And who's in the picture. Speaker 1: Yeah, in the picture, my wife, yours truly, and my daughter, Hudson, my youngest son, Babe, or Paul, and my oldest son, Talley, sorry. VIDEOGRAPHER: And your wife's name. Speaker 1: Amy, didn't I just say her name, Amy. Speaker 2: Okay, in the picture, my son, oldest son, Talley, my daughter, Hudson, my youngest son, Babe or Paul and our dog, Guinness. Speaker 1: Guinness. Speaker 2: After the beer. Speaker 1: More years back, Babe is the first shot, Hudson, me, my wife, Amy, and my son, Talley. Speaker 2: Our Oscar de la Renta, what's that guy's name (laughter). This was taken for one of the magazines. This is Talley. Speaker 1: Okay, our family, Talley, Paul Hunter, yours truly, Amy and Hudson. Speaker 2: Again, another year, this is Amy, Hudson, Talley, yours truly, Babe in the front with the red scarf and our dog, Guinness. Speaker 1: Again, our dog, Guinness, Talley, Hudson and Babe. Speaker 2: One of my favorite shots here. This is Hudson, Talley, yours truly, Babe, my wife, Amy and our dog, Guinness [cough]. Speaker 1: Talley, Hudson and Babe. Speaker 2: This is the family. On the right, and in the first--well, I guess the family together, and then on the other side, the family with my aunt and uncle--no, with my mother and my uncle, and the three adults in front are my mother, Donella, my Uncle Jim and my Auntie Evelyn, and the dog. Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: Yeah, that's a great shot. Speaker 1: This is my lovely daughter, Hudson, graduating from Miami, the U [University of Miami, Coral Gables, Florida] (laughter), very pleased and proud of her. VIDEOGRAPHER: All right. Speaker 1: That's great...