 Story_ID: 103207 Speaker 1: We're gonna begin with me slating the tape, saying that my name is Racine Tucker Hamilton, and I am the interviewer. Matthew Hickey is the videographer. Today's date is Thursday, February 3, 2005. And this interview is taking place in New York City. And I don't normally sound like this. Now, if you would-- Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA INTERRUPTION) Speaker 1: Okay, now, if you would please, Reverend Butts, for the record, tell us your full name, including your middle name, and spell it. Speaker 2: Calvin Otis Butts, III, C-A-L-V-I-N, O-T-I-S, B-U-T-T-S, III Speaker 1: Okay, and will you please tell us the date and location of your birth? Speaker 2: I was born July 19th, 1949, in Bridgeport, Connecticut. Speaker 1: And your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm a clergyperson. Story_ID: 103208 Speaker 1: Now, the next couple of questions are just some People Magazine-ish type questions, just to help us get to know you a little better, so I ask you to give me short answers to these questions. Would you please share with us your favorite food? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Pork chops. Speaker 1: Your favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Autumn. Speaker 1: Your favorite color? Speaker 2: Brown. Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Brazil. Speaker 1: And your favorite phrase or saying, do you have one? Speaker 2: Not that I'm familiar with. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: There are probably several, but none that I can think of at the moment-- Speaker 1: If it comes to you during the course of the interview, please do share it with us. Story_ID: 103209 Speaker 1: Let's begin, Reverend Butts, talking about your mother, starting with where your mother was born and where she grew up as a girl and that kind of thing. Speaker 2: My mother was born in Ocilla, Georgia. She grew up there. Speaker 1: What's Ocilla near? Speaker 2: Fitzgerald (laughter). You wanna try again? Speaker 1: What's Fitzgerald near? What's the nearest largest city to Ocilla? Speaker 2: Well, it depends on what you mean by large city, to Fitzgerald, Tifton and Waycross (laughter) would be the large cities--probably Jacksonville to the south and Macon to the north. Speaker 1: Okay. And did she ever share any stories with you about what life was like for her as a girl? Did she grow up in a farming community? Was it a farming community? Speaker 2: She grew up in the agrarian community. It's difficult to say. She doesn't talk much about what life was like as a girl. I knew her mother, my grandmother, was a very strong-willed woman. Speaker 1: What was your grandmother's name? Speaker 2: Lovey [ph.]. She, she was an energetic woman and a very deeply faithful woman, very religious woman. Speaker 1: And what kind of work did your mother do when you were a boy growing up? Speaker 2: My mother was, from the time that I can remember, I guess you would call her an administrator. She, she was in administrative work, either as like an administrative assistant, and then she went to work as a civil servant. And there she was with the Department of Human Resources for a long time in a kind of middle management, middle administrative position. Speaker 1: And do you know the story of how she migrated to New York? Speaker 2: Well, to the best of my recollection, her sister before her came to New York. As far as I know, this would be her oldest sister, my Aunt Eleanor. And she didn't come to New York. She went to Bridgeport, Connecticut. How she got to Bridgeport, I don't know that I know that story. I'll have to go and ask my mother. And, and my mother followed her, to work. Speaker 1: And how would you describe your mother? Speaker 2: My mother's a very intelligent woman, very smart, very focused, very industrious, you know. She knows what she wants for her family and for her, for herself, and she applies herself, and she goes after it. If she has to work hard to get it she'll do it, very strong, extremely strong, and I mean not only mental and spiritual strength but also physical strength; my mother's a strong woman. I think I came to know that mostly when she cared for her sister, her sister with whom she came to live in Connecticut. My mother spent time traveling backward and forward from New York to Connecticut to care for her sister, and that was often very challenging and often when she herself was in great pain. So, she's a very strong woman. I like to think that my mother is a reflection of black women, which she, she, you know, I've seen a lot of women in our church, for example, who have done similar things. They've cared for their father, their mother, their sibling in the face of great odds. They had to work and then come home and work again, and oh it's--so my mother's a very strong woman but a good woman. Ain't nobody like my mama, you know, great woman, great cook, great homemaker, you know, good--you know, I love my mother (laughter). Story_ID: 103210 Speaker 1: Let's talk now about your father, starting with your father's name, background, where he was born, and where he grew up as a boy. Speaker 2: My father is Calvin Otis Butts. Right now he's senior. In kind of genealogical terms he could be a junior or the second. He grew up in Fitzgerald, Georgia, which is nine miles from Ocilla [Georgia]. To the best of my knowledge, he, he came North after the, or just before he went into the service. And hold on a minute-- Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA INTERRUPTION) Speaker 2: We're talking about your father and just his life in Fitzgerald. Speaker 1: His life in Fitzgerald, I guess very similar to my mother's life, though I didn't mention it earlier, was a life in a segreg-- Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA INTERRUPTION) Speaker 1: His life in Fitzgerald was a life in the segregated South. I can remember one of his older brothers talking about some of the white men for whom they had to work, Mr. Dominic [ph.], and some of the things they had to do, but, not a lot of conversation about those early days. He grew up there in his mother and father's home, and went to the service, and then came to live in New York. He may have been living in New York just a little bit before he went to the service. Speaker 2: Do you know how your parents met? Speaker 1: No. I'm sure that I've heard the story. I just can't recall. My parents, they've been married now fifty-seven, fifty-eight years. And they, they seem like they've been together longer than that. You know, they--hold on a second. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA INTERRUPTION) Speaker 1: They seem like they've been together forever. There's probably a story. I just can't recall what it is. Speaker 2: Sure, sure. And Reverend Butts, how would you describe your father? Speaker 1: My father is another very intelligent man. My father is one of those black men who I think would have made great progress intellectually and otherwise if it had not been for the racial situation at the time in this country. He had to find work. He did a stint in the [U.S.] Army. Again, which is very complimentary of my mother and my father, both very industrious people, I watched them work very hard--this is etched in my memory, in my heart--to build a life, you know, to buy a home, to buy a second home, to take great pride in accumulating, not opulent things, but things that would provide for their comfort somewhat, and for the comfort of their child, and for their child's education, and providing the right kind of atmosphere in the home, helping to make sure that I could meet the challenges of the world. My father--very faithful, another very religious man, very faithful, very faithful, very prayerful, excellent cook. He spent most of his life as a chef and a butcher. And my father is, you know, is a real good man, you know, and I love my father. He's a, he's a real good man, I mean real good; he, he is a, he's a real good man, and funny, great dancer, as is my mother. My mother has an excellent sense of rhythm. They are down-to-earth folk, you know, given to all the social graces of Southern hospitality. It's kind of hard to describe one without the other, you know. Story_ID: 103211 Speaker 1: So, Reverend Butts, you told us a little bit about your maternal grandmother, Lovey [ph.]. Now did you know your maternal grandfather? Speaker 2: Grandfather? Speaker 1: Yes, sir. Speaker 2: Maternal grandfather, Oscar, no, I do not. Speaker 1: Okay, now what about your paternal grandparents? Speaker 2: Yes, I knew my paternal grandmother. I did not know my paternal grandfather. Speaker 1: What was her name? Speaker 2: Her name was Verdie. Speaker 1: Okay. What can you tell us about her? Speaker 2: Well, Verdie Butts was, again, one of these deeply religious women, you know. I've got sermons that I've centered around my life with her, deeply religious woman and very stern, very stern. I got a lot of what the folk would call whoopings (laughter) from my grandmother. One of the funniest things I can remember was, I stayed in Fitzgerald [Georgia] with her for about a year. And I think I went to like what we would call a kind of preschool, and then I went to the first grade in Fitzgerald. And there was a family that lived across the street from where we lived, and it was a lot of them, brothers and sisters, and they liked to fight. And I would have to come past there to come, come, go home, and you know. And they would always get into fights. So one day I got into a fight with this family, and they all jumped me, you know, all of them. And boy, was it a fight. Now, you know, what was I? Six years old, you know, and I'm fighting myself. So, I got beat up, and I remember coming home crying and beat up. And my mother--my grandmother said what you crying for? I said well, they beat me up. And she gave me a whooping. I couldn't figure it out. I said why are you giving me a whooping? She said for fighting. And then she thought about it for a minute. She gave me another whooping. And I was really done. I said why you give me a whooping? She said for losing (laughter). So, (unclear)--my grandmother was a wonderful, wonderful, wonderful woman. She was also a good cook, and she was the center of a lot of activity in the small town, so. Speaker 1: How far back can you trace your ancestry? Reverend Butts, do you know if you came from free people or slaves? How far back can you go? Speaker 2: Not very far. I can go back maybe just a little beyond my, on my father's side, my paternal grandmother, her brother, her sister, and a couple of relatives that I met, but not much further. After that, I really don't know. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 103212 Speaker 1: Tell me, what is your earliest memory of growing up? What is one of the earliest things that you remember? Speaker 2: Perhaps two things. I was walking at--these two things: the first was a very terrible thunderstorm. I was, we were living in the projects in Lower Manhattan [New York City, New York]. And one of those rolls of thunder that shakes the building and a peel of lightning that lit up the sky, not for just a (unclear) but for a moment. And I think I was awakened by the thunder and the shaking of the building and then the flash of light. And I remember running into my parents' room because I was so frightened. I remember that. And the second thing, I'm not sure that I was walking. I remember being in my crib and as a matter fact it was a crib, and I was not able to walk. And I remember that my parents were entertaining. And I could hear the laughter and the people, but I was asleep. And I remember pulling myself up, and I remember looking at this bottle. And I remember throwing the bottle out of the crib and wanting to be where the action was, I guess, where the noise was coming, where the--and I remember my mother coming. And I think, if, if I recall, this is the time when I stopped using a bottle regularly, just said you know, I don't want that anymore. Those were my earliest recollections. Story_ID: 103213 Speaker 1: And can you kind of tell us a little bit about what holidays were like in your house growing up. And were they very festive occasions, like birthdays, and Christmas, Thanksgiving, Easter? Speaker 2: Birthdays were a bit more private. Usually, a birthday was spent just with my mother, and my father [Calvin O. Butts, II], and myself. Maybe every now and then, you know, another relative would come by, but you know, we would exchange gifts quietly. Thanksgiving, Christmas, different stories. Easter was a religious day. We kind of dressed up, go to church, come back, eat a big meal, but it was still very close family. A few other family members would come by, so that might be another one that you could add on to this kind of celebration. My mother, as we are now, and father were the center of Thanksgiving. Everybody would come to their apartment in the projects and eventually their home, and we'd all eat. Boy, but those were--every now and then we might go to another relative's house like my Uncle Leon, but--and those were times of big eating, drinking, and very animated conversations generally around two major topics, politics and religion. It was there that I really got an education, at those gatherings, particularly Thanksgiving and maybe Easter. But people really got engaged in, you know--and television. But the big thing with television was not football games or anything like that; it was seeing who black was appearing, look, look, look, this one, this one. I remember when Nat King Cole had his show, you know, all of this. This was a long time ago. And you know, who is that black woman? You, know, boy, she's pretty. Who is, who is she? You know, and you know, just watching these various things, and people would get so excited because black people did have black folk on commercials--and this is across the (unclear)--but hearing about Roy Wilkins, and what people thought about what was going on with Adam Clayton Powell [Jr.], and of course the Civil Rights Movement, [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King, Jr., and what was happening with James Farmer and, and Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Toure] yelling black power. And of course, you know, going back further than that, Emmett Till, when he was killed, the, the lynchings, the Ku Klux--I mean, what black people could take, what we weren't gonna take. Should we have guns in the home? You know, we'd be--oh, I'll never will forget one year we went to my uncle's home. And he took us all in his basement, 'cause this was another characteristic of my family, you know, buying property, owning your own home. And he said I've got something for you to hear. So he went down and got a 45 [RPM] record. He said you wanna hear this. He said this is music. And he said have you ever heard of--and he showed me the label, and it said Louis X. I said it's from the East. He said yeah, yeah, from the East. You know, he was a (unclear). And the title of the record was "Black Man's--"White Man's Heaven is [a] Black Man's Hell." And it was to a little calypso beat, as I remember. It was [HM Louis] Farrakhan, you know, one of his--'cause he was a calypso singer at one time, and he had moved into the Nation of Islam. And I remember hearing that and listening intently. And I remember hearing my uncle, you know, kind of teaching in the background: this is--listen, you know--(unclear)--I mean all these kinds of discussions, religion, you know. Is there a god? Is there not at god? Father Divine, I remember after one my father drove me through Newark [New Jersey] and showed me the hotel that Father Divine owned. And he drove passed, and he said you see that table setting in there? He said that's set. Nobody sits there for Father Divine when he returns. Sure, they believed he was God, and he's coming back. I never will forget that. My father was the kind of man who believed--I mean we would talk about Lumumba, Patrice Lumumba, and the, the, the decline of colonialism in Africa. We talked about Alex Quaison-Sackey when he came to the UN [United Nations]. We talked about black men and women owning their own businesses. My father was a great believer, if a black person opens a business in your neighborhood, you go there and shop. You spend some money. You know, if they don't give you the right kind of service, if they don't treat you well, then you don't go back, but you give 'em a chance. And to the degree that they serve you well and give you what you want, you keep going back. He believed in that deeply. He supported the black banks. He opened accounts at our black banks, and he taught me to do the same thing. My whole family was very much focused like that. So those gatherings were big discussions, you know. Story_ID: 103214 Speaker 1: I never will forget one of my uncles, in a heated discussion about Jesus and was Jesus black, and he had to be a black man. And I mean it was getting hot. No, Jesus is not black, you know, and they were using terms (laughter). And people said shut up. They eating, and somebody in the background eating and hold up the chicken leg saying (unclear). And all of sudden, my uncle jumped up (unclear). He said look. And it was a picture of the crucifixion. He said you see that, INRI over the cross? And I looked up. I said yeah. He said do you know what that means? I said no. He said that means I, Negro, Rule Israel (laughter). I never will forget that. I was a seminary student before I found out that that's not what it (laughter) meant. Those were the kinds of discussions, I mean just funny, and animated, deep. You know, a lot of things that I heard in those discussions caused me to go and look and study. These were men and women who loved knowledge. They, they read everything, and they wanted to--and, but they never got a chance to really get formal education. My, my uncle was a union leader. My other uncle was a big mason, and he used to talk about the Masonic Lodge and all of that. When I became a 33rd degree mason before he died, he said oh, they moved you along too fast. You moved too fast. And you know, and I was prince, I am a Prince Hall mason. He was I think in the King Solomon, so you know, he had to be careful talking to me. I said but we're both black, unc. He said "That's true" (laughter)--(unclear), so it was, yeah, a great--(unclear). Story_ID: 103215 Speaker 1: Do you remember the name of the street that you lived on growing up where you spent most of your childhood? Speaker 2: Well, if it was with, with my grandmother [Verdie Butts], it was 406 East Roanoke Drive [Fitzgerald, Georgia]. If it was when I came back to the city, it was 500 East Houston Street, Lower Manhattan [New York City, New York]. If it was when we moved to Queens [New York City, New York], it was 102nd Street. If it's in East Elmhurst [New York City, New York], it was 100 Street, and then after that I went off to college. Speaker 1: Where did you spend the most time? Speaker 2: Well, the most time was spent, of course, in New York City, and so that would have been Houston Street in Queens, I mean Lower-- Speaker 1: Can-- Speaker 2: --Manhattan, in Queens. Speaker 1: Can you kind of describe your block for us? Speaker 2: Which one? Speaker 1: The, the one where you spent the most time, on Houston Street. We're start with that one. Speaker 2: Well, Houston Street was the projects, the Lillian Wald projects. It was a healthy mixture of African Americans, Puerto Ricans, and across the street, across Houston Street the Jewish tenements, so a lot of immigrants from Eastern Europe who were Jewish. And the Lower East Side was my neighborhood, and so kosher foods, the Hasidim, with their big horse-drawn carts from which they sold anything you wanted to buy, clothing, shoes, I mean knishes. And it was fascinating to walk up and down the street, and these guys with these long black coats, and the, the curls, and the big round black, you know, hats, and you know, I'd look at them, and they were selling and speaking Yiddish and you know. And Spanish was a big, big language because so many Puerto Ricans were there. And my best friends, one was a Puerto Rican and one was a Jew. And I never will forget how we studied together, skipped school together, you know, do all those kinds of things. I'd go over to the Jewish guy's house, and his mother was an excellent cook, but it was a kind of Eastern European Jewish cuisine, you know, you know, so. You had to be careful because it wasn't the kind of neighborhood that you could just, you know, run across the street. Houston Street's a big street. It came right off of the FDR Drive, right, right onto, right--my, my building was right on the corner as you came off the Drive. Lower Manhattan at that time was filled with street gangs. You know, it was kind of like "West Side Story" kind of gang. And we played a lot in the schoolyard. Living in the projects in those days, they had community centers, and it was in those centers where we had a lot of fun, and we were really engaged in terms of education, intellectual activity. It was there that a, a college student--I'm not sure what college they went to--read to the children who would gather and sit at their feet--college students, 'cause actually we had two or three. I heard "The Three Musketeers." It was read to me. "The Hunchback of Notre Dame," it was read to me, and I became fascinated by it. It was, in fact, then when I learned that Alexander Dumas was a black man, and I was second grade, third grade. The education, public education system was great. I mean we visited everywhere. Story_ID: 102624 Speaker 1: Reverend Butts, can you tell me what sights, sounds, and smells remind you of growing up and remind you of your childhood? Speaker 2: Sights, sounds, and smells. Well, sounds, of course, would be the sounds of New York: the subway, sirens, and the African rhythms that accompany salsa music; I heard a lot of that on the Lower East Side. The different languages, you know, speaking of Yiddish, Spanish, and the various dialects of America, you know, English, that you could hear; laughter, it's a lot of laughter in my life, a lot of laughter in my family. Speaker 1: What sights and smells? Speaker 2: Sights, the East River and the gorgeous view we had from our apartment in the projects, the Domino Sugar plant and the, the boats going up and down the river at night, the view of the 59th Street bridge, the Queensboro Bridge; sights growing up, driving down the BQE, Brooklyn-Queens Expressway and looking out of the window of the car and seeing Manhattan Island, a wonderful view as you approach the Midtown Tunnel of--probably one of the most gorgeous sights on earth in the evening when it's-- Speaker 1: What smells? Speaker 2: Smells, the cooking of knishes on Avenue B or C, whatever it was. Smells--the, the kind of warmth and food smells that would hit you when you would come home from school in your own home. I mean, you know, it's like--or, or, or, or during holidays when the families would gather. I love food; and smells, unfortunately, the smell early in my childhood, too much dog poop on the streets of New York (laughter). Smells-- Speaker 1: That about it? Okay. Story_ID: 102625 Speaker 1: What was the name of the elementary school you attended? Speaker 2: Well, I don't remember the names. They probably did have names. I went first to P.S. 97 over on the Lower East Side across from Houston Street, and then leaving Houston Street, I went to P.S. 92 in Queens over on, that would be 34th Avenue at about 100th Street. From there, leaving P.S. 92, going into the seventh grade, there was something called open enrollment in New York City. Tantamount to busing, children could attend the schools not in their district, which helped with a little integration. And I went over to Russell Sage Junior High School [J.H.S. 190] in Forest Hills [New York City, New York]. Speaker 1: Let's back up a little bit, Dr. Butts, and talk about elementary school. Were there any particular teachers in elementary school who had an influence on you? Speaker 2: Mm-hmm, Betsy Jackson [ph.]. I've built whole sermons around her. I preached her eulogy. Her son, particularly, is still a good friend. She lived in the community. And I was never in her class. And the story that I tell is, she would always say, you know, you need to be in my class. I need to have you in my class, but I never was. I was always either in Ms. Zooback's [ph.] class or Ms. Steinberg's [ph.] class, or Ms. Foley's [ph.] class, or Mr. Fischer's [ph.] class. And--but she was the one who recognized that this little black boy needed some special attention. I got a lot of it from her and of course from my parents and my relatives who surrounded me, who were always encouraging, always affirming. But Ms. Jackson used to say, I need you in my class. And it was not until--and this is the way this sermon unfolds--it was not until I entered Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia] and I heard the glee club sing "Lift Every Voice and Sing." With tears--it's a true story--tears rolling down my cheeks, I can remember saying I'm finally in your class. I got it then, I got it. I said this is what she was trying to--so, I remember Ms. Jackson. Story_ID: 102626 Speaker 1: And during the elementary school years, did you have dreams and aspirations? What did you want to be when you grew up? Speaker 2: Mayor of New York. You know, visiting the Statue of Liberty, that's another sight, you know, because you get--at that time, you could walk up all the way into the crown and look out and look around; taking the ferry across, that's another sight, you know, that you--that I can remember. And then I used to write long, many pages in that, what do you call that notebook with the black binding, and the-- Speaker 1: Composition book. Speaker 2: Comp--yeah, you got it, sister (laughter). In that composition book I remember writing three, and four, and five pages on, I started off writing about the Verrazano-Narrows Bridge, 'cause they were just building it around that time and--or completing it or something--and then talking about the beauty of New York and wanting to be American. You know, I wanted always to be the leader of this great city, you know. When I think about the sights that I just told you about that I remember about the beautiful view of Manhattan Island, and learning early about the five boroughs, you know, and the, the counties of Kings, Queens, you know, and New York, and Richmond, and it seems like may have left one out, the Bronx, I've always wanted to be Mayor of New York. Speaker 1: And why did you want to be mayor? Did you want to make the city a better place, or-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I wanted to make the city a better place. Officer Joe Bolton: "East Side, West Side, all around the town there is something wrong with our city. It's the trash that's on the ground. We've got to get together as sure as me name is O'Rourke," or something like he would say, "and use our fine litter baskets on the sidewalks of New York." (laughter) See, I remember that. And I remember that the city was a very filthy place, and I wanted to see it cleaned up, you know. I remember some of the political discussions in our home, you know, during those, about the rough times we were having in New York, and--but I loved the [New York] Yankees; I loved the [Brooklyn] Dodgers. And you know, and I wanted to see everybody with an equal chance, you know, to enjoy New York, I mean, you know, the way I enjoyed it. Crime was not as much of a concern, because I was ten, eight, and I used to get on the subway by myself and meet my mother downtown, you know. I learned how to ride the subways, fascinated by the subway. And I always wanted to enjoy New York, you know, as a leader of this city. It's never kind of left me. I may still run. Speaker 1: And despite having role models, you still wanted to be a, a role model who was a black mayor. You still wanted to be the mayor of New York. You thought it was attainable? Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Never once in my life--and this could be the result of the early integration that I experienced in the public schools of New York and the later experiences that I've had, all of my life just about, except for a moment, just a brief moment in Georgia and a brief moment in Queens, from the fourth to the sixth grade, I've gone to school with whites. You know, I could do anything (laughter) they could do, you know, and all this stuff about--you know, I watched them, you know, look on my paper for answers, you know. I've seen 'em struggle, you know, so I just--yeah, yeah, I've never--yeah, I've always felt that I could achieve anything I want. Now, of course, later, when you begin to look at the realities, you don't say that you can't do it, but you see the forces that are opposed-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --to you achieving those goals. Story_ID: 102627 Speaker 1: What kind of student were you in elementary school? Speaker 2: As far as I know, I've always been a good student, you know. I mean my, my parents made sure I did my homework, you know. And I, I loved school. You know, I passed all my Regents. And going to Russell Sage Junior High School [J.H.S. 190] was a blessing because, you know, it was a very good school, a lot of emphasis on testing, and excellent teachers, upwardly mobile parents who were pushing their children. And I was from the same kind of background, so I did well. In high school I did well. Speaker 1: And what kind of child were you in elementary school? Speaker 2: Probably no different from most. I mean I was-- Speaker 1: Were you shy? Were you outgoing? Speaker 2: No, no, no, I wasn't shy. When I think of my, my friends, Little Freddie, Freddie Hargraves [ph.], Benjamin Delaney [ph.], you know, we were the guys who would slap the hambone in the back of the class, you know. We were (laughter), were the guys who walk in the back of the line making up, you know, little rhythms and stuff as we walked along. I was never the toughest guy. You know, I was never the best fighter, you know, but I was always with the guys (laughter). You know, I just, just sort of hung out. I, today I always wish that I could turn back the clock a little bit and go back and find two people in particular and probably several more. There was a young woman named Deborah who was in one of our classes, and Deborah had a tough time, I guess she had some kind of, she couldn't control her, her, her bladder. And we teased her unmercifully. I wish to God I could go back and apologize. I wish to God I could go back. Another one was a young woman named Ivy. Ivy was a Jehovah's Witness. In those days, a Jehovah's Witness children, particularly the girls, had to wear these very long plain dresses, a little kerchief tied around their head, and these big kind of Brogan shoes, white socks. And she just looked strange, you know, what we did to Ivy, pulled her hair, knocked her books out of her arm. And then there was Wesley, Wesley was gay, and he used to carry his books, you know, and he was, he, he acted like a little girl. And what we did to him was--I mean we didn't hurt him. (Unclear) and I pushed him around, knocked him down, teased him, laughed at him, but we didn't, you know, we didn't know. We just-- Speaker 1: Just-- Speaker 2: I wish I could go back. I wish I could see them somehow and just really apologize. 'Cause I mean now I recognize. I mean now, you know, you're--I remember the--it's so--Boy Scouts, you know, made a lot of friends there and learned to swim. One friend of mine who's a football coach somewhere, Michael Costa, Michael, we used to go to swim up here at the Harlem Y[MCA] without our scout master, Mr. Shipman, Charles Wesley. And I couldn't swim. Michael was very athletic. He's about my age, maybe a year older, and you know, used to tease me. And one day, I was--he was supposed to be teaching me some kind of lifesaving technique or trying to teach me how to swim, that was it. And he said now come on out in the middle of the water. He said I got you, I got you, I got you, you know. And then when he got me out there he started pushing my head under water, and it was, and it was, the water was deeper than I was tall, so. And I was fighting and struggling, and he was pushing me down, and I thought I was gonna drown. And then finally he, you know, and I learned how to swim because of him. He's a good friend today, but I don't see him much I mean, but I remember him very well. So, I mean I--it was a good childhood, you know. I had my own struggles, you know, but you know, I, I had a great, great childhood. Story_ID: 102628 Speaker 1: In junior high school, who was influencing you at this particular time in your life? Who were you being most influenced by during the junior high school years? Speaker 2: During my junior high school years, I guess nobody had any greater influence on me than my parents, my mother and father [Calvin O. Butts, II]. My friends who were in the Boy Scout troop with me went to school with me, Howard Smith, who's still a good friend of mine. Smitty and I--but see, our parents all knew each other, and so we were--you know, they used to talk. And we'd play outside in front of our houses and run up and down the street together. We played chess. They knew where we were going, what we were doing. Mr. Armwood, Sharon [ph.], he had, he owned the funeral home down on Northern Boulevard, his daughter was a good friend. And I remember she invited me to her party, and that was, I think that might have been the first party I ever went to, and God, and I don't know, nine, ten, eleven. I don't know how old we were then. But I remember we went to Mr. Armwood's when one of our friends passed away. He was riding on the back of a Mister Softee truck. The truck stopped short, he fell off. The truck back up and rolled over him. And I remember us looking over into the casket. Linda Roots, another good friend, who I see from time to time, we all grew up in the same neighborhood. So my friends, you know, Rusty and Freddie--and Mr. Hargraves, Sister Hargraves, you know, my parents, and when we were in the Scouts, they would talk. But the greatest influence in my life were my parents, you know. I was, I was not a street kid, but I still had friends who were. My first girlfriend, I think she passed away now, Lorraine, you know--but fundamentally, you know, I went home I mean and you know, I did homework and talked to my par--my mother. My father worked. Very often I didn't see my father. When I'd leave for school he'd be still asleep because he didn't home until very late. And then, of course, he'd get up and go to work, and he'd work, and by the time he got home I'd be asleep, you know. But-- Speaker 1: And what, what, what was happening with your dreams and aspirations at this time? Like, what did you want to be when you grew up around the junior high school years? Speaker 2: I guess at that time, my physician, Dr. Joseph A. Forte had a profound influence. And-- a physician, I thought I was on my way to becoming a medical doctor. Story_ID: 102629 Speaker 1: Okay, what was the name of the high school you attended? Speaker 2: Flushing, Flushing High School [Flushing, New York]. I wanna say it's the oldest high school in the city or at least among the oldest of the high schools in the city and very good high school, extremely good high school. Speaker 1: What kinds of activities were you involved in, in high school? Speaker 2: I was on the track team; I was president of senior class, you know. What else did I do? Those were the major things. Speaker 1: And what type of young man were you starting to become? Speaker 2: I don't know. I liked to dress well, always loved the ladies, and-- Speaker 1: Did you have a pretty active social life? Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: Mm-hmm? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, had a pretty active social life. My main girlfriend was a cheerleader, beautiful, beautiful black woman. And it was her father, in fact, who was responsible largely for my growing militancy and my, my, my movement toward nationalism, Black Nationalism. Speaker 1: When did that start to happen? Speaker 2: Probably around my, the end of my sophomore year, my junior in high school. Speaker 1: And who were some of the Black Nationalists that you listened to and that you followed? Speaker 2: Malcolm [X] of course, and, and, then it was more about, you know, it was always hearing about Adam Clayton Powell, Jr., and then it was reading and being led to Patrice Lumumba, you know, my father [Calvin O. Butts, II] and his conversations in the house, being led to people like Martin Robison Delaney, you know, being encouraged to read and know more about Marcus Garvey. Speaker 1: What did you think of Adam Clayton Powell. Like, what-- Speaker 2: Oh, he was, he was larger than life. I actually saw--I didn't know him, but my first cousin, the sister with whom my mother went to live when she came from the South, her daughter was her only child, Eloise, was like a sister to me and was a babysitter. She was older than me, and she was a registered nurse, did her nursing work at Harlem Hospital. And she used to bring me up--she lived at 150--well, 54th, between 54th and 55th on St. Nicholas Avenue. And it makes me smile now because I live at about 153rd and St. Nicholas now. And she would bring me to Harlem [New York City, New York] and babysit me. And then when I was 12, 10, somewhere between 10 and 12, she brought me uptown. And I spent several weekends with her, and she showed me Harlem. And she took me to 125th Street, the Tree of Hope of Bill Robinson, da-da, da, da, da. She took me everywhere. And one of the places she brought me was right here, and we sat in the balcony. And as we sat up there and looked down, Adam Clayton Powell came out, never will forget that. Eloise died; she's, she's gone now. But you know-- Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: --you talk about influence, that's a strong one. Speaker 1: And did you ever think that you would someday be standing where he was standing? Speaker 2: Mm-mm. Speaker 1: Not at that time? Speaker 2: No, not at that time. I had no idea. Being a clergyperson was the furthest thing from my mind, though, very often, you know, the family said oh, you're gonna be a preacher one day. You got a head like a preacher and all that stuff. And you know, I'd hear my parents talk about ministers all the time. That's a favorite topic of discussion in black families, you know, what, what's the pastor doing? You know, and is he doing a good job? Did he preach a good sermon? Is he running around with so and --you know, it's all that kind of stuff. So-- Story_ID: 102630 Speaker 1: What church did you, your family go to when you were growing up? Speaker 2: Well, in Georgia it was the Salem First Baptist Church in Fitzgerald. In New York I went to, I believe it must have been Dewitt Reformed Church. All I remember, my parents didn't go with me. I just remember that I found a church to attend down on the Lower East Side. And the more--and I preached at Dewitt. I know the pastor there now, and I think that was the church that I often attended. And then when we moved to Queens it was the First Baptist of Corona, East Elmhurst [New York]. Speaker 1: Do you remember what your experiences were like in church? Speaker 2: Yes, absolutely. When I was on the Lower--well, when I was with my grandmother's, that's a Deep South religion. That's the old meter hymns, that's the lining out of the songs, that's, that's the services intense, deep in the country, that's the healing, that's the, the, the eerie feeling of the movement of the Holy Spirit, the moaning, oh, that's--now when I went back to my family reunion, to the town reunion of Fitzgerald and I had to preach--I have a tape of that--preacher got out and lined out a hymn, and the people started moaning and singing. You know, it--if you, if you're not used to that in a, in a dark Southern hot night, it'll scare you to death, you know. I mean it-- Speaker 1: What were your experiences like in New York? Speaker 2: In New York, I went to First Baptist Church. Well, on the Lower East Side I remember just being in the Sunday school mostly and being prayerful, and meditative. I don't remember a lot, but the First Baptist of Corona, East Elmhurst, I was baptized there in 1960 and had been attending a few years prior to that. It was there when I really remember my deep Sunday school experiences. I remember my Sunday school teacher, Ms. Haversham [ph.], Mr. Singletary, Mr. Stingler [ph.] rather, Deacon and Deaconess Roach [ph.], you know, and many more. And it was there that I really debated with them about the Bible and you know, and, and whom created God, you know, those, those kinds of questions. My pastor, the Reverend William E. Gardner, was a very strong man. He was a Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] graduate and a military man. His wife was very loving and open. And I remember when we were building the new church, friend of mine, who was a member of this church now, Hamlet Wallace, who's an architect, and I used to stand outside, and we'd get our nickels and dimes together to put in the building fund. And then when the church was finally built, there's a little steeple up at the time. We said we built that steeple. That's our money up there. I made a lot of good friends there. I sang in the choir. One of my girlfriends was in the choir, and you know, it was a good experience. I was a boy scout. I got the God and Country award, award from the church you know, and so. Story_ID: 102631 Speaker 1: What were some of your thoughts about college? Speaker 2: College? Speaker 1: Mm-hmm, when you were in high school. Speaker 2: Well, I wanted to go to college. It was clear that that's what I would do. I mean I took every Regent that they had, you know, from biology and chemistry to trigonometry to all of them and passed them and did well, so it was clear. My mother went to Georgia State [College], which is now Savannah State [University, Savannah, Georgia]. My father [Calvin O. Butt, II] did not go to college, but he, you know, again, was an encourager; they were pushing. All of my relatives: you're going to college. It was, it was, enough said. Speaker 1: How did you make the decision to go to Morehouse? Speaker 2: Well, it was college night at Flushing High School [Flushing, New York], and prior to that we'd been sending out letters to various colleges, you know, the Harvards, the Yales. And one college, after I got all the books back that I really liked, was Trinity [College] up in Hartford, Connecticut. I said oh, man. Then I saw the campus, and I didn't visit it. I just, I read the material. The other one was Cornell [University, Ithaca, New York], 'cause they had--and I was thinking about going into what was called industrial psychology. And, but Trinity also had something that was similar, and I had just--Cornell seemed cold, you know. And Trinity, though it was in Connecticut and would be cold, the pictures just fascinated me. I didn't see any black students, but you know, you didn't see many in top schools. So I said wow, this is great. So it just so happened that at college night a representative from Trinity was there. My mother went with me. My father was working. And so, I remember having a conversation. He said well, your grades are very good. He said you know, and everything looks good. He said we will accept you--wow--but there's no scholarship money. That was a kiss of death. There's no way my parents could afford it, you know, just couldn't, with all the loans and all that kind of stuff. And then he said an interesting thing. He said but I'll tell you what, he said we may be able to get your grades up, and then we may be able to consider you for a scholarship. He said if you go to one of those nice colored schools, quote: "If you go to one of those nice colored schools," and you can get, you know, a very good average, grade point average, then you can reapply, and we will perhaps be able. So I went home. I was kind of discouraged, you know. And you know, with my upbringing, you know, I, you know, you, you learn to be, check yourself. But with my upbringing--you gotta change the tape? Speaker 1: No, no, no, go ahead. Speaker 2: With my upbringing, you, you know, you say colored school, that, you know what I mean. But we were cool. We didn't, we didn't explode (laughter) on the man. So I got home and I was kind of disappointed. And my mother was saying well, look, what about Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia]? I said where did this come from? She said well, you know, you used to go to the beauty cultures luncheon with me, and you know, Dr. Mays was a speaker there. He was a speaker, and said you know how you like da--and I remembered Dr. Benjamin Mays. When I was a kid, this man could, he was, he was, oh, he was erect, he was well-spoken, he was, ah, yeah. I said yeah, mama, I (laughter) remember him very well. She said well, he's president here. I said oh yeah? She said yeah. She said when I was grad, I think she said when she graduated from high school or while she was a student at Georgia State, he spoke. And she said I remember saying that I would want my son to be like him. So my father said yeah, you know. And they're from Georgia, you know. Morehouse is in Atlanta. He said well, you know, why don't you apply, see, check it out? So I applied and got accepted. And they said well, why don't you go down and you know? I said okay. So I packed up, went off to Morehouse College, got down there, I got straight A's both semesters, 4.0. Story_ID: 102632 Speaker 1: Dr. Butts, what year did you graduate from Flushing High School [Flushing, New York]? Speaker 2: Sixty-seven [1967]. Speaker 1: Okay. And I want to pick up where we left off, your first year at Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 2: So, I got straight A's, and so it was time to apply to Trinity, didn't want to go. (Laughter) I didn't wanna leave. I was, I mean I, I made such good friends. You know, my best friend from New Canaan, Connecticut, he and I were together right away. One of our good friends, Reggie, passed away. Julius, I don't know where he is. But we all--you know, it was a very good experiences. Caesar was from Buffalo [New York]. Rufus, who was from--where is Rufus from--Pensacola [Florida], I think. You know, it was an all-male school. I mean we just--the, the classes were not easy. But what happened was, because I had, I had received such a profound and well-structured public school education in New York City [New York], you know, I already knew how to take notes, and that lectures, and write, and you know, so. But they reinforced all of that. They said you gotta take reading. I said I know how to read. He said no, no, you don't understand. But it was, it was a wonderful experience. I enjoyed it immensely and even though I was going to an all-male school. And I was familiar with what it might be like at an all-male school. I mean, you know, you got a bunch of guys, some were gay, you know, here and there, and you know, you can live with that. But the, but the--I think just, I mean the educational experience, hearing the glee club sing "Lift Every Voice and Sing," being surrounded by strong black role models, the history, you know, all of that. [Reverend Dr.] Martin King [Jr.] was still alive, you know, and he was a Morehouse man. I'd read about Howard Thurman and his great--you know--(unclear)--I mean my, my, my pastor, Reverend Gardner. But the other thing was--I mean just might as well put it out there--was Spelman College [Atlanta Georgia]. There was, I mean all of those women in one place, I just, it was wonderful. Story_ID: 102633 Speaker 1: And you know, at the time you went to Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia], it was at that the height of the Civil Rights Movement. Did you become involved in civil rights activities? Speaker 2: Absolutely. A number of things: we organized. One of our most vigorous organizing activities was around Horace Tate when he was running for mayor of Atlanta. But you know, I worked with [HM] Bernice [Johnson] Reagon, who was in "Sweet Honey and the Rock." She used to have gatherings down at the Magnolia Ballroom in Vine City. And I remember playing the role of the Smoke King. I am the Smoke King. I am black. (Laughter) It was great, [W.E.B.] DuBois. And we talked a lot about--we had the Soul Roots Festival. And you know, I remember Stokely Carmichael coming through, H. Rap Brown, Cleve[land] Sellers. I remember going down to South Carolina State [University, Orangeburg, South Carolina] after the [Orange] massacre, so very much so. But of course, '67 [1967]--[Reverend Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.] was dead in April of '68 [1968], I remember rioting. Speaker 1: What happened, specifically? Speaker 2: Well, we were watching "Shane" in Sale Chapel. And they turned off the movie, which almost started a riot 'cause it was right at the best part of "Shane," "Shane." Say what? And the movie went (unclear). They had already announced that Martin King had been shot, so that had sort of sent a reverberation. But then they put the movie back on, so we said, well. And then they announced that he was dead. The movie went off, and we went off. I remember going across to Canterbury House and meeting with some fellows that I had been working within an organization called PRIDE, People Ready In Defense of Ebony. Earlier PRIDE had gone to the infirmary there. Dr. [James B.?] Ellison had said you know, what would happen if we had some gunshot wounds. And I said get out of here. We guys--(unclear)--revolutionaries. But now it was serious business. We, we dug up all of our preplans and we went to another location and made a bunch of Molotov cocktails. We bought the gasoline, filled up the, the bottles and stuff, the rags, and then we put them in bags. And then we went out that evening, and we burned several stores to the ground. We firebombed a local church. The fire caught in the basement. They got to it before it raged throughout the church. The church is still there. We terrorized cars with whites in them. And we were on a good roll. I had about, I started out with about seven of these Molotov cocktails, and I had about two left. And at that time, there was a friend of mine and I, and we were walking across this open field. I think the Morehouse School of Medicine may be sitting there now or just across the street from them. It was right in that area. And I remember as we were walking, we heard this whir, and we looked around and it was an armored car, like a, an Atlanta police, like a half-track truck or something. And I tell this story, I said the only thing I can see was a guy sitting on top with a neck that was very red, and he had a shotgun in his hand. And the moonlight reflected off the shotgun, so you could see this long silver barrel and this guy with a red neck holding this gun, and this half-track truck, and this big light flashing. I guess they were looking for us. And I remember telling the audience, I looked down at one of these Molotov cocktails, and I looked up at this half-track truck and this guy with this big shotgun and his very red neck. And all of a sudden I understood that non, that violence was not the way (laughter); nonviolence was the way. So I remember casting off the bag with the cocktails in it and running and just running, running, running, running, running and my friend doing the same thing. But in this open field someone had a clothesline, and I ran smack into that, and it snatched my head back, bam. I landed flat--[cough]--excuse me--flat on my back. Well, my friend was gone, he swoop--[cough]--excuse me. And eventually I got up and ran, and of course, he was already at the place where we started. And I met him there, and we decided that we would approach this another way. But, that's one of the things that happened. Story_ID: 102634 Speaker 1: We were very angry and then continued to organize, continued to teach. I remember we would read things like "[The] Crisis of the Negro Intellectual." That was one of the books. We'd have discussion groups about it, studying it. We would come home to New York. Bill Strickland used to teach a little study group over here in (unclear) Townhouse. And all of us who worked for the Neighborhood Youth Corps would go over and sit with him, and he would sort of indoctrinate us, and teach us, and help to lead us along in things pertaining to racial matters, and the Civil Rights Movement, and the human rights movement, probably had a lot to do with my going into ministry. I wanted to be a philosophy teacher at the undergrad level. I had a minor in religion. But when I looked at--I still had this desire to be politically involved. But when I looked at everything that was responsible for the social, and political, and educational progress of people of African descent, the church was right there. So that was just kind of leading. Story_ID: 102635 Speaker 1: And now what year did you graduate from Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia]? Speaker 2: Actually, the diploma is listed as '72 [1972] because a number of things happened. I really had a ball (laughter), so I pledged a fraternity. Speaker 1: What fraternity? Speaker 2: Kappa Alpha Psi. And even though fraternity and my fraternity stresses achievement, scholarship, you know, we were also a social group. So I had to kind of make up for a little loss time, but I did. And I was in the class of '71 [1971]. The actual diploma didn't come till '72 [1972]. Speaker 1: And what's your degree in? Speaker 2: Philosophy. Speaker 1: A B.A. in philosophy? Speaker 2: [Nodding]. Speaker 1: So, you were thinking that you wanted to be, you wanted to teach philosophy undergrad. So what happened next after you graduated from Morehouse? Speaker 2: Well, it was actually at Morehouse a fellow named Bill Sanders, who's a pastor in Ohio who had graduated the year before, came back from Union Theological Seminary in New York recruiting on the campus. He said well, he said what are you doing, Butts? I said I don't know. He said, why don't you go to seminary? I said, I never thought about seminary. So he showed me his propaganda from Union. Then the next day, Kelly Miller Smith, who has now passed away, came through my, one of my religion classes, and he was talking about Vanderbilt Divinity School [Nashville, Tennessee]. And then after that or just prior that, Henry Mitchell, who was teaching at Colgate Rochester [Crozer] Divinity School [Rochester, New York], came through, and he was talking about Colgate. And so Henry Mitchell even today talks about how he thinks, and Dean Lawrence Jones, how I was scheming, because I got free trip. And I started off at Colgate Rochester, came back through Union, went down to Vanderbilt, and then back into Atlanta all on their dime because (laughter) I was visiting the schools. I got a free trip home, you know, coming through Union, and was very impressed with seminary and the notion that I could be involved in the church, still use the philosophy I had learned but even more so the theology that had come from the, the, the religion minor. New York was home, and so I selected Union. Story_ID: 102636 Speaker 1: And do you feel you were called to the ministry? Speaker 2: Mm-hmm, yeah, I didn't have--you know, there was no--you know, God didn't speak from heaven. A mule didn't turn around and say go preach, you know, but the way Bill [Sanders] returned and the way I was in Dr. Watson's class and Dr. Guy's class, Melvin Watson and Dr. [William Vincent] Guy, who is the pastor of Friendship Baptist now in Atlanta and their teaching, the care with which they handled their students, Bill coming back and saying have you considered seminary, and my ability to visit to the seminary, my wife [Patricia Butts]'s grandfather, with whom, who raised her was a very prominent minister down in Griffin, Georgia, and (unclear)--they built five churches down there, Dr. Stinson. And so, when I was dating her, you know, I would go down and visit with them, and so that had an influence. My parents [Calvin Otis Butts, II], my father especially, you know, they were encouraging. You know, this boy wants to be a minister, so. And then all of a sudden all of that talk about religion, you know, and all of their faith, and all that clicks in. There have been no people more supportive, and more embracing, and more encouraging than my parents. I mean, you know, so it, it was all right there. And that, those are the things that lead me to believe--and then when I got here, after I was here two weeks, Dean Lawrence Jones, who was instrumental in getting me here--he calls me Butsy [ph.]--he said "Butsy, what were you doing? What are you doing walking around the halls of Union [Theological Seminary, New York City, New York]?" I said, "dean, I don't know what I'm doing, you know, I--you know, I'm here. I'm gonna study." He said, "you got a job?" I said, "no." He, said "you got a wife and a child?" I said, "yeah." He said, "well, you gotta work somewhere." He said "look, I got a friend over there at the Abyssinian [Baptist Church], and Powell just died. His name is Sam Proctor. He's looking for somebody with no experience at all. You look like the man. He said go over there and meet him." I went over and I shook his hand, and met him, and got a job at Abyssinian. That was-- Speaker 1: As an assistant pastor? Speaker 2: I don't even think I was an assistant minister. I was probably a gopher, you know. Dr. Proctor said show up (laughter). A handshake, I never got a letter engaging me; he just shook my hand and said be here. So, I came on Sunday, and I was sitting in the, in the congregation. He looked around and he saw me. And then I think the next Sunday he looked at me. He said "come sit in pulpit." I just sat in the pulpit. I've been ever since. That was '72 [1972]. Speaker 1: And so, when you first came to Abyssinian what did you think about? Did you kind of reflect back to that time when you came here as a boy with your cousin? What were your thoughts when you first sat in the pulpit? Speaker 2: It kind of reminds you of how God works. You know, it kind of shows you, you know, you've been called to this situation. Now, that didn't mean that I thought that I was gonna be here as its pastor, but it just said you know, this, look at how this is unfolding. I looked up in the balcony. You know, I told, called Eloise [Butts' former babysitter]. She was still alive then, you know. I told her, you know, this is--she said yeah. She just sort of laughed, and she was very encouraging, mm-hmm. Story_ID: 102637 Speaker 1: And what were your experiences like in seminary [at Union Theological Seminary, New York, New York]? Like, what were some of your favorite courses, and what your experiences like? Speaker 2: I'm trying to remember this professor's name, and I don't know why I keep blocking on it. I'm gonna have to go back. Bob, I think his first name was Bob, but it was, he taught a practical theology course. It was like a sociology course, and it was how the church had to deal with urban situations, so we read like "The Making of Black Chicago"; we read "Harlem: The Making of a Ghetto," Gilbert Osofsky; we read--and then we looked at all of the social, and economic, and political forces that come together to make this city what it is, you know, today, and how we as clergypersons from the point of view of our theology reflect on that, and how the church is used as an instrument of social change. Those were the most fascinating things. Then, of course, one of the major reasons that I chose 'em, probably even prior, more important than any of the others was [HM] James [H.] Cone, 'cause at, at Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] I read his book I think in '71 [1971], '70 [1970], "Black Theology, Black Power." Well, all those discussions in those living rooms at Thanksgiving, here was a man who was putting it down systematically. Oh yeah, Marcus Garvey, "God is a Black-"-"God is Black." Oh yeah, this was it. So James Cone was a reason. In fact, along with Sam Proctor and Lawrence Jones, Lawrence Jones, Sam Proctor, Jim Cone and his systematic theology, his black theology is what drives me today. I mean that's at the very foundation of how I view. It's that and C. Eric Lincoln's--no, that and E. Franklin Frazier's "The Black [sic, Negro] Church in America"; it was actually Negro church, sociological study, and then C. Eric [Lincoln]'s work, "The Black Church Since Frazier." And C. Eric Lincoln was at Union, and James Cone was at Union, and Lawrence Jones was at Union. Lawrence Jones was the one who said the black preacher has to be dually competent. He's the first one to say that. He'd say you just can't be a preacher anymore; you gotta be a preacher and a lawyer, a preacher and a community developer, a preacher and something else. Those things--Leon Watts, who's now dead, from the A.M.E. Zion Church was a Ph.D. student. He was into black theology. Radical as he could be. Leon was tough as nails. Those were the influences on me. And the things that I do today, the, the fights against police brutaligy--brutality--painting of the billboards, the community development work, my work in terms of international relations, particularly with Africa and Ethiopia especially, because this is the Abyssinian church. All of that is tied into those experiences at Union. Union is not the school today that it was then, but-- Speaker 1: How has it changed? Speaker 2: That's the source of another conversation. Story_ID: 102638 Speaker 1: Okay. So, tell me a little bit about, like what the climate was in New York when you first came here. Actually, you know, give us a little bit of history about Abyssinian [Baptist Church], please. Speaker 2: Well, Abyssinian is 197 years old this year, founded in 1808-- Speaker 1: By free slaves. Speaker 2: --founded by, founded by men and women who were worshipping at the First Baptist Church on Gold Street, Lower Manhattan, down where the African burial ground is, that area. There's no indication that they were necessarily free. They were segregated in the church, but the sea merchants who were living in New York at that time who were from Ethiopia went to worship there. They were told that they could not worship in the regular congregation; they had to be segregated. They, not being familiar with segregation, walked out. And the other Africans who were worshipping in the segregated section witnessed this and walked out with them. And they decided to esta--they, they decided to establish a church where anyone could worship. And in honor of the Ethiopians who walked out, they named it the Abyssinian Baptist Church. And so the church was born out of a racial, out of a protest against racial segregation in the house of God, and it has continued to grow over a long history, nearly 200 years. Speaker 1: And some of its legacy in terms of the pastors before you. Speaker 2: Well, you know, there were a number of great pastors: R. D. Wynn [Robert D. Wynn], Charles Satchell Morris, [Reverend John] VanVessler, a number of them. But the ones that would probably be most remembered are the ones in the 20th century, which are Adam Clayton Powell, Sr., Adam Clayton Powell, Jr., Samuel DeWitt Proctor, and me. Story_ID: 102639 Speaker 1: And what was the, the climate like in New York [City, New York] when you first came to Abyssinian [Baptist Church] in the early '70s [1970s]? What was the racial climate like here? Speaker 2: It was a very racially divided city, still is to a large degree. Police brutality was at an all-time high. Speaker 1: In the '70s [1970s]? Speaker 2: In the seventies [1970s]. Black people were struggling politically because [Adam Clayton] Powell [Jr.] had just died, and he was the major political force in the city. The housing stock started to deteriorate, particularly in Harlem and other poor black communities, and drugs. You go up and down Frederick Douglass Boulevard now, between 110th and 125th Street, well, call it 120th Street, and you see all kinds of new development, new housing. When I came back home in 1972 and get off the train there on 110th Street called Cathedral Parkway and walk up 8th Avenue, wall-to-wall junkies, heroin addicts. Speaker 1: Heroin. Speaker 2: I used to go through there, and I'd find some people that I knew from the church. One person whose mother was in the church, I remember finding him. I'd known him for a while before. And I remember walking to try to keep him from OD'ing all night long, a lot of memories I have like that, but--so a lot of the pathologies that visit our community were there, poor health, high rates of diabetes, high blood pressure. AIDS was not an issue at that point. Venereal disease was. Speaker 1: And what were some of your thoughts in terms of how you wanted to change things? Speaker 2: Well, certainly wanted to get rid of heroin and wanted to try to get rid of the junkies. Heroin dealing, drug dealing was, I mean it was rampant. It was out in the open. The drug dealers were violent and vicious, mean. They preyed junkies as well as some of those who dealt on the seniors. Some of horror stories were women whose apartments had been broken into, and they were raped. And you know, these women were in their seventies and eighties, so, getting the junk--pardon me--out of the community. Educational system was terrible. And for me this was heartbreaking, 'cause I got a quality education in New York City. It was one of the best in the world. And so I wanted to make sure that we did something about that, and so we did afterschool programs, tutorial programs; I built a youth program here. And then watching the housing stock deteriorate, what could we do to prevent that, turn that around? So those were some of the things that we--and then police brutality. I mean I've got pictures with us marching on the precincts, 'cause we held police brutality hearings in the '80s [1980s]-- Speaker 1: Do you think police brutality was as much as a prob, a problem then as it was in the nineties [1990s], or just was it more highly-- Speaker 2: Oh no. Speaker 1: --publicized? Speaker 2: It was more highly publicized in the '90s [1990s], but we had a lot to do with publicizing in the '80s [1980s]. I don't think we have had anything more dramatic than those police brutality hearings when Judge [George W.] Crockett [Jr.] and Major Owens and all those guys came into New York City to take a look at it. But it was rampant; it was fueled by racism; and it was covered up by the mayor as well as the police commissioners at that time. Story_ID: 102640 Speaker 1: And so were you starting to become more politically involved? Speaker 2: Yeah, matter of fact I was gonna run, one of my first things was to run for school board. And I remember after prayer meeting one, one, one Wednesday--well, at that time, prayer meeting was on a Friday--I had my petitions. And I said I want you all to sign my--they were signed in moments. And I got a big backlash from some of the senior members of the church who were opposed to it. Speaker 1: Why? Speaker 2: Because they said the, the kinder ones, and most of them said you're a young man and we love you. We want to see your ministry grow and develop. We've already seen one young man destroyed by politics. Speaker 1: Referring to Adam Clayton Powell [Jr.]. Speaker 2: Adam Clayton Powell [Jr.]. You don't need to be in it, and so they, they crushed it. I remember coming home, and I was still in seminary. I remember coming home and getting calls from these members of the church, the officers of the church. Story_ID: 102641 Speaker 1: When did you graduate from seminary [Union Theological Seminary, New York City, New York]? Speaker 2: Seventy-five [1975] was when I graduated with the M.Div. Then I went on and stayed another year or so working on a master's in sacred theology. Speaker 1: Okay. And when did you take over the helm here [Abyssinian Baptist Church]? Speaker 2: Nineteen eighty-nine [1989]. Speaker 1: So, between '75 [1975] and '89 [1989], what were some of the changes that you were seeing in the community surrounding the church? Speaker 2: Well, of course, I watched heroin epidemic turn into a crack epidemic. I watched more of the deterioration of the housing stock. Speaker 1: And can you kind of tell us some stories. I had read about a woman I think who lived right across the street from the church who would cook things, and can you kind of tell us some of those stories? Speaker 2: Well, that was Ernestine Brown. And Ernestine Brown was one of the church members who, who I really believe loved me, and I loved her. And I got to know her primarily 'cause I used to work with the children in front of the church. And when I say work with the children, I mean we'd be out in the street dancing, and you know, I used to wear bib overalls and bowties. And you know, we'd turn up James Brown, you know, in those days and, and--but I'd also be working with them to clean up the park across the street. I'd be trying to get them into the church and teach them more about God through Christ, to help them to raise money for youth programs, take them on youth retreats. Our church clerk, Venia Davis, was, who is very close to me now, worked very close with me then. And so Ernestine, you know, she lived on the block. She went to the church. And she used to lean out the window, and she said come here, boy (laughter). And I'd go over and talk to her, and you know, we became friends. And she--my children were small, and you know, she'd look at them and comment about them. And, and Ernestine belonged to I think it was the Crusaders. And was it Crusaders? Yeah, I think it was the--that's Lillian--she belonged to the Crusaders. But every Sunday after church, members of the Crusaders would leave church and go to her house. And Ernestine would cook, and she'd fry fish, and she'd make bread pudding and cornbread and greens. She's from South Carolina, and--but she wouldn't only do it on Sundays. She would do it usually in the week. And whenever she would do it in the week, and she'd see me, she'd give me some bread pudding in aluminum foil and some nice fried fish that was warm and just wonderful (laughter), great. And I'd--she'd hand it out the window. And Ernestine was there. She was a fixture. Then one day I looked up, and Ernestine wasn't there-- Speaker 1: What-- Speaker 2: --and the building was abandoned. Speaker 1: What happened to her? Speaker 2: Well, fortunately, Ernestine was able to get one of the newer apartments that had been built over here on 135th Street in the (unclear) Park, which was St. Philip's Church. And, and I say fortunately not only because it was a nicer apartment--it was smaller thoug-- but also because Ernestine is--another thing, we have a health ministry now. I mean she'd cook all that good food and eat all that good food, and she was big as a house. And of course, she suffered from high blood pressure, diabetes, and eventually her sight left her. So it was fortunate in that she had a smaller place, and it was more accessible for the handicapped, 'cause eventually she had to use a walker and a wheelchair. Speaker 1: And what happened to the other people who lived in that building? What was starting to happen slowly in the neighborhood? Speaker 2: Well, people were starting to--those who could not find more housing in this area, you know, would move out. Some went to the Bronx. And fortunately, though, by that time, we and some others had started some building programs, and we were able to find them some local housing. But the threat was that this block could have been wiped out. And the bigger threat was that the private developers were trying to get the property and turn this into market rate housing, which would have been all the poor would have been out, and that was criminal. Story_ID: 102900 Speaker 1: So, Dr. Butts, we were talking about some of the changes that were taking place in the neighborhood, the deterioration of the neighborhood. And as a clergyperson here at this church, what were some of your thoughts about what needed to be done? Speaker 2: Well, watching the deterioration, the displacement of people, the threat of private developers pushing out poor people, the church, particularly Abyssinian [Baptist Church], needed to respond to these challenges with programs that would help, first of all, rebuild the community, protect the poor, and not allow this very historic place to just be overrun with developers who have no interest in it other than making a dollar. We had resources in the church. We had political connections, and should say we had human and financial resources. So we had to--my thought was how do you put them to work to meet these challenges? So we gathered some of our more active members around the table, told them what we were witnessing, and said how do we deal with this? And out of those early efforts came the Abyssinian Development Corporation. Speaker 1: So this was around 1986. Speaker 2: This was around 1987--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, somewhere in there. Speaker 1: So tell us about the Abyssinian Development Corporation. What is that? Speaker 2: Well, it is a community development corporation that has as its focus residential, commercial, educational, and cultural development. It actually got incorporated in 1989. And in '89 [1989] we had one volunteer who was working for us, Karen Phillips, who was then I think employed by the Port Authority of New York. The Local Initiative Support Corporation gave us our first grant, $50,000, and (unclear) pay her salary. And from that $50,000 grant, we are now, in terms of residential, commercial, education development, around $500 million. Speaker 1: And what did you all begin to do? You, did you begin buying property? Speaker 2: Well, we began--one of the things we did just prior to incorporation in '89 [1989] was to develop a [Section] 202 program, which is a federal program building housing for senior citizens and handicapped persons. But after that, Karen's first major task was to develop Abyssinian House, which is across the street, which is about twenty-seven or twenty-eight units for homeless families, mostly women and children. And then, so we first began by taking old law tenements and redeveloping them. So the building that Ernestine [Brown] lived in, which is 133 I think, was on West 138th Street, you renovate that in on the inside so people can move back into it, and you take it off the city's tax rolls. So that's how. Right across the street from our senior citizens and handicap development we built condominiums with the help of then Dime [Savings] Bank. The president of the bank at that time was Dick Parsons [Richard Parsons], who now heads Time Warner. And we worked with Dick to get that done, and were very successful. Speaker 1: And in terms of like some of the development you were doing for the homeless, what was the homeless situation like in the city during the late '80s [1980s]? What was the cit--was the city-- Speaker 2: Well, first of all, homeless was not a new term. It was on the Statue of Liberty. But it was a new phenomenon in the city, you know, people without any place to stay. Speaker 1: And more families. Was that part of-- Speaker 2: Yeah, women-- Speaker 1: --the phenomenon? Speaker 2: --and children, yeah. So, the city recognized it, and they knew they had to do something about, so they were looking to partner with organizations to build shelters. Now the homeless shelter is, is, it's, it's--they are apartments, but the families are only supposed to be there no longer than nine months, and then they work with us to find more permanent housing for them so that others can get into the transition process. But there was no more permanent housing, so we had to build it. So the city worked with us to renovate apartments for poor families. But in the transition process we had to help them stabilize, provide them with social services, find out why you're homeless in the first place. It's not just because--always--just because a building has deteriorated. There you couldn't pay your rent, there were some other extenuating circumstances. Let's see if we can address some of the problems. Story_ID: 102901 Speaker 1: And what was happening for you politically? Were you starting to become more politically active in terms of your outspokenness about political leaders and that kind of thing? Speaker 2: Absolutely. I mean, you know, we continued to be in that mode, very, you know, utilizing some of the terms that I had heard, you know, criticizing black leaders for taking soft positions, or being accommodationists, or downright selling out, you know. You could say with the kind of rhythm and force that these were bootlicking, foot-shuffling, knee-bending Negroes who had no--you know, that kind of thing. And then you know, point out political leaders that--yeah, very much so, because, you know, how could we get to this point? How with the sacrifices of Malcolm [X] and [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] could we allow our neighborhoods to deteriorate? Why would, why weren't we fighting these battles? Why did I--you know, so, yeah. Speaker 1: And what was your relationship like with Mayor [Ed] Koch at that particular time? Speaker 2: It was rough, because [Ed] Koch was taking some pretty conservative positions. I thought he could do more. I was not willing to allow him to just run roughshod over the community and talk any way he wanted to black folk and to poor people. And we had a fairly rocky time. Now, the relationship got better, but it was tough. You know, I remember calling him a bloodsucker and a lot of other things. Speaker 1: And you referred to him once as worse than a racist. Speaker 2: Worse-- Speaker 1: What did you mean by that? Speaker 2: Well, you know, a racist, you know, he just doesn't like you 'cause you're black or you, you're Jewish or whatever. I said he's worse than a racist. He's an opportunist, which means that he'll take advantage of anybody in order to get where he wants to go, doesn't matter. And that's what I saw Koch as. He was a political opportunist. You know, he didn't care whether you were black or, or, or white, or red, or, you know, if he had to step on you or use you, he would. And that's the way I felt at that time. Speaker 1: And was your strained relationship with him, was it impacting the development project? Speaker 2: No, actually what happened was he and I met over at Harlem Hospital once. I was invited or either on the community board of Harlem Hospital or invited to attend. Koch was there making a presentation, or I heard he was gonna be there. And so, he made his presentation, and then at the end, you know, I raised some questions, and he and I got into it again. So he said you know, you're so, you know, bitter, you're so angry about what's going on in your community, why don't you do something about it? And I said I am doing something about it. I said part of the problem is you do not respond to people who send you good proposals on how we can redevelop the community. You're insensitive; you're an opportunist. You just, you don't wanna deal with me 'cause I've been on your case, or something back and forth, and he back and forth. He said you have never sent anything in. You have never made a proposal to the city. You--and I said I have. I said I've sent it in to your people at HPD [Housing Preservation & Development]. It should be on your desk. He said you ought to know now nothing gets passed in this city unless I see it first. I said then it's being held up by your people. He said you're not telling the truth. I'm going back and check on it. The next afternoon he called me and apologized. He said I checked on it. It was there. I had not seen it. He approved it. From that point on, we worked closely with the Koch Administration to get a lot of housing done. Story_ID: 102902 Speaker 1: What was your relationship like with [HM] Mayor [David] Dinkins? Speaker 2: It was good. You know, I supported David Dinkins; I encouraged him; I had him here. I was hard on him also, you know, because I thought he had a, a tremendous responsibility to respond to the black community. I thought that he did not take full advantage of that. But given he was the first black mayor, you know, I-- Speaker 1: Was, was there a little resentment because he had taken your job you wanted-- Speaker 2: Oh no. Speaker 1: --since third grade. Speaker 2: No, no, I'm not like that. Matter of fact, I was very happy that he was there. Now, you know, just for a little of that inside stuff, you know, yeah, a little resentment 'cause he's from Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], and I'm a Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] man, and the fact that a Howard graduate got there before a Morehouse man, you know. But he's a, he's a dear friend. He's always been a gentleman, and I've always appreciated him-- Story_ID: 102903 Speaker 1: So, I think we were talking about [HM] David Dinkins-- Speaker 2: Yeah, David Dinkins, you know, that's just a little inside kidding, you know, Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia]/Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] the black college rivalries and things. But no, he was, he's been a gentleman. He's been rather fatherly, you know, and supportive, and encouraging, you know. My critique of his time as mayor is only linked to the things that, you know, I really want to see happen for the black community. And I think he understands, you know. Speaker 1: What kind of mayor do you think he was for the city? Speaker 2: He was a good mayor for the city. He was, he was, he was, he was probably too good a man to be mayor. He's too, too much of a gentleman, too much of a grandfather, fatherly type. You know, New York takes a kind of rougher and more tumble spirit. Story_ID: 102904 Speaker 1: And when did you start emerging as a black leader in the community? Speaker 2: I don't know that I ever have. Speaker 1: You, you don't think that you that you ever have? Speaker 2: I don't, I don't, I don't walk around with the notion that I'm a black leader. I just do what I do. Speaker 1: Who do you think are some of the leaders in the African-American community? Speaker 2: That's much harder to say today. I think some of the men and women such-- Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: So who do you think are some of the leaders in the black community, or actually, Dr. Butts, who were some of the leaders in the black community in the late '80s [1980s], early '90s [1990s]? Speaker 1: Late eighties [1980s], early '90s [1990s]. Speaker 2: In your opinion. Speaker 1: Here in New York? Speaker 2: Yes, sir. Speaker 1: Well, I mean, you know, if you, if you manage, if you're, if you're able to get elected to office, then I mean, and people re-elect you, I guess Charlie Rangel [HM Charles Rangel]. Speaker 2: And what was your relationship like with him? Speaker 1: It's been, it's, it's generally been good. It's been rocky, you know, 'cause I mean in the early days, you know, I would say things like, you know, Charlie Rangel won the election against Adam [Clayton Powell, Jr.] by a hundred or so votes, and they were votes of dead men. Charlie didn't like that (laughter), you know. But across the years, you know, I think we've grown closer, and I've understood more about who he is and what he does. And I think he understands more about me and what I'm trying to accomplish. Speaker 2: You referred to him once as a timid politician. What did you mean by that? Speaker 1: Well, see, I think some of these guys can take stronger and bolder stands, you know, on behalf of black people. I don't think they have to apologize and go along with the party line. And I think they ought to take risks. You know, they think they won't be re-elected, or they won't get the money from the party. The heck with all of that, you know. Speaker 2: What about representing all of new, New York, not just the African Americans New York? Speaker 1: Well, I think you do that. I mean I happen to agree with [HM Reverend] Jesse [Jackson] on that one. A rising tide lifts all boats, and we're down at the bottom. So, whatever we do, however we rise, everybody else benefits. I don't, you know, I don't buy into this. Just like when I was standing next to Jesse when he was not given the kind of support that he needed in 1984 when he was in San Francisco [California]. And I said Jesse, let's walk out of here, said we don't need to stay here and hang out with the Republican Party. You're strong enough. You got PUSH Rainbow Coalition. Let's, let's go. We don't have to stay in here. And there were a lot of people who were, who had already given a lot to him to get him there, sacrificed a lot, organized in the community who were ready to go, and he decided to stay with the Democrats. Speaker 2: So you felt like he should have run as an Independent at that-- Speaker 1: Oh yeah. Speaker 2: --particular time? Speaker 1: I think he could have gelled black people, made us into a much more power force, you know. Story_ID: 102905 Speaker 1: And what was happening in terms of police brutality in the late '80s [1980s], early '90s [1990s]? Were that, was that something you were still very active and involved in? Speaker 2: Well, it had gone--yeah, I was still very actively involved. Our movement had helped to get--Ben Ward made the first African-American police commissioner in the city. We saw the rates of incidents drop. We expanded the Police--Civilian Complaint Review Board so more civilians could be on it. And we actually saw the number of complaints go down and the number of incidents go down, 'course with the coming of Abner Louima and, and-- Speaker 1: Diallo. Speaker 2: Amadou Diallo, yeah. Speaker 1: Let's talk about those two cases. What happened in the case of Abner Louima? Speaker 2: Abner Louima was where a police officer jammed a broomstick or a plunger stick into his rectum, clearly uncalled for. The police officer is in jail, but it was another indication of a blatant kind of racism or, or, or a more pronounced racism that's still in the New York City Police Department. Amadou Diallo shot at by four white police officers over forty times, killed. Speaker 1: What happened when the verdict came down in the, the Diallo case? What happened in your church [Abyssinian Baptist Church] that following Sunday after the verdict? Speaker 2: I was telling a story. The city was racially divided. [Rudy] Giuliani was responsible for it and his political-- Speaker 1: Why did you hold, why did you think he was responsible? Speaker 2: 'Cause I watched him. I watched how he baited black people. I watched how he used race, you know, as a wedge between New Yorkers. I watched his policies and how he responded to black, he wouldn't meet with black people, you know. I met with him early on in his administration. And he made shifts--he was mean-spirited. And during that time, and I was really on his case, a very wealthy, very powerful white person, man, called me and said Cal, you know, it's--we gotta try to get together. We gotta try to do something about all of this division and hatred. And I took him at his word, you know. I said okay and reached out mended some fences, really tried to work for reconciliation. After the verdict, this same person called back. Speaker 1: And the verdict was not guilty, just-- Speaker 2: Not guilty for these officers. Speaker 1: --for the record. Speaker 2: And he was responding to the kind of negative or to, no, he was responding to the rage that was coming out of the black community, how people were saying certain things. Then he started to lecture me: you know, your people ought to not, you, you people ought to, you--so I told him to go to hell, hung up. And so that's the story I was telling to the congregation. And when he started telling me about you people and your people, and then I said go to hell, white man, and that's the, and I relating that conversation to the conversation--to the congregation, to the congregation, well, the media picked it up. And they reported: Butts to white man, go to hell, or go to hell, white man, as if you know, this was a statement to every white man. It was not, but I was certainly angry with him 'cause he hadn't done a thing, you know, except one or two things here, there, throw a little money around; he hadn't done a thing to try to help improve race relations. Speaker 1: And what's the situation today with police brutality here in New York? Speaker 2: Well, we haven't had a lot of incidents, at least reported, that I have known. And of course, nothing sensational as Louima or Diallo or--oh, I don't know why I can't recall this other African [Ousmane Zongo]--(unclear) who was killed by the police in the storage house, but during that period. So, I would say it's maybe a little better right now. Story_ID: 102906 Speaker 1: And so I ask you, who did you think were some of the black leaders in the late '80s [1980s], early '90s [1990s]? Speaker 2: Well, you know, like I said, [HM Charles] Rangel was the elected official, you know. He's, he's prominent, and he's--black woman in New York, C. Virginia Fields has been out front. Speaker 1: What about [HM Reverend] Al Sharpton? Speaker 2: It depends on how people look at Al. I mean, you know, for me, a leader has to have accomplished something. You know, you have to have evidence of your stewardship, so. Speaker 1: And you don't believe he does? Speaker 2: Well, I would liked--you know, I like Al, but I would like somebody to point out for me what it is. You know, I mean, you know, I, I--you know, Charlie Rangel could say well, here's the empowerment zone. You know, at least I brought that in, equals hundreds of millions of dollars for development. C. Virginia might be able to point to housing development, things on the West Side and some other things she's been responsible for. Adelaide Sanford [HM] in the field of education might be able to say that oh, I'm not (unclear), you know. We got John Henrik Clarke House up. I'm a New York State regent. I can point to reforms and progress in terms of education. Or at least [HM Reverend] Floyd Flake can say, you know, I've rebuilt an area of Queens. You know, my church is, you know, 15,000 members I've got. You know, you've got to have some that. [HM Reverend Dr.] Wyatt Walker can point to his housing developments. You've got to have some evidence of stewardship. Story_ID: 102907 Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit about some of your positions that may have been controversial in the black community. Let's talk about the case with Henry Lyons, who was the head of the National Baptist Convention and the position that you took with his particular situation, and tell us about the situation. Speaker 2: Henry Lyons played loosely and freely with the money of poor black folk, trampled on their dreams, and was about to flaunt it in our faces. And I just took a stand and said you can't do that. Speaker 1: And he was accused of buying his mistress a very expensive home, car, and other items. Speaker 2: See, I'm not gonna pass judgment in terms of moral judgment in terms of his relationship with his mistress. But when you take the money of poor black folk and that could be used for their benefit, when you play loosely with an organization like the National Baptist Convention that has such primary importance to our people, I just took a stand and said no, and I'm gonna speak against it and stand my ground. Speaker 1: What is the National Baptist Convention? Speaker 2: Well, it's the largest, it is the largest organized body of black people in the country and maybe in the world. And it is a fellowship of Baptist churches and association of Baptist churches from across this nation who have come together for mutual benefit of each other and particularly the race. It is deeply involved in missionary work, both home and foreign. And it is a forum for social, and political, as well as religious discussion. It's--and for all of its challenges, it is, again, of primary importance to our churches and to our community. And you just can't do what Henry Lyons did and not have people speak about it. Because if he gets away with it, and it's obvious to the public, we become a laughingstock, and we have no voice. And-- Speaker 1: Do you think he got away with it? Speaker 2: No, I don't think he got away with it, went to jail. Speaker 1: But just in terms of the organization, were you surprised that there wasn't more support for your position? Speaker 2: Yeah, I was. I thought that many of the clergy, particularly some of the more prominent ones, would have much more integrity than that. But then when I realized, and see, it wasn't Henry's Lyon's fault all by himself. It was the board of directors. They all should have gone. But, you know, it was a tough stand, but I felt that I needed to do that because we are not about money. You know, I'd rather have it than not have it. It's a very important commodity. I think we should encourage our people on not only how to earn it honestly, but how to use it wisely. But our driving force, particularly as preachers of the gospel, should not be money. And unfortunately, Henry Lyons had to go to jail because of his improper behavior. But now we're watching as men and women are making money the god, prosperity the goal, and really, once again, there is no true evidence of their stewardship except large churches, jet planes, fancy cars, and costumes that entertainers would wear as they prance across the stage. This is pitiful. Story_ID: 102908 Speaker 1: You know, one thing I didn't ask you, Dr. Butts, that I'd like to is when you became head minister here [Abyssinian Baptist Church], do you remember your first sermon that you preached as head minister? Speaker 2: Yea--I've, I'm trying to, one was "Arise and Let Us Go Across This Jordan." And that was after Moses died, Joshua took, and he took over, and he led the people. And I was talking about crossing the Jordan and the challenges that were in front of us. If I'm not mistaken, I have to go back and look, my second sermon was on abortion (laughter). I mean, you know, we just had to get right down to it and saying that in the Abyssinian Church we are opposed to abortion; we think that it is against the teachings of God as we know them through the Bible, but that we are, we do not judge, and that the choice is really up to the individual; that we say to an individual if they are considering abortion, to look to God for guidance and prayer, and maybe you will be persuaded through the Holy Spirit not to do this. But if you do do it, and you recognize that it is wrong, you know that the grace of God through Jesus Christ is always there to forgive; and then, you know, saying things like and be careful about when you think about abortion. You may say well, the baby has Down syndrome. But yes, that's no reason to abort, because the love that that child may bring into your family may be exactly what you need to save your marriage, to give you a greater sense of self-worth. The love that you show to that child may be an example for others. And you say well, the baby's gonna be deformed. One leg will be shorter than the other. But that doesn't do anything to the mind. So you've got a mind that finds the cure for AIDs, it's just got one leg shorter than the other. So you gotta think about the reasons. Well, you know, I don't have enough money. Well, then you need to go talk to somebody other than the doctor or the woman at the abortion clinic. You need to come talk--or the man--you need to come talk to your minister. And so let's pray and let's see if there are ways to help you to meet these challenges, family life centers the churches are building, you know, so that young mothers can feel that there is hope. They don't have to resort to abortion. So these kinds of, these issues we were talking about. It was either that, or I know I preached one right around that time, "Do The Right Thing," you know, using Spike [Lee]. Spike is a Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] man. He's a good filmmaker. I enjoyed the film, so I, I thought it was important, and then wind up at the end of the sermon saying, you know, do the right thing is too much to ask, 'cause you can never do the right thing, but the real all the time, but the real word is try; try to do the right thing. Story_ID: 103234 Speaker 1: Okay, my name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for, for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is--I'm sorry-- Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE): Stephen Leonie [ph.]. Speaker 1: Stephen Leonie. And Scott Stearns is observing. Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Calvin O. Butts, III, C-A-L-V-I-N, O, B-U-T-T-S. Speaker 1: And what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today I believe is March the 6th, 2005. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: At the Abyssinian Baptist Church in the City of New York. Speaker 1: Now, we're following up to complete an interview that we started a couple of months ago, correct? Speaker 2: Yes. Story_ID: 103235 Speaker 1: All right. And let me start by maybe just reflecting back on a discussion that, that you were having before with Racine [Hamilton] about Amadou Diallo case. I was reading--I don't think you all discussed this part of the case. The church in the community here, you know, have been, you know, at the forefront of fighting against police brutality. And there was a [Abner] Louima case, the Diallo case, and there's another case now I think is, his name is [Ousmane] Zongo, brother was shot-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --you know, who was a DVD vendor. But during the Diallo case you got in trouble for some remarks you made in the media about, you were telling your congregation the story about this white, prominent white person in the community that called you up to tell you to try to get people, you know, in line I guess because they were getting out of, they were getting angry, you know, about you controlling them. And you, you called him a racist, or I, I forget the exact language, right? It was in the paper, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, that was a person who had called me, a prominent white businessman who had called me in the past to talk about fundamentally why can't we all just get along, and what can we do to try to diffuse some of the racial tensions in the city? And I agreed with him. I thought that we ought to try to work together, you know, to bring some focus to what some of the real issues are or were around police brutality and that we could all work together. And so we, we attempted to do that. Of course, the situation didn't get any better. The police continued to be brutal and violent, unjustly so. And you saw more discrimination in housing. You know, it just got bad. The mayor [Rudy Giuliani] was crazy and a racist. And so then Diallo happened, and then the verdict came down. And this guy called back almost lecturing me: why can't you, you people, and your people, why can't you, you know, don't you realize this, and we were trying to do our best and then--and so I got sick of him. I just couldn't take it anymore. And he was saying black people this, and black people that. And he was literally lecturing me and, and so I told him to go to hell, white man. And I relayed that to the congregation. And it was to him specifically in the context of that conversation. But, of course, the media, who, who lurk around here, you know, they, they publicized it, put it on the front page of the paper: Butts to white people, go to hell and all this stuff, and sensationalized the comment that was specific in nature. And they called for my firing at the college where I serve as president [State University of New York College at Old Westbury, Old Westbury, New York]. But by now we're used to that, you know. I mean we're used to being quoted out of context. We are used to the sensationalization that the media puts on things, the spin they put on it. We're used to the racism in New York media. So, that was the nature of the story. Story_ID: 103236 Speaker 1: There's a--you were criticized later for I guess welcoming the mayor to--I, I don't know if it's this church, but it was to a gathering to discuss the ramifications of the [Amadou Diallo] case. Speaker 2: Before the verdict came down in--you remember this prominent businessperson was saying what, what can we do? How can we work this out? And I was saying okay, I will try, you know. And so the cardinal at that time, Cardinal [John Joseph] O'Connor called prominent New Yorkers, particularly clergypersons, together to address some of the tensions in the city. And a black priest, Father Goode, G-O-O-D-E, I believe, delivered a powerful sermon at St. Patrick's Cathedral, saying what will you give? What will you offer? How will you extend yourself? And so, in the spirit of Christ and taking the high ground--you know, the mayor [Rudy Giuliani] was sitting right there, and I think I was the next one to speak behind the sermon--so as I got up to speak, I extended a hand to the mayor. And I had called him a racist, believed that he was, but I said well, maybe this is a chance for healing. Maybe I can get to this guy. And he came up and grabbed up my hand, and you know, we embraced. And I thought well, maybe we're moving forward now. And it was received very well by all those who gathered, questioned heavily in the community, 'cause people said what's wrong with Butts? Why would he do that? He knows this--but I said look, Father Goode delivered a powerful message. We were on religious grounds. Let's try to appeal to the highest ideas of our faith. And it didn't go anywhere. Giuliani was and is a racist. He, he used that. And I tried to reach out to him, call him afterwards. He would never return my calls, never get back to me, and disappeared after that. Speaker 1: Okay. So, this was prior to, to the decision, the Diallo case? Speaker 2: It was prior to the decision. Speaker 1: Okay, all right--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Then after the decision this other person called back to say you people, why don't you do this, black people this, black people that. So, you know, I'd had it. I mean (laughter) I'd reached out to Giuliani. I tried a number of other things. And for him, who had done really nothing, to call and talk to me that way, I mean that was it. He didn't deserve any--. Speaker 1: Okay. I just to go back over that, 'cause I didn't understand I guess the sequence I guess, yeah. Story_ID: 103237 Speaker 1: But now, oh, political endorsements. Now, you're in a position at Abyssinian [Baptist Church] where people do call you. You know, white people in the community, businesspeople call you 'cause this is such a, this church is such, such an icon I guess in the, in the city [New York City] and the, and the country I guess, Abyssinian is the, is one of the churches, major churches that people focus on. But, so, now, and from time to time you, you make political endorsements. I think you recently endorsed Governor [George] Pataki, right? Speaker 2: [Nodding]. Speaker 1: How does, I mean what's your view on that? How do you--you know, what, what will--what do politicians have to do for you to endorse them? Speaker 2: Well, I never endorse a candidate from the pulpit of the church or in the context of our worship experience, because in the congregation--men and women of various political persuasions. And they gather really for the word of God and for encouragement, upliftment, and sharing of, well, issues, of course, political in nature, but not to hear me tell them who to vote for, because they can think for themselves. That's one of the great things about Abyssinian. It's a, it's a generally well-read congregation, politically sophisticated. All of our members practically are registered to vote and do vote. So, but afterwards in, in my position as pastor in terms of my visibility, you know, I will leave the church and endorse a candidate. There are a number of reasons why I may endorse a candidate. For instance, I endorsed Ross Perot. And I endorsed Ross Perot because I was fundamentally and completely sick of the two-party process. I mean [Bill] Clinton, at that time, was the prominent candidate for the Democratic Party. But the Democratic Party had been revived by [HM Reverend] Jesse Jackson. 'Cause you know, Jesse had gone across the country, man. He was registering people to vote, he had brought attention to the party. No matter what you may think of Jesse now, I mean he had really, he deserved to be considered as a vice presidential candidate. Speaker 1: Yeah, now that was '84 [1984]-- Speaker 2: That, right. Speaker 1: --when he made his big run? Speaker 2: Right, so-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --for Clinton to select [Al] Gore, I was completely disgusted, you know. I've said that--you know, they said when, at that time when you looked at the president was from Arkansas; the vice president was from Tennessee; the Senate majority leader I think was from Texas; the Republican leader was from some other southern state, and then people said the South will rise again. I said well, it did (laughter), and they control the country basically. And so I, I couldn't go with Clinton. You know, I was through with those guys. I mean, you know, for them to do that, I mean it was a slap in the face. Story_ID: 103238 Speaker 1: Now, were you, were you aware--there's a story I heard. I saw an article several years around, I guess around 1991 or so about [Bill] Clinton appearing at Harlem [New York] and making some sort of joke about black preachers or something at a church here in Harlem. Do you remember that story? Speaker 2: I don't remember that-- Speaker 1: Okay Speaker 2: --particularly. I remember Clinton being in the presence of a group of African American clergypersons and saying that--he was actually chiding black youth for black on black crime. And he was saying, you know, if [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King, Jr. was alive, he would tell black people I didn't, or not--if Martin Luther King, Jr. could speak, he would tell young black people: I didn't die for you all to be out here killing each other and for you all to be involved in this violence, etc. And I was upset 'cause the black preachers let him get away with it. When, in fact, what Martin Luther King, Jr. said: I cannot speak to black youth about violence when my nation is the biggest purveyor of violence in the world. You know, and I, I detest that, that. I mean that's, that kind of spin on Martin Luther King is no better than what these conservative right-wing Republicans are doing today. So, it, it, it, it angered me. I couldn't go with Clinton. I couldn't go with [George H.W.] Bush, you know. And [Ross] Perot seemed to be offering, you know, an alternative. And I had an opportunity to meet with him, and he had some key people to come in and talk with him, you know, and I wanted to see what it was about. So finally, I said well, I gotta go somewhere. I'm not gonna let them trash [HM Reverend] Jesse [Jackson] like this. I can't go with Bush, so I went with Perot. Jesse called up. He thanked me. He understood; he knew. And, but Perot turned out to be a dud. I mean all the brothers from Texas called and said look, man, I don't know what you're doing, you know (laughter). I don't know why you're doing this, but I'm gonna tell you this guy is bad news too. So I was a little frustrated--[George] Pataki, very similar. [Andrew] Cuomo just took black people for granted. We invited him here to speak, you know, before the congregation. He was running. He refused to come. And he took that kind of arrogant position throughout the community. He didn't go, he didn't think he needed to go places. We even asked him, two things I remember asking while he governor and when he was running for his three terms: one, that he would appoint a person of African descent as head of the corrections system, you know, criminal "injustice"-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --system, and he refused to do it. I said, most of the prisons are increasingly black. He refused to do it, I mean just arrogantly, no, I'm not gonna do it. Then I asked, we asked--it was not only me; it was a group of others--that he would consider [HM H.] Carl McCall for a lieutenant governor. He refused. And then that arrogance just kept rolling. I got you, you know, I don't have to do what you say, and you know, I know I got--taking our vote for granted. So, I invited Pataki. Pataki came. Matter of fact, he came the--it was that Sunday I had invited [HM Reverend] Al Sharpton to preach, and he came that Sunday. Al was good, and Pataki spoke. And I think that George Pataki recognized that it represented a turning point in his campaign, and he went on to win. Now I, in fact, did not endorse him that year, but when he ran the second time, because he had done some very creative things, and I appreciated how he kept his word, I endorsed him. So, political parties are not golden calves for me. You know, I don't bow down before either one. And I think that black people ought to be careful about how they give their endorsement, what they, you know, what they're looking for. And as far as I was concerned in the gubernatorial endorsement, Pataki was just as good as Cuomo-- Speaker 1: Okay. (simultaneous) Speaker 2: --you know. Story_ID: 103239 Speaker 1: Now, today, you know, we've got like a Republican president. George [W.] Bush is the president, and he's appointed quite a few black people to key positions. You have any thoughts on the current administration and-- Speaker 2: Well, I don't agree-- Speaker 1: --this? Speaker 2: --with the current administration at all. I don't agree with their foreign policy. I certainly don't agree with the war in Iraq. I don't agree with what he's doing with social security. You know, I think that his choice to lead the Justice Department [John G. Roberts] is a poor one. The one before that was a poor one. And I think there is no commitment to civil rights issues. I think that he's pushing the country back to a state's rights kind of position. You know, I don't happen to agree with many things that this, this administration represents. The fact that he appoints [HM] Colin Powell, Condoleezza Rice, Jackson I think in HUD, and I'm sure I'm leaving out one or two, is of no consequence in that regard. You know, his father [George H.W. Bush] sending--was it his father or [Ronald] Reagan? I forget which one--Clarence Thomas' Supreme Court-- Speaker 1: His, his father did it-- Speaker 2: His father-- Speaker 1: --yeah. Speaker 2: --Clarence Thomas Supreme Court. Those things, you know. First of all, you know, if you look at Clarence Thomas, you know, it's bad news. But Colin Powell, you know, I like Colin Powell. Condoleezza, you know, I don't, I don't have any--you know, I mean she represents Bush's policies, and I disagree with her. But as a human being and as a black woman, you know, I think she deserves a chance. So, my position is Bush and [Bill] Clinton, who get along very well, by the way, both young, you know. And I don't mean this in a negative sense. This is kind of like black street talk, you know, both young white boys from the South (laughter), you know. One comes from very substantial wealth. The other one comes from basic poverty, you know, but they both got the same kind of charisma, you know, with their--so they, they appointed some black people to office, you know, big deal, you know. I mean I like seeing black people elevated and our talents recognized. But if you're not backing the policies that help us, you know, (laughter) I'm, I'm happy that they would do that. I mean Clinton appointed black people. Bush appointed black people. Clinton met with black preachers. Bush is meeting with black preachers. Seems like the same MO. Speaker 1: Seems very similar--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Very similar (laughter). Story_ID: 103240 Speaker 1: Now the, this church--being established so long ago and having the position it has in the community and, and in the world here--is the scene for, people have public events here and funerals are held here for folks that are not even members of the church necessarily but because they're important people in the black community. They had the funeral of John Henrik Clarke here. I think [HM] Ossie Davis may have been a member. I don't know. Was he a member? Speaker 2: He was a member, that's right. Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, Ossie Davis. That was just a couple of weeks ago. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And there was a memorial for Malcolm X I know not too long ago, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, right. Speaker 1: About a week ago? Speaker 2: On the anniversary of his death. Speaker 1: Right. Do you have any, any inside information as to why? As I think someone told me that at the time--this is 1965; I'm going way back--that Abyssinian [Baptist Church] (unclear) hardly any of the churches in, in Harlem would, would hold the funeral of Malcolm X. Is there--do you have any thoughts about that and-- Speaker 2: Well, I think it was wrong, but you know, Faith Temple Church of God in Christ, where Bishop Norman Quick is pastor now, did receive the body of Malcolm. And that's where the eulogy was spoken by Ossie Davis. And so, a church did receive Malcolm's body, a Christian church. But I am--you know, I, this, you, it's just hindsight now. I mean, I'm upset. I don't know why it wasn't at Abyssinian. You know, I don't what the politics were at that time. I don't know what Adam was saying, you know. Speaker 1: Yeah, especially like Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --was a pastor. Speaker 2: Now, that was '65 [1965]. Speaker 1: Five, right. Speaker 2: Adam was about in the midst of a lot of his struggles or close to it by then, so that could have had something to do with it. I just don't know. But I was very upset that the, that the churches would not receive Malcolm's body. I mean Malcolm belonged to all of us. You know, he belonged to all of us, and Abyssinian it seems to me should have. If, you know, if I knew all of the circumstances now, but I would have, because you know, this is a Christian church to be sure. It's a Baptist church, but it is a Harlem church. It's a Harlem institution. It's--you know, you've got a lot of churches around talking about they are cathedrals now. But this is truly the African cathedral, I mean 200 years old, named for Ethiopia, the home of Adam Clayton [Powell], Sr., who was a founder of the Niagara movement and the NAACP subsequently. This is the place where Adam, Jr., first African-American city councilperson, the black congressman for all of black America, you know. This is the place where, you know, political organizing went on and I mean continue. So, this has really been a kind of a seat of the bishops, you know, Samuel DeWitt Proctor, who was like a giant, you know, in terms of theological education, producing Ph.D.s to teach in our colleges, you know, the, the, the epitome of black college presidents, you know, the Mordecai [Wyatt] Johnson, the Benjamin E. Mays, the Mary McLeod Bethunes, you know, and then the Sam Proctors of the world. This is--so this church would have received, should have received Malcolm just as a, a consequence of who we are. Malcolm was our brother and our friend, so you just don't leave him out of the community like that. So I don't know. I was not here then, so I don't know what the situation was at the time. But I would be upset with the other churches, because we had a number of very large churches. Faith Temple is a very small church, but yet they received him. And I, I, I take my hat off to them. Speaker 1: You were fifteen when Malcolm [X] died I believe. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: 'Cause we're the same age I think. Speaker 2: Okay, forty-nine. Speaker 1: One day apart (laughter). Speaker 2: Okay (laughter). Speaker 1: We're actually one day apart. Speaker 2: Really? Speaker 1: Yeah, I'm the 20th of July, same year. Speaker 2: God bless you. Story_ID: 103241 Speaker 1: But did, did you have at that time--I'm, I'm interested in this 'cause I was, you know, I know what was going on in my, my life in those days. But when Malcolm X died, and then you were living in-- Speaker 2: Queens [New York]. Speaker 1: Queens, yeah. Speaker 2: East Elmhurst. Speaker 1: Yeah, did. Speaker 2: Right around the corner from where he lived-- Speaker 1: Did-- Speaker 2: --where his house was bombed. Speaker 1: Really? Did you have a sense of, of his gravity as a person then? Speaker 2: Only that he was--yeah, I guess I did. He was a very well thought of black man. But we were told to be careful, because the aura around the Black Muslims--not their physical presence in the street, the sharp brothers, you know, selling "Muhammad Speaks" and talking to the sisters, and you know, they would protect you, you know, and all that. But there was another element that the--like my parents, the older folk, seemed to understand. And they, you know--there was a brother in our community, 'cause we lived in East Elmhurst, and on Northern Boulevard they had their mosque. And there was a brother in our community who joined their mosque. He'll go unnamed for this. And we all said oh, wow, so and so joined the Muslims, you know, and we were all shocked, you know. And it was said that his parents didn't want him in there, and everybody tried to, you know, get him to come out. But he had made a commitment to go with them. And you know, we used to go into the restaurant. My father took me in their once to eat, you know, and (unclear)--was very clean. The food was excellent, and they were playing Jack McDuff on the jukebox. I'll never forget that. The jazz was going on. It was, you know. But the brothers were coming in. And there was a, there was a, a long flight of steps that led up to I guess the, the, the temple, you know, where they would meet and have their meetings and their offices. You'd see the brothers going up and down. You know, these some hard brothers too. I mean these were brothers who you look like you didn't play with them. They, they were serious. And we said wow, we couldn't believe our brother joined. And he was kind of a tough brother, you know. And then the word got out that he wanted to leave, 'cause he didn't understand, you know, what really what he was getting himself into, and he wanted to come out. But the word was, and you know, you heard the older folk talk. But once you got in, you didn't come out. And that's why they--and they said that the brother made up his mind--now the reason I know this is because I was on Northern Boulevard that day. He said he made up his mind he was going up to tell them he was leaving. He was walking out. He wanted no part about it, and in fact he did. And they beat him unmercifully. And we were coming down Northern Boulevard about 100, the mosque was like a 106th, 107th Street, somewhere in there. And they beat him out of the offices or whatever--'cause we never went upstairs--all the way down those steps and threw him out onto the street. Now we saw that, and that struck fear in us, I mean real fear. And they--it was kind of like after he was there, you know, on the street--and we were teenagers, man. We didn't, we didn't, you know. And you know, maybe it was a comment on us, but we didn't go near 'cause we didn't know what was gonna--he was stumbling, fumbling, trying to get up, bleeding. And you know, they kind of looked at him, went back inside, went up and closed the door. Speaker 1: Was, was this prior to Malcolm's death or, or-- Speaker 2: This, yeah, it had to be. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 103242 Speaker 1: So we, you know--and when I went off to college [at Morehouse College in Atlanta, Georgia]. While I was in Atlanta, I almost joined the Nation [of Islam]. I mean 'cause they were very strong. And by then Malcolm [X] was gone, but [HM Minister Louis] Farrakhan, Louis X, was strong. And when I was much younger, my uncle, we'd had a--I don't if it was Thanksgiving, Christmas, some celebration, family celebration in this house. My Uncle Leon took us down into his basement, 'cause he had a like tape recorder and the newest 45s, you know, the record player. And he had a song. I said what is--he said it's exotic, you know. And it was "[A] White Man's Heaven is [A] Black Man's Hell," Louis X, you know, Farrakhan. And so when I was there Farrakhan was coming through Atlanta, man, and you know, when it came to delivering a talk, you know, there was nobody better. And I would tune into Farrakhan on the radio, and he would be speaking, man. And we had the black, was it the Black Power Conference in Atlanta while I was a student? Ron Karenga [HM Maulana Karenga] was there and Farrakhan, and of course Farrakhan stole the show. He was--I never will forget his speech. Speaker 2: Yeah, that was the Congress of Afrikan People, right? Speaker 1: That's Congress of Afrikan People-- Speaker 2: Right, exactly, in the '70s [1970s]. Speaker 1: --like in the early '70s [1970s], yeah. Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy [1970]. Speaker 1: Seventy [1970], that's right. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Farrakhan was there. I was there. And Farrakhan was talking about the heartbeat. I mean he had the place--so, I mean we were drawn to the Nation, but there was one thing. And I kept saying well, what's gonna happen when Elijah Muhammad dies? People said you don't ask that question, but I did (laughter)--(unclear), you know. He, he's--you know. And to say that Fara, Fard was God. I was sophisticated enough to know, oh. I never did join in, you know. But I miss Malcolm. Malcolm was, you know, he was, Malcolm was our man. He was, he was committed. Story_ID: 103243 Speaker 1: Okay. Oh, on that same vein, how does the church [Abyssinian Baptist Church]--I know Adam Clayton Powell, Jr., you know, really left his mark in this community. And how does the church perpetuate the memory of Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.? Speaker 2: Well, we have a gallery, and in the gallery we have memorabilia connected with him. We have a service once a year, and then we cooperate with the Baptist Ministers Conference of Greater New York and Vicinity. And we have a memorial service for Adam. And I talk about him all the time. Story_ID: 103244 Speaker 1: Right, I was asking you about the significance of Adam Clayton Powell [Jr.] to the Harlem community and-- Speaker 2: Adam-- Speaker 1: --how you memorialize him here-- Speaker 2: Adam Clayton Powell, Jr. was royalty. I mean he was tall, and good-looking, and arrogant, and he was a fighter. He, he represented black people well. I mean he, he represented us in city council and in Congress. He fought for our rights. He was productive in terms of his domestic legislation. We say, and we believe, and we know that he was the most productive and the, the best congressperson who has ever lived in the United States history because he produced more pieces of domestic legislation for the benefit of all Americans than any other chairper--in, in, in, in, in the House of Representatives when he was chair of education and labor. This man was a great orator, you know. He was a lover of the arts. He was a friend of, of the social giants and the entertainers. I mean Adam--and he was, he was from Harlem. He was born really in New Haven [Connecticut], but his father [Adam Clayton Powell, Sr.] was called here in 1908, the same year he was born, so he kind of grew up in New York. And his memory still lives, man, 'cause he, he did so much. And I think it really lives with black people because the whites who were against him do so much to try to stomp it out. So black people are determined to make him, his memory live on, and I am, because recognize and realize what he really stood for. And when you read his book like "Marching Blacks," "Adam By Adam [: The Autobiography of Adam Clayton Powell, Jr]," and when you read books about him like "King of the Cats [: The Life and Times of Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.]" by Wil Haygood or "[Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.: The Political Biography of] an American Dilemma" by Charles Hamilton, you begin to realize the impact that this man had, not only in New York, he went to the Bandung Conference, which was the first gathering of "third world," third world nations. And he was the only U.S. representative to go. He realized then that these countries were very important and the role that they would play in today's world. So Adam was, and he, he had a, a, a, a belief in God through Christ that, that had a little edge on it. I mean, you know, he, he didn't just buy the party line. He was very creative in terms of what he believed about Christ as a representative of the poor, and he got that from his father. His father was actually more powerful than he was, you know. Adam Clayton Powell, Sr. was a gospel giant. He built this church. You know, he, he built this church right next door to the ten of the UNIA, the Universal Negro Improvement Association, Garvey, the Honorable Marcus Garvey. This, this, so this father/son team was, was tremendous. And Adam could walk up and down the street, shake hands with the "common people." He take a swig of wine out of a bottle, you know, and throw some crap, you know, and married Hazel Scott, you know. He was, he was royalty, man. Speaker 1: I heard a story that he would always, when he, when he, when he got, got, got out of the car to shoot crap, he would always make sure he lost a couple of hundred dollars, and that would increase his popularity in the community. Speaker 2: He was, he was smart, but he was committed. He worked hard. I mean Lyndon Johnson wrote him a letter and said man, listen, you're, you're one of the best chairmen I've ever seen, and he was, in fact, the best chairman anybody had ever seen. Speaker 1: Okay, of course, he was censored by Congress--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: 'Cause he, he, you know, they couldn't take him. You know, here was a black man putting it in the face and saying I can do anything you can do, and I can do it better and doing it. And then they couldn't stand it when he was getting away with everything they were getting away with. And it was classic discrimination. Now what, what, was what he was doing wrong? Yeah, probably, but what they were doing was wrong, so everybody in the Congress should have been thrown out and censored just like he was. But that was the racism of the day, the discrimination. But Adam fought back and won. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But it was, you know, late in his career, he was sick, and that was the end. Story_ID: 103245 Speaker 1: Okay. You touched on the theology of Adam Clayton Powell, Jr. and his father. Can you share with us your own philosophy of theology and how it fits into this, this Harlem setting? Speaker 2: My theology is shaped largely by three people in terms of reading and understanding. Two of them have passed on, and one is still living: Howard Thurman, Benjamin Mays, [HM] James Cone. Howard Thurman's writing--and I'm a Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] man, and he's a Morehouse, was a Morehouse man--Jesus and the disinherited, the relationship of this young rabbi from a Palestinian ghetto to his people and his understanding of God as representing the power and the force that would free them from the oppression of Rome but also from the oppression of Rome's puppet leaders like Herod. Benjamin E. Mays, in "The Negro's God [: As Reflected in His Literature]," talking about how our religion was once a religion of compensation. And now it was evolving into something that was pressing us forward in terms of our own struggle for freedom, and liberty, and justice--and James Cone, really, and C. Eric Lincoln, but Jim Cone in "Black Theology, Black Power," Black Power, Black Theology ["Black Theology & Black Power"]. And I tell Jim Cone, Dr. Cone whenever I see him now that, you know, it was his book and his teachings that sort of propelled me into ministry and helped me to be about the struggles that I'm involved in against police brutality, in community development, fighting racism, and encouraging young black men and women to a sense of excellence in their studies and in their work, because God is on the side of black people in their struggle, because we have the conscience of America. We are the ones who continue to save America all the time. And, and those who agree with us are black. That's ontological blackness. This is Jim Cone too, you know, so it doesn't really cast white people aside. He says but if you are part of the struggle that we're in for freedom, justice, and equality, you know, you're black too, you know. And if you don't believe it, you go out there and talk that stuff, they'll lynch you right (laughter) along next to us. So, but C. Eric Lincoln and E. Franklin Frazier, Frazier did a little sociological study of the black church called the Negro church in America, and that informs me, said that the church is the first place of social cohesion, the first place of political empowerment, the first place of economic empowerment, and the first place of education for black people, and that was right when you study its history. And then Lincoln did a little book called "The Black Church Since Frazier," where Lincoln reflects on Frazier, said he was right. But in that sense, the church was the symbol of freedom. And then Lincoln says but now, at the end of the 20th century as we moved into the 21st, the black church became the tool. And so we take, you know, the early embryonic stage of economic development, education, political empowerment, social cohesion, and now through things like OIC [of America], development corporations, etc., etc., we have become the real tool, you know. [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King, Jr., Malcolm [X], if you will, as an expression of the black religious experience, Adam Clayton Powell, Jr. and Sr. We are really building now. And so these are the men who have informed my theology and the writings that have informed my theology. Story_ID: 103246 Speaker 1: Okay. What do you think about today's megachurches? There are so many black folks getting involved in these huge churches, these giant congregations. Speaker 2: From what I know about them right now, they do absolutely nothing. I mean we're, we're considered a megachurch, according to whoever it was that coined this term. That's some white, I think, sociolog, sociologist, somebody, kept saying to us, you know, why don't you sign to be a megachurch? And I said, what is this foolishness? Secondly, I don't know that they do anything. I mean, you know, people praise, and they dance, and they bump, you know, and they have all this dramatic presentation, but I've never seen any of them fight against police brutality. I've never seen of them really do any significant community development. I mean they give a few money here and there; they build a housing project there, but never really getting it, never hear them take a stand for public education, never hear them raise their voices about social security. And I see that when the president announces a faith-based initiative, which is nothing new, I mean the government has been working with churches, religious organizations for years. You know, he gathers a bunch of black preaches around two issues like gay marriage, you know, and homosexuality. Come on, the black church has been dealing with this for years. You know, I don't see him sit--I don't hear them saying anything major about AIDS, you know. I'm the chairman of the Black Leadership Commission on AIDS. And so, I mean it's big church, big churches I mean. But the phenomenon to me is of no consequence to our struggle. I mean I look at other churches that are substantial in size, but you know, Hartford Memorial Baptist Church in, in Detroit [Michigan], you know, doing a great, great work, you know what I mean. And you know, you get all this play about these guys who are making movies and stuff like that. Well, they're just have been co-opted by the dominant culture. Story_ID: 103247 Speaker 1: Okay. Now you're, you're a college president [of State University of New York College at Old Westbury in Old Westbury, New York]-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --too, and I--now this is a, I mean this is a, a staggering revelation when we find out that you're a college president and the pastor of this church [Abyssinian Baptist Church], which I'm sure takes a lot of time. How can--and being a college president takes a lot of time I mean. And the first question that popped in my, my mind was how do you do it (laughter)? Speaker 2: Well, only by the grace of God. And as you well know, I'm a black man in America. I gotta work two jobs (laughter), maybe three or four to get by. So, but it's part of that tradition. My immediate predecessor was a, was a college president and, and pastor, Samuel DeWitt Proctor. Benjamin Elijah Mays was a college president. Now he wasn't a pastor, but he was a Baptist preacher. Mordecai Johnson, you know, was president of Howard [University, Washington, D.C.]. You know, it's just--what I'm supposed to do. I think this is what God called me to. And the fact that I'm president of a state university is a little different because, you know, my religion cannot be directly involved in it 'cause it's a state institution. But I'm hoping that my presence there, you know, represents, you know, just through my, who I am, you know, my own faith, tradition, and what I rep, and what I stand for. Also, I think the church was kind of happy about it 'cause, you know, the, the, the, the older and more senior members of the church, they said well, good, now you won't go into politics, you know, 'cause they, after they saw what happened to Adam [Clayton Powell, Jr.], the older members in the church, they didn't want--I kind of grew up here. I came here when I was like twenty-one, twenty-two years old, so they didn't want to see me chewed up like that. Speaker 1: But it demands a similar amount of energy or even--I mean-- Speaker 2: Oh, it's huge. Speaker 1: --you think about a person as a pastor of a major church-- Speaker 2: Huge, huge. Speaker 1: --like this, and being a congressman, and being a, or, or being a college president-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --that's a lot of-- Speaker 2: Huge. Speaker 1: --time. Speaker 2: Well, Adam was both pastor and a congressman. It's a huge responsibility. So, you know, as we were getting ready for this interview, and you saw me walk in here this morning, I was dragging a little bit 'cause I as exhausted from yesterday and the work that goes into, you know, running that institution. Because running this institution, this was an institution that was like really down. And the state university trustees appointed me to be president. So took the institution--I had, we had to turn this ship around. And we had to bring standards in. You know, they had no stand--you know, the, the institution had been allowed to deteriorate, so it was like open enrollment. We said no, we can't do that because you, you really don't challenge your students that way. So we had to institute certain standards, you know, working with the state university system. We had to raise the SAT scores, you know. We had to build a, a town (unclear) relationships. I mean the, the, the, the surrounding area didn't even know about our college. We were sequestered there. We're in the largest piece of undeveloped land in Nassau County. Speaker 1: Now this is the state university in New York at--where was it at, in-- Speaker 2: In, in Old Westbury. Speaker 1: Old Westbury. Speaker 2: Carolyn--in Old Westbury. And so we, we--don't talk--we, we, we had to turn this thing around. And in turning it around, it takes a huge amount--we built five new dormitories; we built a new student union building; we brought in several million dollars in new technology. The enrollment is now going up, and--but I'm a black man. And the racism is unbelievable even among the faculty. I got a faculty member who has written a letter to the state chancellor saying that I, I've, I'm, I can't have a full-time job here at the church and be the president of the college. And they want--she wants me investigated. Now she's a, she's supposedly a white liberal, just as racist as she can be, can't stand it, you know, wants to know how can I--and she doesn't even know what I get paid. I don't get paid a lot of money. And she doesn't know what kind of time I spend. She's just mad because as president I won't let her have her way. And, and she wants to be the queen bee to kind of run the school from her position. So it's all these kinds of struggles, you know. Speaker 1: What, what, what does she want to do that's, that she's frustrated--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Well, she wants to hire faculty members, and she wants to bring 'em on the way she wants to bring--I said now you can't do this. It's gotta go through a process. And nobody gets hired without the stamp of approval of the president, and you just can't tell the president what to do, that kind of inherited that arrogance in a Baptist preacher and Adam and all that. You don't have to tell me what to do. I work with anybody, and we have, we have, we have really brought the community together, but you're still dealing with this foolishness. You know, it's everywhere, you know. And, and that's why I say you can't just dump this on conservatives. Everybody (unclear) the white conservative, the right wing. Oh no, no, no, no, there's a liberal con, there's a liberal racism that's out there that'll just let a black student who really deserves a 'C' give them an 'A' and just pass 'em through. So when that black student gets out and that person applies to law school or journalism school or whatever, they can't get in, and they wonder why. That teacher gave 'em an 'A' when they were didn't deserve an 'A', you know, just pass 'em along, you know, stroke--don't, don't challenge 'em, oh, terrible. So we turned all that around. Story_ID: 103248 Speaker 1: So what's your percentage of black students there at Old Westbury? Speaker 2: About 30, 35 percent, good number. We're the most diverse campus in the state university. Speaker 1: Do a lot of the students come, come from Harlem [New York]? Speaker 2: More and more-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --you know. And now more and more students of African descent and Latinos are applying because I'm there. And I am telling them I'm going--I say look, listen, I'm, I'm a graduate of Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia]. I think the historically black college and universities are great. But I'm saying look, I've got an excellent school here, great in business, great in the sciences, great in teacher education, you know. I've got top grade programs. I've got a sequestered campus, beautiful new dormitories, and my tuition, if you live in-state, is only $14,000 a year, room and board included. So they said well, there's a black college president of the kind we, we, we know. I mean he's a preacher and you know, he's in that tradition. And they know me across the state and across the country, so it's wonderful. Story_ID: 103249 Speaker 1: Okay. Tell me now, we always ask this question: what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African-American community today? Speaker 2: One, the empowerment of our young people through quality education and encouraging them to excellence, because there's one thing that can never be taken away from, and the old folks say: once you got it, you got it. And that's one of the things in this largely different world. This is no longer the unconquerable globe of Columbus. It's a tiny little sphere, and so those men and women who have it, you know, can go anywhere in the world and compete.t Two, the press for human rights and social justice. And again, from my point of view as a black person for black people in American but for everybody across the world, people of color. And therefore, rising tide lifts all boats or white folks who've been oppressed, you know, in Kosovo and every place else, they ben, benefit from that also. And then just to remind black people in Harlem [New York] and across America that there are some rights we're not denied. We can get an education today, you know. This is Adam [Clayton Powell], Sr., we can buy property; we can save our money; we can go to church, you know. These are things you can do, you know. You can be true to your partner in marriage, you know. You can raise your children. So, if we do those things, and do them well, there's no, there's no, there's no stopping us. And so, be faithful to the fundamentals, continue to preach the gospel, you know, and be loyal to the place where you are planted, you know. I, I came here when I was twenty-two, I think, years old, and I've been here ever since. And so, and I'm working, you know, where I'm planted. I'm trying to bloom and grow right here. And the influence beyond here, God has provided the increase and so. But those thing are where I'm--education I guess is most fundamental for me. Story_ID: 103250 Speaker 1: Okay. When you look back on everything that you've done thus far, I mean is there any major thing that you would do differently? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah. If I had to look back and make a decision on one thing that I would really do differently, it's those days when I was at Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia], deep into spirit of the social fraternities of those day, you know, in that time. I think I'd party a little less and go to the library a little more. You know, I think I'd, you know, stay away from some of that cheap wine and you know, late nights, and pay more attention to some of the studies. And those things were fun, but if I could go back, you know, I, I probably could have spent a little more time studying, you know, and a little, and a little less time into social activities. You know, you, you don't realize--I mean I had a ball now, don't get me wrong (laughter), I enjoyed every moment of it; I loved it. But, when I think about what I, what I, what I don't know now and what I want to know about just me as a black man, about Africa, about social theory, you know, about philosophy, wow, you know. And you just say well, that little bit of time wouldn't have made much difference. Oh yeah, oh yeah, I could have done so much more. Story_ID: 103251 Speaker 1: On that same note, what would you consider at this point to be your legacy? Speaker 2: I don't know, man. I--you know, I'm just overwhelmed that you guys are even (unclear) making a film about me and just in terms of this HistoryMakers thing. I don't, I never perceived myself as doing--but if anything, it would be the development that we've done in terms of our development corporation [Abyssinian Development Corporation], the building of schools, commercial establishment and housing. It would be the fact that I was able to do, you know, the church and the college presidency as complimentary of each other, you know, and that, that if there's some aspect of my life that's important in terms of the struggles against police brutality, the, the prophetic voice of, you know, traveling around the country, trying to remind people of who we are, and what we represent, and what our struggle is, and not to give up, and the, the whole faith tradition of preaching the gospel, those things, you know. And if somewhere, you know, a hundred years from now, you know, a young man or woman who's searching through some stuff finds this or a book or something with me involved in it, and they are inspired, you know. Like I might be by Mordecai Johnson or Dr. [Benjamin] Mays or somebody else, and that's, that's fine. I mean to serve this present age, you know, my calling to fulfill, you know, do the best I can with what I have. Story_ID: 103252 Speaker 1: Now what do you see--now you still have a lot of time left, presumably. We, we never know, but you, you know, you're still fairly young for the day, and you had aspired to be mayor at one point in your life. What do you, what, what do you see for the future? What do you, what, what are your future plans? Speaker 2: I, I can still be mayor. There are some people now who are trying to encourage me to seek political office, maybe. I have not written a book. I've not thought that I really had anything significant to say, you know. Maybe I do have a little bit more now, you know, with age and experience, so I wanna write a little bit and see how that comes out. I think that I can build more. I'm really trying to develop--we have an educational corridor now. And I'm trying to develop a model for churches to follow in terms of involving themselves with public education in their cities so that we can really address the, the, the crucial needs of our young people in the area of education. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then whatever else the Lord may put out in front of me, you know. I mean, who knows, man. I mean the Lord may call me to be a great actor, you know, and I might get an Emmy and or Oscar one day (laughter). Speaker 1: As we speak, there are trailers lined up in the front-- Speaker 2: Oh, man-- Speaker 1: --of the place. Speaker 2: --please, I'm just kidding. Speaker 1: But-- Story_ID: 103253 Speaker 1: Tell us about your family. Speaker 2: I got a great family. My mother and father [Calvin Otis Butts, II] are still living. If anybody is to be--if the people think I'm successful after God, it's my momma and daddy. It's no question. I have the greatest mother and father in all the world, no question. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They've been married for almost sixty years. They, they worked hard, they--deacon and deaconess in the church, strong moral values, you know, just--. My wife [Patricia Butts], father was a great preacher. Mother and father passed on, so she knows the church and all that. And I was blessed to, to find her, you know, as a mate. She, she's been good, and loyal, and true, you know, across these years, three great children, you know. Two boys just got married, you know, wonderful wives, you know. My daughter is a good, good, good woman, you know, and hopefully she'll be married soon. And got a grandbaby, you know, who's four, and I love, you know. I mean (unclear)--aunts and uncles who are tremendously supportive. I mean, that's the secret to, if there's a secret to Calvin Butts, that's it, family--good family. I mean good fam, I mean period, I mean, you know, the, the uncle who, you know, was a mason and you know, and you know, one wrote the number, and you know, and you know, to get together, and they'd drink a little too much sometimes, and they'd dance and have a great time. I got another uncle who was real close to me. He's real sick now, you know, but, I mean, period. That's the, that's--now if you want to frame this whole thing, that's the question, what about your family? And I will tell you that what I am is a product of a strong, and loving, connected black family. And right now, today, if my aunt, my uncle, my mother, my father walked in here, you know, I'd stop everything and talk with them. I mean it's, that's it, God, family, church. Story_ID: 103254 Speaker 1: Okay. This last question is similar to legacy in some respects, but it's a little different. Sir, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Two things, if, if they said anything about--one, in the true sense of the spirit of Christ, that I'm a Christian; and two, somebody said he was a good brother, that he was a good brother, and we could talk to him, he was all right, you know, a good father, good husband, good son. That's--'cause once you're dead, brother, and they put you in the ground, they'll remember you for a little while, but that somebody'll say he was a good brother. Speaker 1: Okay, well, thank you, sir, thank you. Speaker 2: Thank you very much. Speaker 1: All right...