 Story_ID: 97323 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm the interviewer for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Ma'am, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: My full name is Vivian, V-I-V-I-A-N, Lea, L-E-A, Scott, S-C-O-T-T, Chew, C-H-E-W, no hyphen between the Scott and the Chew. Speaker 1: All right, and what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: May 14th, 1958. I was born in Far Rockaway, New York. Speaker 1: And ma'am, what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I am a consultant to the music industry. I do international marketing and promotion for the music industry, as well as, I am an event producer, along with my husband, Ray Chew [HM]. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today is May 18th, 2012. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We are in Fort Lee, New Jersey. Story_ID: 97324 Speaker 1: All right, now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we also ask and they only require a short answer. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: The first one is, do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Pasta. Speaker 1: All right, do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Black. Speaker 1: Vacation destination? Speaker 2: Jamaica. Speaker 1: Time of the year? Speaker 2: Summer. Speaker 1: And the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: "God is able." Story_ID: 97325 Speaker 1: Okay, now I'm going to ask about your family history. Speaker 2: Uh-hum. Speaker 1: I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and your father's side, but we'll keep 'em separate-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: --and then we'll put them together. Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Mamie, M-A-M-I-E, Lea, L-E-A, Germaine, that's with a "G", G-E-R-M-A-I-N-E, Murphy, M-U-R-P-H-Y. Speaker 1: All right, and what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: November 4th, 1925 and she was born in Aiken, South Carolina. Speaker 1: Okay, now what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family? How far back can you trace 'em and what were they doing? Speaker 2: All right. I can actually go very far back on my mother's side. My brother [Lawrence Murphy], who is deceased, was our family historian and he went back to Aiken and to Columbia [South Carolina] and to Beaufort [South Carolina] and Saint Helena Island [South Carolina] and did a lot of research in the courthouses and the cemeteries and interviewed our elders and we were able to trace our family back to our first freed slaves, which were Adeline and Wilson Stephens, that's S-T-E-P-H-E-N-S, and they worked on the Tyler Plantation in Aiken, South Carolina. Speaker 1: Now, about what year are they? Speaker 2: You know what, all that is actually on that. I don't--1800s, somewhere. Speaker 1: Okay, early part. Speaker 2: Yeah, early. Speaker 1: Nineteenth century, I think (unclear). Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, time-- Speaker 2: They had twelve children and I am, oh, that's bad, if you look right on it it shows you what branch I'm on, but they had twelve children and that's where my grandmother [Cora Germaine]'s side is from. I know very little about my grandfather. He was a very unique story. His name was Walter--I'm sorry his name was Moultry Germaine, M-O-U-L-T-R-I-E [sic], and Moultry was framed for murder when my grandmother and he were together and he had to flee. And he kept in contact with my grandmother through a letter that was sent to someone, sent to someone, sent to someone and would eventually get handed to her. And my grandmother was an entrepreneur at Aiken, South Carolina. She was a restaurant owner. Speaker 1: Now what was your grandmother's name? Speaker 2: Cora, C-O-R-A, Anna Germaine, but she was a Stephens before she was a Germaine. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And she had a restaurant that did very well and was stepped to by some Klansmen and were told that she needed to shut it down and if they didn't they were going to burn it down, and they did, and she built it back up and they said, we're going to burn it down again, and they did, and she built it back up and this time they said, we're going to kill your children. And that's how my mother and her siblings ended up in New York, living with relatives, until my grandmother could sort herself out and she came up North and became a domestic. Speaker 1: Hmm, now that's a, now so your grandmother, about what year was she born? Was she-- Speaker 2: Nineteen hundred [1900]. Speaker 1: Nineteen hundred [1900]-- Speaker 2: Uh-hum. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's what she tells us. We actually found out she was born in 1898. Speaker 1: She's trying to get into the 20th Century? Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Okay, so she was born in 1898. Speaker 2: Uh-hum. Speaker 1: So this is the height of [Ku Klux] Klan activity-- Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: --and so she was--her husband was the victim of-- Speaker 2: Uh-hum, he was framed. Speaker 1: And so did he flee to New York? Speaker 2: He--no, he flew to Texas and that was the last, and eventually the letters stopped. We assumed that he started another family and didn't know much more about him. Story_ID: 97326 Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, your mother [Mamie Germaine Murphy] then was one of the--was amongst the children that was-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --sent North to New York? Speaker 2: Right. There were five children. My eldest aunt was Merdis, M-E-R-D-I-S, then came Robert who passed away as an infant. He never made it up North. Then it was my mom, Mamie, and then there's my aunt, Ruby Germaine, and then my uncle, Benjamin Germaine. And the only one who's surviving right now is my Aunt Ruby, who lives in Orlando [Florida]. Speaker 1: Okay, now what did your mother say about growing up? Speaker 2: She had to work very early. They all had to work. It was about school, work, church, family, of course. I know more of when she--after she relocated. And she went to work at the, at the [U.S.] Navy in Brooklyn [New York City, New York], the Navy Yard--excuse me the Brooklyn Navy Yard. Speaker 1: Now she, did she come to New York as a, as a child or-- Speaker 2: She came as a teenager. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She came as a teenager. Speaker 1: About, about what year would you say she? Speaker 2: You know, I don't know. She went to Far Rockaway High School so it must have, it was high school-ish, I would say. Speaker 1: So would you say she was born around 1924? Speaker 2: She was born in 1925. Speaker 1: Twenty-five [1925], okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, so in the '40s [1940s] she was in high school. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay, so. Speaker 2: And she never did what she wanted to do. She wanted to be a buyer. She was very fashionable. My mother, who never went outside of the country, lived through magazines and could tell you about any place you ever wanted to travel without ever having to be there but she married a man who said, you either have to be a mother or a businesswoman, you can't be both. Speaker 1: This is your mother? Speaker 2: It's mother. Speaker 1: All right now, we don't want to get her married yet. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So we'll go-- Speaker 2: All right, so she's in high school and she's working in the Brooklyn Navy Yard as a secretary. Speaker 1: Okay. She graduated from Far Rockaway High School? Speaker 2: Uh-hum. Speaker 1: Far Rockaway is-- Speaker 2: It's in Queens [New York City, New York]. Speaker 1: Yeah, it's like a, the last stop on the A train. Speaker 2: It is the last stop on the A train, and you had to pay double fare. You had to pay a fare to get out at that time. Speaker 1: Okay, I always wanted to go all the way to Far Rockaway (unclear). Speaker 2: One time, you'll be fine. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, so okay, so, any other recollections about your mother's growing up? Now, who lives out in Far Rockaway? Is that a black community out there? Speaker 2: Far Rockaway when I grew up was predominantly Hasidic Jewish and then African Americans moved in, Latinos moved in and it is slowly but surely turning back to being a Hasidic Jewish neighborhood. The block that I lived on, which was Lanett Avenue, L-A-N-E-T-T, was four blocks from the beach. So my street was the corner of Lanett Avenue and Beach Ninth Street. Beach Ninth Street was where the beach starts. And black people never went to the beach then, never went to the beach. And I do remember being young and going to the beach and at that time, Sammy Davis, Jr. had a suntan commercial out at that time and I remember being on the beach and being taunted and made fun of because I was black and why would I want to be on the beach, I was already black. I didn't go back for a long time, until I became a teenager. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But it was a beach town. It was a very--people left their doors open. My neighbors next door were given the right to whip my behind if they saw me doing something wrong. It was really a village. It was a village of Far Rockaway. Speaker 1: All right, now I'll get to that. Speaker 2: Uh-hum. Speaker 1: Let's talk about growing up-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --but I just wondered what your mother said about growing up. Now she grew up in Aiken? Speaker 2: She grew up in Aiken, South Carolina, yes. Speaker 1: For the most part? Speaker 2: Uh-hum. Speaker 1: And now did she talk about her impressions of the [Ku Klux] Klan and race relations in Aiken? Speaker 2: My grandmother [Cora Germaine] did. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My grandmother did. And it was interesting because all of my grandmother's children were brown-skinned because her husband was brown-skinned. My grandmother was very light and she was part Indian. I don't know what tribe. She had very long gray hair and she believes that's why she was able to even get in business initially because she was fair. She wasn't passing but she was clearly black. But the long hair and the fair skin sort of got her around but when she would bring her children around, they would call them "little pickaninnies" and, you know, she had a tough time. And being a woman--and a woman by herself with no husband at that time. Speaker 1: Now she had a restaurant? Speaker 2: She had a restaurant. I do not know the name. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: She had a restaurant. Story_ID: 97327 Speaker 1: Well let me go to your father's side of the family. Speaker 2: That's sticky. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's sticky. Speaker 1: 'Cause you've got two fathers, right? Speaker 2: I have a very unique story-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --in that I think that there are a lot of women that talk about growing up without a father. I thought I grew up without a father, when in actuality I grew up with my father. I didn't know he was my father. Here's the story. My mother [Mamie Germaine Murphy] migrates from Aiken, South Carolina and Far Rockaway [New York] was like the Hamptons, before the Hamptons. People would go--rich people would go and stay in the bungalows, along Rockaway Beach and they were seasonal. So, workers from the South would come up and work their summers in Far Rockaway and they would come in the late Spring, they would prep the bungalows, the families would be there during the summer. They would stay there as caregivers and cooks and whatever they needed to do, and then Labor Day, they packed up and they went back down South. My mother became friends with a man named Bill Scott [William Scott]. He was from Quitman, Georgia. Bill used to come up every summer and work the bungalows and Bill had a friend named Walter Murphy. So Bill introduced my mother to Walter Murphy, they became involved and they got married, and they had my brother, Lawrence Murphy. I was told, until I was twelve years old, that my father, Walter Murphy, had passed away. So there I was a girl without a father. And when I was twelve years old, as twelve year olds do, I'm rummaging through some of my mother's papers and I find an application for a private school called Woodmere Academy that my mother had applied to, and on it, it said mother and father separated since 1959, so I knew he wasn't dead. At that time, my brother, who had just graduated from Oberlin College [Oberlin, Ohio], had come back home to live and he had a phonebook. So I went thumbing through the phone book and low and behold, under "M", is Walter Murphy, living in Jersey City [New Jersey]. So at twelve I found out that Walter Murphy wasn't dead but it took until I was nineteen, and I had, and I was married, I was married at eighteen, it took until I was nineteen, that my husband at the time said, you know, you have a father, you should know him. And I went to meet Walter Murphy, I was nineteen, he died when I was twenty-three. At forty-two, I found out that he was not my father, that all this time, Bill Scott was my father. Bill Scott's the one that taught me how to ride a bicycle, how to skate, how to drive, he was at my first wedding. He was a father. He did everything a father was supposed to do except he couldn't acknowledge it because within the community, he was married, he was a very wealthy man, he was a realtor, he was the head of the trustee board at my church, my mother was the secretary of the church, it was way too taboo for that to come out. So it wasn't until I was forty-two that I confronted an aunt and said, "I'm looking at a picture of Bill Scott and we have the same light eyes." Is there any possibility that? And she said, "Yeah, I've been waiting for you to ask this question for years." So then the question became, well why didn't Walter Murphy, when I went to see him say, sorry I'm not your father. And I think it was, I think it was twofold. I think one, he saw a young woman who had been searching for her father for so long, I don't think he had the heart to say no, it's not me, but then I also think it was his way of getting back at Bill Scott because for those four years that he and I interacted, I was calling him "Dad" and I'm sure he got pleasure out of Bill Scott not getting that title and never got the chance to call Bill Scott "Dad" and he was always Uncle Billy. So that's my father story. It's complex. Speaker 1: I don't mean to be insulting, but that is your eye color that we're looking at right now? Speaker 2: I'm sure. Speaker 1: It is, okay, all right. Speaker 2: I'm sure. Speaker 1: All right, 'cause you never know-- Speaker 2: It is. Speaker 1: --you know. Speaker 2: These are not contacts. Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (unclear) those, that's your-- Speaker 2: These are Bill Scott's eyes, these are his eyes. Speaker 1: It's like an auburn, eyes. Speaker 2: Yeah, and Bill had a wife, who treated me like I was her niece, her child. Nobody said anything. The secrets in the black family run deep. Mine ran very deep. Speaker 1: So was Bill Scott your brother's father? Speaker 2: No, Walter Murphy-- Speaker 1: Walter Murphy was. Speaker 2: --is. And by the time all this information came to me, everybody was dead. I had nobody to talk to. Bill had passed. My mother had passed. My mother, my brother passed away four months apart. I couldn't talk to my brother, older aunt was gone, grandmother was gone, my godmother, who helped raise me, gone. The only one left was my Aunt Ruby, who my mother wasn't very close to. She was able to help me piece a couple of things together but still, it's still, it's still a big mystery. It's still something that I, I toss with. Speaker 1: Okay, so everybody, even Bill Scott was gone too, everyone? Speaker 2: Everybody, everybody. Story_ID: 97328 Speaker 1: Okay, now that is quite a story, but that being said, do you know much about Bill Scott [William Scott]'s background? Speaker 2: Well, how I found out a little bit more was that I had a daughter when I was twenty-one and she didn't look--she, I'm 5'7", my husband at the time was 6'1" and my daughter's four eleven. And we're like, okay, what doesn't add up here? And after I found out about Bill Scott being my father, it all made sense. He had sisters that were all short and very buxom and that's exactly how my daughter is. My daughter is also a diabetic. She was diagnosed when she was six. No one in my side of the family or my ex-husband's side of the family had diabetes. The diabetes was in Bill Scott's family. So it sort of all came together when I needed to do family history and things like that for when my daughter had been diagnosed as a diabetic and it was amazing how many things came out. I know he was in Quitman [ph.]. I know he had three sisters. I don't know who his mother or his father were. He was a very--I am more his child than I am my mother [Mamie Germaine Murphy]'s child. He was very outspoken. He was a man of the community. Whenever anybody needed, he was there. He was the first black man I knew to drive a Mercedes. He was powerful. He was very very powerful. He was like El Exigente. He walked in the room, he was revered. And during that time in the '50s [1950s], he was light-skinned, he had wavy hair, he had light eyes, he was tall, he was what everyone wanted. He was that guy. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: He was that guy. Story_ID: 97329 Speaker 1: That's interesting, that story, so you think that you take more after your father [William Scott]? Speaker 2: My mother [Mamie Germaine Murphy] was the one that taught me to be a lady. Her idol was Jackie Kennedy [Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis] who ironically, Jackie Kennedy died on Thursday, my mother died three days later. I'm sure she was like, Jackie's gone, there's no reason. I mean, the pillbox, the everything, everything, she was etiquette. We grew up with fingerbowls in my house. I didn't know that people used paper napkins. Back in Far Rockaway when I grew up, people were not allowed--black people were not allowed to try on clothes. So my mom would buy my clothes, a size bigger, take it to Ms. Rosella [ph.], the dressmaker, and get it sized. So all I knew was that I would go to Ms. Rosella and get new clothes. I thought everybody got their clothes made. Because my mother was the mistress of Bill Scott, we lived well. I never saw money exchanged. My mother had accounts throughout Far Rockaway [New York]. We went to the butcher, she signed for it. We went to the hardware store, she signed for it. Things were delivered to our house. So it took a long time for me to really understand, you pay for things. You save up money and you buy things. Things were always just delivered at our house. So I lived a very upper middle class life in a lower middle class neighborhood, which was sort of odd, you know, and then throw in going to a private school where everybody in my school was Jewish and extremely beyond wealthy. I had a lot of oxymorons in my life but I was a church girl, and that's what kept me grounded. Story_ID: 97330 Speaker 1: Okay, now let me ask you this, how many brothers and sisters do you have? Speaker 2: I had one brother. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Lawrence [Murphy] was eleven years older than me, very accomplished, very accomplished man. I don't know anybody smarter than my brother. My brother went to Oberlin College [Oberlin, Ohio] where he got his dual B.A. in French and music. He played the piano, organ, violin, viola, flute and cello. In addition to English, he spoke Spanish, Portuguese, French, Italian and then took up Arabic because he wanted to go to Egypt and blend in, and all fluently. He was an educator. He was a very proud man. He was a very proud black man and he was a very proud black gay man. Speaker 1: Okay, now what was his last name? Speaker 2: Murphy. Speaker 1: Murphy, okay. Speaker 2: And he passed away when he was forty-seven years old from AIDS. He died four months after my mother [Mamie Germaine Murphy] died. Speaker 1: Okay, so, okay, so the two of you, and he's older than you? Speaker 2: Eleven years. So we really didn't grow up together. Speaker 1: All right. Story_ID: 97331 Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: So growing up in the household it would have been just probably you and your mother [Mamie Germaine Murphy] most of the time? Speaker 1: It was me and my mom but Bill Scott [William Scott] came down through the week because there were always church meetings. So at least twice a week Bill Scott would be in the house and my mother would cook dinner and it was a big deal and Bill was treated like a king. He was, he was very much my disciplinarian. I would come home with a 95 and I'd go, I expected a 100, you got to do better than that. "I do everything in my life a hundred percent, Vivian." "You've got to be a hundred percent." "You've got to be a hundred percent." "Ninety-nine won't do." That's why I say I'm so much like my father. I'm very much like that. I'm very much--if it's not a hundred percent, it, why even bother. My mother was very passive. She was very passive in that relationship and very girly and very just that lady. And she always taught us, you know, don't talk too loud, don't wear red, don't wear red, it's too loud. You should care about what the neighbors think, whereas Bill Scott was like, "screw the neighbors, I own them." Two very, very different people. Two very different people. Speaker 2: Okay, now did Bill Scott have a chance to finish school? Speaker 1: I don't know. I don't know. That's an interesting question. Speaker 2: He had, you said, an insurance business? Speaker 1: He's a realtor. Speaker 2: A realtor, okay, realtor. Speaker 1: Yeah, he's a realtor. There's another part of that story and that Bill has a daughter, Winona, W-I-N-O-N-A. Winona grew up in my life as my godmother. We were sixteen years apart. I spent summer vacations, I went out there for weekends, Hempstead, Long Island [New York]. Hempstead was where the majority of my summers were. I spent my summers with my father. Who knew? Who knew? Speaker 2: Okay, now was Bill Scott's wife out there too? Speaker 1: Bill Scott's wife was there, Sylvia Scott. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Sylvia couldn't have children so this very tangled web gets very tangled again right here because she couldn't have kids and Sylvia was a twin. Her twin's brother's name is Clifton, who's actually still alive, Sylvia's passed on. Clifton and Sylvia even know they were fraternal, looked exactly alike. Clifton had an affair outside of his marriage. In the '40s [1940s] there were no abortions, well there were no legal abortions. The woman had the baby and gave the baby to Bill and Sylvia, that's Winona. So Winona's adopted. So I'm the only natural child of Bill Scott, was the only heir and I think that Bill took very, very good care of Sylvia. She had the big house. She too had a Mercedes, the fur coats, the vacations. I think she was just accepting, this is his child, I couldn't give him one, as long as nobody says anything, we're okay. And that's how I lived, with Aunt Sylvia. She was--I had no idea she was my stepmother until right before she passed away. She was living in Los Angeles [California] with Winona and she had Alzheimer's and brought her to the house for Sunday dinner, there were several of us, and she went into the living room to watch TV and I excused myself while everybody was cleaning the dining room, pretty much everybody had migrated to the kitchen and I went and I sat down next to her and I whispered in her ear 'cause I knew I had seconds and I said, Aunt Sylvia, I know who you are, you're my stepmother. I know that Bill Scott was my father and I just want to thank you so much, so much for just never pushing me away, treating me like I was one of yours and just, what an amazing woman you are and I kissed her and she turned and she looked at me and she said, "Hello Monk [ph.]" and Monk was my nickname as a kid, and then she looked back at the TV and then she died about a couple of months later. That was the only conversation she and I have had. She held that secret for all those years. That's a long time in knowing that her husband was having a very elongated affair with my mother. It was just accepted. Story_ID: 97332 Speaker 1: Okay, now that is quite a story and at least you have the answers 'cause so many people have been-- Speaker 2: You're absolutely right, you know, and then there gets to a point where there's bliss and ignorance because the people who you deemed to be heroes aren't heroes any more, they're secret keepers, they're liars and the deeper I dig, the deeper, deeper it gets. I mean, if this is a story about my story, then part of my story is about being an incest survivor because Bill Scott molested me starting at age seven and it's something that is painful but it's my reality and I own it and I think in my journey to forgive him, I have to believe I think that rape and incest are crimes and they're crimes of power and he was a very powerful man and for him not to be able to claim me as his child, he did the only other thing he knew, was to claim me physically and that's what he did and I did not recollect this until maybe five years ago, in the heat of an argument and it was like my brain just opened up and all of the memories just started coming down. And they just wouldn't stop. They just wouldn't stop. They just wouldn't stop. And I went through a very very painful period in my life, months, of just, and everyone was dead. I had nobody to blame. I had nobody to talk to. I had to work it out and that's when I learned what forgiveness really, really is. I had to learn how to forgive him. Story_ID: 97333 Speaker 1: All right now, one question we always ask is, oh, well, I didn't ask this, describe where you grew up? The house you grew up in and did the neighborhood have a name or-- Speaker 2: It was just Far Rockaway [New York] but it was the wrong side of the tracks Far Rockaway. We really did have railroad tracks that separated my community from a community called, The Five Towns [New York], and that's where I ended up going to high school, which was in Woodmere. So The Five Towns were Inwood, Lawrence, Woodmere, Hewlett and I can't remember the fifth [Cedarhurst] but that's where all of the women in my community would get on the bus and go and be domestics in The Five Towns. I grew up in Far Rockaway. Everybody on my block went to the same church, which was the First Baptist Church of Far Rockaway. We lived near the beach. We weren't beachcombers because, again, black people just didn't go to the beach but we had a school that was built right across the street from my house and the school had a handball court and that's where I learned that I was actually very inclined for athletics. So handball was our thing. Everybody on my street was black. I go now and I visit Lanette Avenue and there's not one black family. It's really changed, really changed. That was home, a four-family house, my mother, my brother and I lived downstairs. Ironically, Bill Scott and his wife lived upstairs for a small period of time and then they moved to Hempstead [New York]. Across from us was Ms. Jenkins [ph.] and her daughter. Ms. Jenkins babysat me after school and diagonally across was my mother's best friend who is my godmother, who if my mother [Mamie Germaine Murphy] was my mother, Cleo Lark [ph.] was my father. She taught me real life stuff. My mother taught me the pretty stuff of life. My godmother taught me the real deal of life. Speaker 1: Her name is Cleo Lark? Speaker 2: Cleo, C-L-E-O, but we called her Lark. And I think she was, she did not have any children. I was very special to her because in October 1957, her husband was found drowned, his body washed up on the beach in Far Rockaway. We don't know what happened but that was October, '57 [1957]. I was born May '58 [1958]. I plugged up that hole, I was her baby, I was her baby. I lived between those two houses, two very different houses. Speaker 1: So she's like a second mother? Speaker 2: Absolutely, and she was also my godmother, but she was my girl. Speaker 1: Okay, now how many rooms did your house have and what was, I mean, what did you have? Speaker 2: There was a front room, everybody black had a front room, right? And that was just a room with a pullout couch but my mother spent most of her time there. I would find her asleep and she'd be like this and I'm like "Momma, are you asleep?" She's like, "No, I'm just resting my eyes" 'cause there was a TV, that's where our first colored TV was in that room. That's where the Christmas tree was every year but it was also where the typewriter was. So my mother supplemented her income, and even though she was being taken care of, she was always very independent. So I have to believe that my mother had her own little nest egg just in case. And she was a secretary for the church but she also used to do outside secretarial work. So she spent so much time at that typewriter. There was a living room before that and then there was a bedroom, one bedroom and my mother and I grew up in--we slept in twin beds. The kitchen, which was the main heart of the house, and a bathroom with a clothesline and a back yard, a big back yard, where she would host fabulous parties, elaborate. It was always about--that's the part of my mother that I inherited. It's about presentation. It's about if it looks good, it doesn't have to taste good, as long as it looks good. And she was just--she would very much entertain and the music was right and just, she was really amazing like that. And when I think about the pain she must have lived in every day of knowing when is the secret going to come out. When is the secret gonna come out. I think that's why she died at age sixty-eight. I think she died young. I just think her heart--she died from a heart attack. I think her heart just gave out. She just couldn't take it anymore. Story_ID: 97334 Speaker 1: Now, we always ask this question and you dealt with some of it but what are some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Salt water, that was the smell. Salt water, the sounds of seagulls, the sights of the elderly in wheelchairs. There were a lot of nursing homes in Far Rockaway [New York]. So my first job was in a nursing home and I remember the smell of that nursing home. We lived by Kennedy Airport [John F. Kennedy International Airport] so the roaring of the planes that would fly very low over our house. That was a familiar one. And kids playing in the park. There was always kids' voices all the time, and mosquitos, a lot of mosquitos. No air conditioning, it was hot. Speaker 1: Okay, I don't associate mosquitos with New York but that's a, I guess-- Speaker 2: We were by the beach. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 97335 Speaker 1: So now what did you like to do growing up besides--now you liked athletics you said, like handball? Speaker 2: Uh-hum. Handball started at--but when I went to high school, because there were only fifty-eight kids in my class, you sort of got forced into doing everything and because I was really, really good at sports, I was the captain of the basketball team, the softball team. I actually was going to try out for the 1976 Olympics until I injured my knee and couldn't. I was everything my brother [Lawrence Murphy] wasn't and it wasn't until I was an adult that I realized that I was so competitive, sports-wise, 'cause I couldn't compete against him academically and there was always the underlining, "Why can't you be as smart as your brother?" thing. Why aren't you taking piano lessons? So I took piano lessons. I hated piano lessons. I went and broke my finger, literally, took a rock and broke it, my left hand, not my serving hand for volleyball, my left hand, so I couldn't play but I could still do this and do that. I could still shoot basketball. Speaker 1: You actually consciously broke your finger? Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely. I just did not want to play piano. So you couldn't play piano with one hand but I could do everything else with one hand. So that's how I got away with it. And lots of awards and accolades and all the things that my brother got in things that, my brother couldn't even jump rope, he had no desire to. He was very much about school. So when it went time for me to go to college, that was a big point when I didn't want to go. Story_ID: 97336 Speaker 1: Now, you've accelerated to college and-- Speaker 2: I'm going to go back. Speaker 1: --we've got to take you back to grade school. Speaker 2: Absolutely, grade school was-- Speaker 1: Now, where did you start grade school? Speaker 2: Right across the street, PS 197. They built the school, I entered in first grade. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I stayed there till fifth grade. And back then, they had a system where, which was really not fair when you think about it, I mean, the classes were--first grade there was 1-1, 1-2, 1-3, 1-4. One-one was the smartest class. You didn't associate with the kids that were in 1-4 or below. And I was in 2-1, 3-1, 4-1, 5-1, and in fifth grade, they wanted to skip me to seventh grade and my mother didn't think that I was emotionally prepared. Speaker 1: It sounds like academically you're doing fine in grade school. Speaker 2: I was one of those people who wouldn't study and then I would cram the night before and ace. I just had that ability to do that. I was never really interested in school and learning and I was, I was the jock, you know. I wore shorts and a knee band and whatever the sneaker was at the moment through class and it was all about when can I get to the gym? When can I get to the gym? That was really my life. Speaker 1: Okay, now, did you have a favorite subject in grade school? Speaker 2: Hm-mm (shaking head no). Speaker 1: A favorite teacher? Speaker 2: I had a very influential teacher, his name was Trevor Nightingale, he was my--two--Trevor Nightingale, he was our English teacher and a lot of our teachers had just come out of college, now that I look about, because a lot of them were young and a lot of them had affairs with the seniors, actually. I was not one of them but Trevor Nightingale-- Speaker 1: Now this is in-- Speaker 2: This is Woodmere Academy [Woodmere, New York]. This is I'm in sixth grade. Speaker 1: Okay, now, I was trying to-- Speaker 2: So I'm in grade school. Speaker 1: I was asking you about the-- Speaker 2: Oh, I don't remember one teacher. Speaker 1: Not from PS 197? Speaker 2: One through five, but I remember sixth grade. Speaker 1: One Ninety-Seven [197], okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: When--you have to tell us the story of how you get to Woodmere Academy? Speaker 2: Well, I got to Woodmere because my mother wanted me--didn't want to skip me. She didn't think that I was ready to be with kids that were that much older than me. So all of a sudden I got told we have to go to this school, you have to take a test, you know, do your best, and I was accepted and I'm sure one of the reasons why I was accepted was because I was the only black girl. They had none. So I was the first black girl in that class. There were few ahead of me. Then there were years that went by that there were no black girls in the class 'cause everybody moved with each other. It was a very, very small school and I remember the first day walking into that gym. Speaker 1: Now just a second, this is-- Speaker 2: Sixth grade. Speaker 1: This is a school-- Speaker 2: Private school-- Speaker 1: --in one of the five cities-- Speaker 2: --in Woodmere, in one of The Five Towns. Speaker 1: The black women were going to clean up there? Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: They were going to do-- Speaker 2: I would be on the bus, they would get off in their uniforms and I would get off and go to Woodmere and they were all so proud of me. "Baby you learn everything." "You learn everything that those white folks have to teach you." Story_ID: 97337 Speaker 1: So now were there any other black students, at all, at Woodmere [Academy, Woodmere, New York]? Speaker 2: At Woodmere? There were two boys when I was in sixth grade and by the time I graduated, which was in 1976, there were five of us. So they made their ten percent quota. There were fifty-eight kids. Speaker 1: So out of how many? Speaker 2: Out of 58. Speaker 1: Fifty-eight [58], oh-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --in your-- Speaker 2: In my graduating class. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: Uh-hum. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now you walked in and let's go back to that. Speaker 2: Mrs. Weigel [ph.] was my sixth grade teacher and I don't remember the other teachers' name other than that her last name begin with a "U" because it was "Six U" and "Six V". There were two sixth grade classes and I was in "Six V" and I remember what I had on. I had pigtails, I was perfect, I was shined up with the Vaseline, the whole bit and Mrs. Weigel said, who is Vivian Murphy's buddy? And apparently they had talked about the summer, like the spring before, that there was going to be a new girl coming into school named Vivian Murphy. They neglected to tell anybody that I was black. So when I walked in, it was like the air sucked out, like nobody said anything, none of the kids and you heard some giggling and Mrs. Weigel asked again, who was Vivian Murphy's buddy? Who volunteered to be her buddy? Silence, a little bit of giggling. By this time, I'm totally humiliated and this little voice from the back of the gym says, "I'll be your buddy" and it turned out to be my friend Marni Geist, G-E-I-S-T, and what I didn't know is that Marni's father owned Rockaways' Playland. So I won 'cause my best friend's father owned an amusement park. It doesn't get any better than that when you are twelve. And Marni to this day, I just had a birthday on Monday, Marni's my first call on my birthday, every year from when I was twelve to now being fifty-four without missing and I'm the same for her. She saved me. Speaker 1: Okay, so you have a friend, you know-- Speaker 2: I have several friends from back there but Marni, Marni was my first friend. Speaker 1: So she kind of broke the ice? Speaker 2: It was, I was flushed, I was sweating, I was, and it was just such an uncomfortable situation as to why nobody, and years later, I actually, I found out when we--weeks later who my buddy was supposed to be. It was a girl named Kathy Camlet [ph.] and years later we bumped into each other and I said, you're Kathy Camlet aren't you? And she's like, Vivian Murphy, and we were walking along like on the East Side, which is where she lives, and I was like, let's have a cup of coffee. And I got the chance to tell her, I said, you know, you didn't want to be my buddy. And we ended up being great friends through high school. "You didn't want to be my buddy." She said, you know, I was waiting for you to tell me that. I was waiting for the day for you to just say, "yeah," but we're all cool now. Speaker 1: Okay, so this is 1969? Speaker 2: This is 1960-- Speaker 1: Or '70 [1970]? Speaker 2: Sixty-nine [1969]. Speaker 1: Sixty-nine [1969], okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So you're eleven, twelve? Speaker 2: Yup, I went into the sixth grade. Speaker 1: All right, eleven years old, 1969? Speaker 2: Yup. Story_ID: 97338 Speaker 1: Now this is now, [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] was assassinated in '68 [1968]. Speaker 2: In sixty-eight [1968]. Speaker 1: Did that, did you, do you remember what was going on when he was assassinated? Speaker 2: I remember the day. I remember what I was eating. I was at the dinner table with Uncle Billy [William Scott] and my mother [Mamie Germaine Murphy]. We were eating liver with onions and white rice. I don't remember the vegetable but I remember the radio was on and they announced it and I looked at my mother and my mother put her head down and I looked at Bill Scott and he said, "he had no business being down there in the first place." And I watched my mother straighten up. She was originally going into a cry and into sorrow and the minute he said that, she pulled it together. That became very much the makeup of me. When things get rough, you pull it together and you just, you never let them see you sweat. You just pull it together. It took a long time for me to learn that it's okay to fall apart. That's not what Bill Scott did. You don't fall apart in his presence-- Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: --'cause I remember that day. Speaker 1: Was that a, was his attitude, you know, a typical attitude for the black community in those days? Speaker 2: I think it was a typical attitude of a fair-skinned man in a black community. It was interesting that he choose a brown woman. His wife was fairer than him. Aunt Sylvia could have passed, easily. And look at me, I mean, I can't pass for much (laughter). But he was very hard on black people. He thought that black people did not deserve handouts. He did not believe in--like you worked for what you got. We were all equal. We all had opportunities to go to school. It was a new day. Black people were going to college. Equal opportunity. He probably was against it. He probably was, you know, you have to merit, you shouldn't get any special attention just because of the color of your skin. He was very much that guy. And he worked hard, he worked hard all his life. He did. Story_ID: 97339 Speaker 1: Okay, now, okay, 1969, so you're in Woodmere Academy [Woodmere, New York]? Speaker 2: Uh-hum. Speaker 1: This--now was the work challenging for you? Speaker 2: Oh very, very. It was a very accelerated--we were reading Shakespeare. I mean, we were doing things that my peers, who were in public school, had no knowledge of and I was very rebellious 'cause you know the '70s [1970s] were happening now. So it's like, I want an Afro. Oh, that was big. I discovered George Clinton and P-Funk and got into music and along with music came drugs. You know, I went to school with kids whose houses were worth millions and millions of dollars and they had absent parents. They were all raised by their housekeepers. So they got away with stuff and I was the token black girl so I was, you know, it was cool to be my friend. So they gave me clothes, they gave me jewelry. I drove around in their chauffeured cars. I went to Aspen [Colorado]. I would go to Seder, you know, at their house on Friday nights and as much as I rebelled going to that school, it was the best thing my mother [Mamie Germaine Murphy] could have done because I look at my colleagues who were still in Far Rockaway, who still think that that's as good as it gets. My bar was so raised, I never knew that there was a glass ceiling. I never knew that I could only go but so far because I was so challenged academically as well as by all this wealth I saw, I wanted that. And interestingly enough, not a lot of women who were just housewives, these kids' mothers were professionals in their own right. So I saw strong--a lot of my role models were strong, white Jewish women who were very pulled together but they wore the pants in the family. They--and they loved me. I was something, I was like the pet, I was the toy, like I was something that nobody had seen before and because I was raised "well", I wasn't the vision of what they thought black kids were. I had a perm so my hair wasn't nappy. I was always dressed really well. I shopped at the same stores that they did. So I, I was acceptable. I went to church all the time. Church was a very, very--that's what grounded me. I could see where I could have gotten caught up in the drugs of that era and free love and, you know, birth control was just coming around at that time but my mother, all day Sunday, and every Wednesday night, and sometimes on Saturday, I was in church and that's where my love for music came. Story_ID: 97340 Speaker 1: Now this is the First Baptist Church of-- Speaker 2: Of Far Rockaway. Ironically, the pastor's name was Reverend Scott, so there was a lot of Scott's going on there. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that's where I was raised in that church. Speaker 1: Now was he any relationship to Bill Scott? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You never know (laughter). I don't think so, though. Speaker 1: Okay, so you were there for prayer meeting-- Speaker 2: Everything. Speaker 1: --and sometimes-- Speaker 2: Everything. Speaker 1: Did you have positions of responsibility of the youth? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. I was a junior missionary so my job was I used to go and help feed--my mother [Mamie Germaine Murphy] cooked for everybody in the neighborhood. So I would go and take Sunday dinner to the people who were on my list in within like a three block radius so that I could walk and I loved music and for me, it was the music of the church that really drew me to my feelings about God and my belief that Jesus is Lord and-- Speaker 1: What sort of musical delivery did you have? I mean, was there a choir, a children's choir? Speaker 2: We were this (clapping). Speaker 1: Did you have a-- Speaker 2: We were the thumping church. Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: We had a little children's choir that I had nothing to do with it. Speaker 1: Organ, piano or was there? Speaker 2: Uh-hum, it was organ, it was piano, it was drums. We were a very progressive church and we had a choir called The Youth Ensemble that my brother [Lawrence Murphy] was the organist of and they were just--fly. They would take contemporary songs and turn them into non-secular songs. So I remember the Staple Singers had "I'll Take You There" and they did "I'll Take You There", but talking about how God will take you there. And it made the elders in the church go crazy and my mother was very caught in between supporting her son who she very much supported in everything that he did, and the people in the church going, but this isn't church music. So we really turned church out and at one point my mother said, you have to find a spot for your sister, Lawrence, I want her involved, but I can't sing. So I became the choir director and the business manager and I booked out the choir and booked the bus for us to go and made sure that we had the fried chicken on the bus and, you know, and I was very, very good at that and that was the basis of me getting into the music business from behind the scenes. I loved it. Speaker 1: Okay, so, as is often the case on Sunday evenings, were there concerts? Speaker 2: Uh-hum, and we would travel. We go--we were very, very well-known and we were booked up every Sunday. We had multiple robes. I got to wear a different robe because I was the choir director. It was all about control. The choir couldn't do that choir sway back and forth until I said it's time to go back and forth. You couldn't clap until I (held up right hand) went like that, you know, and like my brother's robe and my robe were the same so if you saw us you knew that we were special. We were something different because our robes were different than the choir and I liked that feeling, I liked that, and it allowed me to be amongst greats that were creatively great but in a non-creative position, and to this day that's what I do. Story_ID: 97341 Speaker 1: Okay, so were there any--did you meet any of the gospel stars in those days? Were they guests or-- Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely, Andrae Crouch, Walter and Edwin Hawkins, I mean, they were like our heroes. Tramaine Hawkins. There were quite a few local choirs. Clinton Utterbach was huge. He went on to pastor a really big church. Benny Diggs, who was Whitney Houston's first musical director, he's from the church. You know, so many people started in the church. So I got to rub elbows and we did our own recording which was a big thing and it was just everybody in one room with four mics. You did it and that was it, you know, hopefully nobody was out of key, and we put out two records. It was a big thing. Speaker 1: So you know one of the earliest gospel stars, Thomas Dorsey, was Alabama Tom blues singer and he rewrote some of his songs and put Jesus where it had been "baby". Speaker 2: And it worked. Speaker 1: And then Ray Charles came along and put baby where it had been Jesus. Speaker 2: There you go. Speaker 1: And then, so your brother's doing the same, you know. Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely, because that's what kept the young people coming to church. We had such a big percentage of youth in our church because they came to hear the choir. We were like superstars. It was incredible. And my church was situated in the projects where I wanted to move to. Now here's my mother [Mamie Germaine Murphy] who's very, you know, never looked down on people but like I said, you know, we had fingerbowls. We ate pig feet with fingerbowls. Cloth napkins. Had a dishwasher before I knew anybody did, but in the projects, the projects was where you learned--that's where the fly clothes came out of. That's how you knew what the new style was, the new dances, the house parties. That's where you always became, not a virgin, was in the projects. You had to have a project boyfriend. You had to have a bad boy and that was very true for me and I was, I would sort of go between the projects and the church and home which were three very different identities of me. I was very much a chameleon in learning how to flip it. I was down, I would wear different clothes when I was in the project because they didn't, I didn't want them to think because I went to Woodmere Academy [Woodmere, New York] I was stuck up. When I was in church, I was very respectful, you know, skirt down here, long sleeves, the way it was in the Baptist church. When I got to Woodmere Academy, or when I got out and discovered music and was going to concerts, the Afro popped out, the big earrings, you know, Angela Davis [HM], I was that girl. Very different. Three very different people. Story_ID: 97342 Speaker 1: Okay, now at Woodmere [Academy, Woodmere, New York] were you involved in--now you were there until-- Speaker 2: I graduated in '76 [1976]. Speaker 1: From Woodmere? Speaker 2: Uh-hum. Speaker 1: Okay, now that--they go all the way through-- Speaker 2: It was pre-kindergarten to twelfth-- Speaker 1: Okay (unclear)-- Speaker 2: --which was not called, it was called "Form." So it was Form Three, Four, Five and Six were Nine, Ten, Eleven and Twelve. It would follow the British way of doing grades. Speaker 1: Okay, so your high school was, they didn't have a separate name for the high school part? Speaker 2: No, it was all Woodmere Academy. Speaker 1: Woodmere Academy. Speaker 2: It's now Lawrence Woodmere Academy. They merged with another private school but it was just Woodmere Academy then. We had a campus, it was beautiful. Speaker 1: So you graduated in '76 [1976], right? Speaker 2: Uh-hum. Speaker 1: And are there--were you a member of any special clubs or groups at Woodmere? Speaker 2: I was everything. I was in the drama club, I was in the debate club. I mean, basically, because there just weren't enough people to go around to do everything. I remember starting a club for just black kids. It was five of us called the Onyx Club and one of the mothers of one of the white kids was like well we just think that that's completely racist, you know. They shouldn't be able to have a club of their own and I fought it and I just said, if non-black people want to learn about our experience, they're welcome to come but we're going to have a club. So it ended up we had a--we had a couple of Latinos, a couple of really hip white kids and, of course, the child of the mother who didn't want to be there in the first place, she was just making a point, but that was the Onyx Club. We traveled--I was a cheerleader, I was the head cheerleader. I was very proud of Woodmere. That was the best, best time. That was a good time. Speaker 1: Okay, now how were your grades at Woodmere? Did you, were you like-- Speaker 2: "B", "C." I graduated fifty-three out of fity-eight if that tells you anything. I was not the valedictorian at all, but I was the scholar of the year because I was so well rounded 'cause I would also volunteer at nursing homes and, you know, and every kids mother, we were all at a dinner, every kids mother wanted their kid to win that award and at the dinner, I remember them talking and they kept referring to it and this student and this person and then as it goes along, they go and she, so you hear all the guys in the class go, "Ohh," so now it's the girls and they're going on and on and it's almost like I was walking through a tunnel and I hear them talking but I couldn't hear them talking because they were talking about me 'cause as it just got downsized, it couldn't have been anybody else but me and I walked up there and I got that $5,000 check, which is supposed to go through college, $5,000 in the '70s [1970s] was a lot of money, we were also a very well-endowed private school. And I came back and I sat down and Bill Scott [William Scott] was there and he took the check out of my hand and he said, "I expected you to win this, I didn't expect anything less." "This is going straight to your tuition." And I didn't want to go to college. So there within lied a problem. Speaker 1: And you didn't want to go to college? Speaker 2: I didn't want to go. Speaker 1: And now here you're at a school where I'm sure most of the aspirants were to go to college, I mean, everybody. Speaker 2: Not just college. Speaker 1: The best college. Speaker 2: Seven Sisters, Ivy Leagues, I applied to them all, I got into every one but Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut] but during the summer of '75 [1975] going to '76 [1976], I met a guy who lived in Washington, D.C. and I fell head over heels in love with him. He was a bass player. I mean, he was everything that--big Afro, gorgeous, just a great guy and so I decided if I was going to go to college, well I'm going to go to college in D.C. So I applied to every college in D.C. Story_ID: 98862 Speaker 1: All right, so you met--now tell us how you met this bass player. Speaker 2: He was hanging out in the lobby, waiting for George and the band [George Clinton and the P-Funk band] to come down and I was hanging out in the lobby waiting for George and the band to come down and we were just waiting and we started talking and clicked and he lived in [Washington] D.C. and, you know, I was then going to be a senior in high school and it was time to apply for schools and I asked for a year off because even though I wasn't a great student, it was still very academically challenging and I just wanted a year off, just a year off. I think it was also when I do think about this, I also think the pressure of my brother [Lawrence Murphy] being just so academically ridiculous. I just didn't want to compete. So I thought that within this year, if I could find something else to do, then I wouldn't have to go to college. They weren't having it. They, meaning my mother [Mamie Germaine Murphy] and Bill Scott [William Scott]. So I applied to all the Ivy Leagues, all the Seven Sisters and every school in D.C., with the exception of the school for the deaf, in D.C., and I got, I was--George Washington [University], American [University], Howard [University] and Georgetown [University]. I was accepted in all. Bill Scott said, we didn't put you through a private school to go to a black college. You're not going to Howard. That's out, that's out. So that one got crossed off. So now it was between American, George Washington and Georgetown and when I went to visit Georgetown, Georgetown just resonated with me in a way that the other ones didn't. So I ended up going to Georgetown and somewhere along the course of the road in Georgetown, oh, by the way, of course the day I get to D.C., he and I break up, me and the--right, 'cause he's had a girlfriend in D.C. all this time, of course. So, that's over, I'm at Georgetown but I had met someone else in the interim, lived in New York. And about a couple of months in, I was like, I mean I'm having fun, it's D.C., I used to work at the Florida Avenue Grill over by Howard, I hung out at Howard, I went to pledge, I wanted to be an AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha] and they did the paper bag test on me, that's real. Speaker 1: Did they really? Speaker 2: They took a piece of paper bag, they said, you don't cut it, go to the Delta's. And my roommate was from Cincinnati [Ohio] and she was very fair. We both went to pledge at the same time on Howard's campus because Georgetown didn't have black sororities and they accepted--we're going to accept her but they wouldn't accept me. So neither one of us did and neither one of us actually ended up, you know, becoming a sor--but we hung out at Howard and, you know, that's where all the fun was and just one day it was like, how can I get out of going to college? How can I get out of going to college and how can I really piss them off? I know, I'll get married, then they can't say anything. And that's what I did. So at eighteen going on nineteen, I married Robert Scott, dropped out of Georgetown, devastated everybody, except me. Story_ID: 98863 Speaker 1: Now, okay, so you married a fellow named Robert Scott-- Speaker 2: Uh-hum, I married a Scott. I became a Scott (laughter). I became a Scott. Speaker 1: All right, so you get married, you're like eighteen, you said eighteen? Speaker 2: Uh-huh, I was eighteen going on nineteen. Speaker 1: And so you just got there within the first year then? Speaker 2: Pretty much. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My mother [Mamie Germaine Murphy] was devastated. It was the first--it was the second time I had seen my mother cry. She cried when [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Hr.] was killed. She cried when I told her I was married. Speaker 1: Okay, now who was--what did Robert Scott do? Speaker 2: Robert at the time was a salesman. He worked in a furniture store but what was so appealing to me about Robert was that Robert was very dark and very beautiful. He was just a very handsome man and he was so--is, I'm talking like he's dead, so smart and so smart about the revolution being televised and the black poets and Gil Scott-Heron and he drummed and he was just black. Lived in Harlem [New York City, New York]. You couldn't have gotten any blacker in all the sense of black. And I just think that I was just so ready. I had just come from such a whitewashed life like I didn't, I don't think I'd ever been to Harlem. Speaker 1: Now did you meet him in Harlem? Speaker 2: I met him downtown at a club on 4th Street, on 4th Avenue and 11th Street. Speaker 1: In D.C.? Speaker 2: In Manhattan [New York City, New York]. Speaker 1: In Manhattan, okay. Speaker 2: I was home for a weekend, we met--oh, it was very fast and furious. You know, we met, we dated and I was like, "Do you want to get married?" And he was ten years older than me. He's like, "sure" and in my mind it was--I was so young that if it didn't work out, I would still be young when it didn't work out and I could do something else. So, just in the mind of being a young, carefree, I don't want to do this and this is my out kind of mentality, it made all the sense in the world to me. Devastated my mother and Bill Scott. His daughter is marrying a brown-skinned man who lives in Harlem, who's not college-educated and whose parents live in the projects. It didn't get any worse. So they threw me a wedding 'cause I eloped. My mom did not want the church to think I was pregnant, so I wore a white dress with a flat stomach and walked down the aisle and got monetary gifts and we were able to get our own apartment and we were together and two years later my daughter Loren was born. And two years after that, just like I predicted, I was divorced, but I was twenty-three so I could do something else. And to this day, that's my buddy, that's my buddy, he's a good guy. Story_ID: 98864 Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, all right now, what--so you have a baby and-- Speaker 2: Uh-hum. Speaker 1: --your daughter's born-- Speaker 2: My daughter, Loren. Speaker 1: --so you've got responsibilities as a mother but what were you thinking in terms of a career? Speaker 2: Career. I always wanted to be in the music business but I couldn't figure out an in. So I just did, you know, regular jobs. I worked for a hotel representative, that was my first job after I had Loren. And Loren, by the way is named after my brother Lawrence because my brother was gay and I knew he would never have children so I wanted to give him a namesake and just did regular jobs. Speaker 1: Now did your family acknowledge that he was gay in those days? Speaker 2: Not at all. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Not at all. That was another very--and I also have formulated that one of the reasons why they were so adamant in pulling me back from sports was because that wasn't what ladies did, that was what gay girls did and heaven forbid there was a gay son and a gay daughter, like what could be, what could be worse? There's a lot of things that could be worse. They could have had a handicapped child, you know, that's worse but I really, you know--and put on a dress and, you know, that kind of things. As an adult, now, I can sort of look back and go, oh, I see, I see where that was coming from. But no, and remember, I grew up in the black church, heavily entrenched, so did my brother. My mother [Mamie Germaine Murphy]'s the secretary, Bill Scott [William Scott]'s the treasurer, everybody in the choir's gay, such a contradiction. Speaker 1: Yeah, it's not an unusual story (simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 2: Such a contradiction. Story_ID: 98865 Speaker 1: But, now in terms of sports, though, I guess we kind of lost the tail end of that one but did you now, you said you were going to tryout for the Olympics? Speaker 2: In volleyball. Speaker 1: In volleyball. Speaker 2: And then I had an injury and hurt my right knee and I couldn't, I couldn't try out, I was devastated. Speaker 1: Okay, so did it, it never healed right or-- Speaker 2: Nh-mm, to this day. I was chased by a dog and it was between this German shepherd getting me or me jumping over a fence that had a top like that and when I jumped, my kneecap went in. I went over, the kneecap stayed. It was pretty gruesome. That was it. I was devastated. Sports was my out. That was my way not to go to college. That was my way out of the house and I didn't get it. That just wasn't the plan. Speaker 1: And that was when you were-- Speaker 2: I was seventeen. Speaker 1: Seventeen. Speaker 2: Going on eighteen. Speaker 1: So you were a senior in high school? Speaker 2: I was a senior. Oh, I already had my plan, I knew. Speaker 1: So you had-- Speaker 2: I had the plan. I was going to be in the Olympics. I was going to travel the world. I always wanted to travel the world. Speaker 1: So did you go through some months in a cast? Speaker 2: I went through a lot of months in a cast and a lot of months on painkillers and then had to be weaned off of painkillers. That was rough. I had to go through withdrawal and withdrawal wasn't, let's give her another lighter drug to get her through, it was like, okay, now you don't take them at all. Speaker 1: So this is just before you go to Georgetown [University, Washington, D.C.]? Speaker 2: So it was all tragic and then I had to go to college. None of this was what I wanted. I didn't want the pain. I didn't want to not have the drugs any more. I didn't want to go to school. I didn't want to pick a major. I really didn't want to leave New York. Okay, well, I got the boyfriend in D.C., I'll do that. Oh, you mean you've been fooling around, so now I don't have the boyfriend. So it was like, I really had nothing. So I found something, I got married. Story_ID: 98866 Speaker 1: Okay, so did your mother and Bill, like, take to Robert [Scott] at all? Speaker 2: Just as much as they had to. You know, we did the formalities. We did the wedding. Bill [William Scott] didn't walk his daughter down the aisle, my brother [Lawrence Murphy] did. He had to, (unclear) my evolution just thinking how difficult this was for him. He had to sit at his daughter's wedding, marrying somebody named Scott, and he didn't walk me down the aisle. It had to be tough, with his wife [Sylvia Scott] on one side and my mother [Mamie Germaine Murphy] on the other side and clearly, everybody knew, because when I started revisiting people and people in my childhood and they're like, "Oh, you didn't know?" "Really, I didn't know, you knew?" And they all said the same thing, your eyes, you have his eyes. Speaker 1: And that's rare. It's a rare color. I don't know if people can see it on the cameras. It's a rare color. Speaker 2: On my birth certificate it says hazel, and that's why Walter Murphy left my mother. He had a feeling that I was not his child and he went to the hospital and he looked at me and said, it's Bill Scott's child. I was very fair when I was born and I had hazel eyes. He left that day. Went by my brother's school and said, "yellow sister", I'll see you later. He never came back. Ultimately, my brother and he found each other and they had a relationship but he and I didn't have a relationship until I found him when I was nineteen. Story_ID: 98867 Speaker 1: Okay, so, and you're about twenty-four, you're divorced from Robert [Scott]-- Speaker 2: Uh-hum. Speaker 1: --and now what happened with Robert, was it, I mean-- Speaker 2: He was a great father and just a bad husband. I was a bad wife. Who's a wife at eighteen? I didn't even know who I was and I, you know, I played the role and he went to work and I found a job and I would come home and cook and I was, I was, you know, close to his family because we lived in Manhattan [New York City, New York], my mom [Mamie Germaine Scott] lived all the way out in Queens [New York City, New York] and the connector was when I became pregnant. That was a big deal because then there was, it was my mother, it was something of me. It was, it was--my mother and I became a lot closer once I had my daughter. She was very angry that I had left but, in having a daughter, it meant that I had to keep coming back because I had--and it was a granddaughter and that's what she was--hands down, that was before sonograms. From the minute I told her I was pregnant, she was like, she was buying pink things and it was a girl and I was like, mom, what if it's a boy? It's not a boy, trust me, it's not a boy. It was a girl. And I think my mother very secretly was very touched that I named her Loren. She knew it would be her only grandchild and my mother and Bill Scott [William Scott] showed up at the hospital, my mother and my father. I don't know it's my, my daughter's grandfather, you know, they show up at the hospital and that was my mother's pride and joy, is my daughter. Story_ID: 98868 Speaker 1: Okay, now at twenty-four then, after your divorce, like what are you-- Speaker 2: That's when- Speaker 1: One, you're getting involved in music but-- Speaker 2: Yes, and that's when it sort of kind of happened. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: Because I was, I was separated for about a year or so and then divorced and I had met a gentleman in the subway who looked very quirky and very eclectic and it turned out that he worked in a recording studio in Manhattan [New York City, New York]. And we met and we started dating and he had a professor, former professor, who worked at a, was at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], who was an entertainment attorney by the name of Louise West and Louise had an office on 57th Street, and this boyfriend introduced me to Louise and she hired me, and in 1982 I became her assistant and that was my first job in the music industry. Speaker 1: Okay, so this is about 1980-- Speaker 2: Eighty-two [1982]. Speaker 1: Eighty-two [1982]. Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So this is with what record company? Speaker 2: It was an entertainment attorney. Her name is Louise West. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I worked for her three times in my career. Whenever I needed a job, Louise would take me back. Speaker 1: Okay. Now Louise, what was she, black? Speaker 2: Uh-hum. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: Which was unusual in 1982 for a black female entertainment attorney. She was one of the first. Speaker 1: Now who did she represent? Speaker 2: Oh, God, you're really asking me some stuff. Oh, I will tell you. In addition to, she represented quite a few musicians of that time, but Louise was one of the first attorneys that started representing black executives in doing their deals. So she represented a lot of heads of black music, vice presidents of promotion, that's when becoming an executive in the music industry also meant that you got a contract. She did--that was the majority of her work. She also got very, very involved in publishing deals. So she was very much ahead of her curve. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: All right, okay. So, there's no one that comes to mind that she represented to you that sticks out right now? Speaker 2: Um, I'm sure it'll come to me though. Speaker 1: So, okay, now then what happened next? So you're working with Louise West-- Speaker 2: Uh-hum. Speaker 1: --in her office? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: You're doing clerical support for her? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And what happens next? What's the next step? Speaker 2: What happened was she had to close her office and go work out, work from home because she wasn't, you know, billing as many hours as she was when we first started and she lived in a beautiful home in New Rochelle and I would commute up there. And then it just got to be like I just needed something else. You know, I was not--Louise and I really didn't have any interaction with anyone else and she said, you know, you should go find a job. You should go find a job back in Manhattan and be in the thick of things and you can continue to work for me until you do. Story_ID: 98869 Speaker 1: And New York Times, not the Internet, found a job working in the concert division of Radio City Music Hall and I went there in 1984 and I worked for a man named Scott Sanders, who I'm very proud to say I still have a relationship with. He is the, was the producer for "[The] Color Purple" on Broadway and he just opened up "Evita." So he's gone on to still be in entertainment but in a very, very big way. Speaker 2: Scott-- Speaker 1: Scott Sanders, S-A-N-D-E-R-S. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And Scott and I were like peanut butter and jelly. That was my boy. Southern guy, didn't know much about New York, I was the New Yorker, I got his New York swag on. We were good, good buddies. We were friends until the day he told me to go downstairs to the executive doorman and pick up a package and the package was open, so I pulled out what was in the package and it was his contract and it was for $150,000 and I was making $24,000 with a kid. And a couple weeks before that, I had asked him for a raise and he said, you know, I can't do it. And I looked at those papers and I looked at him, and I threw them on his desk and I said, how dare you? You're making $150,000, travel expense, clothing expense, I have a kid, I'm making $24,000 and you couldn't give me any more money? Wow. All right, I'm out and I quit that day with nothing else to go to. My--I'm going, very quickly I'm calculating, okay, I have this much in the bank, I can always move back home if I need to, I can go on welfare, I can get disability, I'm figuring out every way that I can survive. I'm in survival, packing up my stuff and leaving the building. I was really hurt. I wasn't even angry. I was hurt 'cause we were close. That was my boy. I always thought he would look out for me and he didn't. Speaker 2: Now this is 1980 what? Speaker 1: Four [1984]. Speaker 2: Eighty-four [1984], okay. Story_ID: 98870 Speaker 1: And I walk outside on 6th Avenue and 50th Street and my head is down and a bicycle comes and hits me. And I look up and it's a guy I know named Kashif, who's a producer and who was also a recording artist on Arista Records, the label Clive [Davis] started. And we're talking, he's like, how you doing, and I'm like, oh, I probably just did the stupidest thing in my life, you know, I just quit my job. And he said, well, I'm looking for somebody, do you want to come work for me? So I was jobless for like forty minutes. That's God, that's God because if I had taken the 51st Street exit, I wouldn't have run into him. And I went to work for him and it was at a time where he was on the top, he had his own record label, publishing company, he had just bought the Jackie Robinson estate in Stamford [Connecticut], we built a studio there. Clive said, I've got a new artist, she's going to be a superstar, she's like none other, her mother's Cissy Houston, I want you to work with her, find a song, and that song was "You Give Good Love," her first hit. And that's how I met Whitney [Houston] when she was twenty-one and we were all in the studio together and that time, that one year that I worked with him, opened me up, everything. I traveled with him on the road. I became--I was just that girl and I had a great time. We were short-lived and I learned a lot. Speaker 2: Now this is Clive? What's his name again? Speaker 1: His name is Kashif-- Speaker 2: Kashif. Speaker 1: K-A-S-H-I-F. Speaker 2: S-H-I-F. Speaker 1: And he went on to produce several people, Freddie Jackson hits, Melba Moore, Kenny G. Kenny G used to stay at the house when he was Kenny Gorelick before there were any hits, amazingly talented, talented man. And when my time was up there, I was jobless for a while. Speaker 2: Okay, when you say your time was up, what happened? Speaker 1: He fired me. He fired me on April 4th, 1985 (laughter) and I remember the day because April 4th's the day [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.], Martin Luther King was killed. So I remember the day, I had a red telephone, he called me to say that I was a glorified courier, that I wasn't, 'cause I wasn't going to Stamford [Connecticut] any more, to the house, I was working from home because my little daughter, who was in nursery school, had gone to school and they called me to school and said we found this in your daughter's pocket and it was a picture of me. And when they asked her why do you have a picture, she said, so I can remember what she looks like because I was on the road with him, I was going to Connecticut, it was babysitters, I wasn't raising my kid, that was it. I told him I could continue to work for him if I could work from home. He allowed me to do that and then unbeknowing, I was actually training my own replacement. Hired her, fired me, I ripped the red phone out the wall, pissed, how could you fire me? What I didn't know, was that he wasn't paying any benefits. So, he wasn't paying into unemployment, he wasn't doing any of that. I had nothing and I had just moved into a new two-bedroom apartment. Nothing. Story_ID: 98871 Speaker 1: I was broke, and no child support, learned how to steal, learned how to boost. The woman upstairs taught me how to strap on. I could boost a good 27" TV in the wintertime when I had a long coat on. The people at the Associated Supermarket knew I had a kid so they'd turn their head the other way when they saw me grab a can of salmon. I got into that part of a, just survival. I had to do, I did anything short of selling my body on 42nd Street. I mean I did have standards, but I had a daughter who I was fully responsible for and I just did whatever I could do. I had lots of friends and--who were musicians and we would get together on Sunday and order a pizza and that pizza would last through to Tuesday. My daughter would eat and I would go to bed hungry. And a friend of mine, who worked for an organization that I didn't really understand, was called ASCAP, the American Society of Composers, Authors and Publishers, called and said, I've been promoted, I'm looking for a replacement, I need somebody to be a membership rep. And I referred all these people and nobody worked out and finally one day he called me and said, why don't you? And it's like me? I don't know anything about publishing and performing. I'm not qualified. He goes, we want a membership rep. We want somebody's who's personable. We want somebody who can go out and get more members for us. You know how to do that. And I got the job. And that was in June of 1985. Speaker 2: Well tell us what ASCAP is. Speaker 1: ASCAP is the American Society of Composers, Authors and Publishers and what they do is they're responsible for licensing of music. So anywhere where you hear music, whether it's the supermarket, radio, TV, they charge a set amount of licensing fees to all those entities and then they pay it out to whoever the writers or the publishers are. So as a membership rep, I had to make sure that our already existing members were happy, as well as, bring new members from our competitor, which at that time was BMI and BMI stands for Broadcast Music, Inc. and I always had a problem with BMI because ASCAP was governed by twelve writers, twelve publishers, the people that they represented. BMI was run by the broadcasters, the very people that you're collecting the money from. So I saw the conflict, I couldn't believe nobody else did but the thing about BMI was, you know, back in the day, ASCAP didn't want black writers. It was very much about classical, symphonic writers. They didn't want country writers. That's why to this day most of your gospel, blues, country writers are with BMI because they were welcomed with open arms and during my interview at ASCAP I walked in with a Billboard Magazine, it was June, it was black music month, BMI had an ad and it said, "BMI, we've always loved black music." And so I walked in with it and at the end of the interview, I said, So, can I ask you a question?" I said, "you know, is there a racial thing at ASCAP like there's--I've done my research and there's so many more black writers. They--ASCAP had Quincy Jones [HM] and Stevie Wonder and Lionel Richie and--but BMI had, you know, the hip writers and I said, there's this, can you just explain to me why BMI would say this? And the woman that interviewed me, ultimately turned out to be my boss, she was like, "Oh, I've got to hire you before BMI does because if BMI hires you, you're going to be a barracuda. You have to come over here 'cause I already see that you are a rebel with a cause." And I started the Rhythm & Soul [Music] Awards. This is twenty-five years in existence now at ASCAP. They were honoring the pop writers. They were honoring the country writers. They were honoring the British writers. Nobody was honoring the black writers, and I put my job on the line for that and I won, they passed it and two months later I got another job and I left ASCAP and I went on to start my label career after that. Story_ID: 98872 Speaker 1: Okay, so all this is happening fast? Speaker 2: Fast, yeah. Speaker 1: So the next job was-- Speaker 2: PolyGram Records. Speaker 1: PolyGram, okay, and they made you the director of-- Speaker 2: Of A&R, which stands for artists and repertoire. So, very different now. Labels still do have A&R reps. They call them "A&Rs" which is sort of foreign to me. I was an A&R woman. I was also one of the very few black women that did A&R, that was a guys job. And I was responsible for finding and signing talents, excuse me, I was responsible for finding and signing talent, finding songs, finding producers, making records and it was a glorified job and I was making $45,000 a year and you couldn't tell me anything. I was happy. I was happy. My kid--we could go to dinner. I put her [Loren Scott] in a private school. That was a big deal. I put her in a private school. So that was PolyGram, which is now Universal [Music Group], they were bought. Speaker 1: Okay, Polygram, what artist did they deal with? Speaker 2: Polygram was a big rock label so it was Bon Jovi and Rush and Def Leppard and on the black side, we had Rene and Angela, who's Angela Winbush. I signed Third World there. Gosh, I'm trying to think of who else. The Fat Boys, you know, they got into hip hop pretty early in the game. But PolyGram was owned by Philips [Records] and the key to Philips was that Philips created the CD. So every time a CD to this day is sold, whether it's with commercial music on it or recordable CD, Philips makes a percentage. They're the ones that created the CD and they own PolyGram. And it was a good time. It was, it was--I never felt like I was a chic in the industry. I just felt like I was somebody. I never felt what a lot of other women in the industry have talked about, which was feeling like the girl in the group. I made being the girl in the group work for me. I was the girl in the group, open the door, pull out the chair, take me to dinner, I played the girl in the group. Speaker 1: Now wasn't--didn't James Brown move to PolyGram? Speaker 2: James Brown was originally at PolyGram. He was there before I was and then he went over to Columbia [Records] but PolyGram was where all of his big hits were. Speaker 1: He was at King [Records] first? Speaker 2: Yeah, he was at King. Speaker 1: Then PolyGram. Speaker 2: Absolutely. That's where all the big--Polygram's catalog is so rich with James Brown and if I was a guessing woman, I would say that they own the majority of the copyright as opposed to James. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Third World, they were already-- Speaker 2: Established. Speaker 1: Established. Speaker 2: That was fun for me because I stole them. They were just about to be signed to Warner Brothers and I made being the girl with dreads, work for me. And I went to Jamaica and I said, I heard you're looking for a deal? So I'm in a room with five men and I'm a young chic with dreads, in shorts, 'cause it's Jamaica, it's hot. Speaker 1: So did you have dreads then? Speaker 2: I did. I had dreads for twenty-five years. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I had dreads then and they were like-- Speaker 1: You just changed then, right? Speaker 2: I just changed about a year and a half ago. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And they were just like, who's this American woman with dreads and a contract? So it wasn't easy, I mean it wasn't hard, excuse me, it was fairly easy to get them to come over and we created history. We did a song called "Forbidden Love" which was the first collaboration between reggae and hip hop. A rapper named Daddy-O, he was in a group called Stetsasonic, and we put 'em on the record and hip hop was so alien to black radio at the time that we had to do an edit where the rap wasn't in it because radio wouldn't play it, very few stations, and we could get it played in the clubs. Speaker 1: Now was that because of the content? Speaker 2: It was because--no, it was just because it was hip hop. I mean, Daddy-O was very clean, there was no cursing, it was about being in love. It was about a forbidden love with a girl. It just had to do with the fact that it was rap and that radio, particularly black radio, wasn't playing rap at the time. Story_ID: 99789 Speaker 1: Okay, when you recruited Third World, they were coming off of a stay with Island Records, I guess? Speaker 2: They were with Island. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: They were deal-less and they were being courted by Warner Brothers and I signed them and then the hurricane came to Jamaica, mid-making a record, no communication, couldn't find 'em, didn't know what was going on. I went and got on a Red Cross plane. I went and did a concert, raised money in Brooklyn, got blankets and water purification tablets and just anything we could--canned goods, stuff for women, babies, put it on this Red Cross plane and I flew down with the plane and physically just walked around looking and half of the members' houses were gone or roofs off and it was just a, it was a--Hurricane Andrew maybe, I think, I'm not quite sure which hurricane it was, but that trip made me see the spirit of Jamaicans. It's like the spirit of New Orleans [Louisiana], like you know, after [Hurricane] Katrina when, I don't know if anybody else had lived in any of the other states could have ever survived anything like that 'cause it was more than just a hurricane and water, it was just massive. That's how it was in Jamaica and already Jamaica, which was already just such a poor country, and I went down there and they were having parties. They were, you know, the sound systems were coming out in the middle of the street and just putting stacks of speakers and everybody was sharing food and singing, and I got to really understand what reggae was about. It was more than--it was very lyrical and it was the stories of the islands. And I said, well, if I'm going to learn, if I'm going to get involved in this music, I need to spend some time here. So I have spent an incredible amount of time in Jamaica 'cause after Third World, while I was actually doing Third World, there was another little artist that was sort of brewing on the side, and we'll get to him, but I kept hearing him, I kept hearing him and it changed my life. My relationship with that island changed my life. Story_ID: 99790 Speaker 1: Now, 'cause I--the reason why I want to revisit that is because the direction that you take-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --in terms of dealing with international (unclear) and stuff was-- Speaker 2: Right. PolyGram was a lesson for me. I had a mentor there by the name of Bob Jamieson and Bob was second in command, J-A-M-I-E-S-O-N. Bob was second in command under Dick Asher [Richard Asher], A-S-C-H--A-S-H-E-R, excuse me, A-S-H-E-R, and I had brought--there was a, there was a trend of music called Latin hip hop and it was really club music made by Latinos but very pop driven. So it was played on all the big pop stations all around the country and I used to live in a section of town when we were in our really lean years called Inwood, all the way at the tip of Manhattan [New York City, New York]. And it was very, very much a Spanish neighborhood. And there was a little record store called The Music House that I used to walk past on Dyckman Street all the time and they were always playing music and I would go in and they would play me the newest records. It was owned by two brothers, the Marin brothers, and Aldo, who was the front man, said you know, I've got this girl and I think she could do something, her name is--we're going to call her Sa-Fire. I think her name was Wilma [Cosme], something like that, we're going to call her Sa-Fire. And I took her to the label, I didn't really know the politics of really bringing in an artist like that. I didn't have a contract so that means that I wasn't getting royalties off of my records. I got bonuses but I didn't get points. So Sa-Fire comes in and is a hit and, of course, no longer am I the person that brought her in, now it's somebody else who doesn't look like me who takes responsibility, but we were sitting at a meeting, which we routinely had, where it was A&R people on one side, marketing people on the other, and a big screen and every project that we had, everybody was always paired up, A&R person with a project manager. We had to be responsible for recording cost and marketing cost and what you prayed for was that the recoupable number was bigger than the money that you spent. Each one's coming up red, each one, and we're sitting there, and it's like, oh, we're doomed because our bonuses were based on how many records we had in the black and that we're making money. And so I'm sitting and I'm really not paying attention. Sa-Fire's an "S" and it was done alphabetically. So I'm fumbling or something and not really looking and Sa-Fire's up and I get nudged and I looked and I'm like, what? I looked up and went, and it was in the black. And I couldn't understand because we had spent so much money developing this girl. They had bought her a house. I mean, I knew the money that had gone out for Sa-Fire. And I looked over at Bob Jamieson and he wrote a note and he passed it to me and I looked at it and it said, "international." I didn't know anything about international. I didn't know that the record had been released overseas. As big as she was here, she was even bigger over there. So that's why the record was in the black. And that was the first time that I even acknowledged that records were sold outside the states. And the equation is that over 60 percent of all records released are sold outside the United States. We're a very small part of it. Speaker 1: Now she-- Speaker 2: Out of North America, excuse me, not the States. Speaker 1: Now she had a Latin sound, what was she? Speaker 2: She--almost like Gloria Estefan. So, Spanish pop, you know kind of thing, young girl, really pretty. I just didn't know, like nobody told me that she was selling records outside of America. I couldn't even grasp the concept. And he gave me this little, just very sly little smile and just sort of nodded. Months later I went to him and I said, could you tell me about this international thing. And Bob Jamieson is the one that sat me down and explained the equation and how it went. And I carried that international thing with me when I went to my next position which was at Epic Records. Story_ID: 99791 Speaker 1: Now why did you leave PolyGram? Now you leave in '89 [1989], right? Speaker 2: Yeah, I left PolyGram because Epic [Records] came with a better offer. You know, that's how executives sort of shuffled around. They came with an offer and they came with a contract and at this point I'm a single mother, absolutely financially single, taking care of her [Loren Scott], she's in private school, I want a great life for her. I want to own where we live. I didn't want to--our neighborhood had become very crack infested and I wanted to get us out. So, it was just, it was a gift. I was in the right place at the right time and it was also very trendy to have a black woman doing A&R at the time. We were the new hot thing and it saddens me to see that there's maybe one or two now in the industry. It's a very male-dominated industry, very male-dominated field. We were killing it boy. When I was in there in the '90s [1990s], we were slaying, I mean, every label. Had a black woman that was just doing things. Speaker 1: Who were some of the other black women? Speaker 2: Sylvia Rhone, who remains our queen at this point. We had Sharon Heyward, which is H-E-Y-W-A-R-D. Sharon was the head of marketing and promotion for Virgin Records and then went on to be the president for Perspective Records which was owned by the famed producers, Jimmy Jam and Terry Lewis, who have produced everybody, probably their biggest star is Janet Jackson. And in publishing as well, Rochelle Fields, she was the head of publishing at Warner/Chappell. Brenda Andrews, head of publishing at Almo/Irving. Denise Brown, head of black music at Warner Brothers. Madeline Randolph, VP of A&R at MCA. Women, and my--and my Caucasian female counterparts. Nancy Griffiths was at Virgin, I mean, it was just, it was women. We were doing it, and I think we were trusted because we are innately mothers and keepers of the budget. If you could make a household run, you could pretty much handle a budget. And my male counterparts were very carefree and spending a lot of money and, you know, I mean, nothing bad, they were just doing things differently. I think that the labels just wanted to give us a shot and they did, and they did it in a big, big way. Story_ID: 99792 Speaker 1: And the man who hired me was a lovely man who I remain very close to, his name is Hank Caldwell. Hank was one of the ones that started SOLAR Records with Dick Griffey and Hank taught me very basic life lessons at Epic [Records]. He taught me, you're only as good as the brother or sister who stands next to you. He was insistent that if anybody in the black music department had an issue with the other one, that it stayed and it was resolved in the black music department. You don't air out your laundry. That was one very important lesson that he taught me. He also taught me that I was always going to get my heart broken by an artist. Every artist is eventually going to break your heart. And I have to say he was right about that too 'cause they're just artists, that's what they do. Ego gets in the way. They don't want to listen to what you're saying, and it happens. So he said, don't get, don't get too emotionally and too personally attached 'cause they're going to leave you. Hank groomed me. Hank empowered me-- Story_ID: 99793 Speaker 1: And that guy that I mentioned that I kept hearing about when I was in Jamaica, I could not get his voice out of my head. He had this deep baritone voice and he did this thing called "dancehall" and dancehall to reggae is what hip hop was to R and B. It was the bastard child of reggae. You know, the uptown, upper crust Jamaicans listened to proper Maxi Priest and Freddie McGregor and Bob Marley, after Bob Marley died, that was their reggae but dancehall was from the street, it was very sexual, they called it "slackness," and slackness is just talking dirty and talking stuff and Shabba Ranks was that voice. Rexton Rawlston Fernando Gordon is his real name. And I went back to Jamaica to find him and another label had, had courted him and ironically, a counterpart of mine from the West Coast office, did as well. So it was a race of, I mean, he and I are back and forth to Jamaica like who's going to get Shabba and as fate would have it, Shabba took on an attorney that I used to work for, a guy named Kendall Minter. He sort of blends in there in the years but not for a long time. And Kendall became Shabba's attorney and I told Kendall I was looking for Shabba, and for a very moderate amount of money, we made a lot of money. Shabba started the whole dance, whole trend. Everybody was in Jamaica trying to sign artists. I think that they missed a very critical element in what I think my success was, was the Jamaican community and always taking into account it started there, you have to respect it. So my singles, every time I put out a record, it was always a record that went to the ethnic community. I would have special gatherings for Jamaican and Caribbean journalists. We would take them to Jamaica to video shoots that we did. We always were very, very cognizant that it was his base and if he ever lost his base, we were going to lose him because black radio wasn't playing reggae in America and I had to figure out how to get a reggae record on radio, you get another Jamaican, and you get a Jamaican who just came up with a hit, and it was Maxi Priest. Maxi Priest had just had that big hit "I Just Want To Be Close To You." And I had spoken to a radio musical director and I said, why don't you play reggae? And he said, oh reggae's for white folks, it's for white college kids, we don't, we don't really do, you know. And I said, well, but you play Maxi Priest. And he said, well that wasn't really reggae, that was pop done by a Jamaican guy, and, we can understand what he's saying. We can't understand because of the heavy Patois, what these other artists are saying. So I said, hum, what if I put Maxi Priest singing "The Hook," Shabba doing his dancehall thing, I don't care if they don't know what Shabba's talking about, as long as they can sing along with the record, and that song was called "House Call" and we went to number one and the rest was history. We broke MTV, it was, I would pinch myself every day, like, "wow, this really happened." And we had so much success, so much success. Speaker 2: Now as I remember, it probably is a good idea that people didn't know what Shabba is talking about. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: 'Cause if you look, listen, I've listened to reggae a long time and I kind of, can hear-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --but it was coming real fast but once I heard-- Speaker 1: I know. Speaker 2: --I said, you can't say this on the--but he was. Story_ID: 99794 Speaker 1: And then I did it again with a woman who was just as nasty as him [Shabba Ranks], her name was Patra. So we were breaking all of the boundaries and the thing I'm most proud of is that music is Jamaica's biggest resource, music, the exportation of music, and the exportation of Blue Mountain coffee. And when I went down there, it was just a real lull going on. A year later, studios were back up and running, people were riding around in Mercedes, they had publishing deals, the island was rich and they were proud and they embraced me like I was one of their children. I got awards in Jamaica. I would be followed down the street by kids like I was the Pied Piper. I was Ms. Scott who brought life into this place and others followed and it was, it was a great time. We had a good run. We had a really good run. Speaker 2: Now, here we, now, he was--Shabba Ranks was really popular. I mean-- Speaker 1: Grammys. Speaker 2: Patra and the music videos were, were at their height in those days-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --I think on, on MTV. Speaker 1: Yup. Speaker 2: Now do you remember, or did you have anything to do with Marcia Griffiths, "The Electric Slide"? Speaker 1: I did not, I wish I did. That became a hit many years after she put it out, though. I think it was out and then it sort of--I mean, how, you can't go to a wedding without hearing that song. Speaker 2: And a lot of African Americans don't even know it's a Jamaican song. Speaker 1: It's a Jamaican song. Speaker 2: In fact, I've been in arguments and people say it's not a Jamaican-- Speaker 1: Oh, it totally is. Speaker 2: --and I said--yeah. Speaker 1: It totally is. It was a, I mean, who else, I didn't know anybody else in my life who got paid to go to Jamaica (laughter). It was pretty cool. We won back-to-back Grammys, we had Gold records, we had Platinum records, we traveled the world and it was Hank Caldwell that fought for me to sign Shabba. The label did not want me to sign him and he had a very crafty manager, a guy named Specialist [Clifton "Specialist" Dillon] and Specialist said, I'll tell you one thing, he tours. Get them to understand that he tours. He's already a star. So what we did was, we booked shows in London [England], Berlin [Germany], Paris [France], Johannesburg [South Africa], Tokyo [Japan], all around the world and I made up these postcards and the postcard said, "Shabba Ranks, As Raw As Ever," which was the name of his album, "In store now," knowing that it wasn't in any store outside of America and just like clockwork, every city he would go to, the crowds would go to the show, the next day they would go to the shops, the shops were like, we don't have the record, they're like, "Oh, you don't have the record." The shops would call their local distributors, they in turn called Tommy Mottola, Tommy Mottola, my big boss at the time, called me and said, something's brewing overseas, I think we need to do an international version and I was like, all due respect, it's been on your desk for the last two months. It's there. We sold 750,000 albums outside of America and I bought my first house. It was huge. It, it--that was a gift until it all fell apart. Story_ID: 99795 Speaker 1: So this is 1991? Speaker 2: Ninety-one [1991], '92 [1992], '93 [1993], '94 [1994], we're riding it hard, we're riding it hard and then we crashed and burned. I think the business itself crashed and burned because it was, it was oversaturated and the label people didn't understand the essence of what made it work. They just wanted quick, quick hits. We're going to ride this Jamaican thing 'cause we know hip hop's not going to last. So they found something new and then Shabba [Ranks] got in trouble. Shabba was a hard one to defend. He went on a TV show in London called "The Word" and he was on with one of the Wahlbergs, I can't remember if it was Mark Wahlberg or his brother, and the presenter starts talking about another Jamaican artist named Buju Banton and Buju Banton did a song called "Boom Bye Bye inna Batty Bwoy Head," which translates to "kill a gay man." Okay, now we've got a problem. My brother [Lawrence Murphy]'s gay, my friends are gay, my publicist for Shabba, Angelo Ellerbee, openly gay, what am I going to do? Shabba, on the other hand, is that's all he knew, was that gay people were the boogeyman, that, you know, very Jamaican--like he grew up. He could point at Leviticus, it's about Adam and Eve, not Adam and Steve, you know. I mean, he could really pull quotes from the Bible to justify why he felt homosexuality was such a sin. And here I am at a record label and he had just started the Budweiser tour and he was, it was four artists and headlined by Bobby Brown and he was going on every night right before Bobby, killing it, killing 'em, and Bobby having to struggle to get that crowd back after Shabba's gone off. And the gay community called Budweiser and said, if you keep him on the tour, we're going to boycott. So Budweiser kicked him off and that was the beginning of the end. I would get hate mail. I would get letters of his cracked in half. Words, you know, you homophobic witch. I mean, it was bad, it was bad. He got pulled over--off of every major TV appearance he was supposed to do and he was caught in two worlds. The world that I think that had--we had a little more time, he could have been accepting to understand people's differences but it's hard to stray away from what your mother and your grandmother and your boys have told you, even in issuing an apology to the gay community, it was just too much, too late and, you know, I reference it as if you've eaten vanilla ice cream all your life, and someone gives you some chocolate, you don't want that, that, what, I don't know that. He just didn't know. He just didn't know. Shabba was a loving man. Shabba took care of all of his friends who had been killed 'cause he grew up in a hard neighborhood, a neighborhood called Seaview Gardens in Kingston [Jamaica] and all of his boys who had been killed, every Friday in a paper bag, there were sixteen of them, because I was responsible for making sure those payments happened. Sixteen brown paper bags went to sixteen baby mothers, somewhere in Seaview Gardens to make sure that their kids were taken care of, cash, Jamaican dollars, sent by Shabba. Any problem that happened in the neighborhood, Shabba would fly down and take care of it. He was a great guy. He just had a difference of opinion that didn't work and within one day, it all stopped. It was all over. It was done. It was, it was, that was hard. Speaker 1: I'm glad you recounted that. I vaguely remember that but I don't, you know-- Speaker 2: That was hard, that was hard. It was hard for me personally in how I was going to justify supporting an artist that had those kinds of beliefs and it was hard for me to look at him and go, I've got to step back. Speaker 1: So, here's an artist that breaks your heart like-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --your friend (simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 2: You're going to have to fight this one on your own. So, that was Shabba. Story_ID: 99796 Speaker 1: So, so did that, did you, I mean, so what happened to you, I mean, as a result of that (unclear)? Speaker 2: What happened to me was I still had Patra and she was selling extremely well. I had signed a couple of other artists and then along comes Chris Blackwell, who's the owner of Island Records and courts me to come run their urban music department. And Chris Blackwell and Island are famous. You know, he's the person who discovered Bob Marley but he also discovered Traffic and Steve Winwood and, you know, a lot of big pop artists but I really dug Chris and, I think, my attraction to the offer was that he didn't want me to do reggae, he wanted me to do mainstream urban but also I could be involved in his other companies. He had a company, Island Trading, Island Outpost. He's the one that really started all of those hotels, The Marlin, The Tides in South Beach, and he had a wife, Mary, who had a fabric company. I mean, just, it was--he had a private plane that I flew in and I had never flown private before. And he was just courting me, come do this, come do this, and it was on the heels of my mother [Mamie Germaine Murphy] and my brother [Lawrence Murphy] passing away and it was just a time where I needed a change. I had been at Epic [Records], I felt like I had done all I could do, and Epic blocked me going and countered the offer and I was contractually bound to stay at Epic and the only way that they could keep me was to match the money that Chris was offering me, which money wasn't the issue, the issue was, they had to match the position and they already had somebody at Epic who was self-proclaimed head of black music, he was really head of promotion but he proclaimed that. They knew that they couldn't--they had to figure something out to keep me, which I guess was a compliment but it was also very much politics, because I was the keeper. I kept everything really cool in that department and they were a little uncertain about the gentleman. So I was told point blank, we kept you because we know he's going to shoot himself in the foot and we're going to need somebody to clean up the carnage. That's why we didn't let you go. And I was devastated. Chris Blackwell didn't speak to me for five years because someone had told him that I had never planned on going. I was using it to leverage. So now my new position was head of urban for a new label, 550 Music and I stayed. I was like the little kid that, you know, wanted to leave and I couldn't and it was a very hard time. I had just lost my mother, I had just lost my only sibling and I had lost my opportunity to start new. But I stayed and we had a lot of success. We signed Ginuwine and Jon B. and The Jacksons, Tito Jackson's kids, 3T, and one day I said, you know what, if they're going to make me stay, then I'm going to do the one project that I've always wanted to do all my life, I'm going to sign George Clinton and I did and we made an album in 1996 called, "The Awesome Power of a Fully Operational Mothership" [T.A.P.O.A.F.O.M.] and I got him and Bernie Worrell and Bootsy Collins back together for the first time in twenty years and we built a mothership and we gassed it up and we flew it over Central Park, July 4th and 5th of that year. We didn't sell a lot of records but we had a lot of fun (laughter) and I got to hang out at George Clinton's shows. I mean, I've had a very, very blessed life. How many people wake up doing what they love to do? I do what I love to do. I don't know anything else to do. I believe that people's skills are transferrable. I don't want to transfer mine. I love mine and I love where they sit and I've off-shooted and I do various things in entertainment but it all falls back to the music and that was my last time in corporate America was at 550 Music, 1997. Story_ID: 99797 Speaker 1: Okay, we left, SOLAR, I mean, Epic [Records] in '96 [1996] and now did you leave to start your own company or did you? Speaker 2: I had no intentions of starting my own company. I just woke up one day--by this time I had married a wonderful man, Ray Chew [HM], who I had known for seventeen years before but, you know, you're young, you're in your twenties and your thirties, you want a bad boy, you know. You want the guy who says he's going to call you and he doesn't for three days and you're, you know, moaning, and Ray Chew just wasn't that guy. He was just a nice guy and one of the most talented people I've ever known and we had a very quick courtship. We had--our first date was on Friday the 13th, December 13th, 1996, I was engaged in March, we got married in September. Speaker 1: Now he was a director of music at the Apollo [Theater]? Speaker 2: He was at the Apollo and he was doing "Showtime" at the Apollo at the time and we were married. We had gone away on our honeymoon and come back and he just noticed, he said, you're not happy. You know, I'm like, no, I'm really happy, I'm really happy with you. And he said, but you're not 360 degrees happy, what's going on? And I just said, you know, by this time rap had gotten really--murder, the "B" word, the "N" word. If I couldn't let my daughter [Loren Scott] hear the records that I was involved with, then I wasn't really doing the right thing but I just didn't know where else to go. I didn't know anything else, and Ray said, whatever you decide to do, I've got your back. And I went to go pick up a friend at the airport and there was a billboard and it was Continental Airlines and it said, "Whatever time zone you're in, we're there with you." And the word "time zone" just kept ringing and I'm like, what do you love to do? You love music. You love to travel. How do you do music and travel? Bob Jamieson, international. You made all the money off the Shabba Ranks records, outside the country. Nobody's paying attention to the urban market outside the country. Do something that's never been done before and that's classic me. I've always done what either my friends thought were high roller risk or had never been done before. Now I had a husband to support me financially and emotionally, I could do it and I trademarked it, TimeZone International was born two months later, I became an entrepreneur. Story_ID: 98882 Speaker 1: Nineteen ninety-seven [1997]-- Speaker 2: Nineteen ninety-seven [1997]. Speaker 1: TimeZone International, all right. Speaker 2: That was a--changed my life, you know. I didn't know how to not work within a team environment. I was searching to try to learn how to become an entrepreneur and Black Enterprise in 1998 had a Black Enterprise small entrepreneur gathering in Orlando [Florida], and my aunt and I have a house down there together, she lives down there, and I went down there and I had on my business suits and, I mean, the opposite of how we dressed at a record label but I'm, you know, going to pull it together. And I went every day, it was four days and I would come back to the house and be in tears because at that time, the big entrepreneurial thing was buying a Mailbox Plus. Everybody was buying Mailbox Pluses and making money in franchises and flipping things. Nobody at the conference was involved in music. On the last day, my aunt saw me and I was in the bed and she said, well, you know, isn't the conference happening and I said, there's nothing there for me. And she said, I guarantee you there's something there for you, I guarantee you. You just have to see it out. You have to go. My aunt made me get up, got dressed, I got there just in time for the last session and the last session was an empowerment session run by Les Brown [HM] and he said something that changed my life. He said, "in order to do something that you've never done before, you have to be somebody you've never been before" and it was like the lightbulb went off. I'm trying to do things the way that I used to do things. I was a buyer, I now have to be a seller. I have to learn how to be eloquent and sell this new brand that I have. Six months ago I was single. Six months ago I lived in Manhattan [New York City, New York]. Six months ago I worked for a corporation. Six months ago I lived in, you know, Manhattan. My entire life changed. I had a Chinese last name. People didn't know who I was. I had become Vivian Chew. It was my husband [Ray Chew, HM] who said, insert the Scott back in. People don't know who you are. Thirteen months without a check, still grinding at "TimeZone", still believing. I got my first check the week before Christmas and it was from Kedar Massenburg who runs Kedar Entertainment. Kedar used to be the chairman of Motown [Records]. He signed D'Angelo, Erykah Badu. He owns the trademark to the word "neo soul" and he gave me a shot with one of his baby artists. It was a kid named A+ who dropped a single ["Enjoy Yourself"] here, didn't do anything, dropped the same single overseas, and it encompassed the Beethoven's Fifth, da-da-da-dum, was the hook, it was in Europe. He sold a million copies. That was my first client. So I've learned that sometimes it's not your time, it's God's time, and if you just continue and have patience and faith and believe, that when you are in that valley, you're in that valley for a reason, you'll go to the mountain top, and that was huge. My first client was a million selling client, and that's what started it. So over the last fourteen years, TimeZone has been in existence, and we provide international marketing and promotion services and licensing and distribution of product and touring, which is probably my favorite part. I'm a real live tour girl. So we do all those things. I have colleagues all around the world that I bring on, on an a la carte basis, on however we're doing a project. Story_ID: 98883 Speaker 1: And I think innately because I do love the live aspect of music more than anything, just watching my husband [Ray Chew, HM]being a musical director, it was like, you know, we can own that, we can produce these shows as well. So he and I formed a company, Chew Entertainment, which produces events from small string, you know, string quartets to huge, huge things. My husband was the musical director for the Neighborhood Ball which was the first gala that President Obama went to with his wife after, you know, with Beyonce singing and Ray did the national convention, the Democratic Convention and we've done Carnegie Hall and we've done--we did a tribute to George Clinton at the Apollo [Theater] and we've just had, we've done Carnegie Hall twice, actually, as producers. And I love that part of my life. My heart is in anything that involves the evolution of music in whatever form that is. And now for me, my newest thing is, we've started a foundation called Power to Inspire. I am clear that I am on the other side of the fence now in my career, and it's time for me to create some new shoulders for new blood to step on and stand on just like people like Louise West did for me. I was a young twenty-three, twenty-four year old girl with no direction and she gave me some and now it's my time to do that. So that's what Ray and I are doing together, it's called Power to Inspire. I'm excited. Speaker 2: Okay, now, what does Power to Inspire do actually? Speaker 1: Power to Inspire, we're just, we're just getting it together. We are, you know, getting our 501(c)(3) status and what we will be doing is mentoring children, Ray from a very creative standpoint and myself for kids who want to be in the business, and for me being in the business now, is absolutely being an entrepreneur. People can say what they want to say about hip hop. Let me tell you what I love about hip hop. Hip hop has spawned more black entrepreneurs than any other genre of music. Jay-Z, Puffy [Sean Combs], Russell [Simmons, HM], Cash Money, Master P, just amazing. Nobody even went to Atlanta [Georgia] before, now Atlanta's a hotbed for music and, and I mean, they've done it and they employ their own and it's, it's empires and it's gone from music to clothing to vodka to an arena. Jay-Z is building an arena in Brooklyn [New York City, New York]. How huge is that? So, I just think that we have the responsibility. Ray and I look back, music is no longer in the schools, it's not mandatory. Our program will go in schools and we'll be teaching children their craft as well as I will then be reaching to all of my colleagues, all the people who were in the graduating class before me, myself, right underneath me, to come help and mentor a new generation. That's what "Power to Inspire" will be doing. Story_ID: 98884 Speaker 1: Okay, now, I have a note here that some of the people you've worked with include clients--Jill Scott-- Speaker 2: Uh-hum, Jill Scott, India.Arie, Brian McKnight, JoJo, Chico DeBarge, oh my, Jay-Z, Ja Rule, oh I know I'm missing some big ones, BeBe Winans, one of my favorites. McDonald's, the McDonald's slogan "I'm Lovin' It", when they went to market it around the world, we were hired to market it in six countries. Lots of, and I like the people I work with. I really like the artists that I've seen from Jill Scott, her original label, "Hidden Beach," they sold 9,000 records the first week. We were having a party. Sony was having, you know, they were having a funeral. They were like, 9,000 records. "Hidden Beach" grinded and grinded and grinded and I saw her play 200-seat cafes to a thousand to five thousand to arenas and I've been fortunate enough to see that growth over the last ten years with her. I mean, it's amazing. India.Arie, I met in a coffee shop playing a guitar. She's an international star. So that's been a blessing. I like to start with the artist from the very beginning, get involved in their development. Ray and I also have a company, a production company, where we sign artists and get them developed and shop deals for them. And we have a daughter, Bianca, who goes to the Berklee School of Music [Berklee College of Music, Boston, Massachusetts] and who is a developing songwriter and singer and so we're helping her so we're keeping it close in the Chew family. And I get a lot of joy out of that. Speaker 1: Now do you develop artists from Africa? Speaker 2: I do not. And my only work so far has been in South Africa, which South Africa has been an amazing territory. I mean, their love for jazz, their love for gospel and their love for house music is incredible. They have a music called quito [ph.], which is like their version of house music. So I can book deejays in South Africa all day long and thousands and thousands of people come, and they're loyal. You don't have to be somebody who just had a hit. It could be somebody who had a hit ten years ago but who never toured South Africa. South Africa's a huge country. Southern Africa is a huge portion. I have not gone into West Africa or Northern Africa or Eastern Africa yet, but I will. Speaker 1: So you've gone into South Africa-- Speaker 2: Uh-hum. Speaker 1: --bringing artists from here to-- Speaker 2: Bringing artists from-- Speaker 1: To South Africa? Speaker 2: Right, exactly. Most of my business is the U.S. there. I've done some European artist into other parts of Africa, Europe, Asia, Australia. I do Common, who's one of my favorite artists. I get calls from corporate, you know, we need an artist to do something and I was like, "Hum, Common, do you want to go to Australia, I know it's going to be your birthday and we're going to be on a plane, so that means we're going to be a day ahead and you will have missed your birthday, but let's go." And we went and he did a Formula One, Red Bull party and got a six figure check for doing thirty minutes. That's not bad. And I got to visit my sixth continent, I have one more to go, and I'll make it. I will go for about ten minutes, put a pole, and leave, because Antarctica's pretty, pretty cold, but that's the only place I've never been. I've gotten, like I said, my mother [Mamie Germaine Murphy] never traveled, she traveled in her mind, and I got the opportunity to see all the places that she had told me about as a kid and that I could go see them all, and I have. Story_ID: 98885 Speaker 1: Okay, okay, now what's next? What do you see yourself or what would you see yourself ideally doing next? Speaker 2: Right, the development of artists, you know, working very closely with my husband [Ray Chew, HM]. We've been able to maintain a fifteen-year professional and personal relationship which is, which is hard sometimes. You know, we don't always agree on things but we've learned how to agree to disagree. I respect what he does when it comes to creative. He's got the final answer, no doubt, he's the maestro. When it comes to business things, he'll acquiesce to me because I've been the business person in the family, even though he's catching up pretty well, you know. The "American Idol" music director chair, you better know the business and you better know the politics so he's right behind me, he's catching up. I'm proud of him. Speaker 1: I was going to mention that. That's really, that's huge now. Speaker 2: Huge, just huge, and neither one of our mothers lived long enough to see our greatness and they see it now, they see it now, and I think what's next is supporting my husband in what he's doing. "Idol's" just the beginning for him. Ray is--a little known fact about Ray is Ray's most favorite thing to do is to orchestrate. He's a conductor. He loves writing scores and doing strings and things like that and he'll be eighty or ninety years old doing film scores and TV shows and I'll be at the spa (laughter). That's what I ultimately want to do. I ultimately want to go to every fabulous five star spa in the world, and to continue to make a difference. I get a lot of joy when I bump into people who are younger than me and go, Ms. Scott, I already know what--I can already put what decade we're in now. Ms. Scott, you don't remember me but you're the one that sent me books and you're the one that told me about seminars and you're the one that gave me five dollars because you know I didn't have train fare to get even to this meeting, and look at me now? I'm so and so, I'm so and so and I've got--I call them my young'uns and I call on them when I need to know what's going on and what's current and who a new producer is that I don't know about and it's a blessing to still maintain relationships that I had in my twenties and my thirties and my forties, you know, now where I am now, and to still feel respect when I walk in the room. I kept my dignity and my integrity and people know that my first love is God. My first love is Jesus Christ, that's who I claim. This has all been his plan. I'm just sitting back and watching it unfold. Story_ID: 98886 Speaker 1: When you think about everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could go back and change it? Speaker 2: Hum, nh-mm, no. I think the only regret that I have is that I wasn't able to show my mother [Mamie Germaine Murphy] the world. I didn't have the resources that I have now. I wished that she could see what I see and I travel with a small mirror of hers that when she was very ill she had given me this mirror and she said, take it everywhere with you so I can see where you are. I go nowhere without that mirror, so she can see. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's it. Story_ID: 98887 Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes for the African American community today? Speaker 2: I want us to vote. I want us to empower. I would hope that the crab-in-the-barrel mentality would just go away. I really do believe that I'm only as strong if, if my sister's not doing well, then I'm not doing well, I'm not. And there are a lot of people who are in position who have been very blessed as I have who don't think that it's their responsibility to turn around and look behind their shoulder and just help somebody. There's a--my godmother who I refer to, Cleo Lark [ph.], she used to sing a song to me as a kid and it's "if I can help somebody, then my living will not be in vain." Don't live your life in vain, you know, it takes a smile. When you smile at someone, you'll never know if that's the only time that they're going to get a smile the entire day, the entire week. I would hope to see for the African American community for us to dig within the resources that we have amongst ourselves and there's also a great divide between African Americans and Africa. I worked very closely with a woman, Verna Eggleston, who works with Bloomberg, and her whole focus is on helping Africans become sufficient, for them to realize the diamond mines and the gold mines that they live right on top of but are importing product from China because they don't know how to do it themselves. So it really is about empowering our communities no matter where we are to be sufficient. I do not believe in racism. I don't--that's, I think, it's from growing up in such a diverse, you know, culture of Far Rockaway [New York], I had to live alongside Hasidic Jews and then I was in high school with reformed Jewish people and then traveling the world and meeting people who all we have in common is music and the love for music and smiles and eyes and gestures and these are my friends. When 9/11 hit, nobody could get phone service in New York, if you remember. I don't know if you were in New York when it happened but I got phone calls from overseas. They could get through. Those lines could get through and these are my friends who were just calling to say, are you okay? I hope black people travel more. I hope we get out of our four by four neighborhoods and that mentality that goes along with it. I want us to stop hating on each other. I had dreads for twenty-five years. I now have straight hair and that's okay. My life has changed since I changed my hair. People are a little nicer to me. Doors are opened a little wider for me amongst my people. I never got that discrimination except within my own community. That hurts, that me having hair that's more mainstream accessible, makes me more accessible. I'd like to see the day when that doesn't matter. Story_ID: 98888 Speaker 1: Okay, now when you look back again at everything you've done to this point-- Speaker 2: Uh-hum. Speaker 1: --what today would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: My daughter, my older daughter [Loren Scott]. My younger daughter is my daughter by marriage, and I met Bianca when she was five, she's now going to be twenty-one and she's my heart, that's my baby, I raised her. My daughter and I were only twenty-one years apart and we grew each other up. She was diagnosed having diabetes when she was six so she's been insulin dependent. She's never complained a day in her life. She was diagnosed in tenth grade as having attention deficit disorder [ADD/ADHD]. I have her in these highfalutin private schools and they're just passing her along and then one day it's like, you're failing everything, I'm not understanding. We found out that she had ADD. We put her in another private school. They told me let her go to a trade school, she was determined not to, she graduated with honors from college. My daughter is my hero. She's now a young mother, I'm a grandmother, a little boy who's going to be four. Everything that I've--every lesson that I've learned as far as life, has always been a reflection of my daughter. She's amazing, amazing. Story_ID: 98889 Speaker 1: Okay, now normally we ask people about their family now at this juncture but you just answered two questions in one but is there anything I have not asked you that we need to talk about before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: Wow, I think we covered--I don't really talk about me a lot, you know. I mean, my job is to market and promote other people. So I always stay in the background and I'm married to a man [Ray Chew, HM] who's very much in the forefront so I know how to take that backseat very well and I take it with pride. So it's a lot for me to even talk about as much as I have. I think, I don't know what your last question is, but I'm proud of me 'cause I'm a survivor. I am a survivor in every sense of that word. I've been poor, I've been broke, I've been lonely, I've been almost homeless, I've been raped, I've loved hard without reciprocation but I'm here. I survived, that's what I'd like to say. Speaker 1: Okay, you seem to always anticipate the question. The question is ma'am, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: There you go, as a soul, S-O-U-L, survivor. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: That's who I am (laughter). Speaker 1: Thank you very much. Speaker 2: Thank you, I love that. Thank you...