 Story_ID: 188356 Speaker 1: Dr. Catoe [HM Dr. Bette Catoe], we're gonna begin, and we're gonna first start with me--by me saying that my name is Racine Tucker Hamilton, and I am the interviewer, and Edgar Carey Lane is the videographer. And today, Warren--[HM] Dr. Warren Strudwick [Sr.] is the observer, and the--today's date is Thursday, June 17 [2004], and this interview is taking place at 1748 Sycamore Street Northwest, in Washington, D.C. And if you would, Dr. Catoe, please begin by telling us the date and location of your birth. Speaker 2: The date and location of my birth. Speaker 1: Yes, ma'am. Speaker 2: I was born in Washington, D.C. (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--One second, Dr. Catoe. Thank you. Okay; so, Dr. Catoe--once again, if you could begin with the date and location of your birth. Speaker 2: Okay. I was born on April 7th, 1926, at Columbia Hospital in Washington, D.C. Speaker 1: And, if you would please, tell us your occupation. Speaker 2: Occupation--semi-retired pediatrician. Speaker 1: Okay-- Story_ID: 188357 Speaker 1: The next couple of questions are just some People magazine-ish type questions just to help us get familiar with the process. Speaker 2: Okay, okay. Speaker 1: Could you share with us your favorite food? Speaker 2: I suppose my favorite food would be chicken--chicken (laughter). Speaker 1: Your favorite time of the year. Speaker 2: My favorite what? Speaker 1: Time of the year. Speaker 2: Favorite time--in the spring; I love the spring--it's beautiful. Speaker 1: Your favorite color? Speaker 2: My--blue, blue. Speaker 1: And your favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: St. Thomas, U.S. Virgin Islands. Speaker 1: And your favorite phrase or saying; do you have one? Speaker 2: Let's see; I guess my children would say is--my daughter sent me a plaque once that said, favorite saying is, "What does that have to do with the price of rice in China?" Story_ID: 188358 Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit about your mother, starting with her name, where she was born, her background, and that kind of thing. Speaker 2: Okay. Well, I think--I, I have to say in the beginning, I think my mother was the smartest person I have ever, ever met or ever seen. She was born in Upper Marlboro, Maryland, and her mother was Mary Littleton Adams and her father was John Adams, and she often told the joke about the fact that when the teacher would ask her what her father's name was and she would say, John Quincy Adams, they would send her home (laughter) because they thought that she was being smart. They moved--her father died when she was a young, young girl, I, I just don't know the exact age, and then her mother moved back to Washington with my great-grandfather who was James Littleton, and he was a family--family history says that he was a black Indian, and he, he lived to be 105. And she had, she had six--she had six children--seven children; my mother was the youngest girl. There were three, three girls--Amor [ph.] and Irene [ph.], and then my mother; then she had three sons, so that's six--yeah. And--no, there was one that died, so that's seven. And--let's see, my mother went to D.C. public schools, and really wanted to go on to college, and her teacher wanted to send her but her mother said that she had to go to work to help her with the boys, so that was, that was the end of her education. Speaker 1: And did she ever share any stories with you about her growing up and that kinda thing? And if you would, please tell us her name, too. Speaker 2: Okay. Her--my mother's name (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Yes. Speaker 2: My mother's name was Laura Beola Adams Catoe Askew [ph.] (laughter). Story_ID: 188359 Speaker 1: And did she [Catoe's mother, Laura Beola Adams] ever share any stories with you about her growing up? Speaker 2: Well, yes, she--well, one thing--the interesting thing is that her father was married before, so her mother was the age of his youngest child, and her, her mother went to--down to Upper Maryland [sic, Upper Marlboro, Maryland] to, to teach. Apparently, you could teach then, if you had finished high school or something like that, and she met her father and she grew up on the farm until her father died, and then came to Washington [D.C.]. They were--they lived in Southeast and, as a child, I spent a great deal of time in Southeast [Washington, D.C.], so it's amazing to me now to see the gentrification and what's going--what's going on over there and, let's see--stories of her childhood. I think that--more than anything, I think she was frustrated because she could not get, get more education, but she was determined that I would get an education, so I guess, guess that's as far as that goes. She--they--as I, as I said, my great-grandfather--they always tell the joke about the fact that he would give the family history at Thanksgiving, and then he would pray, and by the time he finished praying, they had eaten the food (laughter) because he took, he took so long. And I really wish that--I can remember, as a child, giggling when he was praying so long. But now I really wish, as 'Roots' did, I really wish we had been able to record what he said because all of that history is lost; all that's lost. Story_ID: 188360 Speaker 1: So, how would you describe your mother [Laura Beola Adams], Dr. Catoe [HM Dr. Bette Catoe]? Speaker 2: Well, I guess she really personified the strong black woman in that she used the resources that she had to the maximum. She had strong ideas about what you should and should not do, and I think sometimes now, about the young people that are--do not seem to have any, any oversight, but her oversight was strong. She would do anything for you to help you; of course she would tell you about it also (laughter), and she loved her grandchildren, she loved her son-in-law, and she just delighted at, at the family--she just delighted in the family. She was very talented as far as home decorating was concerned. She--in the early days before she went to work in the government, she was a cook, and she also worked at the White House during the Roosevelt era [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt]. And I guess now, during this time, she would be called a gourmet cook, but then she was called a cook. And she was very careful about the households that she worked in because she wanted to influence upon me to be positive (laughter), so she worked in households where there were a lotta books, where there were-- a way of life that, that you aspire to, you aspire to. Speaker 1: What did she do in the White House [Washington, D.C.]? Speaker 2: She was--I, I gather that she was a--I guess pastry, pastry specialist in the White House, yeah. I gather, I gather that because--and I have some plates downstairs that I really don't know what to do with because you know when they worked in the White House in that era, there were no paper plates or anything like that, so they would bring leftover food home on the White House plates, so I don't know whether I'm supposed to have those or not, but I have them (laughter). Speaker 1: And did she ever share any stories with you about working in the White House? Speaker 2: Yes, she--more--more so about the personnel that she worked with; she worked with--she--the butler that had been there for years [Alonzo Fields] and of course I can't remember his name, and she was very impressed by the Roosevelts [Franklin Delano and Eleanor Roosevelt], and gained a positive image, gained a positive image, yeah. Story_ID: 188361 Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit about your father [John Catoe], starting with his name, where he was born, and how he grew up. Speaker 2: Okay. My father was born in Kershaw, South Carolina--or was that North Carolina? Kershaw, South Carolina, yes, and he was--both my mother [Laura Beola Adams] and father were nineteen when I was born. He lived in Kershaw, and his mother and father both died, on the same day, from the flu epidemic, and he told the tale about the fact that--at that time, it was starve a fever and feed a cold, or something; anyhow--and that he tried to get water to them, but the church people would not allow it. His father was a pastor and his mother was a teacher, and with their passing, of course, this--the, the, the family fell apart. There were, I think there were--let's see, there were two girls and about five boys, and so he came to Washington [D.C.] to live with his aunt and uncle. It's interesting in the family history, two, two--a brother and a sister married a brother and a sister--McManuses [ph.] and Catoes. So, they always said they were double--double-related, so he came up to live with Aunt Hattie and Uncle Luther McManus [ph.], and that's when he met my mother, I suppose. And he--I--as I said, I was born--they married when they were nineteen and I was born when they were nineteen. And from that, that point on, they--they were married until I was six years old and then they were divorced, and I was my mother's only child, and my father was married twice, and I'm the first of nine children--from--of--that my father had, but my, my mother's only child, so I was raised really as an only child. He was--worked as a chauffeur, and then they bought a--about three taxis, and my Uncle James [ph.] and my father, and another uncle--before they were divorced, they were taxi owners--taxi drivers owners, so for the rest of his life really, until he died when he was eighty-three, he was a taxi driver--taxi owner driver, yeah, and told marvelous tales about the passengers and the different parts of the city and where, where none of his children should go, and why they shouldn't go, so--yeah. Story_ID: 188362 Speaker 1: And how would you describe your father [John Catoe]? Speaker 2: Let's see, as an adult I--shoot, I think I describe him as a very smart, frustrated black man who did not really meet, meet his full potential because when his mother and father died, at that time, with black families you just had--if you had no support system, that was it, and he was old enough when they died to see a different future from the future that he had, from the future that he had. But very positive, liked the ladies (laughter), and I understood him better as I matured. Story_ID: 188363 Speaker 1: How far back can you trace your ancestors? Do you know if your family were slaves or if they were free people? How far back can you trace your ancestors? Speaker 2: Yeah. On my mother's [Laura Beola Adams] side, my great-grandfather Littleton bought his wife's freedom from slavery, and in--on my--the, the other side, as I said, my grandfather's name was John Quincy Adams; he was a landowner in Upper Marlboro, Maryland. There was a great deal of discussion about his origins, and the fact that he was described as a red man, which meant that he was fair, and--but Aunt Maude [ph.], who was the oldest of my mother's sisters, had the opinion that you just didn't talk about those things. And really, with--when she died, all of the pictures of him disappeared, and the history, so that's all the history that I know-or the rumors, and I don't know the other side of the Adams family--the, the family that he had before-- Story_ID: 188364 Speaker 1: So, Dr. Catoes [sic, HM Dr. Bette Catoe], what can you tell us about your grandparents on your mother's [Laura Beola Adams] side? Did you spend a lotta time with them? Did you know them well? Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes. (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Starting with their names. Speaker 2: Okay. Well, let's see; my--as I said, my great-grandfather outlived everybody, but my grandmother died when I was nine years old and, as I grow older, I have more memories of it, strangely. But I loved to comb her hair and, of course, she could do no--do--we could do--the grandchildren could do no wrong, and she--I guess--another family joke is that she used to make wine, and she said that--there was no alcohol in the wine because she had not put alcohol in the wine, so that the grandchildren could drink the wine. So my mother said that they would--that they would have a family gathering like a holiday, and the children would sip the wine and then they'd get sleepy and they'd say, "Well, Mom, can the kids stay here while we go to a party or something?" And she said they would all creep out, creep out (laughter). But there were no--no alcoholics resulted, so (laughter) I guess she, I guess she didn't; she said she didn't. Every spring and every, every fall, we would--she would gather up the grandchildren and her spring tonics, the fall tonics, were a combination of the, the African background, the Indian background, and she sorta put it together so we would--she would make up tonics. But one, one thing that she did that I did not understand until I got older, then when I got older, I did not allow it, in that she would have us pass urine, and then a little later she would wash our faces and, and she said it made our skin beautiful. But it was the uric acid in the urine that they use in cosmetics now, that worked, that worked, that worked, it worked. But when I found out what was, what was going on, I was all the way up to the attic before she could catch me (laughter), before she could catch me. But, but these were the kinds of things that were used, and they didn't--right--didn't understand really what the ingredient was, but they knew that it, it cleared up the skin, and all the grandchildren had beautiful skin, beautiful skin. And she loved to cook, and--now, I did not know my great-grandmother--by the time I was able to understand my great-grandmother, her mother was dead but her step-mother and my great-grandfather, I knew them. In fact, in later years, my husband and I--after he died, my husband and I took my step-great-grandmother to the hospital for her last, for her last illness, her last illness, so (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--And what was everyone's name? What was your grandmother's name? Speaker 2: My grandma's name was Mary. Speaker 1: Mary? Speaker 2: And, and, and his second wife's name was Mary. So, I (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--That's Littleton? Speaker 2: Littleton, Yes, Littleton, Littleton. Speaker 1: And what about your grandfather? What can you tell us about your grandfather--starting with his name? Speaker 2: Yeah, no--I didn't know my grandfather. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: See, my grandfather died--my maternal grandfather died when my mother was young, and then my paternal grandfather 'course died in the flu epidemic of 1918--'14-'18 [1918], so I did not know any of those grandparents. Story_ID: 188365 Speaker 1: I know that you shared with us that your paternal grandparents died when your father was very young but did you have a relationship with the aunt and uncle who raised him here in Washington, D.C.? Was that like a grandparent-type relationship? (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Oh, yes, oh, yes, oh, yes, oh, yes. Speaker 1: Can you tell us a little bit about that? Speaker 2: Well, even after my mother [Laura Beola Adams] and father got divorced, I was very, very close to the McManuses [ph.], and we'd go to the house on some holidays that we didn't go to my maternal grandparents' house. After my grandmother died, we were more there and she--they had a daughter and a son, and I grew up with them, and both of them went to D.C. Teachers' College [District of Columbia Teachers College, Washington, D.C.], and both of them ended up teaching. Luther, Jr. [ph.] ended up as a president of one of the colleges in South Carolina and just died about two years ago and, let's see, Uncle Luther and his wife really lived until I was a young adult, because--there was a fire at her house, and she died from inhalation of fumes from the fire, but--yeah. And I had a relationship with my father's youngest sister who's still living; it wasn't as close as it was with the McManuses, but Uncle Rudolph [ph.] was a preacher and, and I went to the church services. And you know, in growing up in a segregated Washington [D.C.], it was interesting in that--I grew up in Adams Morgan [Washington, D.C.] area, so we would go to all of the churches; in the summer I would go to the Catholic church picnic in (unclear), I would go the Methodist church picnic in (unclear), and the Baptist church picnic in (unclear), so the families--really, the church was the center of the family social life, and that--my grandparents were in the church, different churches, so it, it was quite different from, from now. I find that young people now sort of floating around--what do I do? What do I do? But it was, it was--looking back on it, it was--we didn't realize we were segregated, we didn't realize we were poor, we didn't realize what we didn't have because the, the community was so close. Story_ID: 188366 Speaker 1: I went to Morgan Elementary School [Thomas P. Morgan Elementary School, Washington, D.C.]. When they built the new school, Adams School [John Quincy Adams Elementary School, Washington, D.C.], we were given Morgan Elementary School, and I gave my mother [Laura Beola Adams] a fit about that because I would go and stand in front of the Adams School, the new school; I could not understand why I couldn't go to that school instead of the old Morgan School. But they made up for it by making it a demonstration school, and Miss Edith Lyons [ph.] was the principal, and they supposedly put the best teachers there and used the newer methods. Sometimes I don't know whether the newer methods were the best (laughter) because I never learned my multiplication tables because you were supposed to figure it out. I never learned my alphabets (unclear) because you were supposed to figure it out, but these were the newer methods that, that, that were used, and we did very well on the, the, the, the city-wide exams; we did--we were Division two, and we did--from Morgan School, we did better than Division one. So, that was a plus. Story_ID: 188367 Speaker 1: Let me ask you this, Dr. Catoe [HM Dr. Bette Catoe]. Can you tell us what your earliest memory of growing up was? Speaker 2: My earliest memory of growing up. I suppose it would be--I have a memory of--you know how, when you're young and you, for instance, fall asleep at your grandmother's house or something, and then you're picked up and carried home, and I have a memory of being picked up, hugged, carried home, and kind of--I don't want to wake up, I don't want to move and, and, and going home; I guess that's my earliest. I also remember when my grandmother died at nine, that I just refused to accept it; I just knew she was going to wake up, I just knew she was going to wake up. And let's see; I guess other memories are of going to, going to Sparrow's Beach [Chesapeake Bay]. What was the other beach? The beaches again were segregated, so we would go on the church trips to the picnics and the beach--going to the beach. I can remember when I was twelve years old and (laughter) 'A Tisket A Tasket,' Ella Fitzgerald, 'A Tisket A Tasket.' I was tall, skinny--nobody would ask me to dance; I wanted to dance, but I couldn't dance, I wouldn't dance--but anyhow--that--those kinds of memories. I remember in kindergarten--Miss Brent [ph.] was my kindergarten teacher and she was very, very positive, and apparently I was very, very strong-willed, so I can remember some of those clashes. Story_ID: 188368 Speaker 1: Dr. Catoes [sic, HM Dr. Bette Catoe] tell me what sights, sounds and smells remind you of growing up. Speaker 2: Sights, sounds and smells. Smells from the kitchen--the cooking; eating was such a big part of social life. The spring, when winter was gone and, and the clouds went away, and spring just smells fresh and just looks gorgeous; just, just--the trees coming out, and--let's see what else from growing up? I guess that's about it, that's about it. Speaker 1: What--any sounds remind you of growing up? Speaker 2: I--yeah, the streetcars clanking--clank, clank, clank, clank, clank; particularly going all the way out to far Northeast to get the firecrackers for the Fourth of July, the, the--I remember the iceman coming--yeah, the iceman coming and the Good Humor truck, Good Humor truck, yeah. Speaker 1: And do you remember the name of the street that you lived on, and can you describe your block or your community growing up? Speaker 2: Okay, let's see; it was a pretty--growing up was a pretty narrow section because it was in Adams Morgan [Washington, D.C.], and--let's see, when my mother and father [Laura Beola Adams and John Catoe] married and I was born, they lived in the 1700 block of S Street; when they got divorced, they lived in the 8--no, wait a minute--6th--16? Yeah, the 1800 block of S Street, and then we moved to the 1800 block of Oregon Avenue. Now that's now the 1800 block of Swan Street because the senator from (laughter) Oregon came, and he did not like fact that the street named for Oregon was one, one, one street--one block, and that it was predominantly black, so it was changed to the 1800 block of Swan Street because on the other side of 18th Street, it was Swan Street. And it was a close community because, for instance, my principal lived right across the street; Miss Lyons [ph.] and her sister lived in the apartment 'cross the street. Our doctor lived right up the street from us, and another doctor lived up the street from us, and his sons now are friends. The--all--everybody in the--in that immediate neighborhood went to Morgan Elementary School [Thomas P. Morgan Elementary School, Washington, D.C.], and it was just that, that, that--you didn't have poor here, middle-class here; it was--everyone was sort of together and could influence one another. I know that when we moved--after the divorce, when we moved on Swan Street, we were--the house that we lived in was--a teacher was there, a government employee. I learned to cane [ph.] chairs because a brother, brother caned chairs commercially, and I also learned to, to take numbers, so--it was, it was interesting, interesting, interesting. Story_ID: 188369 Speaker 1: It's a picture of my mother [Laura Beola Adams], my father [John Catoe], and me as an infant; had to be taken in 1926. Speaker 2: That is a picture of my father with his taxi, and he was very proud of his taxi. That had to have been taken in the 1940s. Story_ID: 188370 Speaker 1: So, Dr. Catoes [sic, HM Dr. Bette Catoe], I know you've told us a little bit about Morgan Elementary School [Thomas P. Morgan Elementary School, Washington, D.C.], but can you tell us a little bit about what your life like was there, who were some of your teachers? Were you influenced by any of your teachers there? Speaker 2: Yes. As I said, the plant was old because we inherited it, and I can remember hating the bathrooms because they had the old-fashioned toilets that are now in style with the thing up at the top, and you had to pull the, the chain (laughter), and so therefore, I did not--I had to run home every day because I did not use the, facilities. But the teachers were wonderful. As I said, Miss Brent [ph.], my kindergarten teacher--in fact, she lived until I finished college. Because you think in terms of your teachers being so much older, but these were newly trained teachers who were trained in this new method of teaching, so they were, they were really young. Mrs. Johnson [ph.], who was my sixth grade teacher--now, for a year in the elementary schools, after my mother [Laura Beola Adams] and father got divorced, we went to live with my grandmother in Southeast, and we went--I went to Plummer Elementary School [Washington, D.C.] for a year, and then the principal at Plummer told my mother that she really should take me back up to Northwest because there wasn't anything that Plummer School could do for me, so we went back up to Northwest; I went back to Morgan School. It was a good education--good elementary school education, and the teachers were highly trained because here again, you had segregation so you had teachers with master's and Ph.D.s teaching you in elementary school, and that was the thing all the way through; you had (unclear) in high school I had a Ph.D. teaching me physics, and it--you developed a lot of self-confidence in yourself and you developed the abilities to think rationally, and I think that's something that isn't taught now, and also, you also develop morality. For example, I was supposed to give a speech, I think it was the graduation speech, but we had a program, and at that time, as I said, I was very aggressive so I wanted to be in everything, and I wanted to be--we had a program and I wanted to be one of the ushers or participate in it, and Miss Johnson [ph.] had said, "No, you can't do that; we are gonna let so-and-so do it." Now I was determined, so I came and did it anyhow, and then she said, "Okay, well then you can't give your speech." And of course I thought that, you know, she was going to change her mind, you know (unclear)--she didn't, she didn't. Up until the last minute, I thought I was gonna be able to give the graduation speech; I didn't. I learned from that, you know (laughter), you know--okay, all right, modify your need to be seen and to be heard, you know--okay. Story_ID: 188371 Speaker 1: And what kind of child were you at this age in elementary school [Thomas P. Morgan Elementary School, Washington, D.C.]? Speaker 2: I think introspective, a little lonely, and maybe, they would say now, strange. I can remember sitting on the steps of Morgan School, and Mr. Walker's Pharmacy was across the street, and I would sit there for hours because I could not figure out how you got pharmacy out of parmacy [ph.], so I guess--I had a lotta friends (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Do you remember some of their names? Speaker 2: Yeah--Eloise [ph.], Maythel [ph.], Rita--Rita Butler [ph.], Lucille Anderson Woods--she's Woods now--Harvey Bullock. (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--What kinds of things did you all enjoy doing at this age? Speaker 2: Well, we enjoyed one, going to the library; we used to go to the--Rita Bucter, Lucille Woods and I used to go to the library at least twice a week--the Mount Pleasant Library [Washington, D.C]; we'd walk up to the library, and they lived on 15th Street, up a little bit above Meridian Hill Park. What is that, Martin Luther King Park now? You know where Meridian Hill is? Sixteenth Street and we would go to the library and get about five or six books and read them, and then take them back and go--we liked to go up to Marie and Park to the concerts; they had concerts then in the park. We liked to sit on the front and talk; my mother [Laura Beola Adams] ran a tight ship so I didn't, I didn't go too far--didn't go too far and, as I said, we liked to go the beach. But mostly, we liked to read and 'course we listened to the radio then; we didn't have any television. We listened to the Joe Louis fights (laughter), and I liked to sew; I learned to sew and I liked to sew. In fact, I learned to sew and I made most of my clothes up through, up through--really up through, through college, through college, yeah. And that was 'bout it, that was about it. Story_ID: 188372 Speaker 1: And at this time in your life, during elementary school [Thomas P. Morgan Elementary School, Washington, D.C.], did you have dreams and aspirations? Speaker 2: Yes. I think that living in the block with the doctors that I decided at a very early age I wanted to be a doctor. But then reality set in and I decided that I couldn't afford to be a doctor so I wanted to be a nurse, and then reality set in again and then I said, well I wanted to be a lab technician (laughter). And the influences that I had were responsible for me finally going to medical school because at--during that time, you were told--you were not told you couldn't, you were not told that you couldn't do something because you were poor like you--you were not told you could not learn because you were poor, and this was under a segregated system. My elementary school teachers encouraged me. Apparently--I was a strange child, but apparently they say had a high IQ so--that I didn't always use for positive things (laughter), and when I was in high school, I stopped high school [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School, Washington, D.C.]for a year and went to work in the government because I got a little peeved with the dean of women and--because she said that I cut school and I didn't; I was sick so I couldn't find her and went home, so by--and that time I had made 99.9 on the Civil Service Exam, and teachers were making $1,240.00 a year, and I went and made $1,440.00 a year, and I didn't find out until later everybody was very upset; my mother [Laura Beola Adams] was upset and everything. But I did go to night school, and went back and graduated with my class from, from high school. Story_ID: 188373 Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit about the junior high school years. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Were you still at Morgan [Thomas P. Morgan Elementary School, Washington, D.C.] for junior high school? (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, I went to Morgan, then--by that time we had moved to Ontario Road, 2200 block of Ontario Road, and my mother and I were in a duplex apartment and they built a new Banneker Junior High School [Washington, D.C.], but it was not finished by the beginning of the year, so I had to go to--half-day to Garnet-Patterson Junior High School [Washington, D.C.] until it was finished, then we went to Banneker. And of course we passed many schools walking to Banneker, but we could not go to those schools because schools were still segregated. But we were very pleased to go to this brand new school, and Mrs. Walker [ph.], the wife of the pharmacist that was across the street from Morgan, was the principal, and we--here again, because it was a new school, the teachers were, were tops-notch, and we received a good education there that made you want to achieve. And there, there was a method there that was used, and I don't know why it isn't used now; the students that were good in math taught the students that weren't, and served as mentors for them. The students who were good in the literature taught the students who weren't, and served as men--mentors for them. So, you had a feeling that, that everyone was helping everyone to kind of move up, move up. And I don't have that feeling, that X factor, now with, with the education that's going on in the city. Speaker 1: And in junior high school, what type of student were you? Speaker 2: I think I was a good student, I think I was a good student (laughter). Story_ID: 188374 Speaker 1: What type of young lady were you developing into around this time? Speaker 2: As I said, I was very tall for that time; I have not grown at all since I was twelve years old; of course in recent years, I've shrunk (laughter), so I was five feet, six [inches] and one--3/4ths when I was twelve years old, and I was very thin and I did not think I was attractive at all, but--and that's when I learned to make my own clothes because then you didn't have the, the types of sizes that you have now, and to get clothes for my height, they were all too big, so that's when I learned to--my mother used to say I was gonna fall apart one day. Here again, we lived in a strictly segregated type of community; our parents--I realize now that our parents were very careful with us. We had our own movies on U Street, first run--Booker T. [Theatre], Lincoln [Theatre], and--hmm, what's the other one?--three--and we sort of had our own life. And then there were also tiers within the black community, with those whose parents had the benefit of education early on, those who didn't, and those who were struggling. And because I was apparently a good student, I was thrown in over here, so there were kind of--I had kind of mixed feelings about where I fit in--kind of mixed feelings about where I fit in. But I was not--I was not into sports except for bicycle riding. I remember we used to get on our bicycles and ride through the zoo, all the way down to the National Airport [later, Ronald Reagan Washington National Airport] and all the way back; if I did that now, it would kill me, would kill me, would kill me, but--and I was very involved in the church, very involved in the church. In fact, you could not go to the movies on Sunday afternoon if you didn't go to church in the morning, so I went to church in the morning so I could go to the movies in the afternoon. Story_ID: 188375 Speaker 1: And what were your family's experiences like in church? Speaker 2: In church? Speaker 1: What were your--yeah. Speaker 2: Well, as I said, church was the center of your social life, really. You had the trips, you had the dinners, you had the plays, you had the fellowships, and this was really your center of your universe more or less--yeah, yeah. Story_ID: 188376 Speaker 1: And during junior high school [Banneker Junior High School, Washington, D.C.], did you still have the same dreams and aspirations? What were some of your dreams and aspirations at this time? Speaker 2: Well, I think my main dream and aspiration was to get to high school (laughter) to--I did go through a period in junior high school, since we were doing this mentoring and teaching, to be a teacher, and my mother never got over the fact that I did not go to, to be a teacher. When I announced that I was going to medical school, she sorta went into shock, but anyhow--and--you know, I don't really remember that much about what my aspirations were; I think my aspirations were more day-to-day--let me get through this, let me, let me do this. Story_ID: 188377 Speaker 1: Who was influencing you at this particular time in your life? Speaker 2: My mother [Laura Beola Adams], number one; two, Mrs. Walker [ph.] the principal, Miss Boyd [ph.] a teacher, our math teacher. I think the teachers were--my mother--the teachers were my main influence, and I guess the, the religious background. There was a morality that, that--there were certain things you didn't do and you did do. Sometimes I, I--sometimes I applied it, sometimes I didn't (laughter). But it wasn't until I got older and I realized maybe in high school more, of what the status of blacks; it wasn't blacks then, it was colored or Negroes--what, what the status was in the scheme of things. But I think--we used to walk back and forth to school and we used to have friends on the block in the neighborhood-Juanita [ph.], Shirley Dixon [ph.], the Browns [ph.]--and so you had your neighborhood friends. I--as I said, I look back on it and know that my mother was struggling; I know that my mother was struggling. I think the--when we first moved to Ontario Road, the weekly salaries were somethin' like fifteen dollars or twenty-five dollars, and I really don't know how she did it; I don't--she could take a dollar and turn it into twenty dollars. I, I really have never figured that out, never figured that out. But it was, it was almost a time of innocence compared to what you knew later on. Story_ID: 188378 Speaker 1: And what was your relationship with your father [John Catoe] like? Did you see him much--that kinda thing? Speaker 2: During that period, no; he was busy with the six children of the second marriage. He stayed in our lives enough to appear to annoy my mother [Laura Beola Adams] (laughter), and I--during that time, I think I resented my father, but my mother said that the Bible said that you honor your mother and your father, and she would not allow me to be as defensive or dismissive as I wanted to be, so--I really, I really--during that period, I think I felt rejected; I think so, I think so. Story_ID: 188379 Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit about high school now. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Where did you go to high school, and what were your experiences like there? Speaker 2: Okay, I went to Dunbar High School [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School, Washington, D.C.]. Now, between--the summer between high school and junior high, I got a job, and I presented myself as being eighteen years old; of course I wasn't, and I was supposed to be a child caretaker, and of course the, the young man--one of the young men, he was in high school, so he was older than I was and the--I think the daughter was around my age, so one day I--they announced on the radio that there had been a murder; they--well--we--murder and that the person that they had arrested was a Roosevelt Catoe so, you know, like--I got on the telephone and said to my mother, "Do we know a Roosevelt Catoe?" And my mother [Laura Beola Adams] said, "Yes, that's your father's brother;" so we went through that, we went through that. And of course my aunts on--my mother's sister wanted me to change my name and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Was it a highly-publicized (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yes, oh yes, oh yes, oh yes. And my mother--we decided we weren't gonna change my name. So I started Dunbar High School and (laughter), unfortunately again, I was in the highest class with, with the so-called socially elevated young people, and I remember that when I went in, the teacher said--another teacher was in the office--in the room, and the teacher said that, "Oh, this is Bette Catoe." And they looked at one another and I had gotten very sensitive about it, so I didn't like that. So I decided--I think somewhere along in high school I decided I was gonna be who I was and what I was, and anybody that didn't like it could lump it. So, I guess, here again my arrogance showed again (laughter). But it, it was, it was a difficult period because everybody was not kind, and some people even thought that it was my father, and it wasn't. And, of course, he was electrocuted and that, that, that--I had, I had to live with that. Speaker 1: What impact did that have on the family? Speaker 2: It had a negative, negative impact, and they were--at that time, there were six other half-brothers and sisters, so I think that's part of my determination that I was going to make Catoe a positive name rather than a negative name, and it was, it was not easy, it was not easy, but I had good friends and my mother's family was up in arms; they wanted to--they didn't understand why I was keeping the name--why I didn't take Adams (laughter), because after the divorce, my mother had gone back to Adams. But I think sometimes a negative can be a positive, and for me it was. Speaker 1: Can you tell us a little bit more about the, the, the nature of the crime and, you know, that kinda thing? Speaker 2: Well, it was the opinion of the family that--here again, this was a different time--that he was the scapegoat, that actually he had not created the crime but they needed a--they needed an immediate type of thing. The--it was a murder, it was a murder; I don't, I don't know all the details about it and, and as I said, I didn't know him, you know, I had to (unclear). You know, Catoe is the kind of name that not everybody has so, you know, what, what, what, who was this? But it influenced me, it influenced me; made me more determined and, and made me less, made me less caring about what people thought, you know. Like, I'm gonna do what I'm gonna do, and if you don't like it, that's, that's just it, that's just it. Story_ID: 188380 Speaker 1: And while you were in high school [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School, Washington, D.C.], were you thinking that you would go to college? Speaker 2: I didn't; I wanted to but I didn't know whether I'd be able to, and as I said, I stopped high school for that year and I--my mother [Laura Beola Adams] made me put all of my money in the bank (laughter). No matter how sick I was, or how I was feeling, I got up and went to work (laughter); I got up and went to work and, as I said, I went back--I went to tenth grade; I was out in eleventh grade then went back to the twelfth grade and finished with my class and was inducted into the honor society when I went back. And I think that the experience of working that year convinced me that I was not going to put up with that in my life because you had these groups of black women who were well-educated and capable, working in the government; then there was this non-white supervisor who was not as educated as all of them. Speaker 1: Non-white or non-black. Speaker 2: Non-black I mean--who was not educated--as educated as these women, and it was terrible. And I looked around and I said, "No, no, this--I--this isn't going to happen to me." Then, I was fortunate enough to go and work in another department where--this Office of Economic Warfare, where they're all college professors, so--and the work that I had to do, I could finish in two hours, so they allowed me to go and take courses during that summer, in the daytime, then come back and then, another two hours, the work was done. So--and they encouraged me to go back to school so I did, yeah. So, as I said, I was fortunate in my encounters to encounter people that sort of pushed me forward. Story_ID: 188381 Speaker 1: And when did you finally make the decision that you would go to college and, and where you would go to college? Speaker 2: All right. I applied to Fordham [University, New York City, New York] for the [U.S.] Army Nurse Corps; Fordham turned me down and sent a letter saying that I had not had enough English. Well, coming from Dunbar [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School, Washington, D.C.], they choked you with English and literature; I mean, you know (laughter), it was impossible, but here again it, it was a segregated service then, and they--okay. So I really didn't know what I was going to do, and one of my biggest memories is I was on the telephone to a friend who asked, who asked what was I going to do--was I going to go to college, and I said I just didn't know. And the mail came, and I said--I stopped, I said, "Wait a minute, let me get the mail." And I got the mail, and in the mail was a notice from Howard University [Washington, D.C.] that I had a tuition scholarship. So, I went to Howard University. And believe it or not, fifty dollars paid for my--all of my tuition for the year--believe it or not. And of course, by that time, I also had, had received a scholarship to one of the New England colleges, and my French teacher didn't speak to me for years because I turned it down. But I said, "I can't do that," because it was just a tuition scholarship; I would still have transportation, room and board, whereas at, at Howard, I could live at home and commute; so, she was very disgusted with me, very disgusted with me. But we made--after I finished medical school, we made up (laughter). And so I went to Howard, and enjoyed it, commuted, met my husband [Warren Strudwick] at Howard when he came back from the service, and at that time, I was going to--wanted to be a medical--I said I wanted to be a medical technician, so Dr. Herman Branson, who was my physical--physics teacher, asked me what did I want to do, and I said, "I want to be a technician." He said, "No, you don't." He said, "You want to go to medical school." And, you know, I said, "I can't afford to go to medical school, and furthermore, they probably aren't gonna take me anyhow," you know (laughter). Story_ID: 188382 Speaker 1: So, Dr. Catoe [HM Dr. Bette Catoe], tell me a little bit about--we ended with you talking a little bit about your experiences at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.]. What did you major in, and what kinds of classes did you enjoy most at Howard? Speaker 2: Okay. One, I enjoyed the friends that I made; two, I enjoyed the teachers, and I enjoyed getting a superior education. You know, sometimes you get the idea that because it's a black school, that the education is, is somehow inadequate, but I think that the education that I received at Howard prepared me for anyplace, anywhere. The teachers were--I mean, you know, teachers like Frank--Frank Snowden [Frank M. Snowden, Jr.], Locke [Alain Leroy Locke], Branson [Dr. Herman Branson], that later on went on to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] or, you know, with the integration, went on to Harvard to teach, but there was not the feeling that sometimes that you get in other places, that it was all right to be not as good; you got the feeling that you had to work up to capacity and you had to produce, and if you didn't, somebody kicked you in the rear end (laughter), psychologically. My major was chemistry and physics, I think (laughter), and some psychology. And I was on the dean's list until I hit the, hit the chemistry; my mother [Laura Beola Adams] couldn't understand how I could get a C in chemistry, and my whole attitude was, I'm glad to be there. We started out with 250 in the class and we now have thirty? You know, I'm, I'm very pleased, very pleased." So, she had to, she had to understand that, and Dr.--as I said, Dr. Branson asked me what did I want to do, and I said I wanted to be a, a lab technician, and his whole attitude was, "Unh-uh, no, not that." Like, "What do you mean, not that? That's all I can afford." He said, "Yes, you can; you can afford." So, I don't know what--I don't even know what pathways were created for me, but I do know that at the--while I was in school in--at Howard, I--three things happened; one, that we didn't have computers, so you could take as many classes as you wanted to take because there were no computers. So, at the beginning of what would have been the end of my journey and the beginning of my senior year, I went to get my scholarship renewed, and they told me I could not get my scholarship renewed because I had finished (laughter) and--like finished? But that I could have a work scholarship. "Well," I said, "I can't take a work scholarship because I already have two jobs." You know, I had two part-time jobs the whole time I was in undergrad school, and I just--I--you know, I--to work on my master's, they said. So, I went home and I talked to my mother and I talked to Dr. Branson and I fumed, so I went down and got the application for medical school and I put the application for medical school in and thankfully I was accepted. So, my senior year in college was my freshman year in medical school (laughter). Story_ID: 188383 Speaker 1: And the year that I went online for AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority], so--you can only do that when you're young; thinking, thinking about it now just makes me tired, just makes me tired--yeah, okay. And I was accepted and as I said, I don't know what paths were smoothed for me (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--What year was this? Speaker 1: Huh? Speaker 2: What year was this? Speaker 1: This was in 1947--1947; but I didn't get my undergraduate's degree until 1948 because at that time at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], you had to march. I hear young people saying now, "I'm not going to my graduation, it doesn't mean anything." At Howard, at that time, if you didn't march, you didn't get your degree. So, I--at the end of my freshman year at medical school, I graduated from undergrad school, so that was three years at undergrad and four years at medical school. Speaker 2: And what was that year like for you--pledging sorority, being in medical school? All--what was all that like for you? Speaker 1: As I said, you can only do that when you're young because it was--well, I remember my first weeks in medical school. I said, "These people don't mean for you to do all of this, this is impossible; but then I found out they did--they meant for you to do it, so you just had to do it (laughter), you know. So, as I said, you, you can do a lot of things when you're young that you didn't think you could do, and looking back on it you say, "Unh-uh." But anyhow, it was an interesting year, it was an interesting year because I remember when--I finally got disgusted with, with being on pro [probation] because I had--I was getting ready to have finals at medical school, so I took myself off pro because I was having anatomy, you know, and I had to study for anatomy; I didn't have time to crawl on the floor. Speaker 2: Explain what you mean by being on pro. Speaker 1: Oh, oh, when you're--are going into a sorority, you have a probation period, and during that period, one, you have to do some social services, you have to do things for the sorority sisters, you have to attend meetings, and you have to be at luncheons to sit on the floor and to--generally--and after a while, I decided, "I can't do this," you know, "I really can't do this," so--then I was in the anatomy lab, and some of my sisters came down to the lab and I know that it was very difficult for them because I was in the lab doing--dissecting a, a cadaver, and I know it was very difficult, and (laughter) I told them, "Unh-uh, I just can't do it; I have to stay here, I have to study." They said, "Fool, you're going off tonight, come on." So, so (laughter), so--as I said, when you're young, you do these things (laughter). So I said, "Oh, okay." So, I went off and then I went back to the lab and went back to my exams, went back to my exams. Story_ID: 188384 Speaker 1: And-- (simultaneous) Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In medical school [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.], which classes did you enjoy the most? Speaker 1: I don't know whether you enjoy medical school or not (laughter); I don't know. Let's see, what classes did I enjoy the most? I guess the anatomy and the biochemistry, I guess--yeah, yeah, the anatomy and the biochemistry. In the meantime, in the senior year, I met my husband [HM Dr. Warren Strudwick, Sr.]; he came back from the war, and so he went into--both of us finished in '48 [1948], so he went into medical school in '48' [1948], so he was a little retarded, you see; he was a year behind me. I tease him all the time; I tease he and his friend, T.C. [ph.] a late, very good friend. And then in--I got married in--we got married in medical school. It was the end of his freshman year and the end of my sophomore year, and both of our mothers thought we were stark raving mad. Looking back on it, I guess we were, but--so, so we studied together and sort of went through medical school together, yeah. Story_ID: 188385 Speaker 1: One of the things I didn't ask you, Dr. Catoe [HM Dr. Bette Catoe] , and I'd like to go back to it, was you had talked about your mother [Laura Beola Adams] really wanting to go to college and not being able to for financial reasons. What was her reaction when you had received a scholarship to college [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] and you were going to be able to go? Speaker 2: She was elated, she was very elated--very elated; but she still thought I was gonna be a teacher (laughter). This was her, this was her ideal that--but, as, as I told her in later years, "Well, I am a teacher; I teach medical students, I teach residents, you know? And in pediatrics, I teach parents"--yeah, yeah. Story_ID: 188386 Speaker 1: And so how--while you were in medical school [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.], how were you determining which field of medicine you would go into? Speaker 2: Well, I think the cultural--academic cultural system determined it for me. Thing number one, when we went to medical school, there were seven women in our class, and some of the professors and some of my classmates wanted to die; their whole attitude was we were taking a space from men--from the veterans, and the--one professor told me one day, one, one time, "You should not be in this school, you should be somewhere married." I said, "I am married," (laughter). And he said, "When did you get married?" You know. But, but we--what was the question? I'm, I'm, I'm-- Speaker 1: Well, let's talk a little bit about that. What was it like for you, as a woman, in medical school in the late '40s [1940s]? Speaker 2: It was, it was--our--most of our classmates were very supportive; we had a few that harassed us and said, you know, "You shouldn't be here and why are you here?" I had one classmate--one classmate from New York; I got a Jewish classmate who asked me, "Bette, why would a girl like you want to go to medical school?" I said, "Well, you know, I want to be a doctor, and the only way I can be a doctor is to go to medical school." And he says, "Oh--oh." So that, that, that, that sums--that generally sums it up. We--you--I went in when the veterans were coming back, and they knew what they wanted to do, and they didn't want any mess about it, so therefore, the pace was swift (laughter), and the, the academics were grinding because the--every--it was very competitive. So, I think that I got a magnificent medical education because of my--I had people in my class that had been class presidents--I mean college presidents, I had people in my class who've had Ph.D.s, I had people in the class who this was their third or fourth degree and then, as I said, the young men coming back from the service who had lost time and were older, and they just moved, so we--the seven of us just moved along with them, Speaker 1: (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--The question I had asked you before, Dr. Catoe, was how did you decide which field of medicine you would choose to practice in? Speaker 1: Oh, okay--okay, yeah. Well, my original choice--my first choice was obstetrics and gynecology, but in the history of Howard University [Washington, D.C.], there had been only one woman resident in obstetrics and gynecology, so--and the, the head of the department at that time was not inclined to take any more. My second choice was pediatrics, so I ended up at pediatrics and I have loved it; I have--I have loved it. But I also love now when I see the young ladies in surgery, or obstetrics and gynecology--all of the fields, I think now, and when I see that, that 50 percent of the classes are women in medical school, so it's--there's been, been, been a big change, been a big change. I guess we were pioneers (laughter), we were pioneers. Story_ID: 188387 Speaker 1: And you have two sons who have gone to medical school? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: What are some of the differences when they went to medical school and when you went to medical school [at Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.]? Speaker 2: Well, their attitude is that it, it couldn't have been as hard (laughter), you know, and my attitude is yes it was, yes it was. But--well, for one thing, they did not have to struggle as far as scholarships were concerned. Also, there was more to learn in medicine; medicine had advanced, and they were--and medicine was changing because we talked to both of them and said, you know, "We know that you're under pressure because your mother and father are physicians, but there are other things that you can do, and you know--don't--you don't have to feel--feel forced into this." And both of their attitudes were, "We don't"--had--like my oldest son said, "I've never thought about anything else, I've nev--I--I--have--don't want to do anything else, and I won't," (laughter). So they both, both went to medical school. Our daughter, on the other hand, from seven years old, says, "I want to be a lawyer." So, that's what--that's what she is. Story_ID: 188388 Speaker 1: So, let's talk a little bit about--you graduated from medical school [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.]. What year did you graduate from medical school? Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty-one [1951]. Speaker 1: And what did you do immediately after graduating from medical school? Speaker 2: Immediately after graduating from medical school, I went into residency. Well, no, internship; at that time you did a year of internship. You rotated through all of the fields of medicine, so I did a year of internship and three years of pediatric residency, and then after then, after my residency--during my residency, our first--our daughter was born, and that was interesting. And then after my end of my residency, I opened a private practice and went into private practice plus the teaching, plus the teaching. Story_ID: 188389 Speaker 1: And tell me a little bit about when you began practicing medicine in 1956, and your practice was in your home. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Tell me a little bit about that. Speaker 2: Well, I loved it, I loved it. And I think more and more people are going back to home things, but medicine isn't yet, but I think it's going to because it was--I could see patients at any time, I could see patients in the middle of the night in my bathrobe, you know; they would come. I was always--always felt like I was in contact with my family, with my children, and they frequently sat on the steps leading down to my office, so everybody knew them; everybody knew, knew, knew our kids because they would come through the office and they would--I remember when Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] died; my daughter burst through the office, "Momma, they killed my president," you know, and I didn't even know it had happened, and I'm stand--and when she did that, I rushed out to the waiting room standing in front of the television and said--you know, we're both there screaming together. But anyhow, they, they--everybody knew, knew the kids and they were like community kids. Also, as I said, I could--I did not have to send my patients to the emergency rooms; I could see them, see them at night, and my mother [Laura Beola Adams] would sit on the porch and give them advice. "Momma, don't, don't, don't give--don't, don't give--don't, don't do that." "Well, you know, just--I didn't tell them about medicine, I just told 'em about common sense." And the neighbors would sit on their porch in the summer and they'd say they were entertained because some of--as you went down into my office, it was a rail, and the kids would lock onto the rail and refuse to go--refuse to let go (laughter), and the neighbors would--but it was, it was a good journey for me. My patients loved me, I loved them, they knew that if I needed further intervention, that I would send them. Story_ID: 188390 Speaker 1: I was fortunate enough to practice for forty-eight years and never get sued; I was fortunate enough. And just the last few years were just intolerable with the--with, with the new medicines and the new insurances and the--and--you see, we--in practicing, I had control of my patients, I could treat my patients; it meant you worked harder 'cause you stayed up all night at the hospitals or you--you know. But I felt that I was giving my patients what they needed. In the later years, I felt like I, I was not actually practicing medicine the way I should, the way I should, and I guess that was my decision to retire, even though it was time; it was time, but I had thought at one time I could just go on and on and on, you know, into the '90s [1990s], but it was--to me, medicine and the practice of medicine has been a wonderful life, wonderful life. Story_ID: 188391 Speaker 1: In your, your very first office in the basement of your house-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --can you kind of describe that a little bit for us? Speaker 2: Yeah. Okay, my husband [HM Dr. Warren Strudwick, Sr.] made my examining tables; we got the doors from Hechingers [The Hechinger Company], and the legs from Hechingers, and he put them together. My mother made my curtains, and--let's see; we improvised it. Let's see, I had the waiting room that you came into, and then I had one large room divided into two examining areas, and then in the back was the bathroom, and then you went out to the yard from, from my office, and the steps were leading down to the office. And our oldest son--now, he was the only one that didn't quite want me practicing that medicine because he would sit on those steps and roll his eyes at everybody that came in, and some--as, as the boys in the neighborhood got older, they would not come in the front door of the office, they would come in the back--in the yard and, and knock on the door, and come in with their ailments and their things. And I, I could, could--I loved it, I loved it because it was home. But after--when we moved here, my mother [Laura Beola Adams] moved into the house, and then sh-after she died, it was felt that I should be in an office building, so I moved to 5505 Fifth Street [Washington, D.C.]-- Speaker 1: What year was that? Speaker 2: That was 1971. Story_ID: 188392 Speaker 1: And, in the early years, describe what a typical patient was like for you? You know, who was your typical patient? Speaker 2: Well, my typical patient was a child of my contemporaries, okay? And a child that was within the age group mostly of my children. They--the parents--always within the black community, the mothers worked and the fathers worked, but they--it was a more leisurely time, and they could take off and bring their children, and at that time, I had night office hours; I had morning office hours, then I had night office hours from six to eight, that sometimes went on to eleven to twelve, but I was home, and the patients--we--at that time, of course, we had measles, we had mumps, we had chicken pox, we had encephalitis, we had penicillin when we first started--not all of the antibiotics that we have now. Always in pediatrics, it's half medicine and half mentoring and advising and, and, and, you know, saying, you know, like kids would come in. "How's school?" "Fine." "What's fine?" "I made three Ds and two Cs." "That's not fine, that's not fine." "Mom, have you been to the school?" "What's going on?" You know; so, it was a balance of, of medicine and management, management. And we loved one another and, and I can't even remember when malpractice became a problem because I know when I first started practicing I didn't--there was no malpractice insurance, then malpractice came in and grew and grew and grew and grew and grew until its head has just, just, just ruined everything. But, but I, I, I really can't--my husband and I were talking about that not too long ago, I really can't remember when we started payin', payin' malpractice premiums, but I know once it started, it just grew and grew, and became such, such a problem, such a problem. Story_ID: 188393 Speaker 1: In the early years, in the '50s [1950s], were--was there any resistance from patients to seeing a female physician--female pediatrician? Speaker 2: Well, yeah; it started when I was doing my residency, and that's why I don't use Strudwick because (laughter) they would call and say, you know, "Dr. Strudwick--well, do you want [HM] Dr. Warren Strudwick or Dr. Bette Strudwick?" "Oh, there's a woman?" You know? And we'd go through all of that, so we decided that I would use Catoe professionally, and I'd be Mrs. Strudwick as far as family was concerned. But--no, because so many of my first patients were my classmates in high school, my classmates in college, and when they came to me, it was, it was because they wanted to. Now, the bigger problem at that time was that, because of the rarity of black doctors, there was a reluctance to go to black doctors, so we--over the years, we saw that grow; it never disappeared. [HM] Sterling Tucker asked you had you done--been--in the early years of my practice, the only hospital open to us was Freedmen's Hospital, now Howard University Hospital [Washington, D.C.], and he came to me and, and to my husband [HM Dr. Warren Strudwick, Sr.], and wanted to know would we--he was head of the Urban League then--would we participate in integrating the hospitals. Speaker 1: About what year was this, Dr. Catoe [HM Dr. Bette Catoe]? Speaker 2: This was--this had to be '57 [1957], '58 [1958]-'57 [1957], '58 [1958], early '60s [1960s]. And we said, "Yes," so we went through the, the thing of, of, of applying to these hospitals and it was much resistance at first, and then gradually the hospital was opened up. Washington Hospital Center was then ear, nose and throat hospital and another hospital, so they went to--went together. And Providence Hospital [Washington, D.C.], we had had problems in--within recent years of my get--going to practice where a mother had had a baby on the sidewalk outside of Providence because they wouldn't admit her because she was black--she was negro, and Columbia Hospital [Columbia Hospital for Women, Washington, D.C.] did not--Columbia Hospital admitted black patients because I was born there on the blackboard, but they did not admit black doctors to their staff, to the staff, so we had to pressure them to open, and now the younger doctors know nothing about that, they know nothing about that. I remember Children's Hospital [Washington D.C. Children's Hospital, later Children's National Medical Center, Washington, D.C.]; I had a patient that had measles encephalitis, and when I called over there, they couldn't find the resident; they couldn't find the staff person, so I went over there and treated my patient; of course I got a letter saying that this was not proper, you know, and I remember writing a twelve-page letter and I'm certain I misspelled some words because I'm a terrible speller and--about the fact that, you know, my patients did not understand this, and that my patient was in critical condition and I was not gonna let my patient die because their, their coverage was deficient. So that, that's the type of thing then and, and I never, I never applied for a membership--a staff membership at Children's because of that; I just never could. That was just such a psychological turn-off for me; my husband went--was on the staff at Children's but I--and my partner, but I just--I, I couldn't bring myself to do it, which was probably wrong. Okay, so we integrated Providence, we integrated Columbia, we integrated Washington Hospital Center. My husband integrated Greater Southeast [Community Hospital, Washington, D.C.]. What was--it was Cafritz [Memorial Hospital, Washington, D.C.] then, I think, okay? And it was an interesting time. Story_ID: 188394 Speaker 1: You mentioned your partner, Dr. Lillian Beard [HM Dr. Lillian M. Beard], and tell me a little bit about when you look at her now; remembering when you first brought her into your practice and you look at her now and and all of her accomplishments and achievements, what are some of your thoughts? Speaker 2: Well, she was not the first one--the first doctor to come to my office; we had a series of residents and staff people--Dr. Hunter Malloy who's now a prominent ear, nose and throat, a doctor who, who died, was an OB-GYN--I'm blocking his name right now, but I remember in my office he said he wanted to be a millionaire before he was thirty-five, and he was; Dr. Chivas [ph.] went through my office, and then Dr. Beard came in in--let's see, Dr. Beard came in (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--1973. Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--in 1975, I think. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 188395 Speaker 1: So, Dr. Catoe [HM Dr. Bette Catoe], we were talking about just some of the physicians who have come through your office, and I was wondering if you could just share some thoughts with us about Dr. Beard [HM Dr. Lillian M. Beard]. Speaker 2: Okay. Dr. Beard was referred to me by Dr. Fajay [ph.], and she was finishing up her fellowship, so she joined the practice, and at that time, the practice--she took her board [ph.] while she was in practice, and she was very interested in a media career, so the practice tried to be as supportive as we could of her--with her media career, and she has done very well with that, very well with that, and we're proud of our contribution to her career (laughter). Story_ID: 188396 Speaker 1: Just when you think about--we talked a little bit about, during the early days, what the typical patient was like and when you finally did make the decision to close your practice in 2003 what was a typical patient like back then and, and what were some of the biggest changes you saw-- Speaker 2: Okay, the biggest (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--over the years. (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, over the years. Okay, the biggest changes that I saw, one, was that parents were losing control of their kids--that somehow or other, they had lost their faith in themselves as parents, and faith in what the family requirements were, and that there was a, a great deal of anxiousness, a great deal of feeling of 'How am I going to handle this?' The children were asking for control, asking for control and didn't get it, and then they acted up. So, it almost became so that you would treat the, the illness for five minutes, and then for the next hour you were treating the psychological interaction--the family interactions, and this has disturbed me. Also, across economic--across economic lines, the parents were busy with their careers and aspirations, and they gave their kids more material things than of themselves. I tried to convince the parents when they went on vacation, "Take your children," you know. "Cut down on some of the, the activities--the basketball, this course, that course, and that course, and do things with your children; sit with them." And that still isn't happening enough, that still isn't happening enough--again, on--through all income levels, because with the Upward Bound income levels, there is the feeling that all--the children are almost used as steppingstones; their schools--with the lower income levels, you have a third-generation of parents who don't know how to parent, who have not been trained to parent, and this, this gives you--it gives you problems; this gives you problems. In the middle, you have upwardly mobile, mobile parents who are interested in their kids getting educated, interested in their kids, and do things with their kids, are still involved in the church, and I'm trying to get this side and this side to look at what the middle is doing. Story_ID: 188397 Speaker 1: What kinds of changes had you seen--we talked a little bit about social changes; what kinds of changes have you seen in terms of medical changes? Like--are, are parents still pretty much coming in with the same ailments with their children, or how has that changed? Speaker 2: Well, well, not really because, you know, we have the vaccines now, so you don't see the mumps, the measles, the German measles [rubella], the scarlatina as much as you used to; you do see--you do have some outbreaks. You don't have the--but the expectations for perfection are greater, you see? Nobody is supposed to get sick, nobody is supposed to die; you still have the cancers, even though the leukemia with children there's a big success rate, you still have the infections that are overwhelming; you still have the temperatures that last for two or three days and you have to stick with the child, you have to--you know that, that their--you don't wave a magic wand and the child is well; that it takes work, and this you have to convince parents of because there is a feeling that children should get well instantly, instantly. We're having a problem with more asthma, and it's dangerous, and educating the parents on prevention and acknowledgement, diagnosis at home. There's the depression; we have more depression, and parents--you have more depression and you have a lotta depression on the higher end (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Meaning-- Speaker 2: The higher income end that, that, that is not recognized because these children are being exposed to the subtle racism; they're being exposed to the subtle impedance of their --of what they want to do, and this is not recognized like it should be. And then you have--on the other end you have the children who feel they aren't gonna live anyhow, so how do you--how do you make these children whole? How do you make the parents realize what has to be done? And here again it's a--it's talk--it's talking to your children, knowing what they think, being supportive of them. On this end, don't think because you've put them in this integrated situation--in this, this integrated school, that they're all right over here; don't, don't think that because your life has not been what you want it to be, that you can't help your child's life to be what you want that child's life to be, and it's, it's more complicated than it was. Story_ID: 188398 Speaker 1: What impact has the increase in violence had--have you seen in pediatrics, or has there been an impact? Speaker 2: Oh, yes, oh, yes, oh, yes because it--now, the culture is beginning to accept the fact that when children see violence from the cognitive age--when they're able to look at the television and look at the violence, that they internalize this and they're not old enough to understand that this is not real, this is not the way life is, but this is, is--and so therefore they get immune to the violence, and in some, in some instances, it's, it's a, a text book of how to do the violence, and I think that because, you see, before the television, you had to go to the movies, so when you went to the movies, it was obvious that this was make-belief, you see, and it wasn't in your life every day, every hour; that the sex, the violence, the--even the, the idea--the, the, the--like the Simpsons and some of the other movies where the father is the buffoon rather than head of the family--a strong father. So you, you get all of these ideas that get engraved and it's, it's just difficult, it's just difficult. Story_ID: 188399 Speaker 1: What about teenage pregnancies? Speaker 2: Teenage pregnancies are the result of our culture. There needs to be more education, as far as pregnancy, on male and female side; there needs to be more--there needs to be more preventive measures taught, and there needs to be the institution of more activities so that sex is not something that takes the place of recreation, takes the place of, of--you find that you get far less teenage pregnancy, in young people that are engaged in athletics, they're engaged in the arts, and--but you see, our country talks a good thing about being conscious of the youth and doing things for the youth, but education and health just are the most important factors in the life of the young people, but there just is not the commitment to see that it is there and, until we change that, I, I don't know where we're going. Story_ID: 188400 Speaker 1: Dr. Catoe [HM Dr. Bette Catoe], one thing we didn't talk about was in 1976, you were selected as a delegate to attend the National Democratic Convention. What was that experience like for you? Speaker 2: That was a wonderful experience, it was a wonderful experience. I have often said that--at--then I was interested in--well, I've always been interested in civic activism, but I was interested in, in possibly doing something in the elected field then, but I sort of backed back from that. But it was wonderful, it was the year of Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter], and I have wonderful souvenirs and I have wonderful memories and--to see how the political process worked, and in addition to that, it was wonderful because I took my youngest son with me and he was able to see how the process worked, and I let him have my badge one day so he could go down on the floor, so he, he has--I asked him recently, "Do you remember?" He said, "Yeah," but it was--and, and then, here again, you didn't have the meanness of politics that you have now (laughter), you know? You know, I, I just hate to sound negative in my old age (laughter), but you just don't--everybody's so mean now, you know? So--but it was, it was, it was a lifetime experience, it was a lifetime experience. Story_ID: 188401 Speaker 1: You were also a member of the D.C.--a member of the Board for D.C. General Hospital [District of Columbia General Hospital] here in Washington, D.C. What are some of your thoughts about what happened with DC General and the closing of that hospital? Did you support that? Speaker 2: No, I did not. I was chairman of the board. I was chairman of the board when the mayor [Mayor Anthony A. Williams] sent in--restructured the board and sent in his special people with the aim of closing D.C. General. I had a hard time understanding why this was being done, and I fought it. D.C. General had problems, but we were coming out of the problems, but then D.C. General was starved financially; just the, the jail--what, what we had to pay for the jail we didn't get paid; what we had to pay for the schools (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Because D.C. General saw patients from the jail. (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, yeah, we saw patients plus we provided the heat and air-conditioning for the jail, and we weren't paid for that; we weren't paid for, for the school nurses, we weren't paid for--all the programs that they have to pay for separately now, we weren't paid for, and I could not understand why this was being deliberately done. And now I understand it's the developers want that land, and I think that it was--it's the primary disservice to the citizens of the District of Columbia because we had--they're talking about a new hospital on the edge of this land now, but we had a program--we had a commitment where a new hospital could have been built without any, any taxpayer payments, and we were turned down by the control board every, every, every turn we tried to make to turn this around, and it just became the, the--and then the staff was pitted against the administration, and I tried to convince them that--"This hospital is gonna be closed. Now, I know you have problems between the administration and staff, but you need to work together." But it, it--as I said, now I know; it's just that the developers wanted that land. I didn't even realize that the D.C. General land went down to the Potomac [River], you know? It's as simple as that, and I just think it's a disservice that this administration has done that I can't forgive; I--so I have retreated from volunteering political activities; I miss it and I think that now that I'm a year to retirement, if, If I don't get Alzheimic [sic, Alzheimer's disease], I think I'm going to get--try to get back into it. But, but it was heartbreaking, really, really. Speaker 1: Would you still like to pursue a political career? Speaker 2: I don't know, I don't know. At one time, I had decided that politicians will sell their mothers to get (laughter), to get, to get what--to get--to progress. Maybe I'm--I'm coming off of that because I think some of the politicians now in this city are--I mean--are, are, are well--have the welfare of the citizens, so I don't know; no, I think that my role will be more to serve, to serve. Story_ID: 188402 Speaker 1: Tell me a little bit about how you feel about the way that you've lived your life, and what's the most important to you. Speaker 2: Well, I think my life has been a wonderful journey; I think that I have been lucky to have people that influenced me because my life could have been quite different, quite different. I was raised by a single mother, which seems to be a negative now--I don't know why. I was not affluent, and that I was able to use what, what, whatever I had to, to, to achieve what, what--to achieve my goals of being a doctor. I think that my--other than the medicines, I think that my proudest moments come from my family, my husband, myself and our children. My children are my jewels and, and I've been lucky with that; they're wonderful, they set goals, they achieve their goals, and now we have seven grandchildren. So, I think it's been--like I tell them, "When I close my eyes, it's been wonderful, it's been wonderful." Story_ID: 188403 Speaker 1: For those young women who are interested in pursuing a medical career, what kind of advice would you have for them? Speaker 2: Go for it, go for it, go for it. Speaker 1: And do you think that you would choose a different career path if you had the opportunity? Would you choose a different path? Speaker 2: I sometimes think that I would have done more academically, but at a point, my husband and I decided that--without even discussing it, I think, that he would do the academics and I would do the civic and the mommy (laughter), and--no, I don't think so; I just deplore where medicine is going now, but I think that--I think we're gonna finally get back; not in my lifetime, but we'll get back to practice of medicine, the interest in patients, treating patients as patients; it'll just be different. We have the electronics, and it'll just be different. Story_ID: 188404 Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community? Speaker 2: That we--on one end, that somehow or other, we get back the X factor that our ancestors had; that even though this generation didn't make it, you work to see that your children make it. Also, on the upper end, that you see that their--your children, as they enter the bigger world and as you enter the big--that they do not lose their history and do not lose an understanding of their culture, and do not have a chip on their shoulder, but to realize that the system does not always work in their benefit, no matter how educated they are, no matter how capable they are, and that they do need advocacy on this end as well as this end. But I think that--and that we need to emphasize the positive as much as the negative. You don't read in the paper about what young people are doing that's positive and what families that are doing that are positive, and what families are together and what families stay together and raise their children, so I think that we need more information on that. Story_ID: 188405 Speaker 1: What are some of your concerns about the health disparities between the African American community and the majority of the white community? What are some of your concerns about just some of the health disparities and how African Americans are more likely to die from cancer certain kinds of cancer than their white counterparts, et cetera. Speaker 2: Well, as I have said, the most important thing for African Americans is education and health care; education not just on the academics, education about your health, 'bout your body, what diet, medicines, dispelling some of the myths, health care that's available to them--early. What happens now, health care is available to a vast--of part of our population late, and it's too late to do anything, it's too late to save them. That--just, just like in the district [District of Columbia] now, they have stopped the program of mammography's and cervical examinations for poor women; that's ridiculous because both of these cancers are curable if they're found early; they are not curable if they're found late. And I, I think that we need to, to fight for education and health care. Story_ID: 188406 Speaker 1: Tell me a little bit, Dr. Catoe [HM Dr. Bette Catoe], about how you would like to be remembered. What do you want people to say about you? Speaker 2: Oh, she enjoyed her life and she hopes that she made a contribution and that she helped some families--she helped some young people. Story_ID: 188407 Speaker 1: Why do you think history is important and more particularly, preserving history--especially African American history? Speaker 2: It's important because I've seen it with our children; they (laughter)--when we tell them that we could not go to the Hot Shop, they don't believe it. When they don't understand about segregation; they don't understand how demoralizing that is, mentally. On the other hand, as my--we were talking about it with our oldest son, and he said that we also have to remember that there's still ongoing, as I said, the subtle type of racism, and that that sometimes is worse than the overt. He said that we knew what we had to do, and we knew what we had to confront, but he says that it sneaks up on him. So I think it's important that they understand what their forefathers had to go through to get them to the stage that they are, and I don't know whether I'm saying that well or not, but I do feel it deeply; I feel that they need to understand what has gone on before. Story_ID: 188408 Speaker 1: What do you hope your legacy will be? Speaker 2: What do I hope my legacy will be. I hadn't really thought about it that much, but I hope it will be that, that she helped; that she helped, and that she loved her family, she loved her race, and she loved her country with all of its defects--all of its defects. Speaker 1: Is there anything you'd like to add, Dr. Catoe [HM Dr. Bette Catoe], that perhaps we didn't touch on? Speaker 2: No, I just think that we just need to--really I think education and, and health are just so important, that if you have an education and you have good health, then you can go on and do what has to be done. If you don't have a--an education and good health, you can't, you can't really help anybody else, and you can't help yourself. So, to me, we need to work on that in this country. Story_ID: 188409 Speaker 1: Okay, okay, this is a photo of my mother [Laura Beola Adams] and, and her (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, this is a picture from the '50s [1950s] of my mother and her siblings. I think that it was taken at the--after the funeral of her youngest brother. Speaker 2: Okay, could you tell us everybody's name? This is your mother, right here? Speaker 1: My mother is on the left, that was--my Aunt Irene is (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)-- (unclear) name? Speaker 1: Laura Beola Adams Catoe Askew [ph.] (laughter). My Aunt Irene is in the--in--I'm sorry-- Speaker 2: That's okay. Speaker 1: --is in the middle (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Irene (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Butler [ph.], Butler. My Aunt Maude [ph.] is on the right; she was the oldest of the, of the children--six children, and-- Speaker 2: And, and who are the gentlemen? Speaker 1: Let's see--okay, my--on the right is my Uncle Eddie [ph.], and on the left is my Uncle William [ph.]. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: That is my husband's [HM Warren Strudwick, Sr.] mother, Mabel--Mabel Strudwick. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Mabel Wormley [ph.] Strudwick. Speaker 2: And what year do you think that was taken? Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: That had to have been taken--let's see, she died at sixty-six when Chris was three years old, so fifty--that had to be taken in the early '50s [1950s]. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: Okay, that is a picture of my mother and me as a teenager. That had to be taken in the '40s [1940s]. Speaker 1: Thank you. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Okay, that is a picture of my husband's grandmother. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: What's your grandmother's name? Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Irana Strudwick (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Okay, can you spell it? Speaker 1: I-R-A-N-A. Speaker 2: About what year did you take that one? Speaker 1: Oh, goodness, that had to be taken in 1930-something. Nineteen thirty [1930], or 1920? Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Yeah, 1920. Speaker 2: Okay, that's my husband on a golf outing with--that's my husband on the left. Yeah, I don't know the gentleman next to him; that's Dr. Lenwood Rayford [ph.], the third person from him, and the person on the right is Dr.--Emm--he'd dead--Warren, Warren, Warren. Hold up. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: Eugene Clark [ph.]. Speaker 1: Eugene Clark, all right, okay. Speaker 2: Dr. (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--The last--okay. Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Dr. Eugene Clark. Speaker 1: Okay, and about what year do you think that was? Speaker 2: That had to be in the '70s [1970s]. Speaker 1: Nineteen Seventies [1970s]? Okay, great. Speaker 2: Okay. That's, that's the family picture of--taken in 1970. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Okay, that's--on the far left is our youngest son William Jeffries Strudwick; in the middle, that's me, Bette Catoe Strudwick; our daughter is on the far right (unclear), Laura Christina Turner (unclear) Christina Strudwick Turner. My husband's in the middle in the back, Warren J. Strudwick, Sr., and then next to him is Warren J. Strudwick, Jr. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Okay. That--oh, that, that picture is taken in 19--that's 19--19--no, that's 20--that's 2004 (laughter)--2004. Okay, that's Warren J. Strudwick, Sr. and Bette Catoe Strudwick...