 Story_ID: 610071 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Ma'am, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Yes. I'm [HistoryMaker] Frances Graves Carroll. That's Frances with an E, F-R-A-N-C-E-S; Graves, G-R-A-V-E-S, and Carroll is C-A-R-R-O-L-L. Speaker 1: All right. And what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: May 8, 1932, Chicago, Illinois. Speaker 1: All right. And ma'am, what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm retired, I am a retired educator. I was principal, a special education teacher, regular education teacher, college professor. Speaker 1: All right. And what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today is the 19th of, the 19th of February [February 19, 2008]. Speaker 1: All right. And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: At The HistoryMakers, 1900 South Michigan [Michigan Avenue, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 610072 Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that we always ask, and they only require a short answer. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: The first one is do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Not really. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Well what's that? Speaker 2: Pink and green (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Yes, I like summertime better than all the times--the seasons. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Yes, Cancun, Mexico. Speaker 1: All right. And the last question is do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Yeah. To God be the glory. Story_ID: 610073 Speaker 1: Now, I'm going to ask about your family history, and I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [James Graves] side. But we'll start with your mother's side first. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it? Speaker 2: Yes. Grace, G-R-A-C-E, Winstead, W-I-N-S-T-E-A-D [Grace Winstead Graves]. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Her date of birth is July 22, 1901, in Nashville, Tennessee. Speaker 1: Okay, Nashville. Now, what do you know about the ancestors on your mother's side? How far back can you trace them, and are there any stories associated with them? Speaker 2: Not much. My mother's mother died at thirty-three years of age from the flu, influenza, and her grandmother [Sylvia Davis] virtually raised her. My mom was thirteen years old when her mother died and she had two brothers--three brothers, I'm sorry. And I only had the opportunity to meet one of my uncles because she--her brothers, when they came from Nashville to Chicago [Illinois] they stopped in Indianapolis [Indiana]. And then they came, she came to Chicago with her oldest brother [Troy Winstead]. And the two younger brothers [Isadore Winstead and Frank Winstead (ph.)] were going to come and follow them, and they never could find them. Speaker 1: Really, they just never found them? Speaker 2: They never found them. They could never find out where they were. Speaker 1: Okay. So-- Speaker 2: And in those days, you know, telephones were not as plentiful, and they didn't have the telephone number where they were going to stay. They came to the Rosenwald building [Rosenwald Apartments; Michigan Boulevard Apartments] in Chicago and they tried to contact their two brothers, and they were never able to do that. Speaker 1: Do they suspect something happened to them? Speaker 2: No, they didn't. It's just that they lost them because they weren't able to--the communication system--they weren't able to locate them. Speaker 1: Okay. So how old was your mother when she came to Chicago? Speaker 2: She was in her twenties. Speaker 1: Okay. So, there's no information on your mother's side of the family about--there's no information that goes all the way back to the end of slavery or Reconstruction or any of that (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No. Her grandmother had been a slave, was just out of slavery. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Right. That's what she has told us. And my uncle was a great historian and he specifically identified with Marcus Garvey and Mahatma Gandhi; he identified with them. He had all the stories, and, but he did lots and lots of reading. But my mom had to help to raise her three brothers--because she was really the oldest, she was--at thirteen. And she, she finished the eighth grade and then she had to drop out of school to help raise her brothers. Story_ID: 610074 Speaker 1: Are there any stories that your [maternal] grandmother told about slavery? Speaker 2: I never met my grandmother. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Only what my mother told us; that it seemed that her grandmother [Sylvia Davis] was a very strong woman, and she gave her extremely good moral values. My mother liked, she liked Nashville [Tennessee] and Meharry College [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee]. She always talked about Meharry College, and dated some guys who were medical students before she came to Chicago [Illinois]. She had a cousin that, they ran together as they went to the events at Meharry. She wanted to be a music teacher, but because she was raising her brothers--and she brought them to Indianapolis [Indiana] and headed to Chicago. So, her one brother was Isadore [Isadore Winstead]. And they tried to trace them. They put ads in the paper, but they did not respond to that. So she looked for her brothers all her life, you know. So, too bad they didn't have the Internet you know, so that they could probably have done a greater job in trying to find them. Speaker 1: That sounds like such a shame that she couldn't, she could never reconnect with them. Speaker 2: No, never, but they talked about them all the time. Speaker 1: Okay. Your brothers' names were Isadore and--? Speaker 2: Isadore, and what was the other one's name? It was Isadore and Troy [Troy Winstead]. And the two, the younger brother, you know, I don't recall his name. Because I guess they talked about them until we, my sister and I--there're only two of us. We were about like five to ten years of age. And then my mom and uncle would talk about the brothers all the time. Frank [Frank Winstead (ph.)]--it was Isadore and Frank. They were named after, had Jewish names, because my grandmother worked for a Jewish family. In fact, my mother's name was, she changed her name to Grace [Grace Winstead Graves]. Her name was Albinda [ph.], which was after two Jewish, the two Jewish people that my grandmother had worked for. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And they named her Albinda. She did not like that name as a first name. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so she changed her name to Grace, after the movie star. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And my sister's name was Grace [Grace Graves Dawson], my twin sister; she named her Grace. Speaker 1: All right. So, you say you had an uncle who was a Garveyite? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Was this your--? Speaker 2: It was my mother's brother. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes. Those were the two who came to Chicago, right. Speaker 1: And what was his name? Speaker 2: Troy, that was Troy. Speaker 1: Troy, okay. Speaker 2: Right. Isadore and Frank were the two that were left in Indianapolis. Speaker 1: Okay. So Troy didn't get lost, but Isadore and Frank-- Speaker 2: Yeah, Troy came with her. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay, all right, okay, all right. Now, did your--so your mother, did she grow up around Meharry Medical College? Speaker 2: Yes. You know-- Speaker 1: In the neighborhood? Speaker 2: She lived really outside of Nashville in a place called Nolensville [Tennessee]. It's still there, and it's probably--it's a suburb now of Nashville. Because we've gone back to try to locate any roots, you know. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So when she came to Chicago, what did your mother do for a living when she got there? Speaker 2: When she came to Chicago I don't know how she located in the Rosenwald building [Rosenwald Apartments; Michigan Boulevard Apartments, Chicago, Illinois], which was a really lovely place. And she did housework for a Jewish family, and then she met my father [James Graves] about two years before we were born. I think that was about 1930. Story_ID: 610075 Speaker 1: Let me ask you about your father's side of the family. Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Thomas-- Speaker 1: Thomas. Speaker 2: James--I'm sorry, his name is James Booker; his brother was Thomas [Thomas Graves]. James Booker Graves [James Graves], G-R-A-V-E-S. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And he sometimes went by T.J., which was his brother's name. Speaker 1: Sometimes he went by his brother's name? Speaker 2: Yes (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, all right. (Laughter) Is there a reason for that? Speaker 2: Yes, because his brother was younger, and so it depended on which age he needed to be, he would take his brother's name. They all had the same names. They had five brothers, and when I say the same name, they had James in their names. Like Thomas James was T.J., my Uncle T.J. And then there was Booker [Booker Graves], and his name--my father's name was James Booker, but he had a brother named Booker. And so I laugh and say that they all had the same names. So, they interchanged. And I understand my Uncle T.J. would use my dad's name in Memphis [Tennessee] so he could be older. Speaker 1: That's interesting. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So, they interchanged the same-- Speaker 2: Interchanged the same name, right (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) three names back and forth? Speaker 2: Right. Well, he had a brother named Golie [Golden Graves], and that wasn't easy to change, G-O-L-I-E. And he had one by the name of Grant, G-R-A-N-T [Grant Graves]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And one sister. Speaker 1: All right. Now, what was your father's date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: He was born December 1, 1989 in-- Speaker 1: Eighteen eighty-nine [1889]? Speaker 2: I mean 1889 (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In York, Alabama. Speaker 1: York, Alabama. Now-- Speaker 2: That's right outside of Birmingham [Alabama]. Speaker 1: Okay, near Birmingham, all right. Story_ID: 610076 Speaker 1: What do you know about the ancestors on your father's [James Graves] side? Can you trace them back to slavery (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) A bit more, uh-huh, a bit more. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Right. My grandmother was a Creek Indian [Native American], and her name was Frances [Frances Graves]. And I don't know what her maiden name was. And her parents had been enslaved. And my grandfather was Riley Graves, R-I-L-E-Y, and that's my middle name. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He was a merchant, a barber, and owned a grocery store. Speaker 1: Okay. So, he was doing pretty well then? Speaker 2: Yeah, they had, he owned several houses. Speaker 1: And that's in Alabama, right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And he made moonshine (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He had a still. (Laughter) And then so the brother T.J. [Thomas Graves] owned the store, a grocery--a candy store it was. And they cut hair. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, they were entrepreneurs. Speaker 1: So, they sound like they were pretty important people in town [York, Alabama]. Speaker 2: Well, they kind of--there were a lot of them, a lot of Graves. And my grandfather was a very strong, brave man, you know, and so he would fight. And if the whites came to try to destroy his still, he would shoot at them. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But he--well, half the family passed as white. And Grant, my Uncle Grant [Grant Graves], cut Teddy Roosevelt's [President Theodore Roosevelt, Jr.] hair on the train. They were on the train, and they asked if there was any barber on the train. And my uncle said he was, and they took him to Teddy Roosevelt to cut his hair. And after that he had lots of children, and Roosevelt would send him, send the kids clothes. Speaker 1: Okay. Just because of that one incident? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Because of-- Speaker 2: So that was, you know, that was a family story. Speaker 1: Now, you say some of the, some of them passed for white? Speaker 2: Yeah, he did. Speaker 1: He did? Okay. Speaker 2: Blue eyes. Speaker 1: How did that work for the rest of the family? I mean did they disappear forever out of the family? Or did they come back and forth, or what? Speaker 2: No, they were back and forth. Only for their convenience did they pass for white. And I think he was probably passing for white on the train. Speaker 1: Oh, just situational? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, okay. So it wasn't a permanent thing? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: It depended on the situation? Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: If they could gain some advantage, then they would (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) If there was an advantage for them they would, right. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. That makes sense, all right. So that's how he ended up on the same train with Teddy Roosevelt? Speaker 2: Right. Story_ID: 610077 Speaker 1: So, your father [James Graves] then grew up in York [Alabama] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He she- he grew up in York and left York. He, he hated it, he hated the treatment. And so he said it took him twenty years to get out of, of York, Alabama. So he was not fond of going back, like a lot of people would go back. And we only went one time as children. Speaker 1: Okay. So did he leave at twenty years old, you say? Speaker 2: Yeah, in his twenties. Speaker 1: In his twenties. All right. Speaker 2: And he came to Chicago [Illinois] and got a job with the New York Central Railroad. Speaker 1: Okay. Now (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was a cook, a chef on the New York Central. He advanced to the 20th Century [20th Century Limited], which was the crack train then. Speaker 1: Now, is there a reason why he chose Chicago? Was Chicago a stop on the route, on the train route? Speaker 2: It probably was. I, I, don't know his reason for, you know, landing in Chicago rather than somewhere else. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We never talked about that. All I know--well, what happened was he and my mom [Grace Winstead Graves] got married. And the Depression [Great Depression] came, and he could not find a job at first. And in order for us to get any kind of nourishment, he had to leave home. And my mother went on welfare, ADC [AFDC], I think it was called, Aid to Dependent Children [Aid to Families with Dependent Children], but the father could not live in the home. So I think he took--I know he took a job in service. That means that he worked as a butler. And so that was his first job prior to going to work with the New York Central Railroad. I think that probably came a little later after, a little later after the Depression started getting better. Because the first month they said he worked in service. Because we would ask, you know, "Where's Dad?" And he had to live in. So, he would only come home on the weekends. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, he must have understood how to handle himself I guess in what they call polite society, if he was a butler (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, he did. He was a butler, he was a bartender, and he really--and then he was a chauffeur. He later became a chauffeur. In fact, when he retired from the railroad he got a chauffeur's license. But I remember the family, the Manning [ph.] family, and so obviously it was probably--it was the North Shore [Chicago, Illinois], probably one of the North Shore suburbs. And my dad was the only person on the block that owned a car. He always bought a Chevrolet, and would let us wash it on the weekends. Story_ID: 610078 Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your parents met, that they tell? Speaker 2: You know what? The only story that they always told, they were at a party. And my mother [Grace Winstead Graves] was a very attractive woman, and he said, "Hi, little girl, how are you?" And she had a very nice shape. And Dad [James Graves] was obviously a ladies' man, he knew how to talk to the women. And she had long hair. So, he talked to her, and that's how they met. Story_ID: 610079 Speaker 1: And then when they got married and had twins, the only kids, he dressed us up. He brought us clothes; he bought all of our dress clothes. Of course we were in church at Sunday school, and he would parade us around, his twins. And I can recall at about four years old having a red velvet snowsuit with the fur, the white fur collar. And he always liked to have for birthdays and Christmas very exotic things, you know, with the clothes. He liked to select our clothes, so we had very pretty dresses, and we wore the Shirley Temple curls. And he would take us to 47th Street [Chicago, Illinois] to Walgreens [Walgreens Company] to buy a soda so that everybody could meet his girls. Speaker 2: Now, is it just you and your twin [Grace Graves Dawson]? Speaker 1: Two of us, right. Speaker 2: Just the two of you? Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: No other brothers and sisters? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And he always said he was a doctor. They either called him Reverend or Doctor, Dr. Graves [James Graves]. Yeah, so that must have been his aspiration (laughter). Speaker 2: But he asked people to call him Reverend or Doctor? Speaker 1: Uh-huh. And he dressed, he wore a suit every day of his life. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Okay. Speaker 1: He even washed his car in a suit. Story_ID: 610080 Speaker 1: Now, where did you grow up? Speaker 2: At 36th [Street] and Wabash [Avenue]. Went to kindergarten with [HistoryMaker] Quincy Jones. Went to Raymond School [Benjamin W. Raymond Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: 32nd and Wabash? Speaker 2: 36th. Speaker 1: 36th, okay. Speaker 2: Yes, 3603 South Wabash, right down the street from Raymond School. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, do you have an earliest childhood memory, the first thing that you remember as a child? Speaker 2: Uh-huh, I can remember back to two years of age. Speaker 1: Is there a first memory that you know you have? Speaker 2: That seems to be the first. I don't remember when I was a baby. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (Laughter) I remember saying a speech at two years of age at church. Speaker 1: Do you remember your sister [Grace Graves Dawson] from way back when? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The two of us, right. Speaker 1: Most people don't have another baby to-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --interact with, so-- Speaker 2: Right, right. We were very, we were very close, best friends. And so we did everything together, always everything together. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Plus I remember her speech and my speech. Speaker 1: Okay. So, when you'd have a speech to do? Speaker 2: Yeah, it was an Easter speech, you know, right. Speaker 1: The kind they put on a slip of paper and give you to memorize? Speaker 2: Well, no, you know, you couldn't read, so you had to memorize it (laughter). So, but, obviously because we, you know, were in--and this was in York, Alabama; we went back to York, Alabama. And so, we were in the Sunday school, with our Sunday school. Mine was very short. My speech was, "Jesus wept." And hers was, "Christ died to save us all." So, but, evidently the people thought that was very nice and applauded, and probably had it embedded in our memory. But I do remember the first--you say first memory. Along with that memory--because, you know, I can still see myself on the stage--I remember the smell of the red clay in York, Alabama. And for years and years and years I loved that smell. Speaker 1: Now, I've heard that some people actually eat that. Speaker 2: Oh, we did, we ate it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And the bus--the exhaust--in Chicago [Illinois] before I guess before they changed the oil--the exhaust of the bus used to smell like the red clay. And I loved to smell the exhaust of the bus. Speaker 1: Now, is there a--was there a rationale behind eating red clay? Because I've heard that people eat it, and a lot of times pregnant women would crave it. Speaker 2: There probably is, but I--we didn't know about that part. All--we would eat, you know, the red dirt. We called it the red dirt because--in front of my [paternal] grandmother's [Frances Graves] house. And then I mentioned that my granddad [Riley Graves] owned a lot of houses. So, when we would go--we went down for--we were two when Dad [James Graves] took us down we stayed for like a year, and we lived in one of the houses. And right out front I can recall that the dirt--there was no grass right. So the clay was red. And I guess--I don't know whether I thought maybe it was just because we were kids that we were eating it. But I have talked to some of my cousins, and they said they ate it too. I guess--you know, I don't know whether they dared you to eat it or what, how--but not often (laughter). I didn't eat much of it, that's for sure. But I did like the smell of it. Story_ID: 610081 Speaker 1: So when you were little you said your father [James Graves] would take, took you down to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, he took me down once. Speaker 1: Once? Speaker 2: Once. Speaker 1: And you were what? About three? Speaker 2: Two or three. Speaker 1: Two or three years old? Speaker 2: Two years old. Speaker 1: Okay. And you spent a year in Alabama? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Was your mother [Grace Winstead Graves] there with you? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And your father, was he working for the railroad [New York Central Railroad] then? Speaker 2: No, no. And you know what? I think he left us there. I don't think he stayed with us. And that may have been like in '34 [1934], so it may have been during the really bad years of trying to find a job, or what. I don't recall him being there. I remember my mother cooking and making pies, and they sold pies. And I remember we had first cousins who were twins. And then I remember going to a funeral, and my mother wanting to get out of Alabama and get back to Chicago [Illinois]. And so he sent for us and we--she, she never went back. Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So obviously it was too country for her. Story_ID: 610082 Speaker 1: You were raised at 36th [Street] and Wabash [Avenue]? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: What were some of the sights, and sounds, and smells of the neighborhood? Speaker 2: Well, first, the, the neighborhood was very close. The people were close, so we had lots of friends on the block. And I often say that, you know, we never knew we were poor. We didn't--you know, you didn't associate with being poor. You always had a meal. People would come to our house to eat. And my mom [Grace Winstead Graves] was a great cook, so food--the foods--she could cook everything. And so, I imagine what I call a good cook is a person who can take neck bones, and chicken, and lean pieces of meat, and pork chops, and liver, and fish, and really make them taste good. You know, I say anybody can cook steak. I don't think we ever had steaks when we were growing up, though (laughter). I don't remember. And we would get the margarine and you would put the color in it. So, we got to take turns doing that. And the desserts--helping to make that. The, the--in front of our house it was concrete. But there were, there were like two story homes right next to it. We lived on the corner in a three story building, apartment building. But next to it was, there were about five houses before you got to the alley, and they had lovely green grass. And as I said, the family was very--the families were friendly. I think our family was the smallest. Everybody else had more children than my mom, and so they always thought we were privileged because we had fewer children in the family. Because they had like six--big families--six, seven and eight. And then across the street from us where we moved, to the 3600 building, it was known as the Cranford Building [Cranford Apartment Building, Chicago, Illinois]. And our building, the three story building, the landlord, the owner, lived on the first floor. We lived on the third floor, but we had coal heat; the house was heated with coal, a potbelly stove. And so my mom always wanted to have steam heat. So, across the street was the Cranford Building, and she moved across the street to a five bedroom apartment, but it had steam heat. And of course being--we were about eight or nine--being children, we liked where we lived. We had no problem with the cold, because we didn't have to feed the stove, right. But she moved into--she wanted steam heat and so we moved into--well, on the fifth floor of this building, because that was like the only apartment vacant, and she took the fifth floor. And she was a really great housekeeper, so she had to, had to really clean this apartment up, because it was really--the lady before wasn't a good housekeeper. And I remember my mom keeping us in all summer to clean that house. We could not go out to play, you know, because the stove was caked with stuff, and we had to clean it. So, I really learned how to clean. (Laughter) So, she painted. We painted, I learned how to paint. And I think they used casimi [ph.]. Casimi? It wasn't real paint. You'd stir it up and put the paint in the--stir it up with water. But she had a friend that was a decorator, and this was like a really inexpensive paint. You couldn't--well, when you washed it, it came off the wall. But it was, you know, the house would smell really clean. So, I can remember helping to paint. And as I mentioned, we went to Raymond School [Benjamin W. Raymond Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] and [HistoryMaker] Quincy Jones was in kindergarten and first grade with us. And Raymond School was at 3700 South Wabash, and we lived at 36th. So, he lived over on Prairie [Avenue], 34th [Street] and Prairie. But at the time the school must have been overcrowded, where they were and they sent those kids over to Raymond School. Story_ID: 610083 Speaker 1: Okay. You were talking about your neighbor, [HistoryMaker] Quincy Jones. Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And, well, neighbors Spencer Leak [HistoryMaker Spencer Leak, Sr.] and his brother. Speaker 2: Yeah, Spencer and Andrew [Andrew Leak]. Andrew was the oldest. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And Quincy, Quincy--in fact, I see some of our kindergarten colleagues every once and a while. But Quincy, when he performed here at--I have a photo, and maybe I can bring that. He autographed it twenty-five years. He performed at Golf Mill [ph.]. Do you know where that is? Right. And his mom [Sarah Wells Jones] would always be with him at that time. So, we went to renew old acquaintances. And he had forgotten he had gone to Raymond School [Benjamin W. Raymond Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois], and so I reminded him. And he used to chase me home in the hall (laughter). And he had real curly hair, and a lot of the kids didn't have curly hair at that time. He was just a very, very nice--he is still the same way. He was a very nice child, you know, young man. And so, we were really sad when they took them back. I think it was Douglas [Stephen A. Douglas Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] he went to when the school--you know, the boundary lines changed back and forth. And Raymond was never overcrowded because there were no houses at 38th [Street] and Wabash [Avenue]. Now they have those small little houses. That was a big vacant lot that we used to play on all the time, and play baseball and run and play. But, so, it was not an overcrowded neighborhood. Because the students--well, we took kids from Dearborn [Street] back all the way over to Prairie [Avenue]. And so some of our friends went to Progressive Baptist Church, which was located at 37th [Street] and LaSalle [Street]. And they came from, they came all the way over to Raymond School. Speaker 1: Now, did Quincy Jones exhibit any of the great musical talent that he was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) None, no, no. Not, I think until about the fourth grade. I understand about the fourth grade he started. People who went to school with him--it was Douglas, probably, at 32nd [Street] and Prairie or Calumet [Avenue]. Douglas, right? I think that's where he went to school. Some of the students' friends that we met said that, you know, he started exhibiting talent. But then his mom, they moved to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. So, that's when we lost track of Quincy until probably around eighteen years of age when his name started coming up, you know. And so we kept in touch with the student newspaper and hearing about what he was doing, and just followed him all of his life, you know. Because when you have someone that you know the name and that you have been friends with, it always sparks, sparks an interest. Story_ID: 610084 Speaker 1: Now, a lot of people, a lot of famous people grew up in that era in that neighborhood. Did--who were some of the others? Did you go to school with any of the other people that--? Speaker 2: No, Quincy [HistoryMaker Quincy Jones] was the only one that went to Raymond School [Benjamin W. Raymond Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] that we know about. There were a lot of people who have made good from Raymond and then went to DuSable [DuSable High School, Chicago, Illinois]. I went to Forrestville [Forrestville Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois]. I left Raymond School, let's see, in the fifth grade, because my mom [Grace Winstead Graves], we moved to 46th Street right off of King Drive [South Parkway; Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. Drive]. So, we went to Forrestville. We tried to remain at Raymond. And when I say we, I speak in plural, so me and my twin [Grace Graves Dawson]. And we, you know, commuted back and forth to Raymond School until the teacher said, "Why are you coming here when you can go to Forrestville?" So, we transferred in the sixth grade to Forrestville, which was the best thing we could have ever done. It gave us a whole new level of experience. And then we went to DuSable High School, where naturally they all had--they were in the band with Walter Dyett, and all, and Marion Beach [Marion Lett Beach]. All the great musicians came from DuSable. So, DuSable had such a proud heritage. Speaker 1: Now, Marion Beach, you mentioned-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: That's the same person who's known as Tumblewood Beach? Speaker 2: Well, that's her husband. Speaker 1: Her husband, okay. Speaker 2: Right, right, right. Roscoe--Marion's husband is Tumbleweed. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Roscoe--Roscoe was the music teacher. Speaker 1: Roscoe Beach is the-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Roscoe, Sr. [Roscoe Beach, Sr.], right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He was the--yeah, Marion Beach, I didn't know her until much later. I got to know her and her son [Roscoe Beach, Jr.], we were really good friends. Marion was a teacher in Dumas School [Alexandre Dumas Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois], and we were both special ed [special education] teachers. I was at Carnegie [Andrew Carnegie Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois], and we really got to know each other quite well. And she had gone to, she wasn't using her Indian [Native American] name then. And she's, she's a Creek Indian. And I didn't know that until-- Speaker 1: Okay, this is Marion "Tumblewood" Beach? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: As she was known in Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 2: And she went, moved back to Alabama, because the Creek Indians came from Alabama. And she, she, in fact, she passed in Alabama. Speaker 1: Okay, I didn't know she had passed. Speaker 2: Yeah, I did her funeral. She was an Alpha Kappa Alpha [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.] woman, and I did the Ivy Beyond the Wall [Ivy Beyond the Wall Ceremony] for her funeral. Speaker 1: Okay. And it was her, it was her (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Her husband. Speaker 1: Her husband was the musician? Speaker 2: Right, right, a great musician. Speaker 1: His name was Raymond-- Speaker 2: Roscoe. Speaker 1: Roscoe Beach? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Roscoe, Sr., because there's a Roscoe, Jr. Story_ID: 610085 Speaker 1: Now, when--did, did you have any favorite teachers in grade school, at Raymond [Benjamin W. Raymond Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] or at Forrestville [Forrestville Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Who were they? Speaker 2: Mrs. Lumbar, L-U-M-B-A-R, was like third grade or fourth grade. She taught--she was an African American woman, and she would give us lessons in life, just tell you about how to live and your aspirations. But my favorite teacher at Forrestville was a Mrs. Williams [ph.], who locked us in the room and didn't--you didn't go out to recess. You ate lunch in the room, because she said we needed all that time to learn. And they sold candy to the kids. One of the kids would go out and buy the candy. I guess we thought it was a long way, going to 71st [Street] and State Street to buy the candy. We could buy whatever we wanted in the room. This woman taught us everything. She taught us how to conjugate verbs, she taught us math. She was a superior teacher, and 90 percent of her students made the honor roll when we graduated from elementary school. And I, I got a double. You know, they had 7A and 7B, and 8B and 8A. I don't know if you're familiar with that. The B was the first half, and the A was the second half of a semester. It seems like it should have been the other way around. But, you could get a double. So, her class, all of her class, the principal double promoted us from the 7A class to the 8A class. So, we were like one semester in the eighth grade before we graduated. So, but she--and I went back from high school [DuSable High School, Chicago, Illinois] to tell her what a wonderful teacher she was. Of course at the time, we weren't aware of all that we were learning. And the reading and all--she had individualized reading. In those days they were doing individualized reading, and you changed seats according to how well you read. And so, the competition to read and be in the first row was really high. And she tested every Friday, and you changed seats according to the test scores (laughter). So, it was, it was a great incentive to be at the top of the list. So, she really instilled into us the pride of being first. So, there was a little group of us that juggled between the first seat and second seat, you know, the first row and second row. So, and it was friendly competition, you know. But now as I think back, I think about those kids who were in the sixth row all the time, you know. And so, I'm not so sure about how they felt. Speaker 1: But she was a good teacher? Speaker 2: Oh, she was excellent. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She was devoted, too. And there were like forty-eight students in the classroom. And she was just a disciplinarian. And you didn't dare, you didn't dare talk out of turn or get up without permission. She was a strong disciplinarian. Story_ID: 610086 Speaker 1: And were you always in the same class with your sister [Grace Graves Dawson]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes. Now, in some, some schools they separated twins. But we, at Raymond [Benjamin W. Raymond Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] and at Forrestville [Forrestville Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois], they never separated us. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Now, we were in different divisions when we went to high school [DuSable High School, Chicago, Illinois]. But we took classes, you know, and since you could choose classes, we took some of our classes together. And then we were in the band, which was at the end of the day. We were in the band together, and played clarinet in the concert band. We moved up to the concert band. Speaker 1: Now, was music a big part of growing up? Speaker 2: Yes, oh, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And if you really--we started music in kindergarten. And you talked about [HistoryMaker] Quincy Jones. Well, everybody took--well, it seemed like everybody--maybe they didn't. You had to pay twenty-five cents to take a piano lesson, and they brought it to the school. And my mom [Grace Winstead Graves] was always interested in music. And I mentioned a little earlier that she had always wanted to be a music teacher, and that's probably why we always took music. My sister and I, we took voice lessons and piano lessons. We never did learn to play that well, (laughter) but we took music all our life, clarinet lessons. Yeah. And then we played in the church band, sang in the choir. Story_ID: 610087 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now you were at Progressive-- Speaker 2: Baptist Church (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) Baptist Church [Progressive Baptist Church, Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: Right. It's that church that's right next to Comiskey Park [Chicago, Illinois], a large church that's right next to Comiskey Park. Speaker 1: Okay, now who was the pastor then? Speaker 2: The pastor now--it was T.E. Brown, who was a legend, was our pastor. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Thomas Emerson Brown. In fact, that church was moved. He was the first one that stood up to Daley [Richard J. Daley]. We built the church, we began building the church in the '50s [1950s]. And they discovered--you know how they give you a permit. And they discovered that it was in the middle of the Dan Ryan highway [Dan Ryan Expressway] that was going to come through. So, they offered us every place in Chicago [Illinois] to move to, and to buy the church for a million dollars, which was quite a lot of money back in the '50s [1950s]. And Reverend Brown refused to accept any money. He said he was going to stay in the neighborhood. He had built that church at 37th [Street] and LaSalle [Street], which was right next to a tavern called the Bucket of Blood, and he--the land was very sacred to him. So, they negotiated with the church, and I think we were really one of the first large buildings that was rolled across the highway. In fact, I was going to get married in the church, but they were still in controversy over what they were going to do. And they hadn't completed it, and it took them over a year to get--the engineers had to figure out to move the church. And they, it took them a solid year to roll that church. And now, they do it fast. Speaker 1: So, they actually lifted the church up and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They lifted the church up-- Speaker 1: And rolled it-- Speaker 2: --and rolled it across over to Wentworth [Avenue]. So, the side of the church is on the highway rather than the front of the church, because they couldn't turn it around. So, and it seats four thousand people. It's a phenomenal, a phenomenal thing that occurred. A lot of people don't know the history of that. But Reverend Brown was a Republican, because he was dedicated to Lincoln [President Abraham Lincoln] having freed the slaves. He was from Meridian, Mississippi. And so he--he had Judge Green [W.E. Green] and all the politicians--the Republican politicians used to come to our church and speak all the time. Also, he instilled--and I started at that church when I was five years old. And he instilled in the people to save at the bank. So, I had a bank account at Illinois Service Federal [Illinois Service Federal Savings and Loan Association, Chicago, Illinois] since I was fifteen years old. And--to buy a home. So, people were--and come to him before you bought it, and invest it. Because remember, during the Depression [Great Depression] in Chicago--you weren't born, but my mom [Grace Winstead Graves] had told me. And then we moved to 46th. During the Depression blacks owned their homes and lost them, and they were permitted to rent them back. And so we moved with a lady on 46th Place that had lost her home, and they were renting it back. And she needed--so she rented out the second floor to my mom so that she could get an income. But those homes are still there at 46th Place, and that area is really being developed. The Illinois Service Federal bank moved to 46th and King Drive [South Parkway; Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. Drive]. But, so, that's where we went to Forrestville Elementary School [Chicago, Illinois] from, 435 East 46th Place. Story_ID: 610088 Speaker 1: At DuSable [DuSable High School, Chicago, Illinois]. Now, you said you played the clarinet there and everything? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And in the band for three and a half years. Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Now that's, you were, you say you studied under the great Walter Dyett? Speaker 2: Walter Dyett was the bandmaster. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And he, he also was a mentor, he mentored the students. And when I went to college, I went to Roosevelt [Roosevelt College; Roosevelt University, Chicago, Illinois]. And when I was--I made sure I got on the student--I was elected to the student council. And I graduated in '54 [1954]. And Roosevelt was a relatively new school, having started up in about '45 [1945], and had moved to its present location probably in '47 [1947]. Because I think it started out as part of a community, the Y school community college [Central YMCA College, Chicago, Illinois]. They used to have a college called the Y community college. And, but, so we were new, and it didn't have a lot of traditions. And as a member of the student council at Roosevelt, I got on the prom committee. So, they had never had a real prom. So, I could get Walter Dyett to play for our prom. So his band, he had a big band sound, you know, his own band. Speaker 1: Okay, so he had his own big band (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so, he played for our prom. And after I graduated, he must have played another five or six years for the prom at Roosevelt. Story_ID: 610089 Speaker 1: Well, let me go back to high school, though. Now, what, when you were in high school, what were you interested in besides music? You and your sister [Grace Graves Dawson] were playing clarinet in band, but (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, we were academics, because we didn't take the business courses. We were academics, and wanted to, you know, we wanted to be teachers. Ever since I was five years old, I wanted to be a teacher and wanted to go to college. And, but, I tell the students now, it was interesting. I didn't know you had to pay to go to college. So, I wanted to go to the University of Illinois because I guess every--Marie Johnson [ph.] was in our class. And Marie, her father, I don't recall his first name. But he owned a shoe store on 46th [Street] and State Street. Well, no, it was about 48th [Street] and State Street. He was one of the chemical engineers to develop the atom bomb. Yeah. And we, you know, we never knew that until later. Speaker 1: Now, this is a black man? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Yeah, and he was-- Speaker 2: Oh, yes, he was at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But he owned the shop. He had three kids. And he, they were going to--she went, she was going to the University of Illinois. They all went to Navy Pier [University of Illinois at Navy Pier, Chicago, Illinois]. I thought they were going--I wanted to go away and live on campus. And some of the students from DuSable [DuSable High School, Chicago, Illinois] went down to Urbana [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois]. And, but, they started out at Navy Pier. Well, I didn't know about Navy Pier, that you could live at home and go. So, I presented my mom [Grace Winstead Graves] with I wanted to go to the University of Illinois. And she said, "And who's going to pay your way?" (Laughter) So, so, I guess it just had never dawned on me that you had to pay tuition, right? (Laughter) So, that was the end of that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And the counselors didn't, you know, didn't talk about scholarships. Speaker 1: They didn't really--? Speaker 2: No, they didn't really counsel us on it. They may have counseled some of the students, but I worked in the counselor's office, and I was totally unaware of scholarships. So, I ended up at Chicago Teachers College [Chicago State University, Chicago, Illinois]. Story_ID: 610090 Speaker 1: Did you know anything about the United Negro College Fund [UNCF] in those days (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, no, no, no, no. Speaker 1: And DuSable [DuSable High School, Chicago, Illinois]--now, that seems odd. Because DuSable's a black school, you know, and they only-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I'll tell you where the students all went. They went to the southern schools on band scholarships. And we were not, we were not--my mom [Grace Winstead Graves] wasn't letting us go out. So all the guys--Morris Ellis, James Ellis [Jimmy Ellis], Cecil Bogans [ph.], they all went to Florida A and M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical College for Negroes; Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida] or to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you were in school with Jimmy Ellis? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, he was my section leader (laughter). Yeah Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: And his brother had just graduated. And guess who else was in our, in the band. Well, [HistoryMaker] Harold Pates, did you know him? Speaker 1: Yes, right (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, he was-- Speaker 1: Yes, I know him well. Speaker 2: He was a section leader. Yes, oh, yes. And-- Speaker 1: Harold Pates. Speaker 2: But Cecil Bogans was a great drummer. You may not have known Cecil. Speaker 1: What's his last name? Speaker 2: Bogans, B-O-G-A-N-S. Speaker 1: Bogans, okay. Speaker 2: Yes. But he, he played, he had his own band for years. In fact, he played with Morris also for years. And who else was in that band? They had some great flutists in there. But Dyett [Walter Dyett] really--because we were honor students, you know, he didn't try to sidetrack you. He got band scholarships for all the guys. And there were about twenty girls in our band of a hundred and twenty. And if you were honor students he would get you go on, and go through the academic way. Story_ID: 610091 Speaker 1: Now, tell me now. What--I know when we interviewed [HistoryMaker] Harold Pates, and he talked a lot about the influence of the great entertainers that came through the Regal Theater [Chicago, Illinois]. Did you, did you go over to the Regal to see the shows (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yes. We lived around the corner from the Regal, and went every Saturday or Sunday (laughter) to the Regal Theater, yes, indeed. And you're absolutely right. I talk about how we were influenced with--you could go--I guess it was maybe five cents or ten cents or whatever, and you could go at ten o'clock in the morning for maybe half price. So we went to the ten o'clock Saturday shows, and you got the same thing. And the tap dancers, the singers, every one of them--Nat King Cole, Cab Calloway--so much. And Lena Horne, just any--all of the African American greats came through the Regal. Speaker 1: Okay, that's right there in the neighborhood. Speaker 2: Right. And the Savoy [Savoy Ballroom, Chicago, Illinois]--and I'm pointing to it (laughter). The Savoy was right next to it, and the Savoy had boxing and wrestling. And on Sunday we could go roller skating at the Savoy Ballroom. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then the South Center store was on the corner, and Neisner's ten cents store [Neisner Brothers, Inc.]. So, you could do all of your shopping; you could go to South Center. And Madame C.J. Walker's beauty college was up over one of those stores on King Drive [South Parkway; Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. Drive] and 47th Street. So we knew about Madam C.J. Walker, and you could get your hair done for about twenty-five cents. And so my mom [Grace Winstead Graves], she never knew how to straighten hair, so we went to Madam Walker every week (laughter) to get our hair done. Speaker 1: So, did you have like a different texture hair from your mother? Or-- Speaker 2: No, oh, no. It's just that she never--you know, most blacks know how to hot comb, you know. But she went to the beauty shop; she believed in the beauty shop. I think it was probably twenty-five cents. So my sister [Grace Graves Dawson] and I went to the beauty shop, you know. And then at the college, you were learning how to do hair, right. So of course they burned our hair out. (Laughter) But-- Speaker 1: That's pretty bad Speaker 2: Right. (Laughter) But then we got our own--she got a person, you know, who did hair in the house, you know. So, she had a person who knew how to do hair, and started doing our hair. Because we didn't like it really fried straight, and they'd just hot comb or warm comb it. So, but that was a part of, a part of our culture. Story_ID: 610092 Speaker 1: Now, is there anything, any neighborhood today in Chicago [Illinois] that resembles the neighborhood that you grew up in [Bronzeville, Chicago, Illinois], in terms of activity and--or is that something that's completely lost now? Speaker 2: You know, I'm sure that there are neighborhoods that are like that. Now, I live very close to where I grew up. I'm at 33rd [Street], but it's a totally different neighborhood, you know. But I am sure that--in fact, the West Side [Chicago, Illinois] has quite a few cultural experiences. Because now if I want my hair braided by someone that really--the way you like it--you have to go to the West Side to get it done. And there are very few people on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois] who can braid the hair and do the natural hairdos and all the fancy hairdos. They do it from their kitchen, really. And the only other place--I go to church at 53rd [Street] and Michigan [Avenue]. And when the kids lived in--what were those--Robert Taylor Homes [Chicago, Illinois]? They would get their hair done by somebody right there. Another teenager their age could do the same thing. So, the culture is still there; it's still being passed down. But it's in certain socioeconomic levels. So if I want my hair braided, I have to go to a place that I'm really not comfortable in. And so, you know, I just don't go, because that's--I've kind of moved away from that lifestyle. Speaker 1: So, you're saying that the middle class community just doesn't know how to do certain things that they used to know how to do (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right. So, you know, go pay a hundred dollars, a hundred and fifty dollars, to get your hair coiffed. And while the other folks, they pay ten dollars or do it themselves. (Laughter) So, they still have the talents and the skills, they're still there. I guess we're so busy going, working, you know. Because they wouldn't think of paying that kind of money for getting their hair done. Story_ID: 610093 Speaker 1: But the neighborhood you grew up in [Bronzeville, Chicago, Illinois], there were places to shop, and big shows were coming into town? Speaker 2: Right. And then, you know, the blacks owned the shoe shops. I went to the Louis--there was a theater right at 35th Street. In fact, they still have it, and they're trying to renovate it. That was the Louis Theatre at 35th and Indiana [Avenue]. It's, there's some, some--I think it's a body shop in there, but they still have the windows up. Ace Hardware at 35th, they preserved those places, 35th and Calumet [Avenue], I think it is. And then the Bee Building [Chicago Bee Building] on State Street [Chicago, Illinois]-- Speaker 1: Yeah, the Chicago Bee Building (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) All right. Well, right next to that was a fish market, and it was wholesale fish. And you could go down the alley where the railroad, where the "L" train [elevated train] is, and they would sell you fish. So we went, we bought our fish; we had to pick it out. And we would go from the time I was five years old and pick out our fish every Friday. And I guess it was five or ten cents a fish; they'd sell it to the neighbors. And the other thing they had, Webber Cleaners [ph.], W-E-B-B-E-R. There's one downtown now. But it was David Webber [ph.], and it must have been the wholesale cleaners. It must have been the plant there, because we could put our clothes in Webber Cleaners for little or nothing. But they had, they ran the naphtha that they cleaned the clothes with out of a pipe into the alley. At that time they just had--they would--the dirty cleaning fluid. It was naphtha, that's what we called it. Speaker 1: And it would just run into the alley? Speaker 2: It would just run into the alley. So, we would take our pails and get the naphtha that would come out of the pipe and clean our clothes, spot clean, you know. So you'd go up and get some naphtha and take it home, you know. So, that's how the people made it, I think. Speaker 1: They had different survival techniques. Speaker 2: Right. And the merchants didn't mind sharing. You know, they didn't try to keep you from getting it; they didn't mind sharing. And like the guys in the fish market--the other people came in from the State Street side, and we came in from the alley side. And they would say, "Pick a fish." And then you'd go over and they'd wrap it up in a piece of paper and you'd get the fish. Well, we bought silver bass. My mother [Grace Winstead Graves] liked silver bass, so we had to get a big bass every Friday. And that fish store stayed there for years. We moved out of the neighborhood and moved to 39th [Street] and Prairie [Avenue], across from Wendell Phillips [Wendell Phillips High School; Wendell Phillips Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois]. But we could go back, and that fish store stayed there. Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And there were houses up on top of it, apartments on top of the stores. Story_ID: 610094 Speaker 1: At DuSable High School [Chicago, Illinois]--now, were you and your sister identical twins? Speaker 2: Yes, we're identical twins (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Identical. Now, did you ever fool people? Speaker 2: They fooled themselves. We don't try to fool them (laughter). Speaker 1: So, you never tried to fool them deliberately (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, we really don't. And they just, they still cannot tell us apart. And Julieanna [Julieanna Richardson] met my sister at the funeral of my husband [Floyd Carroll]; I lost my husband in October. And she was talking to Grace [Grace Graves Dawson] and giving her words of condolence, because it was the same--my husband's funeral was the day after her father's [HistoryMaker Julius Richardson]. Because her father--my husband died on the day of her father's funeral was. And she came, and I was so surprised to see her after her grief. But she stopped and talked to my sister to give her words of condolence, and then she looked and saw that there were two of us. And she just said, "Oh, my God, oh, my God," (laughter). So, I thought she knew I had a twin, you know. But yes, we're still identical. Speaker 1: Are there any funny st- now, in high school, you know, you're dating and that sort of thing. I mean I guess, I don't know. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yes. I only went to the prom for her one time, because she had to work (laughter). Speaker 1: You went to the prom for her? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yes. Speaker 1: Now, did her date know it was not her? Speaker 2: No, he didn't find out until later. I think I told one friend, and I think they kind of dropped it. So he asked Grace, "Did you go to the prom with me?" (Laughter) And so she told him, "Well, it was Frances [HistoryMaker Frances Graves Carroll]." (Laughter) I kissed him goodnight and everything. He was very happy. Speaker 1: Now, did your sister tell you not to kiss him too good? Speaker 2: No, she didn't tell me. She knew that I wouldn't. (Laughter) I thought this friend knew us apart. We had grown up together, and I said, "Call me Grace." (Laughter) And so she said, "I wouldn't have known that you weren't Grace." You know, when we got to the prom, I said, "Call me Grace," you know. She said, "I thought you were Grace." (Laughter) So, but, she was the only one who knew. But maybe Grace slipped and told someone else, you know, because he finally found out. He went to church with us [at Progressive Baptist Church, Chicago, Illinois], and he finally found out that he had taken a different one. Speaker 1: Is there any way to tell you two apart? Speaker 2: We really, you can really tell us apart if you're smart (laughter). Now, what happens is that if you have been with one of us a long time, I think that you begin to know. My mom [Grace Winstead Graves] told us apart by our eyes. She said my face was a little fuller than my sister's, and it always has been. And, but, most people don't look at those differences. And if you look at the differences, you can kind of tell us apart if you can really find a distinction. They used to tell us apart by our rings, because Grace had a band and I had an engagement ring. Because she was married two years before I was. And now there are still some people who have to look at our rings to tell us apart. But they just get baffled, they just can't tell us apart. And then others can do it real easy. Story_ID: 610095 Speaker 1: Now, when, when you were a senior in high school, did you all decide to go to the same school together, or did you--at that point did you-- Speaker 2: We went to-- Speaker 1: --think you would split up? Speaker 2: Unh-uh, the same. We, we did everything together, except our doctorate. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So-- Speaker 2: I got my doctorate first, and she [Carroll's identical twin sister, Grace Graves Dawson] didn't want a doctorate, so she helped me. And then when I graduated, the board of education [Illinois State Board of Education] had a partnership with Southern Illinois University [Carbondale, Illinois]. Like I graduated in June, and in August they developed a partnership. That was in 1980. Speaker 1: Now, I don't want to get too far ahead-- Speaker 2: Okay, go ahead (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) of the story, now. Speaker 2: Go ahead, all right (laughter). Speaker 1: We were trying to get you out of DuSable [DuSable High School, Chicago, Illinois]-- Speaker 2: I'm still at DuSable. Speaker 1: --and into college, yeah. Speaker 2: Let me get back to DuSable. Speaker 1: Yeah, so you're a senior at DuSable? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: And your grades are good, I take it? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: And you're trying to choose a college. And you end up going to Roosevelt [Roosevelt College; Roosevelt University, Chicago, Illinois], right? Speaker 2: No, not at first. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know how when you're a senior you go around to a lot of colleges, or the colleges come out to recruit. And we went to Roosevelt and took the exam for a scholarship, and didn't get the scholarship. We received a letter that we could come to Roosevelt any time. But we didn't, you know, they could not offer us a scholarship. But-- Speaker 1: Now this is what, 1950 (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Fifty-four [1954]. Speaker 1: I'm sorry. Speaker 2: Oh, '50 [1950], '50 [1950], right. Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty [1950]. Speaker 1: So you graduated from DuSable in '50 [1950]? Speaker 2: From DuSable in '50 [1950], right, January of '50 [1950]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They had two graduations. And probably in '49 [1949], we took the exam. Roosevelt was just coming on the scene, and we really liked the way they presented themselves to us. So, I guess one of the instructors or counselors said, "Go on and take the test." So we took the test, hoping to get a scholarship from Roosevelt, not having, not having any knowledge about what Roosevelt was about, however. Story_ID: 610096 Speaker 1: I'm thinking about one of the most famous Roosevelt [Roosevelt College; Roosevelt University, Chicago, Illinois] alumnus. Speaker 2: Who, St. Clair Drake (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Harold Washington. Speaker 2: Harold, yeah. Speaker 1: Well, did you grow up-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --with him? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: He would be older than you. Speaker 2: No, I didn't know him at all at that time. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: Okay, right. Speaker 1: Or [HistoryMaker] Gus Savage I know also-- Speaker 2: Gus was my alderman. So we didn't know him at that time, no. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Well, he was, had the newspaper [Citizen], right? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Right. And so we knew the name, right. But not, you know, not any kind of personal involvement, even though I was very political and involved in the political movement very early in life. From the time we were five or six years old, our precinct captain used to take us to the political rallies, Democratic rallies at the Savoy Ballroom [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you remember William Dawson [William L. Dawson], I guess? Speaker 2: Yes. William Dawson was right there in our--he was our--what was he, alderman? Alderman, I guess. Speaker 1: Yeah, I think he-- Speaker 2: Because we lived in the 2nd District, and he was the alderman of our district-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --at 36th [Street] and Wabash [Avenue] and 39th Street, right. Speaker 1: Now, he took--now before that, he was the first Democrat--and as you were saying before, your pastor [T.E. Brown] was a Republican. And, you know, Oscar De Priest [Oscar Stanton De Priest] was a Republican. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And some of the other (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. All of those people came over to Progressive [Progressive Baptist Church, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: People like A.A. "Sammy" Rayner and other people-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --were Republicans. Speaker 2: Right. A.A. Rayner and Leak [Andrew Leak, Sr.], they were our morticians who took care of everybody that died at Progressive, right. Speaker 1: Right. So-- Speaker 2: But we were Democrats, you know. Speaker 1: Yeah. So the change--do you remember when black people basically changed their focus from Republican to Democrat, and why? Speaker 2: You know, I really don't remember a movement. I do know that Roosevelt [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt] had become president, and that's why my mother [Grace Winstead Graves] was a Democrat. And I think a lot of people who had remained in the South and who had just come up were Republican. Because my church was basically Republican, but most of those people were from Greenville, Mississippi. A lot of them were from Mississippi, so they were Republicans. But all on our block, we were all Democrats. Because the precinct captain lived on 36th Street. It was like, that's a part of the culture. The people lived right in the neighborhood with you. You know, the barbers, the beauticians, the grocery man; everybody lived together. But Mr. Tibbs [ph.] had gone to Howard University [Washington, D.C.], and he was the precinct captain. And he was a very intelligent man, and would go around and talk to the people. And I think he must have been a motivator, because all of the kids on the block--and remember, I said there were quite a few--all talked about higher ed [higher education]. Well, we didn't call it higher ed at that time, but we talked about going to college. And he--in fact, I probably would--my life probably would have been different if he had lived. But Mr. Tibbs died when we were about, just getting ready to graduate from elementary school [Forrestville Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois]. Because even when we moved to 46th Street, he kept in touch with us. They had no children, and my sister [Grace Graves Dawson] and I, they kind of like adopted us as their children. And so, we would go the Democratic rallies at the Savoy Ballroom. I guess at that time they wanted to bring people. My mother was a house person, she didn't go anywhere. And so, but she let us go. So we would dance at the Savoy at the Democratic rallies. We would dance on stage, and we made up our own dance. Speaker 1: Dance on the stage? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. (Laughter) We were part of the entertainment. Speaker 1: Really? For the Democratic (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, we did a little crazy dance called the slue foot, knock kneed dance, my sister and I, you know (laughter). Speaker 1: So you and your sister? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So, this was an act, basically? Speaker 2: Right, we put on an act, right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Right, right. You're right, it was an act. I never thought about that as an act, but it was. Because we did--I knock--I was knock kneed and she was slue foot. (Laughter) They'd play the music, and we'd dance. Story_ID: 610097 Speaker 1: I forgot that Dr. Pates [HistoryMaker Harold Pates] had a, had his own band in those days (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yes, right. Speaker 1: And there were other, quite a few members of that DuSable High School [Chicago, Illinois] that had, had their own band. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Jimmy Ellis. Speaker 2: Right. And I don't know if you ever met Dequers, Robert Dequers [ph.], they all played with, with Harold. In fact, Robert is a deacon at my church now. And we were in the same division together. So, there was a really great cohesiveness with the--from the teachers. B.B. Bibb [ph.] was our teacher, I don't know whether you know her. She's a psychologist now; well, retired. But she must have been twenty-one years old at the time when she came back to, came to, she was at DuSable as our chemistry teacher. And so, there was a cohesiveness. Now, her daddy was Dr. Bibbs [ph.]. And there were the chemistry teachers. One was-- you know, if a teacher was--you couldn't work in the same school. So, if it was a husband and wife team, one would work at Wendell Phillips [Wendell Phillips High School; Wendell Phillips Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] and one would work at DuSable. And what we didn't know was that most of those teachers were substitute teachers, because they could not pass the exam, or they would not allow them to pass the exam to become certified. And we didn't find that out until after we left, and they started transferring them around to other schools. Speaker 1: So the, the black teachers at DuSable, you're saying were, couldn't get full time teacher status (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right, they were not certified. Story_ID: 610098 Speaker 1: Now, DuSable [DuSable High School, Chicago, Illinois] was, I guess--that, was that the first intentionally black high school in the city? Speaker 2: I think so, right. When they moved from Phillips [Wendell Phillips High School; Wendell Phillips Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] it was supposed (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Because Phillips was the original-- Speaker 2: Right, right, originally-- Speaker 1: --black high school in some ways, yeah. Speaker 2: It, it--well, it became a black high school, because that community originally was not African American. Speaker 1: Yes, ma'am. Speaker 2: But DuSable really was the first black school built for blacks, you're absolutely right. I think it was maybe, oh, in '33 [1933] or '32 [1932]. Because I remember Tim Black [HistoryMaker Timuel Black] talking about walking from Phillips to DuSable. Speaker 1: Yeah, I think the story is--and correct me if I'm wrong--DuSable was supposed to be the new Phillips at first. Speaker 2: Right, it was, right. Speaker 1: Because it was a fire or something like that. Speaker 2: They even took the colors and everything. Speaker 1: Yeah, there was a fire at the old Phillips. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: And they moved, and then they stayed there and kept it open. And they--and DuSable took the Wendell Phillips colors and wouldn't give them back. Yes, and so, Wendell Phillips had to choose--I think they're blue and white. Because we're black and red. I think they had to choose new colors when they reopened. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And Reggie Brown [Reginald V. Brown, Jr.], I don't know whether you knew Reggie. He was the superintendent in one of the districts. He was in our class, and there were about five or six brothers. And they all were in sports--basketball and football. And, but then the ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps]. So, DuSable became great. And Nat King Cole and all of the--many of the great musicians went to DuSable, because DuSable took in from 47th Street to 58th Street. And the blacks were moving up to move further south, and had really nice apartments. Not a lot of homes, but apartments, a lot of large apartment buildings. And so, they lived there. And so, DuSable always felt itself snobbish. Because it was only Phillips and DuSable. Englewood [Englewood High School, Chicago, Illinois] and Hyde Park [Hyde Park High School; Hyde Park Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] came in later. Speaker 1: Okay. There were a few blacks who went to Englewood and Hyde Park (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right. Speaker 1: But-- Speaker 2: Not a lot, right. Speaker 1: Not a lot. Speaker 2: So, DuSable was really, (unclear) it was well known for its music. The football wasn't so good, but the ROTC and the academics were great. Story_ID: 610099 Speaker 1: So, here we are once again at the verge of graduation [from DuSable High School, Chicago, Illinois]. Now, what, what was your favorite course of study in school? Did you have a favorite (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. The languages, and math, and English. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I took French and Spanish. Speaker 1: Okay. So did you, so did you go right to Roosevelt [Roosevelt College; Roosevelt University, Chicago, Illinois] after you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I was getting ready to say that we, you know, we looked at the various colleges. And we had taken the exam to get a scholarship, but Roosevelt didn't give it, so that was out for us, and because of the tuition. And so we went to Teachers College [Chicago Teachers College; Chicago State University, Chicago, Illinois], and we passed the test. You had the Teachers College, and you had to take a written, a physical, and an oral to get in. Speaker 1: Now, was Teachers College still out on 95th Street? Speaker 2: No, it was at 68th [Street] and Stewart [Avenue]. Speaker 1: 68th and Stewart. Speaker 2: Chicago Teachers College and Wilson Junior College [Woodrow Wilson Junior College; Kennedy-King College, Chicago, Illinois] shared the same campus, remember. And so Chicago Teachers College--in fact, there were only eleven blacks in the whole freshman class. So, naturally Chicago Teachers College was one of the top colleges. And so my counselor said, "Well, why don't you take the test for Chicago Teachers College?" And so we took the test and passed it, except we graduated in January. And you could not go to Chicago Teachers College until September unless you were majoring in P.E. [physical education]. And we always wanted to be kindergarten primary teachers, so that was my major. And so we had to wait until September, so we went to Wilson Junior College for a year, a semester. And I think it was twenty dollars. The Chicago Teachers College was about twenty dollars for tuition. And so, we could afford that. (Laughter) The books cost about twenty dollars, you know, or fifty dollars or whatever; they were very cheap. So, we went to Chicago Teachers College for two years. And it was kind of racist, you know. There was one, one black in the class, and never more than two. And we had been accustomed to being honor students, and no matter how hard you worked you'd get a B. And we didn't like that. So my mom [Grace Winstead Graves] said, "Well, you just keep complaining." And the professors would tell us that B was a good grade. And then some of our white students who hadn't worked nearly as hard--if you got 95 you got a B, you know. And 95 was supposed to be an A. So, and then, you know, you never saw the final grade, of course. Story_ID: 610100 Speaker 1: Mom [Grace Winstead Graves] said, "Well, why don't you try Roosevelt [Roosevelt College; Roosevelt University, Chicago, Illinois]?" At that time we were a little bit more able, and tuition was thirteen dollars a semester hour. So, they had a break. We had a winter break, and we took the letter--we never threw away anything. We took the letter down to Roosevelt, and they admitted me the same day. I took my grades, and so if we didn't get admitted we could go right on back to Teachers College [Chicago Teachers College; Chicago State University, Chicago, Illinois] (laughter) in February or whenever school started. And so Roosevelt started earlier, and so we got registered to make sure it was a real registration, and started at Roosevelt. And my life was different from that day on. Speaker 2: So this about 1950? Speaker 1: Nineteen fifty-two [1952]. Speaker 2: Two [1952]. Okay, okay. Speaker 1: And life, it was a whole different world of freedom--the liberalism, the acceptance. And they had Lorenzo Turner [Lorenzo Dow Turner]. I don't know if you ever heard of Dr. Lorenzo Turner. And he brought African students into Roosevelt from Nigeria. Every year he would to Ghana or Nigeria and bring students back. And to my knowledge, that was the first university--I know we didn't have him at Chicago Teachers College. And he lived at 39th [Street] and Ellis [Avenue] in a big old house. And he would invite his classes over to meet and to discuss with the African students. And we would take them to our church [Progressive Baptist Church, Chicago, Illinois], and the music was so--after studying the African culture--studying it--you could not tell the difference between the African music and the music at the Baptist church. And so it was very, very interesting. And then my mom would invite them to dinner, and we would have African and Asian students. Speaker 2: Now, can, do you remember the names of some of the students that-- Speaker 1: Well, Atunde Adakawa [ph.], I remember that name; Atunde I can remember. And there was a Joe Williams [ph.], but he was from Liberia. So, they spoke English, you know. Now, all of the students spoke English because they had to speak English to come here. But there was maybe five or six. Some we stayed closer friends with. Atunde was really, in fact he--when I got married he was, he was at the wedding. I stayed with him and met his wife. He's dead now. Because he went back to Africa. But there were many, at least twenty that we interacted with. And then Dr. Turner died. When Dr. Turner died, in maybe the '80s [1980s], we kind of lost that relationship. But by that time, the world was going international. We moved to 60th [Street] and Blackstone [Avenue], across the street from the International House at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois]. And so then we would have African Americans, Africans, Asians, and Indians for Thanksgiving dinner and Christmas dinner. Remember, I said my mom was a good cook. Speaker 2: Okay. So, when you say you moved, was that you and your sister [Grace Graves Dawson], or-- Speaker 1: Me and my sister and my mother. Speaker 2: And your mother, okay. Speaker 1: We bought our mother a house when we graduated from college at twenty-one. We bought her a house at 60th and Blackstone. Speaker 2: Okay. So you maintained these--now this is interesting in this time period, and important too, that Dr. Turner was trying to, you know, bring together the-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --African students and the black students. Speaker 1: He, he did. And, you know, of course we didn't understand the significance of it. It was just that you loved your professor. St. Clair Drake was there. And Turner, and Rice [ph.], he's still there. He may have just retired now, but he was an historian at Roosevelt. And the president of Roosevelt, Sparling [Edward Sparling], was exceptional, and he would come and talk to the students. Now, presidents do that now. But to have the president--we never saw the president at Chicago Teachers College. But Dr. Sparling would come into the cafeteria, which was on the first floor of Roosevelt and talk to us. He would come up to the lounge and ask how you're doing. And so, as a result of that kind of interest and relationship, the first society that was formed within the alumni was the Sparling society, and you had to pay a hundred dollars, which was a lot of money in '54 [1954] to belong to the Sparling society. We're charter members of the Sparling society. Our names are now on, have been all the time, in the student lounge on the wall for the Sparling society. Story_ID: 610101 Speaker 1: At Roosevelt [Roosevelt College; Roosevelt University, Chicago, Illinois] we were very active. Had a, my sister [Grace Graves Dawson] had a political science teacher, and Stevenson was running. And-- Speaker 2: Adlai Stevenson, right (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes. And so she would be riding on the back of the car with the loudspeaker saying "Vote for Stevenson." (Laughter) So, I guess we've just been active in the political movement all of our lives. But, so she was--and whatever one of us did, the other profited from it. Because her, her political science teacher was so active. Dale [Dale Pontius], I don't--I'm slipping his name, but he was very popular and was being active and very liberal in the political movement. Speaker 2: His last name was Gale? Speaker 1: No, Dale. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Dale, and I'll think of his last name. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: He had an odd last name. He, he was, just--solicit the te- the students to go with him. Story_ID: 610102 Speaker 1: At Roosevelt [Roosevelt College; Roosevelt University, Chicago, Illinois], when I said it was a whole total new experience--the clubs at Roosevelt, you know, the clubs downtown that we used to couldn't go into--the Union League Club [Union League Club of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], the Chicago Athletic club [Chicago Athletic Association, Chicago, Illinois], and the University Club [University Club of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois]. Those are private clubs. Roosevelt had activities at those clubs all the time, it would be some kind of lecture. And because we were Roosevelt students, we were allowed to go into those clubs when they weren't even admitting blacks then. They wouldn't let them come into the building. They would--if you were delivering something, they would take it. But as a Roosevelt student, we were able to go to--we went to those clubs during the day for a lot of activities. Speaker 2: So it provided access to venues that you had never (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right. Right. Speaker 2: --that you'd been barred from before, basically. Speaker 1: That's right. Plus, the Art Institute [Art Institute of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], you had--everybody had to take art culture at Roosevelt. And we--our classroom was the Art Institute. So, we would go there then. And the Symphony Orchestra [Chicago Symphony Orchestra], we had to go there for your music. And then Roosevelt had the Heller School of Music [sic. Chicago Musical College; Chicago College of Performing Arts, Chicago, Illinois] that was outstanding, you know, still today. Speaker 2: Now, who were some of the lecturers that you heard in those days? Was--did-- Speaker 1: I told you St. Clair Drake--we would go--I wasn't ever in his class, but I would go to his lectures. Hamilton, Charles Hamilton-- Speaker 2: Charles V. Hamilton, right? Speaker 1: Yes. Yeah, you're right-- Speaker 2: He's the author of the book I think everybody had at one time, 'Black Power' ['Black Power: The Politics of Liberation in America'] Speaker 1: Black--right, right. Speaker 2: By Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture] and Charles V. Hamilton. Story_ID: 610103 Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Clark Burrus was in my class. He w- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Clark Burrus, right. Speaker 1: Yes. You have probably have done an interview with him. I think he was the president of the student council when I was on the student council; I was secretary. And, you know, later he became comptroller of the city, wasn't it? Speaker 2: Yes, the comptroller of the city. Speaker 1: And, you know, being involved in--I don't whether you remember Jess Gill [ph.]. Jess Gill, he was the president of the alumni for a while. And Vernon Skalar [ph.], yeah. And there were several Jewish lecturers. Because you just, it was like being brothers and sisters. We were invited to the fellow students' weddings. Roosevelt [Roosevelt College; Roosevelt University, Chicago, Illinois], I guess at the time, was pushing liberalism and brotherhood. And so all of the students, since you went by choice, if you didn't like it, you didn't go. And so, there was a very liberal atmosphere and situation there. Keith Caldwell, who married Barbara Caldwell, her dad was a congressman, and he was there at Roosevelt with us. Murrell Duster [sic. Murrell Higgins Duster] of the Duster family, we were all classmates. Speaker 2: They were related to Ida B. Wells. Speaker 1: Ida B. Wells, right. The grandmother is Ben's [Benjamin C. Duster III] grandmother I think. And well, she hadn't gotten married at that time; she was Higgins, you know. And [HistoryMaker] Ora Higgins was I think the first personnel director of Spiegel [Spiegel Inc.]. And so-- Speaker 2: Right, that's right (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right. And so, you always had--you always had someone to look up to. And Murrell was just down to earth, even though her mom, everybody knew her mom at Spiegel, or knew of her mom at Spiegel. Because they lived at 42nd [Street] and Prairie [Avenue]. We moved to 39th [Street] and Prairie and, you know, still today we're very, very, dear friends. Story_ID: 610104 Speaker 1: Senior year they had a class called backgrounds for if you were paying for education. And that was an eight hour workshop where, you know, it was like an internship. And Roosevelt [Roosevelt College; Roosevelt University, Chicago, Illinois]--the Chicago Teachers College [Chicago State University, Chicago, Illinois] at the time was the only--the Chicago Teachers College graduates did not have to take the exam to become a certified teacher. They were the only school whose graduates did not have to take the exam. Roosevelt students had to take the exam, and all the other colleges, right. So Roosevelt brought a lawsuit against the board of education [Illinois State Board of Education], because it was discriminatory that one school didn't have to take the exam, and the Roosevelt students were passing the exam like at 98 percent. So, when I graduated, we had to take the exam. But the next year we won the case, and so they didn't let everybody pass. What they did was made the Chicago Teachers College students take the exam. Story_ID: 610105 Speaker 1: Okay. So we were talking about the Roosevelt University [Roosevelt College; Roosevelt University, Chicago, Illinois] years. So when did you graduate from Roosevelt? Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty-four [1954], January. Speaker 1: Okay, '54 [1954]. And you had a degree in? Speaker 2: Early childhood education (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Early childhood education? Speaker 2: A B.A. in early childhood education. Speaker 1: And you passed your test? Speaker 2: Yes. (Laughter) Yes, yes. Speaker 1: Where was your first job? Speaker 2: My first assignment was at the Willard School [Frances E. Willard School, Chicago, Illinois] at 49th [Street] and St. Lawrence [Avenue]. Speaker 1: Okay, Willard School. Speaker 2: It's torn down now (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And what did you teach there? Speaker 2: First grade. I wanted kindergarten. I did start out as a substitute in kindergarten for half a year, like from September to December. Then I received an assignment, and was assigned to a first grade classroom because they had veteran teachers, kindergarten was a really hard grade to get. Speaker 1: Okay. So this is 1954? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And now did your sister [Grace Graves Dawson] get an assignment too, the same year? Speaker 2: Yeah, she graduated and she went to Parkman School [Francis Parkman Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois]. She went to Betsy Ross [Betsy Ross Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] first, and then to the Parkman School. And she taught--she had upper grade, I think, seventh grade. Charles Mingo was her student. He was the principal of DuSable [DuSable High School, Chicago, Illinois] for years and years (laughter). He used to bring her gifts every day, you know, because here we were twenty-one looking like eighteen, you know how the kids think (laughter). Speaker 1: Oh yeah, popular with the young fellows (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, right. (Laughter) So, yeah, so that's what we did all of our lives. That's what--we just loved teaching and mentoring, you know. And I taught at the college level and always had two jobs--the college level--teaching, and coordinators, and principals. Speaker 1: Okay. So. So, well, tell us about teaching first grade. Speaker 2: Oh, I loved--that's my love, teaching first grade kids. Because they come in--at that time--now they, in kindergarten, you know, they do a lot of academic teaching. But at that time the kindergarten got the kids ready for first grade, and then you taught them how to read. And so, to have kids come into your classroom not knowing how to read, and at the end of the year knowing how to read, that always was for me a great boost and a great motivator. So I always wanted my class to be the top, the best. So we worked real hard to do a lot of things so that they would be exposed. I had science fairs and art fairs. Everything that the upper grades did, we did it in the first grade. And I invited the parents, and every child in the classroom would have a chemical experience--experiment. And if we--for the science fair. Because at that time, the primary grades did not participate in the science fair. So, I would have a science fair. Story_ID: 610106 Speaker 1: And I accredited that to, to the encouragement received from Roosevelt [Roosevelt College; Roosevelt University, Chicago, Illinois]. Because I had Frances Horwich, also I didn't mention, Frances Horwich. She had 'Ding Dong School' on television (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes. Speaker 1: She was my teacher in education. And then-- Speaker 2: Right, that was a syndicated television show. Well, I think it was on the network for a while, yeah. Speaker 1: Yes, yes, for years, right. Speaker 2: 'Ding Dong School,' right. Speaker 1: And she finally had to leave teaching, because I guess it became so involved that she devoted all of her--at first she would just do her shows and continue to teach. And then she finally left Roosevelt to do that. Speaker 2: Now, what was her--how do you spell her name again? Speaker 1: H-O-R-W-I-C-H, if that--I think that's pretty close. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And her first name was Frances. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: I never did forget that. Speaker 2: I think the children knew her as Miss Frances. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: On-- Speaker 1: On 'Ding Dong School,' right. Speaker 2: Yeah, for 'Ding Dong School,' right. Now, she had a technique, right, that she developed, or a certain way of dealing with-- Speaker 1: With young children. Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And, you know, I just know how she dealt with us. She was such a good professor. With the 'Ding Dong School,' I think she brought out the creativity in the children. And she preceded Mr. Rogers [Fred Rogers], yeah. And so she did some of the same things, with having the kids talk about themselves and talk about what they liked to do, and then be creative in art and drawing and painting. So, I did a lot of finger--I adopted a lot of her techniques. And we did a lot of finger painting and artwork in the classroom in first grade. And the kids just loved that cutting and pasting--creative arts, you know, walking in the paint with their feet. So I had to get my parents to kind of like that, so we had a little basin of water and we'd clean up afterwards (laughter). Story_ID: 610107 Speaker 1: Like for Dr. Turner [Lorenzo Dow Turner] having been at Roosevelt [Roosevelt College; Roosevelt University, Chicago, Illinois], I always welcomed in nations. In the zoology, I had everything in the classroom from African mice to parakeets to chickens. So, there was all of those creative things that they did at Roosevelt to sort of encourage you to let the kids experiment. So my classroom--and the principals never stopped me. The kids took care of all the animals in the classroom, and we kept them very clean. And they, they loved coming to school. And one thing--and I'm just thinking about this really now--is you remember I told you about that elementary teacher that kept us in all day and we didn't go out to recess? You could go to the bathroom anytime you wanted to, but you didn't go out to the ten minute recess. My kids never had to go out to recess. The parents loved me, because all during the winter they never had to go outside and they would stay inside. We'd have cookies and peanut butter sandwiches or whatever, and they could play a game for the recess period. Well, when spring came, I let the kids go out. They thought it was time for dismissal, right? (Laughter) Some of them went home (laughter). So-- Speaker 2: They didn't come back. Speaker 1: Right. So, the parents had to bring them back, you know. (Laughter) Then I had to explain to them that it was recess, and now we were changing the routine. But it just dawned on me that I probably developed that; that you didn't have to go outside when it was cold. And so the parents loved it, because the kids didn't catch as many colds. So, and then even as long as I was in the classroom, the students could come in. I would let them come into the classroom when they got to school. I always got to school really early, and they didn't have to wait out in line. I always thought that that was the one thing that the public schools did that the private schools didn't do, you know, the kids didn't have to stay outside. So, I always let mine in. Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I had understanding principals, as long as I was willing to stay in the classroom with them. So I always got superior ratings, you know (laughter). So I was unusual, so I got superior ratings all the time. Story_ID: 610108 Speaker 1: Now at this point, you, you hadn't really gotten into--you weren't teaching special education at this point, right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, no. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I didn't start teaching special ed until I got my master's [degree] in '61 [1961]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I went from--when I graduated, we took one class a semester. I never stopped going to school; I always went to school and had the master's degree. There was no rush. I was the first one in the school with a master's degree. And then the only--I went and got my master's from Chicago Teachers College [Chicago State University, Chicago, Illinois], and they had only four choices, and special education was one of them. And the others, one was math, industrial arts, and something else that didn't interest me. So, I took my degree in the educable mentally handicapped. And so naturally once I took the degree and graduated, then a class became available and the principal asked me to take the special ed class. And so, that's the best thing that could have ever happened to me. The mental measurements of psychology and all the background in special ed--every job that I have gotten since then was based on my special education training. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what was the lay of the land then, in terms of special education? I remember being in school and, you know, most of the classes were stratified. There was a top group, a middle group-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and then a lower level group. And then there was special education, which was completely different. And-- Speaker 2: Well, would you believe I didn't know anything about special education? (Laughter) Because like you said, the room was probably hidden somewhere in the school, and I just was--in fact, I don't even know where the special ed classroom was at Willard [Frances E. Willard School, Chicago, Illinois]. And I graduated. I transferred from Willard to the Carnegie School [Andrew Carnegie Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois], which was a new school at 60th [sic.] and Blackstone [Avenue]; Dorchester [Avenue], really. They actually built that school for the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] students, but nobody would come across the Midway [Midway Plaisance] to go there. Remember, I said I bought our parents a home at 60th--my mom [Grace Winstead Graves], really--at 60th and Dorchester. Blackstone; it was really 60th Place. And the Carnegie School was half a block from there. Speaker 1: So it was a half block going--? Speaker 2: South. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: 61st Street. So, I transferred to Carnegie. Story_ID: 610109 Speaker 1: So that's like the un- invisible boundary, I guess-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --between Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois] and Woodlawn [Chicago, Illinois] I guess (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right, you're absolutely--see it is in Woodlawn. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: It's East Woodlawn. And of course it started ea- south of the Midway [Midway Plaisance, Chicago, Illinois]. You know there was an invisible law-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --where they didn't cross-- Speaker 1: Black people traditionally lived south of there. Speaker 2: That's right. Nobody lived in the Hyde Park area, so to speak. There were always blacks there, but not too many, and not too many. And they wouldn't come across the Midway to go to Carnegie [Andrew Carnegie Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois]. But the board of education [Chicago Board of Education] had built--it's a little school right sort of between Dorchester [Avenue] and the railroad, the IC [Illinois Central Railroad] tracks. So, it was really isolated. Now it's a fantastic school. But there was a large school called Scott [Walter Scott School, Chicago, Illinois] that was across from Hyde Park. Because Hyde Park was meant to remain white, but then the people all moved out of the neighborhood. When I moved there in '54 [1954] we bought a house, and it was all white. In fact, we were the only blacks that moved into the courts [Plaisance Apartments, Chicago, Illinois]. And it was only because that particular--it was townhouses--and that particular--they didn't call them--they didn't call them townhouses then; they were white stoned houses. That particular house, doctors had lived in it, and they hadn't kept it up too well. So they decided to sell it, and they would allow blacks to buy that particular corner house. And we bought it. It was beautiful to us, so we painted--remember I told you we were great decorators. So our friends came and they painted. And it had hardwood floors, four bedrooms, living room, dining room, reception, kitchen on the first floor. So it was, they came--they had the inspectors, and they thought that we were probably going to try to break it up and use it for a rooming house. Speaker 1: And that's--a lot of the big houses in Chicago [Illinois]-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --were broken up like that. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: They were using the big townhouses as rooming houses. Speaker 2: So, the inspectors were out there every day to make sure that that didn't happen. Because they couldn't imagine why we were fixing it up so, you know--fireplace, French doors, et cetera. So anyway, so that was our first home that we owned, so we were very, very pleased. We graduated in January and bought our mom [Grace Winstead Graves] a house in April. Remember also that training for saving money and having a bank account. So we watched the Chicago Defender every week, it was a weekend paper, to see what the houses cost, what the down payment was. So, you needed fifteen hundred dollars down to get a pretty decent house. We were trying to find one cheaper than that, though. We never liked the West Side [Chicago, Illinois]. When you grow up on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois], you sort of become place bound. They had better deals on the West Side, but we didn't like the West Side. So, this house was in the Defender. And we drove by it and went out to see it, and then went to the real estate that was showing the house. And they liked us, because we had just graduated from college. And so we bought it and we went--Daddy [James Graves] signed for it, and we bought the house. We had the fifteen hundred dollars and put it down on the house. And it took I guess maybe five or six years to save that, you know, because we saved whatever we made. And so, we had bought the house for our mom. Speaker 1: Okay. That's, I mean that's a milestone. I mean the neighborhood--now I know that the Ripertons lived on 60th [Street] and Woodlawn [Avenue], I think. Speaker 2: Minnie [Minnie Riperton]? Speaker 1: Yeah, not too far from you, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. See, that was in West Woodlawn. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: See, blacks lived in West Woodlawn for years. And then they moved, starting moving farther east across Woodlawn, you know, Dorchester, Kenwood [Avenue], Kimbark [Avenue]--all of that was--President Cook [sic. dean, Raymond Mack Cook] of the Chicago Teachers College [Chicago State University, Chicago, Illinois] lived at 61st [Street] and Kimbark, which was right around the corner. So, if you can imagine me running into him after those years, you know, after graduation. He was the- he lived there for maybe three more years after we moved in. Story_ID: 610110 Speaker 1: But I had the opportunity to--at--when I transferred to Carnegie [Andrew Carnegie Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] the--and went into the special education program, I had Ray Geralds [ph.] who was a very progressive principal. And he asked me to take the special ed class. And he kept my name on my second grade class, because you couldn't just interchange like that. And I taught the special ed class that they were opening. Because you were asking about the status of special ed? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: It was before the '75 [1975] law, right, for 94-142 [Education for All Handicapped Children Act of 1975; Individuals with Disabilities Education Act of 1990]. But special ed was becoming more prominent and that was all, it was one class. Usually the school only had one class. Then he--the psychologist was the only one that could certify you for special ed. And so they were getting more children that were being identified with an IQ less than 75. Speaker 2: Now, was that the way--was that the criteria for-- Speaker 1: Right, a psychologist-- Speaker 2: --an IQ test? Speaker 1: Right, an IQ test. Stanford Binet [Stanford Binet Intelligence Scales], less than 75, okay. So, they were identifying more students going into special ed, so we opened up a new classroom. And he knew that I had graduated, and so he asked if I would take the class. You know, special ed had a smaller class size, had fifteen to eighteen in a classroom. Story_ID: 610111 Speaker 1: At that time I think I had fifty-six kids in, in second and third grade, because the neighborhood [Woodlawn, Chicago, Illinois] was growing so, and folks were moving in every day. And what turned out to be, supposed to be a small school, was becoming overcrowded as the people moved in and the neighborhood was changing. So, I took the special ed classroom. And they, they were given teacher aides at that time. Because now, that was '59 [1959], because I stayed at Willard [Frances E. Willard School, Chicago, Illinois] until '59 [1959]. And so, things were really changing. I guess times were getting better, people were moving. And so, they had teacher aides. I guess the ESEA, the Education Secondary and Elementary Secondary Education Act [Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965] was in place, and they were giving monies to schools for students for over crowdedness, for--the projects were growing, and they were giving schools money for free lunch, et cetera, et cetera. And-- Speaker 2: Just like part of Model Cities? Speaker 1: Yeah, Model Cities was coming into focus. A little bit, this was a little bit before Model Cities, but the assistance acts were being implemented for the school systems. And I'm sure--and at that particular time that was not my interest. But I'm sure that special education was being funded also, partially funded by the government, so then they could identify more students to come into the classrooms. Because when you have a smaller class size, that means you have to have more teachers, and that's expensive on the system. Because Willis was in--Benjamin Willis [Benjamin C. Willis] was the superintendent then. Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: And we were having a fight over the gerrymandering of school districts. Speaker 2: Right. What was the nature of that crisis with Benjamin Willis? Could you just go over it (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The mobile units. He would gerrymander the districts and they would keep kids in overcrowded schools, and they'd put mobile units on the playground. Speaker 2: So, I guess maybe--correct me if I'm wrong--but the black community was bursting at the seams-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --with the population? Speaker 1: Right, right. And so, to contain (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And the Chicago school board [Chicago Board of Education]-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --rather than build new schools, was trying to-- Speaker 1: Was containing them. And-- Speaker 2: Containing them-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --and building mobile units? Speaker 1: Right, right, right, the mobile units. And they would have class-- Speaker 2: And they-- Speaker 1: Some schools would have ten or fifteen classrooms on the playground. Speaker 2: Yeah. Now these--and this is when segregation was at a crises point. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Housing segregation-- Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: --and neighborhoods were shut off to blacks, and people were-- Speaker 1: Like, they couldn't move beyond certain boundaries. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Remember, they couldn't move west of Ashland [Avenue], and then it was Halsted [Street], and then they moved over a little bit. And Ashland, they definitely weren't going past that Marquette area, Marquette Park [Chicago, Illinois]. So, they weren't going that way. And then they couldn't move south of 63rd Street and as far as, in east, east of Cottage Grove [Avenue]. Story_ID: 610112 Speaker 1: And so, you, you were contained in certain areas. Because I indicated, we were the only blacks at 60th [Street] and Blackstone [Avenue]. And the, there were twenty-four houses in the court. It was in a courtyard with a fence and everything, Plaisance court [Plaisance Apartments, Chicago, Illinois]. But everybody there worked at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], which made them more accepting of blacks moving in than just the general population. So when we moved in we were college graduates, and then we fixed the place up. So, and we had to--the court garden--rather than have everybody maintain the courtyard, we paid dues, and one family maintained the courtyard and kept it, it was beautiful. So, we had always wanted to live where there was grass. I indicated that there was no grass at 39th Street, because it was a commercial corner. And so we loved the grass, you know, having our own front yard, and then the courtyard, which added to the beauty of looking out on it. So we stayed there for fourteen years I guess, until we got married. We got married and moved out and bought our own home. Speaker 2: You say we. You and your sister [Grace Graves Dawson] at the same time? Speaker 1: No. Well, well, she moved. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: My mom [Grace Winstead Graves]--what happened, the University of Chicago took the property for urban renewal. Brazier [HistoryMaker Bishop Arthur Brazier] came in with TWO [The Woodlawn Organization] to fight the segregation in Woodlawn [Chicago, Illinois]. And the power plant was behind our house, behind the court. So the house, all of those houses were labeled urban renewal, and the city bought the houses; you had no choice. So, that was in maybe '65 [1965]. And so they made an offer and, you know, some people held out. We had moved, I had moved into my own home. My dad [James Graves] was still there, and my mom had passed in '63 [1963]. So the city bought the house, and we rented it out to Chicago, to Chicago, University of Chicago students at first. And then they didn't tear the house down for ten more years. Now the University Press [University of Chicago Press, Chicago, Illinois] sits there on the land, because it's right at Dorchester [Avenue] and 60th because we were 1431 East 60th Place [sic. 60th Street]. So, that's all the press. So when I go to the university to speak, I tell them, I say, "You're sitting in the middle of my house." (Laughter) But Carnegie School [Andrew Carnegie Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] is right down, half a block down on 61st [Street]. So when I transferred to Carnegie, it just really made it great to work there, to walk, to be able to walk home, and to be a neighbor, to be in the neighborhood. Story_ID: 610113 Speaker 1: So, I carried a lot of weight with the parents. Because, 'cause I went to Carnegie [Andrew Carnegie Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] in '59 [1959]. Speaker 2: Now, now, now was Carnegie crowded? Speaker 1: Carnegie had a double shift, we went to a double shift. Carnegie was built in '57 [1957] maybe. I went there in '59 [1959], and it was very new. And within--about '61 [1961], it was a double shift. You recall the Great Migration, and the people were moving into the community, East Woodlawn [Woodlawn, Chicago, Illinois]. And, you know, Carnegie was on double shift. So, I got to work two shifts. But then they built, they built the 61st and Uni- well, they didn't build it. They put about twenty-five mobile units on a vacant lot and called it the 61st and University school. So they took all of the overload there from Fiske [John Fiske Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois], because Fiske is like at 61st and Ingleside [sic.], and Carnegie was at 61st [Street] and Dorchester [Avenue]. So, they were right in the middle, so they took all of those kids out of there and sent them to the 61st and University mobile unit school. Story_ID: 610114 Speaker 1: When you look at--I guess--I was asking you about special education as a-- Speaker 2: As a-- Speaker 1: --have, have, has the definition remained the same for someone who's special education? Or (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, no, no, no, no, no, no, no. In, when was it? In 1975, the education for individuals with--IDEA, the Individuals with Difficulties Education Act [sic. Education for All Handicapped Children Act of 1975; Individuals with Disabilities Education Act of 1990]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The disabilities education act. The Individuals with Disabilities Education Act was passed in 1975, and that's when the law changed. You had to have a staffing, and you had to have complete examinations from physical and mental. You also--they found there was a lawsuit, and they found that the Stanford Binet [Stanford Binet Intelligence Scales] was unfair for African Americans (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Racially biased? Speaker 2: Racially biased, because it was standardized on middle class students. So, they threw that out and they had to go in with so called non-biased testing. And so the staffing was to make--even after all the test results, a team sat around and decided on whether every child, whichever child it was, was going to go into special ed. And then they had retesting of every child in the mentally handicapped program. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And many of those kids were let out of special ed, but they, the support system really created a problem for them, because the teachers didn't want them in their classrooms. They didn't train the teachers to accept kids who may have different learning styles. So, I became a coordinator. And I had to, we had to teach every principal the law. Story_ID: 610115 Speaker 1: In your opinion, when you were teaching special ed [special education], did, did, did they, did the students seem the same? Did they seem like they really-- Speaker 2: I'll tell you what I did. Speaker 1: All right, okay. Speaker 2: I'll tell you. That's an excellent question. I only found one--I taught special ed at Carnegie [Andrew Carnegie Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois ]for--from '69 [1969]--maybe six or seven years. I stayed in special ed eight years as a teacher. I had one student who could not learn, who I had a difficult time teaching, one. Kids have very different learning styles. Speaker 1: So, one that really had a-- Speaker 2: One that a real serious problem. Speaker 1: --a real serious (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right. Speaker 1: --problem with trying to learn? Speaker 2: One. And I had--there were--you could have up to seventeen students. And I had, every year I had fourteen boys. So I told the principal to just give me all boys, you know. Because the teachers identified the boys as having the problems, because they have a very different learning style, and schools are made for girls really. And the rules are made for the little girls, they sit still. Boys are just different; they act out, and they rough house. They need the activity, and their interests is different. So if you, if you don't recognize that, then they just--they just--what I call--they refuse to get involved. And they don't know that, but they're not, they're not interested in what we teach in school, unless we're teaching in a way that they can really get turned on. So as a result of that, since I had mostly boys--well, the principals would never comply and just give me all boys, because I think probably they would have gotten in trouble. But I've had one or two girls, and the rest boys. So my program was basically geared to males. And the badder the boy, the better I liked him, because it was a real challenge. And I think it came from my primary teaching: that you start with what you have and you can see how far you can go by the end of the year. So they had to wear suits and trou- and pants, and look nice. So some of the parents, they, they would challenge me on why I wanted certain dress. Story_ID: 610116 Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: We've talked about several different things at the same time. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Do you want to go back to special ed [special education]? Speaker 1: Yeah, we--yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I just had one more point about special ed. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Is that in--what was it--late in '69 [1969] or the '70s [1970s], I was able to--after going into special ed, naturally when you just get your master's degree in a subject and you get a chance to really teach it, it's exciting. So I guess I was very excited about what I was doing, and the challenges were to see if you could overcome them. And having been at Carnegie [Andrew Carnegie Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] for--just when it was starting up--what I call startup school--I had many friends. So, what I would do to--if you got, if you did your work real well, the first thing then was to teach work habits. Because in the classroom, most of the kids who got identified was because they didn't do the work. So, you had a routine. Everybody had a job, but you had a routine where you had to be finished by a certain length of time. That gave me the time to get my paperwork done, pages, attendance, et cetera, and then we would move into instruction. And, but, when--if they were able--and I had big boys--if they were able to read at the same level groups--so you read--if you didn't know the words and you didn't know how to read because you had fooled around or whatever--they'd learn how to read. So, I taught the phonics method. But once they learned how to read, then they had to read at their grade level. And so then I got my friends to take them into their classes, so they got to sit in the classes with the regular level. And Carnegie went up to the sixth grade, so I would put them mostly in the fifth and sixth grade because they were big boys. And the male teachers--I had male teachers in the fifth and sixth grade, and they loved my kids because they were so well behaved and they would pay attention. So they would go to their regular grades, and then at the end of the year I got the principals to let me transfer them to their regular grades. So, that was--the parents started asking that their children be in my special ed classroom. So that was like, I guess that was a real reward for me. And the kids really loved--and I took them everywhere. We went on long trips. We went to Galena [Illinois], we went to the museum, we went on train rides, and whatever I heard of. I went skiing, and I would tell the kids about all the activities. And so, they were motivated. They got to go if they participated and did their work, and I could get the principal to let me take them everywhere. Parents would go along with them to Springfield [Illinois]. We went everywhere, so that was unheard of for special ed kids to go. And the people never knew they were special ed. I never told them they were special ed, and they would compliment them on their behavior. You know, you better not say a word, you know (laughter). Story_ID: 610117 Speaker 1: Nowadays it's so much, what, so many things have changed, or some of the rhetoric has changed at least. There's a lot of emphasis, at least there was a few years ago, on Ritalin and drugs like that to-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --slow down the activity, especially of males-- Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) so that they could learn better. Speaker 2: Well, that's-- Speaker 1: What, what--do you have an opinion about that? Speaker 2: Well, I don't like medication for controlling behavior, because you never learn how to control your own behavior. And I know I'm not a doctor; I know that I'm not a medical doctor, anyway. I know that there may be some basis for certain drugs, but we've overused Ritalin for certain disabilities and behavior disorder, and then they don't really get any better. Now some of the drugs do, because I guess the way of the structure of the brain is. Some of the drugs probably do reduce the activity. I know it does, but what are the side effects? You have to deal with the side effects. There's so much known in medicine, yet we still not have studied behavior. You know, we're seeing the outcome of all of this, all of the drugs. And if you don't take it, what happens? The same that just happened last week. So, and there could be side effects from that. So, I prefer having kids learn to like themselves and to be in control. And I think the foods have a lot to do also with behavior. And so many kids eat so much candy you don't even know about it, and they bounce off the wall just from that. And so I guess I was lucky during the years that I was in the classroom. You know, I was the principal [of the Nancy B. Jefferson Alternative School] in the detention center [Cook County Juvenile Temporary Detention Center, Chicago, Illinois] just recently. But I was--I used the same philosophy. So I do believe that the right modeling, and the right behavior, and understanding the kids makes the biggest difference. Speaker 1: Okay. That's above and beyond all the drugs and such (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Uh-huh. Story_ID: 610118 Speaker 1: Now, so you were at-- Speaker 2: Willard [Frances E. Willard School, Chicago, Illinois] and Carnegie [Andrew Carnegie Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Yeah, Willard and Carnegie. And then where did you go after Carnegie? Speaker 2: Then I went to the Central Office [Chicago Public Schools Central Office, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I was in charge of the Urban Teacher--I worked for the Urban Teacher Corps. That was, I guess that was during the--which war was that? The Urban Teacher Corps in '69 [1969]? I guess that was the Korean War. You could go to--in fact, the inner city studies had one of the sections. You stayed in the Urban Teacher Corps for two years. We were having a teacher shortage. And I got a master's degree in inner city education and taught the fourth and the fifth grades, because that's where we were having our troubled kids, in the fourth and the fifth grade here in Chicago [Illinois]. And so we had mostly white males in the program, two hundred Urban Teacher corpsmen in the Chicago Public Schools. So I was one of the liaisons for the Urban T--placing them. So I went to the Central Office to do that. Speaker 1: Okay. And I see where you were with the school mental health program? Speaker 2: Yes, I was the counselor. They called it an adjustment teacher at the time at Carnegie. And when was that? Nineteen sixty-eight [1968]? About '68 [1968], '67 [1967], '68 [1968], maybe? Speaker 1: This is the early '70s [1970s], it says here. Speaker 2: For the Urban--no, that was the Urban Teacher Corps. But at Carnegie, I was with the mental--well, I was with the mental health program at Carnegie. And then it was, it became--the mental health program was in Woodlawn [Chicago, Illinois]. And the two psychiatrists that came to Woodlawn from Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut]--and Glasser [ph.]--they all--Glasser went to California, remember? And they came to the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] and worked in Woodlawn schools. There were twelve schools in Woodlawn they worked at, and I was selected to be one of the coordinators. And then in the '70s [1970s] they moved out. They trained us as laymen, and as I said, there were two of us. They trained the director and myself, I was selected. And we moved into the area office to take the program into all of Woodlawn. So, and, the mental health program was a first grade program. And it moved into the other grades where kids talked about their problems, just like what we were saying, and with the parents, in a parent environment. And the basis being that kids cannot learn when they're preoccupied with other things. And if there's been a fire in the neighborhood the night before, or if somebody's been killed the night before, or if there's been a problem--we can't as educators expect kids to come to school at nine o'clock in the morning and proceed to learn as if nothing happened in their lives. So, it was to make the teachers more sensitive to the mental health of the students. And so every morning they were supposed to have a little five minute talk about what had occurred. And the philosophy was that if the kids got a chance to talk about what was on their mind, then they would be free to learn. So, that was our role. We were right in the height at that time of self-realization I'm going to call it. The University of Chicago was very involved in the mental health program. But, as you know, it was mostly Caucasians and Europeans involved. And Barbara Sizemore [HistoryMaker Barbara A. Sizemore] was over the Woodlawn Experimental school district [Woodlawn Experimental Schools Project], and that was self-realization. So, they did not like the fact that these two Jewish psychologists were in the mental health program. So what--Curtis Melnick was the area superintendent, and he moved us out of Woodlawn because he was over all the South Side [Chicago, Illinois] superintendents--principals, and the district superintendents. And since there was such a fight in Woodlawn about who was in control, he said it's time Frances [HistoryMaker Frances Graves Carroll] and Loretta [ph.] move to all the schools on the South Side. So we moved to other schools on the South Side with the mental health program, where we taught the teachers how to hold classroom meetings. So, that was '70 [1970] to '72 [1972]. Speaker 1: Okay. Now (cough) was that successful? Was that program successful? Speaker 2: Oh, well, listen, I still have remnants of it--the whole--the idea of kids talking about who they are. And you just see it popping up in all kinds of books and everything. Keller [sic. Sheppard Kellam] and Schiff [Sheldon Schiff] were the two major psychiatrists in that, and they were quite renowned in what they did, you know. And many books were written about that, because it involved the whole community. We had community meetings that involved people being, being aware of the effects of your attitude, if that's what you want to call it, on learning. Story_ID: 610119 Speaker 1: You went to work for City Colleges of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] after that, right? Speaker 2: Well, I worked at City Colleges, but it wasn't full-time. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, I worked with the Consortium of Colleges and Universities. I had an administrative leave in '72 [1972] to go to the consortium. That was--Model Cities was funding that. And I worked with the early childhood program to train the staff of the two hundred daycare centers for--the aides received an A.A. degree, and the directors received a master's degree. And the consortium--I worked with eleven universities to prepare the program for the early childhood educators. It was the Institution for Early Childhood Education [ph.] under Model Cities. Speaker 1: Okay. And that's like '72 [1972] to '74 [1974]? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Story_ID: 610120 Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Then went back to the schools for, for--and taught special ed [special education] again-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --for about a year and a half. And then I went into the district as a coordinator for special ed. Speaker 1: Okay. And you were teaching at Governors State [Governors State University, University Park, Illinois], too? Speaker 2: Governors State and Kennedy-King [Kennedy-King College, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Okay. And Kennedy-King, all right. Speaker 2: And I taught special ed at Governors State and at Kennedy-King, and early childhood education for those--Kenne- the City Colleges [City Colleges of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] gave a certificate, see, in early childhood education. Not a degree, a certificate. Speaker 1: Okay. So I see where you taught at Chicago State [Chicago State University, Chicago, Illinois]. And then (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Story_ID: 610121 Speaker 1: And I guess in '79 [1979]--now this is--you became the coordinator of evaluation and diag-- Speaker 2: Nostics center. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And that's with the board [Chicago Board of Education]? Speaker 2: Yes, all of that. My whole life has been with the board. The only time I was on leave from the board was for the consortium [Consortium of Colleges and Universities]. They give very few administrative leaves. If it's connected to the education system, you can get an administrative leave. And so I would stay there two years, and then when I went back to the system, I went and became a coordinator of the diagnostics center. And I'm looking like this because that was not my love, to--because the diagnostic center dealt with the lowest performing children. And it was just not something that I felt I wanted to do. And once I got in, I loved it. We had to place--it was for non-public school students. In the Chicago Public Schools they have their own teams to diagnose the kids, and the multi-disciplinarian staff, et cetera, et cetera. In the private and parochial schools, which the state has responsibility for, they have to go to the diagnostic center. And if a parent or a teacher in one of the private or parochial schools identifies a kid as having problems, the Chicago Public Schools has to pick up the tab. And so they have to be diagnosed. So tested and staffed, to see if they indeed need specialized instruction. So, that's what I did. And remember, I indicated that my training in special education and my master's degree was one of the best things that I could ever have done. Because on the diagnostic team I had to work with the psychologists, the social workers, the psychiatrists, and the medical people. And my knowledge was very helpful, to direct those people. And if I thought that what they were doing was off track, you know, I could say that. They had a lot of problems with my being an educator telling them what to do. But when you're in the Chicago public school system, the educator is the top person. So-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, so, they didn't know how I could lead them and wasn't a psychiatrist, you know. But they were putting kids in an educational setting, so they had to deal with that. And so, I had the law standing behind me for that. Story_ID: 610122 Speaker 1: You pursued a Ph.D. at the University of--? Speaker 2: Sarasota [University of Sarasota; Argosy University, Sarasota, Florida]. Um-hm. Speaker 1: Sarasota. Now, how did you choose--now that seems like a long way from Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 2: Right, because it was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How did that happen? Speaker 2: (Laughter), that's an interesting question; not many people ask me that. The acting superintendent of Chicago Public Schools was a professor at Sarasota. And several of the outstanding educators were associated with Sarasota. And at the time that I wanted to get a doctorate degree, I did not want to take off from work to get a sabbatical. I wanted to work and do it part-time. And there were only a couple of places offering that, and so naturally they were in Florida. So, Florida--now Nova [Nova Southeastern University, Fort Lauderdale, Florida] came along a little later, and Vanderbilt [Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee], after I had enrolled. But Sarasota was--and I had two or three people that I admired were in involved in the Sarasota program. So, that's why I selected that. And so we had to go--and there was a meeting in the living room. I had a problem with the adjunct schools and non-traditional meetings in the living room. So, I wanted to go to a school. So I went to Sarasota, you know, after discussing it with my husband [Floyd Carroll], because that was going to be much more expensive than staying at home. And so they would have classes during the breaks and during the summer, and so I could get to go and take classes. And so-- Speaker 1: Okay. So you were able to finish that program in 1980, I guess? Speaker 2: Right. I started in '78 [1978]. And Tas Brown [ph.], my superintendent, was very encouraging also. And so, I worked out of the district office. And when I said I wanted to go to school, he really encouraged me to go and do it. And then getting--I got my degree in curriculum and instruction, but I really concentrated on special education. So, I was able to go and to--the professors were from Chicago, so I could meet with them and have them as my advisors, you know, with an appointment. So I was able to work with them and to get my, all of my classwork done, and then to start on my dissertation. And was able to finish my dissertation within like six months, you know. And so, you could work at your own pace. So my husband took over the family and did the cooking, et cetera. And every night I could go to the library and work, and then get up every morning at three o'clock and write. So-- Speaker 1: That sounds like hard work. Speaker 2: (Laughter) It was hard. Listen, it took me a long time not to ge- wake up at three o'clock after that (laughter). Story_ID: 610123 Speaker 1: Okay, but you, you finished [University of Sarasota; Argosy University, Sarasota, Florida] in 1980? Speaker 2: Uh-huh, August of 1980 (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And now, what was your dissertation about? Could you summarize it in a way that we could understand it (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, I can, because it was on instruction for the educable mentally handicapped, the learning disabled, the cognitive delayed, and the physically handicapped student. And I did an activities book for them. And what is so interesting today--today, they have combined all of those classes together; those children are in the same class. And that was unheard of when I wrote it, but I wrote activities for each one of the disciplines. So I was able to use--as a coordinator and a director, I was able to use my--and unfortunately I never published--able to use my dissertation and activities to help teachers to just pass out the activities. I gave a copy of my dissertation to the Chicago Teachers College--Chicago State [Chicago State University, Chicago, Illinois] by then--and to Roosevelt University [Chicago, Illinois] and to the Chicago--you know, you had to designate who you were going to--and to the Chicago Public Schools, so that they could utilize the activities in there. Then I just got so busy I never got around to publishing. Story_ID: 610124 Speaker 1: Now you, you also taught at Roosevelt University for many years (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) As soon as I graduated, I was hired by Roosevelt University [Roosevelt College; Roosevelt University, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: So you were still working full-time for the board [Chicago Board of Education] though, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Teaching at Roosevelt? Speaker 2: Not teaching, but I was a coordinator and a director. In '80 [1980] I was still at the diagnostic center I think, right. Then I moved downtown to be the director of special ed staff development, and that's when all of that became so useful. Because at that time then they had moved into several other acts and laws in special ed [special education], so part of my studies were in the knowledge of the law. So I taught school law at Roosevelt, because we were getting into lots of trouble as a system of not having the proper classes for the special needs students. And we were threatened with a lawsuit, and there was a consent decree that said that Chicago Public Schools were non-compliant. You know, they had brought--the parents had brought lots of lawsuits against us. So in '87 [1987], I started the friends of special ed, where we trained two parents in every school in Chicago [Illinois] with the knowledge of special ed law. We took the proactive route, because parents were saying that--the principals were saying--they would tell the principal their kid was having trouble, and they would say, "Well, we can't do anything about it right now." And you know, you have sixty days to test the kid and to make a decision. And the date started on the day the parent told you, and the parent would remember. Because they might have, they may have been on the way to the store to buy their kid a birthday present, and they knew the date. The principal didn't know the date. (Laughter) And so we had--the board set up a program where I had to train every principal in Chicago about the law. When I say I, I was the director of staff development, and had to write the program and furnish all the supplies. And every principal had to come for three days to me. So, we did twenty-five at a time at Whitney Young [Whitney M. Young Magnet High School, Chicago, Illinois], so that they would know the law and they could not refuse parents. And the principals were responsible for their building. So if they told the janitor it would begin the first day, that was the first day of the sixty days. So, it was critical that we had our people informed. Because they threatened to take all of the money, all of the government money away from Chicago Public Schools. Speaker 1: Now that's, let's see, 19--okay, so-- Speaker 2: So, I did that from '84 [1984] to 1992, I think. Speaker 1: Yes, right, I think so. Story_ID: 610125 Speaker 1: It has here--the next big activity it has is your appointment as Cook County commissioner on women's issues. Speaker 2: Oh, that was '94 [1994]. Speaker 1: That's '94 [1994]? Speaker 2: Yes. See, the law passed in '94 [1994], that every county had to have a women's issues committee. So I was appointed by President Stroger, John Stroger [HistoryMaker John H. Stroger, Jr.], at that time to sit on the commission for women's issues [Cook County Commission on Women's Issues]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I still am on there. Speaker 1: All right, okay. Speaker 2: And we started--we were able to enact the domestic violence law, child care, elder care. We did a lot of things, the seventeen of us. Speaker 1: There were seventeen on the commission? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: All women, or was it mixed? Speaker 2: All women. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: So its women's issues, you know--elder care, child care, and domestic violence was female issues. So, we have public hearings and then we make our recommendations to the commissioners. And we were able to--and one of them was--we have now--you know, it's worldwide. Well, it's countrywide, the Domestic Violence Act [Illinois Domestic Violence Act of 1986]. Women were testifying about all the things that were happening to them. So, we have the cell phones where you can bring a cell phone and they will program the cell phone for the women so they can call 911. We didn't do that but one time. We got so many cell phones (laughter) that we couldn't handle it. Story_ID: 610126 Speaker 1: So you began serving on other boards and committees around other issues throughout the city. Speaker 2: Well, I was on Youth Guidance [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Youth--okay. Speaker 2: In fact, I introduced Youth Guidance to the board of education [Chicago Board of Education]. It's a social agency for at risk youth. Really the director, the former director, her son was in first grade with my son [Floyd Carroll II] at Lab School [University of Chicago Laboratory Schools, Chicago, Illinois]. And that's how she was a social worker at Youth Guidance. But they did not work with Chicago Public Schools, so I introduced her at that time to Manford Byrd [HistoryMaker Manford Byrd, Jr.], who was Redmond's [James Redmond] assistant I think at that time. So they came into the schools, to eleven schools, Chicago Public Schools, to work with the social workers and to work with the hardest--hardcore kids. So, I was asked to join that board. I think I joined in '76 [1976]. Story_ID: 610127 Speaker 1: Now, you've been the principal of Nancy Jefferson Alternative School [Nancy B. Jefferson Alternative School, Chicago, Illinois], too? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay. This is in the mid-'90s [1990s]? Speaker 2: Well, that was the Cook County Juvenile Detention Center [Cook County Juvenile Temporary Detention Center, Chicago, Illinois]. And so I changed the name of the school to--the board of education [Chicago Board of Education] has a school in that building on the entire second floor of the school with seventy-five staff and-- Speaker 1: I don't think a lot of people know this. Speaker 2: They don't. Speaker 1: I know one thing that astonished me in life is going to Cook County juvenile court. I'd never been there before. And I was there-- Speaker 2: It's downstairs on the first floor, right. Speaker 1: I was there to testify. You know, one of the neighborhood kids had broken into a bookstore, and I knew that they were the ones that did it. So I went to--there's so many pe- so many kids are down there, it's scary. Speaker 2: I had twelve thousand kids a year. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Not in the same day; about seven hundred a day was the highest. But the rotation--you know, a kid isn't put into the detention center until he has a count, like a fifteen--maybe higher now. But it was like the police--every time you got into trouble--you know, the first time you get in trouble you're going to go to the detention center unless it's some really drastic problem. And so, but when you get a count, when you get picked up by the police several times, and you get so many points each time. And when you get up to fifteen, they bring you to the detention center. And then you go to court for whatever the charge is, and you have a probable cause hearing. Well, many of those kids are let go within two or three days by the judge, you know. So, you know, it's a constant rotation. And some, they've been in there up to like fifty-nine times. So, the detention center had--you could have--it runs on a special law, all by itself, of how many kids can be in the classroom, et cetera. So everybody, all the teachers in the detention center have a master's degree. It was funded by special ed [special education], so you had to have a special ed degree in the beginning. Now, they have-- now special ed--the state said everybody in the detention center couldn't be special ed, so we had to retest everybody. And so about 20 percent of the kids are regular ed. Story_ID: 610128 Speaker 1: I wanted you to just tell us something about Nancy Jefferson. She's someone I don't think we had a chance to interview here, but-- Speaker 2: But, before--right, right (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) she needs to be in the records. So-- Speaker 2: Right. Nancy Jefferson was a great advocate for social rights. And she wanted to make sure--and she really concentrated on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois], mostly. And she wanted to make sure that the West Side received the proper recognition, and all the resources that the city had to provide. So, she spoke out against anything she thought was unfair. And when they built Whitney Young [Whitney M. Young Magnet High School, Chicago, Illinois] in the community, she wanted to make sure that it was accessible for students from the West Side to go to. So, she was in the building almost every day that I can remember. My son [Floyd Carroll II] went to Whitney Young, and as they were preparing my son--my brother-in-law was the principal. He had been the principal of Calumet [Calumet High School, Chicago, Illinois], and he was selected through a long process to open up Whitney Young. I think they took about a year before they opened up Whitney Young and selected the teachers, et cetera. But Nancy Jefferson and many of her, her constituents were right there to make sure that everything went well. So she--he really liked her. When my son went into the first full class--they like started the semester, and he graduated in June from the University of Chicago Laboratory School [University of Chicago Laboratory Schools, Chicago, Illinois]. And then so naturally I went right--I went to school, too, (laughter) over at Whitney Young and got to meet--I was very active in the parents association. And he was a band student, so I was in the band, a band parent. And so I was with the, whatever activity that the students participated in. And the second year I became the president of the band, and was the president for five years. Because when he graduated, I still stayed on. They asked me to stay on another year. But she, she was, she made such a difference in the community, and not just in education, but in housing. She got buildings from the city to be renovated, I think for a dollar. And she made sure that there were jobs for the individuals who lived on the West Side. And she especially liked the detention center [Cook County Juvenile Temporary Detention Center, Chicago, Illinois]. She was over at the--that was before I was involved in the detention center. But she was always advocating for the youth in the detention center. Story_ID: 610129 Speaker 1: So, when I went to the detention center, it was called the Cook County Juvenile Detention Center [Cook County Juvenile Temporary Detention Center]. Prior to that, it was known as the Audy Home [Arthur J. Audy Home, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: The Audy family sued this county. They did not want their name on the building, to be associated with the building any longer after maybe the mid-'80s [1980s]. Because the students, at first the Audy Home represented kids who were truant or ran away from home, just mild kinds of infractions, and they were placed in the Audy Home. But as the years went on, in the mid-'80s [1980s] or early '90s [1990s], the kids were being detained at the Audy Home for much more serious problems. And it's my understanding that the Audy family wanted their name withdrawn from there. So, they renamed the detention center the Cook County Juvenile Temporary Detention Center, because that's what the name was. And so, the school was called the Cook County Juvenile Temporary Detention Center School [Nancy B. Jefferson Alternative School, Chicago, Illinois]. And now the principals, former principal, just before I became the principal, had started a graduation exercise. And on the diploma was Cook County Juvenile Temporary Detention Center. Well, everybody knew where it came from. So, I wanted to change the name so that it would not appear on the kids' diploma. You can't show a diploma that says Cook County Juvenile Detention Center. Speaker 2: Yeah, that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Plus, these were big kids. They--at the detention center, you only stayed in there until you were seventeen. The day you made seventeen, they moved you over to the county jail, and within the week you were gone. So, we had the renaming. And the Chicago Public Schools has a process for changing names, which was kind of lengthy. I think it's done a little easier now. But we went through the--the LSC [local school council] had to be the one to offer the name change, and then it was approved by the board of education [Chicago Board of Education]. And then we had a big ceremony to rename the school. And President Stroger [HistoryMaker John H. Stroger, Jr.] and President Emil Jones [HistoryMaker Emil Jones, Jr.], we had all the dignitaries out there to change the name of the school and renamed it. So, the students felt very proud. Story_ID: 610130 Speaker 1: We talked to the parents. I was--I went to the detention center [Cook County Juvenile Temporary Detention Center, Chicago, Illinois] not as the principal, but as the parent, as the parent coordinator to organize a parent group. And I took my special ed [special education] parents from the Central Office [Chicago Public Schools Central Office, Chicago, Illinois] with me. And I told them I had a training; remember I said a training. And I told them that I was leaving the Central Office and going to the detention center. And I was amazed at the number of parents who came to me to ask to go with me, and had relatives or relationships to the detention center. Now, I really didn't know anything about the detention center. And so, they formed my first advisory board. The University of Illinois allowed us to meet in their facility, because the University of Illinois was trying to decide whether they were going to sell to Michael Reese Hospital [Michael Reese Hospital and Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois] at that time. And so, we used the doctors' conference room. And we had a grant where we gave the parents money to buy their lunch--five dollars, I think it was. And they could buy their lunch down there for like three dollars and they could get all of the desserts, et cetera, et cetera. And we had a great advisory board. It was the first advisory board in the history of the juvenile justice system, and we won awards and everything. So I started a parent meeting once a month, and had to study the lay of the land. Because, you know, there's a lot of guards and lots of reasons why you can't enter at certain places. And so the parents had visiting hours every Wednesday at seven o'clock. So, I started my parent meeting at five o'clock. And I negotiated with the detention center that the parents who came to the meeting got to go in first. Because the problem was the line would start forming at 4:30, and nobody wanted you to get in front of them. So we didn't know how to get--if they came into the meeting, how do we get them back in line? So we negotiated that the parents who came to the meeting would go up first, because it was on the second floor. And you had to enter to go up to the dormitory from the second floor. So, the superintendent of the detention center allowed me to have the parents escorted up. So, naturally I got all the parents coming to the meeting so they could be first (laughter). And we served refreshments, and it was, it was such an improvement for the kids. I got to know the parents, because you can't--they couldn't visit the students in the school [Nancy B. Jefferson Alternative School, Chicago, Illinois]. The chief said that the reduction of whiskey bottles on the grass and the conduct of the line had improved so that they really loved he parent program; they really supported me in that. So, we would have speakers talk about improvement. And the only thing that occurred--and my teachers would stay after school for free, because the kids behaved better because we knew their parents. They would come up and we would tell them, "Talk to me," you know. And everything improved because of the parent involvement. So that's, I know that's the key to the kids doing better, is to have their parents know--we told the parents what they learned in school. The kids had told them they didn't do anything sometimes, you know, so they found out for themselves what occurred. And they were very, very cooperative. And I invited any of them that wanted to be a part of the advisory board to join. Well, not too many joined, but I got some really great people who united with us, who had the time to come, because the meetings were in the daytime. So, we made a big difference. We won all kinds of awards. The teachers were encouraged to write up their innovative methods. And we--I had ten teachers to win the Oppenheimer awards. That was like two or three hundred dollars, but they could do whatever they wanted with it for the kids. Story_ID: 610131 Speaker 1: And the, the summer that we had such a hot summer, maybe it was '95 [1995], and people, like seven hundred people died. Speaker 2: Yeah, uh-huh. Speaker 1: And the detention center [Cook County Juvenile Temporary Detention Center, Chicago, Illinois] had no water. There were no water fountains, you know, all the walls were brick. And whoever designed it did not design any water for the kids. So, they would go in the bathroom and drink the water with their hands. So Paul Vallas was the superintendent at that time, the CEO, and I wrote a letter requesting that we get water fountains. So, they came out to see if they could drill holes in the wall. But that couldn't be done because that was much too expensive, everything was brick. So they gave me seventy-five water coolers. So, when I called Hinckley Schmitt [Hinckley and Schmitt, Inc.] they thought it was a joke, because they had to bring water out there. They said that was the biggest order they had, you know. So the kids loved it, just water for them. Speaker 2: Just--what you're telling me is just amazing, you know. I mean to--you know, anybody who's ever been in juvenile court knows what--it just, it's dispiriting to see all the kids there in the first place. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And to think that, you know, someone would build a building without water. Speaker 1: It's unbelievable, because you know how they have water fountains in every school. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So I said, "Where's the water? Where's the water?" Well, you know, teachers would bring their water. Story_ID: 610132 Speaker 1: So it seems like you really have been able to make a difference in that (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, we made a difference. We made such a difference. We--I won the outstanding principal award, twenty-five thousand dollars of monetary awards, and I threw it back in there for the teachers. And so they did a good job. Speaker 1: Well, this is something. So you did this from '95 [1995] to '99 [1999], right? Speaker 2: Yeah, uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay. I mean, have things stayed-- Speaker 2: You know, I had the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Have some of the improvements lasted? Speaker 2: Yes. I had the privilege--I had a great LSC [local school council], and parents can't be on the LSC because the kids would be identified, and, you know, it's a privacy thing. So the LCS members represent organizations, legal organizations, child advocacy organizations. And the chairman of the--and the judge is on the LSC, and the superintendent, and the citizens' committee. So, the LSC is made up of--Bernardine Dohrn is on the LSC there, still there. It's made up of a very powerful group of people. And so they enjoyed having the kind of--they were all children advocates, so they, they were very supportive of what I did. And so I was able to make a recommendation of who succeeded me. And I selected my social worker, and she's still the principal there [Nancy B. Jefferson Alternative School, Chicago, Illinois]. And I feel that I had a legacy that needed to go on. (Laughter) So, she's done many, many things that has kept this going. Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Also, one more thing I think that's interesting because of your interest in education and teachers and kids learning--is that I had, in '95 [1995] I think it was--the first--it was the first early retirement for Chicago Public Schools for the state; you'd get five and five. And I had--the detention center [Cook County Juvenile Temporary Detention Center, Chicago, Illinois] was like a social club, or a country club. Because you had all these experienced teachers, but it was the best kept secret in the world. They only had eight kids in a class--child care work outside. I had--people were thinking the detention center was dangerous, and it really isn't. You do work behind a lot of doors, but it had more protection than any school in the city (laughter). So, nobody ever left the detention center. It as a twelve month job. So I--sixteen teachers retired because we did change some things. So, they took the opportunity to leave. And I brought in sixteen of my graduate students. I had taught the graduate classes, so I coerced them to leave their schools and come to me, and they came over to work with me. And I brought females in. They had only, I think there were three or four females in the detention center when I went there. So, the male teachers were really concerned that the females wouldn't be able to keep the discipline. But as you know, the African American male relates to his mama. (Laughter) And so these teachers came in, and they kept better discipline than the men. They brought all kind of warmth and humanity to the classroom. I didn't bring in all females, but quite a few. And we started, we had assemblies; we just started talking. I let them wear their hair in certain ways, and they had to--well, they all dressed in a uniform, you know. But they had to carry themselves in a way--and be very polite. And so we got through that, and got that through to them. And so they really enjoyed working with women. Story_ID: 610133 Speaker 1: So, you were there until 19--? Speaker 2: Ninety-nine [1999]. Speaker 1: Ninety-nine [1999]. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Now tell us about the, tell us about the Carroll Family Foundation [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: In 1999 when I retired, I took all of the funds from my retirement party and started a foundation. I named it for my daughter [Francesca Carroll], who's handicapped; she has a learning disability. And I developed the High Aim Scholarship, the Francesca High Aim Scholarship [ph.], so that I could give to students who would have difficulty getting other scholarships, and fund them in the college roles. It's kind of non-traditional, because the students that we have funded have gone to City College [City Colleges of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], to cooking school to become a chef. I have funded Hispanics who couldn't, did not have airfare to get to the schools. They went down to chef schools in New Orleans [Louisiana]. But I would give them funding and admit them through Youth Guidance [Chicago, Illinois], of course. And I would fund them, fund the students. You know, it gets around, (laughter) so I funded students who didn't have clothes for graduation. And so I call it--and the last student I funded each year, she came from Crane High School [Crane Technical High School; Richard T. Crane Medical Prep High School, Chicago, Illinois], number one in her class. Her mother a drug addict, and was she such a good student. She got the IndIGO Scholarship, the United Negro College Fund scholarship [UNCF], and went to Clark University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] and just graduated last June. And she works for Pfizer [Pfizer Inc.]. She's back in Chicago [Illinois] and bought her own home. Speaker 1: Now, that's a success story. Speaker 2: Oh, yes. So, you know, you get a great joy out of helping kids who couldn't get help, who may not--there were a lot of scholarships going begging. But they would call--someone would call, and they knew about our scholarship and we would help them. Story_ID: 610134 Speaker 1: Now, you're also involved with the Group 17 Education Consultants [ph.]? Speaker 2: Yes, right. My son [Floyd Carroll II] and I. He's--has lots of--he's a--has photography; he's got a digital studio. So, we do educational consulting. That was our 2000 venture. We started that in 2000, at the turn of the century. So the group--he named it Group 17, because there were seventeen of them. He was in higher ed [higher education], and there were seventeen of his buddies who wanted to start a group of consultants, and he called it Group 17. Well, he ended up with it just being he and his mother. But that's where the seventeen comes from. And he can reach out to them to do a lot of things. Story_ID: 610135 Speaker 1: Now since ni- 2003, you've been a member of the board of trustees at the University of Illinois [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois]. Speaker 2: Correct. Speaker 1: And there's a--well, there's a big bold note here about the negotiations over the use of Chief Illiniwek as the university mascot. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah. Speaker 1: So, you were deeply involved in those discussions I guess? Speaker 2: Well, I presented the resolution to retire the chief. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: Now was it your id- now, did this come from the Native Americans themselves? Speaker 2: The Native Americans and lots of people writing about the offense of the chief. Speaker 1: Now was this, was it organized through the, through AIM, American Indian Movement? Or-- Speaker 2: I'm not familiar with the organization. This is from the--and there are a lot of--AIM is one of the organizations that speaks out against the Native American imagery. But the NC--NCCA [sic.], they had already started-- Speaker 1: The NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: The-- Speaker 2: The National Collegiate College (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, NCAA [National Collegiate Athletic Association], okay. Speaker 2: NCAA, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: They had already started the elimination of Indian imagery, and the University of Illinois along with a couple of other, a few other colleges, was the last to let go. Speaker 1: Right. A lot of the schools, for instance, Miami University in Ohio [Oxford, Ohio] were the Red Men, and now they're the RedHawks. Speaker 2: Right. See, many of the schools automatically changed their names. The University of Illinois calls the mascot a symbol, not a mascot. And a lot of people were very wedded to the idea of Chief Illiniwek. And I imagine in all the colleges they had the imagery, and sold all of the clothing and whatever. But Illinois is a state that's really hard to change. Story_ID: 610136 Speaker 1: Now, just put this in perspective here that Chief Illiniwek is symbolized by--it's a student usually dressed in a-- Speaker 2: In Indian [Native American]-- Speaker 1: --Indian war bonnet and-- Speaker 2: And most of the people didn't--they thought it was--and most of the people never--outside of the university [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois] they thought that it was an Indian. Speaker 1: Okay. But it's-- Speaker 2: It's not. You have to try out for it, and you just, it's a basic dance. But you can be innovative, and so the most athletic, I imagine, you know, got the position of being the chief. Speaker 1: Okay. So whoever wins the audition? Speaker 2: Right, right, right. Speaker 1: Yeah. And then they give him a costume? Speaker 2: Right, and they have coaches to teach the dance, you know. It's not authentic; you can make it up or whatever. So, the offense came I think with the realization of people being proud of their culture. And then people became to, began to not want to be portrayed--have people make mockery of their culture. It's like the minstrel show. So that's what I saw, and I think I could relate to it probably more than someone who hadn't been poked fun at, and could understand the sense of dislike for someone taking your culture and making a mockery of it. Because the people doing it don't really see it that way, but the people who are looking--and there was a time when we didn't speak up for what we, what hurt us. We accepted it. And now that time is gone. Speaker 1: Yeah, I interviewed a man [HistoryMaker Ernest McBride] in Long Beach [California] who--Long Beach High School [Long Beach Polytechnic High School, Long Beach, California]--when he arrived there in the late '40s [1940s], he said Long Beach High School had a tradition of having a fundraiser which was a minstrel show. White people would put on blackface and do a minstrel show. Speaker 2: And didn't think anything about it (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And he said when he got there, he said, "It's over with. We're not going to do this anymore." Speaker 2: Well, because a lot of times people don't even realize that it's offensive, because they've done it so long. Speaker 1: That's what they told him (laughter). Speaker 2: And so, so, it's a new awareness. And it's really--what I found interesting is the people who just want to dig in their heels and not see that it was offensive. You know, I went out to Utah to talk to the Native Americans and to see exactly how they felt about it. And once the Native Americans and the anti-chief people found out that I would listen, you know, they starting writing--sending all kinds of information about what was going on, and their feelings. And you could not help but understand that. And there are lots of people who aren't minorities that understand. That--and a lot of times you can do things in your own culture, but you don't want anybody else doing it. And the thing that I find out--it's like being African American, and I love being African American--that if somebody else does something, it becomes really offensive to you. You can talk about neck bones and black eyed peas or soul food, but you don't want people to do that in a way that it's a put down. Speaker 1: You wouldn't want the president of the university to ask you if you wanted a plate of neck bones (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right, I'm serving you this because like we have an Indian we serve Indian food. But don't assume that because I'm African American that that makes, that's the kind of thing that makes me happy. You know, don't assume that. And so, I think that it's a right. Human rights have become the American way, and it's not just for some, it's for all. Story_ID: 610137 Speaker 1: Now, what was the response of the board? Now, how many board members are there on the-- Speaker 2: Nine, and the governor makes ten. Speaker 1: Okay. And when you submitted the proposal-- Speaker 2: What I did when I first (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) or when you read the resolution-- Speaker 2: When I, when I--you know, there had been a long fight about the removal of Chief Illiniwek for fifteen years, and it just got nowhere. And so, you know, I never even thought about it. I imagine what happened is that the people who were fighting this, who wanted to see the chief gone, probably reached out to every new trustee to see where that trustee was. Because I started getting emails and letters about Chief Illiniwek, and they would send information about how, how it affected them. And so then I started talking about it and asking about it, really. But being new, I needed to know what the history was. So, I was supplied with the history and how difficult it was to broach the subject, because several trustees had tried before. In fact, Gloria Bacon [HistoryMaker Dr. Gloria Jackson Bacon] was on before I was. And Roger Plummer had done a study. They had authorized him to do a study on it, and he said that there did not seem to be a compromise. So, Gloria had worked--she was the only no vote. And they really ran her down, and the newspaper was down there, which they did to me, too. I didn't care. I think having come from the South Side [Chicago, Illinois] and being a fighter all my life, it didn't really make me any difference what they said. And so, what I did was to present my resolution. But prior to that I had spoken to each board member, and with the exception of two people, they were all for it; they said the time had come. And four of the board members are--now it's five--are U of I [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois] graduates, and they loved the chief. But they said, they admitted that the time had come for change. So I spoke to all the members, and then when it came time to vote for it, the pressure had come on them where--because I had the vote, I had eight votes. The pressure was put on them so heavily that I lost one of my votes. You had to have--I needed six votes, and so I lost a vote, you know. When I say I lost a vote, there was some wavering as to what should occur. And so, I was not going to put my vote on the floor and have it voted down or tabled. Because it was already--the chief was already active, so there was no sense in putting it on the floor and having it--so, I mean I commiserated all night long with the attorneys as to my alternatives and my motion, et cetera, et cetera. So nobody knew what I was going to do. And I withdrew my motion, but I did talk to people who I knew were pro-chief, because I did not want them to table my motion. And I asked them if I withdraw my motion, I don't want you to make another motion to table it. So they were, they were delighted not to do that, (laughter) and they didn't have to fight with their constituency I imagine about retaining the chief. So, then we continued in a different way, a different approach. Story_ID: 610138 Speaker 1: Now, what happened? Now how did they, how did you get it passed? Speaker 2: How it finally pass? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Well, we got new members on, a couple of new members on the board, and we continued to talk about it. And it became a real divisive issue, because there--it was dividing the campus. And even though the pro-chief people outweighed the anti-chief people, everywhere you went it was a bone of contention. So the trustees were still looking at how to resolve this issue, and we were getting sanctions from the NCAA [National Collegiate Athletic Association]--the NCCA [sic.]. We were getting sanctions, and we had a sanction that we could not host a conference. Well, we didn't host them anyway, but there were--the athletes were not coming to the University of Illinois [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois] because of the chief. Speaker 1: So, it was a recruiting problem? Speaker 2: Oh, yes, they had a big problem; it became a big issue. And so they weren't going to get caught up in that, especially when they had other choices. So, it became an issue for us. It was not just something that died and went away; we were meeting it all the time. So, more people were understanding the statistics and what was happening to the university. We're a world class university, but we were getting letters from across the world about Chief Illiniwek, and individuals not coming. And we were also getting threats from the alumni, mostly in their forties and fifties, who were saying they were going to stop giving their money if Chief Illiniwek went away, because they were so wedded to the idea. But we did our research, and for everyone that left, we would get a new one that was not giving because of Chief Illiniwek. So it wasn't going to affect anything, and we could still run the same high class university. So, that was not the threat. The threat was the feelings of the people in central Illinois, because the rest of the people didn't give a hoot about Chief Illiniwek. So, we were able to convince the other trustees that it was in the best interest of the university to take a stand to remove Chief Illiniwek. Story_ID: 610139 Speaker 1: Well, did any, was there anything remarkable that happened on the part of those who didn't wanna? Did they do anything remarkable to block the (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You mean the people? They're still trying to have a lawsuit and bring it back. They didn't disappear, you know. Speaker 1: So, so the mascot has been--I mean was voted out? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: But when--did it take--I mean has it been-- Speaker 2: No, it started (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Have provisions been-- Speaker 2: --in September. Speaker 1: It started in--this coming September will be the-- Speaker 2: Last September. Last September we had no more mascot. Speaker 1: Okay, as of last September there was no-- Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: --chief [Chief Illiniwek]? Speaker 2: Right, right, it lasted until June. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then in September when the games started up again, there was no mascot, you know. There were a lot of die hards at the time. You know, we do the Three in One, right. And at the time, the chief used to come out with the band and they would stand, you know, and yell and scream. Well, now they go, "Chief," but there's no chief, you know. Speaker 1: Was there any attempt to substitute the chief with-- Speaker 2: No, no, we had a kind of-- Speaker 1: --another symbol? Speaker 2: We--not yet. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was thought that best leave--the chancellor has the responsibility of disposing of the chief. My original suggestion was that the chief be placed in the library, you know, in a glass case, and that the symbol be retired. Speaker 1: It's historical. Speaker 2: As a historical part of the University of Illinois [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois]. And so the chancellor there at UIUC has the responsibility for bringing--you know, there's a society called the Chief Society [Honor the Chief Society]. There's a society of the chiefs. All of the students who ever played the chief, they have a society. So there were--and then there were copyrights on--the university has a copyright on the chief symbol. But if you don't use the copyright, somebody else can--if you don't use it somebody else can take it. So it's a legal entity that has to be addressed that we're working on to make sure (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And I guess there's money, too, associated with this-- Speaker 2: Well, the money-- Speaker 1: --the marketing of this figure, yeah. Speaker 2: Don't you think that was the whole thing? It's all about, with a capitalistic society it's all about the money. So they can't make any new chief items, but those chief items just sold out like that. So, because it's hard for people to give up any symbolism. We know that from across the world. Story_ID: 610140 Speaker 1: Are there any more Illini Indians [Native American] left? Speaker 2: No. The Peoria Tribe [Peoria Tribe of Indians of Oklahoma] is the one that represents the Illini Indians. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. And so I communicate with the, one of the chiefs of the Peoria Tribe. And the regalia was actually received from the Oglala Tribe [Oglala Sioux Tribe]. And it was Chief Crazy-- Speaker 1: Crazy Horse? Speaker 2: Crazy Horse had sold one of the outfits to the university [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois]. And at that time, the Indians--and that was eighty years ago, right? At that time in 1923 I think, he brought, they bought--in 1980 they bought some regalia. But at that time, the Indians had not become self-sufficient. The Indian nations had not become as self-sufficient as they are now. And it's like African Americans, where once they reach a certain status they're able to stand up for what's right. The Martin Luther Kings [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]--and, you know, we've been doing it all our lives with Garvey [Marcus Garvey] and all. We've had black leaders forever, but there was a time when the Paul Robesons were thrown out for speaking up. And, but now we understand that the whole nature of survival is for you to stand up for yourself. Somebody else--you can't count on somebody else to do it. And that's what I like about the Indian nations now, they're standing up. And with the capitalism of society that we're in with the ownership of the casinos, I guess has given them a base. And they're opening up museums, and they're realizing that they have not been relegated to reservations. Story_ID: 610141 Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: I want to see us mentor--and when I say us, I mean those of us who have had the opportunity to excel. I want to see us go back like we used to do and mentor the children, mentor the young people. I think that our young people have been robbed of mentorship from their own people, from their community, because we stopped being a community and we moved away. When I was growing up, we had people who had jobs and people who didn't have jobs all living together. And then we went into an era where people who didn't have anything all were thrown together. And only if they had someone to show them the way out, they got out, and it became a way of life. And it's easy to have a way of life established and to lose hope. That's really easy if you don't see anything around you happening. And I think that we owe it to our people to bring back the hope; not just to talk about it, but to show them the way, to be there to provide--not charity, but to help our kids to get in the schools. So, access. I'm the chairman of access for the University of Illinois [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois]. And my goal is to bring more African Americans and more minorities into the University of Illinois. I'm also the representative for all the public universities in Illinois, and to improve the numbers of African Americans that are enrolled--and in my position, all minorities--to make sure that they get the opportunity, especially African American males. Because when I was at the detention center [Cook County Juvenile Temporary Detention Center, Chicago, Illinois], 99 percent of the population was African American males. Now, there are more females coming in. But the reason why the guys were in there is because they had dropped out of school. They were, some of them were counseled out of school at sixteen. But I'm talking about dropping out of school in elementary school. The students that I received had not taken a test since second or third grade. Now, you know, we test every year. They had not--so their second grade tests was on their records. So when you look at a child's reading score, you get a kid that's thirteen and his reading score is second grade. That's really not true. So I started--having been a counselor, I started looking at the year that they took it; they would be absent for the test. They think they'll fail the test anyway, so, they either didn't go to school that day or had--whatever, but they didn't take the test. Speaker 1: That's really sad. That's-- Speaker 2: It was just as simple as that. So guess what? I instituted the test. They went to school, and I had the student after school reading and gave them the skills. They--three weeks maybe--I had three groups of kids, one group that stayed a year because they were there for much more serious charge. Another group just stayed two or three days, and another group stayed maybe three or four weeks. Speaker 1: (Cough) I'm sorry go ahead. Speaker 2: Okay. I wasn't sure (unclear) but three or four weeks. And so I, having been in charge of staff development, having to teach people in two days or three days. If the adults could learn, then the kids could learn. So we had lesson plans for three weeks, six weeks, and a year. And they had to take the test when the public schools took the test, so they could have some scores on their records. So when they got--because you could go--since it was Chicago Public Schools, you could go back into the regular school that you came from. Of course, the principal didn't want you there. And so, we would have to find a school. But in the collaboration, and being experienced, we were able to teach the same subjects at the same time, so that the kids could take their grades back to the public schools with them. So, Vallas [Paul Vallas] gave me an advocate to get the kids back in the school, and that's what we did. So, it was just the matter of putting some processes into place. So, this is what I want to see happen. I want to see, whether it's in the church, or whether it's at a community organization, or whether it's on your block, for us to connect with kids. Because they're learning from each other so much, and they really need to learn from an individual that's a little bit more mature, that has, has been through some of the times; not to preach, but to teach. Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's what I want to see. Story_ID: 610142 Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do, do differently if you could? Speaker 2: You know what I would do? You--I have had many ideas and wanted to do lots and lots of things. And I've found that the reason why I didn't take off on some of those, is I had no one to teach me the way. And what I would do is to--like I wanted to own my own--my dream had been as a kindergarten teacher, was to open a nursery school, and I never did that. And all I needed to do was to have someone to show me how. And so what I would do differently, is I would go and find that person now. (Laughter) You know, that's what I would do differently. Because I really think I should really be in big business now. I'm very creative, very innovative, and work well with people. So, I really think that I could do more for my people if I had--you know, I had a lot of opportunities that came to me. And so, I probably was distracted because I worked in a lot of jobs and did a lot of things. I've had the opportunity to get many kids--not kids, educators into different programs. Like, I started doctoral programs with Illinois State [Illinois State University, Normal, Illinois] and with Northern Illinois University [DeKalb, Illinois], where I have over 125 doctoral students that I can name and call on that got their doctorates. So, I've mentored people to move on into higher education. But I think I probably need to be running my university, you know. Story_ID: 610143 Speaker 1: This is a similar question. But when you look back on everything now, what do you consider today to be your legacy? Speaker 2: My students. The stu--I helped to get the doctoral program at Roosevelt [Roosevelt University, Chicago, Illinois] started, and half the principals in Chicago [Illinois] were tutored under me. And the students that I had in elementary, high school, and especially at the college level, are my greatest legacy. I walk out in the street, and anywhere I go I see a student. And they come up and say to me what they learned from me, and how I encouraged them. And that's my greatest reward. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: There's no city that I go in where I can't--there's not someone who says I was in their class. I'm at funerals and everything, and I don't even remember some of them. (Laughter) And they say, "Dr. Carroll [HistoryMaker Frances Graves Carroll], I know you don't remember me, but I was in your class. And everything that you taught me about special education--," and I went to a funeral this summer, and this was really the greatest legacy. This woman--and I usually remember my students after they tell me, but I could not place her. And she said, "I know you don't remember." And she said--she gave me her name, and the name was not even familiar. And she said, "I'm the secretary of education, and everything you taught me about special education, I've used." And the thing about it, I only had them one term. Because House Bill 150 [Illinois House Bill 150] said everybody in education had to take a special education course, remember. And I said, "I'm going to teach you what you're supposed to know, not what you see every day happening. Because you've got to stay out of jail." And so they would listen, that got their attention. They had a test the first day on special education and, of course, you know, they all failed it. Now, this is how the kids feel. Now, let's see what you do at the end of the semester. And they got the same test at the end of the semester. I exposed them to everything in special education--the conferences; they went to meetings. And I taught every day--no, just one day a week, really. And so they had to know that if they were going to be administrators, to protect themselves and their kids. So, they say it's paying off. So, that's, that's, that's my, that's my legacy. Story_ID: 610144 Speaker 1: Now, you were married in 1956, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And can you tell us about your family? Speaker 2: Yes. I--well, my hus- as I mentioned earlier, my husband [Floyd Carroll] passed in October of last year. We were married fifty-one years. And I have two children, a son [Floyd Carroll II] and a daughter [Francesca Carroll]. And my son is in education. He fought it, he didn't want to go into education. He's now the head of the military school for the Chicago Public Schools. He worked in higher ed for fifteen years, so he was on college campuses. He was with Illinois State [Illinois State University, Normal, Illinois], Wisconsin [University of Wisconsin Madison, Madison, Wisconsin], Ypsilanti, Eastern University [Eastern Michigan University, Ypsilanti, Michigan], and then Toledo [University of Toledo, Toledo, Ohio]. And so he's brought all this knowledge. Chicago [Illinois] started changing, and he just loved Chicago, so he got himself back in Chicago and went to Chicago Public Schools in post-secondary education. And what he learned in the colleges--he was director of multicultural studies on the different campuses, and he just brought it back. He has the five military schools and the JROTC [Junior Reserve Officers' Training Corps] programs. And he's gotten scholarships for the kids. He takes them to West Point [United States Military Academy, West Point, New York] and to the Citadel [The Citadel, The Military College of South Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina], and they're, they're just wonderful kids. He got his first Gates Millennium Scholar this year. He always has a high aim. When he was on the college campus he wanted his first African American student to be a 4.0 [grade point average]. So he started, he would identify certain students when they would come and in, and work with them to encourage them. He was in charge of the Golden Key [Golden Key International Honour Society] on each campus, to work with the honor students. So, he, that's what he does. My daughter has a learning disability, and she had meningitis when she was eleven days old. And so I worked with her--she had spina bifida; she's had everything. She just graduated from Northeastern Illinois University [Chicago, Illinois] in December. She works for the Chicago Public Schools in specialized services, and we've been around the world everywhere. And she's a workaholic herself, and very admired by all that she works with. So, I'm very proud of my kids. My husband was in insurance, and he worked for the government and the Chicago post office. And he was the chairman of our deacon board at church. He's Alpha [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity]--he was an Alpha, I should say, and he was president of the Theta Chapter, just a wonderful guy from Mobile, Alabama. And he was very highly cultured, you know, an opera buff, classical music, all of that. His mother was a principal and had her own school in Mobile years ago. And so my twin sister [Grace Graves Dawson] is an educator, we do the exact same thing. She's a trustee at Northeastern Illinois University. She has two sons. One is a dentist and one works for the Santa Fe railroad [Burlington Northern and Santa Fe Railway]; he does the--corrects the rails through a computer. You do all this through a computer. When there's a derailment or anything, he runs it from--so he lives in upper Wisconsin. So anyway, there's one grandson in the family. (Laughter) So, and neither of our, you know, neither of my kids are married nor is my sister's son. One of her sons is not married. The dentist is not married, but the eldest one is. So they all went to the University of Chicago Laboratory School [University of Chicago Laboratory Schools, Chicago, Illinois], and Clark [Clark Dawson] graduated from Howard, Howard dental school [Howard University College of Dentistry, Washington, D.C.]. Story_ID: 610145 Speaker 1: Now, is there anything I have not asked you that we need to cover before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: You needed to ask me about my civic and religious work (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Well, all right. Speaker 2: Well, I'm the director of Christian education at my church. Speaker 1: That's Progressive [Progressive Baptist Church, Chicago, Illinois], is it still Progressive? Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: No? Okay. Speaker 2: I go to Greater Bethesda [Greater Bethesda Missionary Baptist Church, Chicago, Illinois]. I've been at Greater Bethesda thirty-seven years. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's at 53rd [Street] and Michigan [Avenue], and our church is 128 years old. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Dr. A. Lincoln James [A. Lincoln James, Sr.] was the pastor there for fifty-two years. He was also the president of the National Baptist Congress of Christian Education. Greater Bethesda had some of the most renowned African Americans as its members. Dr. Walker [ph.] was the chairman of our trustee board, the first African American Negro millionaire. And Overton of Overton powder company [Overton Hygienic Manufacturing Company]. Speaker 1: Anthony Overton, right. Speaker 2: Parker House [Parker House Sausage Company, Chicago, Illinois], Parker sausages, Grisham, Daryl Grisham. They were all members. And we have the greatest, we have the greatest music. We do the 'Messiah' [George Frideric Handel] every year for fifty years. We've done the 'Messiah' on the second Sunday in December, and it's renowned. We have one of the three churches in Chicago [Illinois] with the music pipe organ. And so, we just celebrated the fiftieth year that we've done the 'Messiah' this last past December. And the musicians from all over come to hear our choirs. We have great music every Sunday. And so we have, our church now has an aging congregation. And our pastor retired a year ago, two years ago. And so we have a young minister that's the assistant pastor, and he's a University of Illinois [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois] graduate in engineering, a chemical engineer. And he went back to his calling; he went to American Seminary, Theological Seminary [sic. Northern Seminary, Lombard, Illinois]. And he was so outstanding in his class that the president of the seminary came and awarded him his degree at our church. And he said--he's projecting that he will be the first African American president of the American Theological Seminary [ph.]. He's a very smart young man, thirty years old. And his wife is also a chemical engineer, the first African American and first female to head the Yoplait plant for General Mills [General Mills Inc.]. Speaker 1: Now what are their names? You may as well give their names. Speaker 2: David Watkins [David Watkins III]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And Latasha Watkins [Latasha Napper Watkins]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She's just been designated to become one of the first vice presidents of General Mills, and she's moving to Minnesota. So we're very proud of our kids, because at Bethesda it's not, are you going to college? It's, which college are you going to? And we've given hundreds and hundreds of thousands of dollars for scholarships for our kids to go to college. And we send them packages, and that's a part of Christian education. We also have a homeless program, breakfast program, every Sunday. That started, this is the nineteenth year. And they come and get a full breakfast every Sunday morning and a full sermon. (Laughter) So, the assistant ministers come out and they take turns. So then we have a Saturday free school that my sister [Grace Graves Dawson] is the principal of for--this is the eighteenth year of the Saturday free school. Every Saturday morning from ten to twelve--and we all certified teachers, everything is volunteer. We have a computer lab, and Blue Cross Blue Shield [Blue Cross Blue Shield Association] gave us ninety computers. And of the church members repaired the computers and set them up; they have the software. And our kids tested highest on the public school tests, okay. And our students from Roosevelt [Roosevelt University, Chicago, Illinois] have staffed the Saturday free school. So, only certified teachers can teach. But the other members who are not teachers can participate in the attendance and help with the activities--the tours and the trips that the kids take. So, we're very proud of that. So, I spend all my spare time in, as director of Christian education where we have many programs. Story_ID: 610146 Speaker 1: And then I'm also civically involved. I just stepped down as the president of Theta Omega Chapter of Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.], which is one of the largest chapters, and just completed building a $2.5 million community service center in Woodlawn [Chicago, Illinois] where we serve the student programs. So I was instrumental in getting--when I took over as president, there was a hole in the ground. And now we have a hundred thousand foot community service center. So, we're very proud of that. Story_ID: 610147 Speaker 1: Now, is-- Speaker 2: It's your last question (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Well the last question. Speaker 2: You got one left, okay (laughter). Speaker 1: The last question is similar to legacy, but a little different. Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: I would like to be remembered as an individual who has always taken time to listen to others, especially in the relationship of education, the field of education, and who helped others to find their way to a brighter future. That's how I want to be remembered, because that's my, my mission. The soul of my being is to share information with others, and I think I've done a pretty good job in listening and in doing that. I do a lot of talking--but in helping others to find the avenues and to try to be a resource for, for, for young people and anybody that's interested in education. Story_ID: 610148 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer for The HistoryMakers. Today's date is July the 11th, 2008, and we're-- Speaker 2: Tenth. Speaker 1: I'm sorry? Speaker 2: Isn't it the 10th? Speaker 1: The 10th? Oh, the 10th, I'm sorry, July the 10th, 2008. And we're finishing-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): No, it's 2009. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Just kidding. Speaker 2: They're messing with me now Speaker 1: They're messing with you. Speaker 2: Yeah, they're messing with me now. But it's July 10th, 2008 and we're finishing an interview we started in February. Story_ID: 610149 Speaker 1: Dr. Carroll [HistoryMaker Frances Graves Carroll], tell us about some of your community activities. Speaker 2: Well, I have been involved in working with the community through various organizations. There are about five organizations that I have contributed my time to. I am very active in the Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.], and if you want to call that a community organization, I'm just going to put that under there. It's more-- Speaker 1: It's a service organization (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) a service organization. And our motto is, service to all mankind. And I'm a Silver Star this year. That means I've been in the sorority for twenty-five years. I just completed my term as president of the Theta Omega Chapter, which is one of the largest chapters in the sorority of two hundred thousand women. This is our centennial year, and we'll be going back to Washington, D.C. to Howard University where we started the first African American Greek organization for black women in--100 years ago. So, we're really excited about that. We have the opportunity, and I've been fortunate to be able to serve on several committees. One is the connection committee, where I have the opportunity to involve the community and the membership in getting out the vote, participating in activities that will empower black Americans politically, carrying them to various activities, participating in voter registration, and engaging our membership as well as the public in being enlightened about all candidates. I also had the opportunity to take our membership to Springfield [Illinois] to lobby with the legislators. And so, we have an AKA day in Springfield where we go every year in March to meet with the governor and the legislators to talk about the needs of our community. We've been very successful in getting their ear. We go to the assembly, the General Assembly [Illinois General Assembly], and to the Senate [Illinois Senate]. We have partnered with now President Emil Jones, Jr. [HistoryMaker Emil Jones, Jr.] who is an honorary soror in our chapter. And he was the first person to introduce us to Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barak Obama] and ask for our support of him, and said, "This young man is going far." And this was when he was running for the Congress, U.S. Congress. And we rallied behind him and participated in helping him to get elected to the U.S. Senate. Story_ID: 610150 Speaker 1: I also have been able to work with the homeless, and we established a homeless program in my, at my church. It's a breakfast program, and this is the twentieth year now. Every Sunday morning we serve breakfast to the homeless. It's not a soup kitchen. We prepare a full course breakfast for them and provide a service. We have counseling and social services so that they can--we can help them get out of their predicament. Speaker 2: What's the name of your church? Speaker 1: Greater Bethesda Baptist Church [Greater Bethesda Missionary Baptist Church, Chicago, Illinois] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 1: I'm the director of Christian education there. And the sorority [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.] comes over and helps to serve breakfast. It's a very orderly, organized activity. Even the 51st Street police district brings guys over and we have--so we have seen children. We have mostly males, but some females, and we have seen people in destitute positions that have helped themselves to move ahead in life, and we've been able to support them. And now this program, what we like about it is it's fully funded by the membership; it's not a government program. So, we have all volunteers and we never have less than fifteen to twenty people there to serve every Sunday morning, and we serve anywhere from forty-five to a hundred people. And they come--they have to be in the service by 8:30 to participate, because we want them to hear what we have to say. And they communicate and talk, and then we serve them breakfast at nine o'clock. And we clean up so well and sanitize the place, and most of the membership don't even know that they've been there. Speaker 2: Now, how many years have you been doing this? Speaker 1: Twenty years, this is our twentieth year (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Twenty years, okay. This reminds me somewhat of the Black Panther breakfast program [Free Breakfast for School Children Program] years ago. You know, they started doing that back in the '60s [1960s]. But it's-- Speaker 1: It's a great service. And there are many, there are many organizations that have breakfast programs or food programs. But we like to think that we are one of a kind, because not only do we feed their physical body, we feed their souls. And we're very proud of the fact that we're able to help them to look inward and to help themselves. Story_ID: 610151 Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Also, I've been able and blessed to have considered through my life to work in other organizations. I have been on the executive board of Youth Guidance [Chicago, Illinois], which is a social agency for--in fact, I'm a senior board member. I've been on that board for almost thirty years. And we help at risk youth, and have been able to finance some of their college expenses. We have many programs now through the Chicago public school system [Chicago Public Schools] where we reach these young people. I established a scholarship fund, and it's really just for seed money. Like, many of the youngsters, because of their economic condition they can get full scholarships, but they didn't have airfare to get to the college, or clothes. And so I have been able to give them small scholarships, five hundred to a thousand dollars, so they can get to college. Speaker 1: Is that through Youth Guidance? Speaker 2: Yes, through Youth Guidance. Speaker 1: Now, that's James Comer's [HistoryMaker Dr. James Comer] project. Speaker 2: Yeah, we have a--yeah, we brought him into Chicago [Illinois], oh, maybe fifteen or twenty years ago. And the Comer, we have the Comer project [Comer School Development Program] where they work with parents and the community in particular schools, and he's been extremely effective. His program, we go all over the country. Vivian Loseth is our executive director now, and she was the one that was assigned to do the Comer project, and she's just done amazing things with that Comer project. We're in many, we're there in many states now. Story_ID: 610152 Speaker 1: I have had the opportunity to work with Phi Delta Kappa [Phi Delta Kappa International], which is a professional sorority. And I've been in that sorority for over thirty-five years, where I worked as dean of the high school students. That unit is called Azenos [ph.], and we had the opportunity to train young women to use their talents and skills, and to value education. I mentioned before that my mission is to serve and to help young people especially--that means from early childhood through college to pursue their educational goals and to inspire them to continue their education. So, currently I have at least 160 students who have gotten their doctorate degrees from Illinois universities--Roosevelt University [Chicago, Illinois], Illinois State [Illinois State University, Normal, Illinois]. I was honored for having, back in '98 [1998], for having sixty graduates in the Ph.D. program where I wrote the proposal for minorities to go Illinois State in special education, and that number now is up to about 125. I had also had the privilege of, while I was employed with the Chicago Public Schools for over forty years as an administrator, to also teach at Roosevelt University as an adjunct professor. And I taught all the students in special education who were getting their master's and doctorate degree. So, I had the opportunity to encourage them to go on to attain the highest degrees that they could. So, I feel really good about the fact that I chaired over twenty-five dissertations, and those people have come back to serve the community. Their pledge is that they have to help somebody else. So, we know that it takes a village to raise a child. And since I'm talking about educators, it's important that we as educators understand that there's a teachable moment, and if you stop and help someone, that that person can give back to the community and we can improve the community and the skills that we have. Story_ID: 610153 Speaker 1: Now, when did you join AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.]? You, you joined in college, right? Speaker 2: Yes. No, I joined as-- Speaker 1: Or did you (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) as a graduate. Speaker 1: As a graduate, okay. Speaker 2: Right. In-- Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: --nineteen eighty three [1983]. Speaker 1: Nineteen eighty-three [1983], okay. Speaker 2: So, this is my twenty-fifth year being a member of Alpha Kappa Alpha, and I've held many positions. This year I'm very proud to say that I'm chairing at the centennial boule, which is our business meeting that occurs every two years, and I'm chairing the Central Region. We have ten regions in our sorority, and the Central Region is one of the smallest. We have some ten states involved in the Central Region, and I am the luncheon chair for the boule for the Central Region. I have also been appointed to the international connections committee, which helps to enlighten the sorority on any community service that helps us to empower economically the membership and African Americans. I also will serve on the rules committee when I go next week. So, I'm looking forward to very involved activity. We will have a unity march on Thursday, where we expect to have all of the Pan-Hellenic Council [National Pan-Hellenic Council] which involves--all of the African American and Greek fraternities and sororities will march. And on Sunday, we will have a centennial march where all, a centennial march where all of the members and the families of Alpha Kappa Alpha women will- can participate. Story_ID: 610154 Speaker 1: I'd just like to say a little bit about my church work, because I think that is the soul of my being. I've been, I was baptized when I was five years of age at Progressive Baptist Church [Chicago, Illinois], which is right next to Comiskey Park, now U.S. Cellular park [U.S. Cellular Field; Guaranteed Rate Field, Chicago, Illinois], and that church has a rich history. I think a Dreamgirl, Jennifer--what is the-- Speaker 2: Holliday [Jennifer Holliday]? Speaker 1: Holliday, yeah, she was--they did the interview at Progressive. I grew up there, and it gave me a background for what I do now. We had a program called the Emancipation Proclamation celebration on January 1st every year where everyone in the church--and the membership was about four thousand. Everyone in the church participated, but we always had a debate, and it was an honor to be a part of the debate team. And you were given a side; you didn't get to choose which side you were on, the pro or the con. And so-- Speaker 2: So when you were growing up they would-- Speaker 1: Yes, we would-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: We were doing the Emancipation Proclamation celebration on January 1st every year (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, well, were you ever assigned a pro-slavery position? Speaker 1: Oh, right. I was honored to be selected to participate every year on the debate team. And sometimes I had to talk about pro-slavery and, you know, it was the hardest--that was the hardest thing to do. And, but we had to read and do a lot of research in order to talk about how it happened. And you could choose how you discussed it. So I would always--if I had the pro side--and that would not always be the topic. Slavery was just--it focused on slavery, but it would be different topics as to how we looked at it. But we had to--I think the richest thing was that we had to do research, because you got points and you wanted your team to win. And so in order to--you had to decide what take you were going to do on your subject. So rather than talk about slavery was good, we'd talk about how it happened and what--the wit of the slaves in order to survive, and what they had to do in order to survive. And you could see the intelligence of the slaves as you looked at what they went through and how they prepared themselves to endure and to move from that. So it was a great lesson, I felt, for us as teenagers. Story_ID: 610155 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) When you look back, now who is--you know, who is the mentor for this program? Or whose idea was it? I mean as far as you could tell? Speaker 2: As far as--well, the pastor [of Progressive Baptist Church, Chicago, Illinois], T.E. Brown, who was an outstanding minister, it was his idea. But the leader of it was a gentleman by the name of Wardell Harston. And his son now-- Speaker 1: How do you spell, I'm sorry, how do you spell it? Speaker 2: H-A-R-S-T-O-N. Speaker 1: H-A-R-S-T-O-N. Speaker 2: He was a graduate of the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois]. And can you imagine, I'm talking about back in the late '40s [1940s]. Can you imagine all of the wisdom that we were exposed to as young people to have such teachers as these to participate? He was always the moderator, and he had so much knowledge and information for family, the Harston family. In fact they--construction, they own construction companies now, some of the grandchildren. Speaker 1: So they're contractors? Speaker 2: Right. And, and one of the daughters was my music teacher. She graduated from Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois], and she was a mentor. We lived all on the same block. And I think I mentioned that [HistoryMaker] Quincy Jones was my--he was in kindergarten with me. And the neighborhood, I lived at 35th [Street] and Wabash [Avenue]. And the neighborhood was just rich with people who could make contributions. And you had rich and--not rich, but you had people who had pretty good jobs-- Speaker 1: They had some means (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) and people who didn't have much, all together. So, it was an inspiration for us as children. I think that that's what we've lost now and we need to get back to. Speaker 1: I think that--well, when we talked in February you mentioned a man named Dr. Johnson [ph.] who his family sold shoes, I think it was? And he was, he was associated with the University of Chicago, the atomic project there; he was part of that. Do you remember that? Speaker 2: No, I may have mentioned to you Charles Johnson. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Who had, there were about, I think they had ten, eight to ten children in the family. And he went to DuSable [DuSable High School, Chicago, Illinois] with us. But they lived at 43rd [Street] and Indiana [Avenue], I think it was. And, but he went on to become--he went to the University of Chicago and then he was drafted in the, I think it was probably the Korean War. And he went to Europe and learned many languages and came back to Chicago [Illinois] to be a diplomat. And he's now in Vermont and he's still doing some of--he's retired, but he's still doing some of the same kind of work. But he just was, he was a real role model for us. Because we--Charles had come from--when you had a lot of children, that meant you were considered kind of on the poor side because there were just a lot of mouths to feed. So you don't have all of the resources that someone with one or two children had. But the great thing about our community was that we had people with large families and meager, meager, meager beginnings that they could--would have to share. And then we had students who their parents were doctors and lawyers. And so, and no one ever thought that they were better than the other. Story_ID: 610156 Speaker 1: I think I also mentioned that the president of Illinois Service Federal bank [Illinois Service Federal Savings and Loan Association, Chicago, Illinois], her grandmother lived on our block, Thelma Smith. And as teenagers, she and her sister worked at Illinois Service Federal which was on 47th [Street] and Michigan [Avenue] and is now at 46th [Street] and King Drive [Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. Drive]. And I've been a member of that bank since I was fifteen years of age. Because again, this minister, Reverend T.E. Brown, said every member of his church [Progressive Baptist Church, Chicago, Illinois] had to have a bank account. So we started out with like maybe five dollars, (laughter) and put something in every month or every week, and continued that bank account since then. When I go in and talk to the officers now--because as president of Theta Omega Chapter of Alpha Kappa Alpha [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.], I had the privilege of erecting a two and a half million dollar building. And we have a community service center, and we got our loan from Illinois Service Federal. I recommended Illinois Service Federal, and we have the largest loan that they've ever given to any group. So when I walk in the bank, everybody knows me. (Laughter) And it makes it-- but to think that the people that you grew up with--now Thelma has since retired. Her husband was a White Sox baseball player. They lived at 97th [Street], across the street from where we all lived at 97th and Wentworth [Avenue]. But it was--I asked Coretta [ph.]-- Speaker 2: I'm sorry, what was his last name? Speaker 1: Smith. Speaker 2: Smith, okay. Speaker 1: I'm trying to remember his first name. But her name was Thelma Smith. They were--if you don't remember Thelma Smith, she was the president of Illinois Service Federal for many, many years. Speaker 2: Now, I'm trying to think of--is it Al Smith? Speaker 1: Al Smith, that's right. Speaker 2: The ballplayer, right? Speaker 1: Right, right, right. Speaker 2: I think he was a famous picture of somebody pouring a cup of beer on his head? Speaker 1: Something they did. They did something, right. Speaker 2: Do you remember that? Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: There's something that happened in '59 [1959] I think when they were in the World Series or something. Speaker 1: I don't remember the year. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, it's, yeah, Al Smith. Speaker 1: And they, they kind of live in Chicago [Illinois] and in Florida now. But it's just, it's just such a rich experience, and I think that it's important that we tell our story and that we pass it down to other young people who maybe have lost sight of all of the gifts we have. And if we can do that, I think that we can kind of change some of the attitudes that we have now with some of our young people who don't--now, many young people value education, but we do have some who have been told that it's not important to have to pursue education and to have a certificate or have a skill. And we know now the job market--if you don't have some kind of skill or if you don't have an education or a degree or certificate, you really end up having to work on the streets. Story_ID: 610157 Speaker 1: How do you--when--we've been discussing your volunteer activities. How important are those activities nowadays for black people who have received an education and have professional occupations, in light of the fact that we don't have communities where you have doctors and lawyers living in the same community with the poorest people? Speaker 2: Oh, if we don't give back what we have received, I think we're doomed to--for failure. Because you can't get paid for everything you do, and the joy and the value of building a rich community is volunteerism. And we now have community service in the school because they're finding out how important that is. And most of the scholarships that are given are based on more so than your grades on what you have contributed to the school that you're in and to the community that you live in. It's, it's getting to be a very important part of the resume. So it's not just African Americans that need to do it. All people need to volunteer and give back their talents, and we're seeing a lot more of that. One of the reasons why African Americans probably aren't able to devote as much time as we should is that we have to work harder and travel farther, and there are more demands. And so you end up being tired at the end of the day, or being so busy at the end of the day. But more people are cutting out time for their, this opportunity to participate in volunteerism and in helping students to learn what they know. It's just a beautiful thing. And once you get organizations of volunteering, they don't stop. And can you imagine two hundred thousand women in Alpha Kappa Alpha [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.] and other Greek sororities and fraternities working as volunteers to make sure--that's what the program--Dr. Barbara McKinzie [HistoryMaker Barbara McKinzie], who is our supreme president, the national president, encourages volunteerism. And her program, the ESP program [Extraordinary Service Program] is based on us being in the community and giving back to the community. Story_ID: 610158 Speaker 1: Let me ask you one--I, I can think of two other things to ask. I don't know if we covered this the first time or not. But I know when we first came in, you were talking about something that you're still getting feedback about--the Chief Illiniwek situation. Speaker 2: Oh (laughter). Speaker 1: So, they're still getting letters and-- Speaker 2: Oh, every day. Speaker 1: --mail and calls to the University of Illinois [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois] because of the retiring of the mascot, Chief Illiniwek, right? Speaker 2: Yes. The mascot symbol, as it's called, for Chief Illiniwek, which as you know I had a basic part in helping to retire the chief because of the fact of the impact of that symbol in today's time and how it's demeaning to the people who--first, the Native Americans and minorities. Because this symbol that was so worshipped at the time that it came into being, the people that it affected were ignored. And I found out that so many people thought that it was a Native American dancing and depicting the chief, and they did not know that it was not. What has occurred now is we retired the chief, and that took a lot of cooperation in getting people to understand that it had outlived its time. And--but there are many people who graduated in the '40s [1940s] and the '50s [1950s] who cannot let go, and we get letters every day saying that "I won't make a contribution." And they just sign on the alumni response that until the chief comes back. But as it is, God is good. And for everyone that won't make a contribution, we get two that will. So-- Speaker 1: Okay. So the school hasn't suffered (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The school has not suffered at all. People who would not contribute because of the chief have now come forth and are making huge contributions. So, we're very pleased with that. And we know that, we know that it takes time to deal with change. And we anticipate it will be about four years before people would settle in, and people would accept the fact that the chief was not good for everybody; the chief symbol was not good for people, and that it offended people and that they should, you know, we should be more conscious of that and concerned about how the University of Illinois was projecting itself in the world. Speaker 1: So, I think the chief argument was that the Native American people felt that it was a mockery of them, rather (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was, and they were not consulted, even though Chief Fools Crow [Frank Fools Crow] brought the bonnet to the University of Illinois. But at that time, the money that he received was more important for his tribe than the effect that it would have on the people. So, I'm very pleased that the trustees are joined with me in helping to retire the chief. And I'm hopeful that all of our alumni will understand the need to step up and to know that all people are important, and to honor people in their alums rather than just think about their symbol and how they felt personally about this opportunity at the football games. And it's dying down. It's not gone yet, but it's dying down. Speaker 1: Okay. And one of the ironies is that you reintroduced a resolution, I guess, or formulated another one after-- Speaker 2: Right (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) others had tried. Speaker 2: Like fifteen years. I think this fight was going on about fifteen years. And in 2003 I reintroduced the resolution, and it took until, what, 2007 before we were able to get there. But we're there, and we're thankful that we had more people to begin to understand that the time had come to move ahead and to make the University of Illinois the university that it is, the outstanding leader in the world, not just in Urbana [Illinois]. Speaker 1: And you, yourself, are part Creek, right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Simultaneous) Before you continue-- Story_ID: 610159 Speaker 1: Yeah, I just wanted to make this point from the last roll. We--that you're, you have Creek ancestry, one of the Native American groups from the South. The Creeks who were in Florida and some of the other states. Speaker 2: Yes. And it was so interesting that I hadn't even thought about that until a reporter asked me why was I so adamant in the removal of the symbol of the chief, and was I sympathetic to Native Americans. And when he said that, it jolted my memory. You know, because we never, that was something you didn't talk about. You didn't talk about being African, because when I was in high school [DuSable High School, Chicago, Illinois] all you talked--all they talked about was Africans in the jungle. And so, it was not something that you identified yourself with. But when he mentioned that, I always knew that I had Indian [Native American] blood, but it was not something that you went around talking about. It's almost like every African American, and many people have Indian blood. And I said, "Well my, my--well, now that you mention it, my [paternal] grandmother [Frances Graves] is Creek Indian, but that was not my motivation." And so, we had a long conversation about that. In fact, he came from New York [New York] to interview me, and they had a picture in the paper with me holding my grandmother's picture. But all I remember about her was that she was very stern, and she loved her grandchildren. And she went--in fact, I remember being in Alabama just one time, but we stayed a couple of years, and had an opportunity to be at her house every day. But she would not travel to Chicago [Illinois]; she would not come out of York, Alabama. That's about a hundred miles from Birmingham [Alabama]. But she had this long, black hair and was--I'm saying that she was pure blooded, but she was very fair, you know. But the opportunity to--my whole--I guess my whole life I've just been against unfair things, and working in boycotts and marching. And the idea when I was appointed as a trustee--you know, in Chicago we didn't hear much about Illiniwek [Chief Illiniwek]. And then when I get to Urbana [Illinois] I go to a football game and I see this chief, you know, and the crowd. And so, I started investigating what's going on. And then we were in an age where symbolism is important, and should be the right symbolism. So, then I just--I thought it was going to be really easy just to bring up the resolution. And I started talking about it and I had no idea it was going to be a major war-- Speaker 1: Now did you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) when we started. Story_ID: 610160 Speaker 1: Did you--were you aware of the other resolutions, I mean the resolutions that preceded yours? Before, before you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, I had. You know, [HistoryMaker] Dr. Gloria Jackson Bacon had, maybe in 2000 I think it was, had brought up the idea of removing the chief [Chief Illiniwek]. Now, this was after I had done it. You know, I did my research afterwards, after I had brought the idea to the table. And the trustees, the majority--I talked to each trustee separately, and they all agreed with me. And then the pressure came on them, because you have to post what you're going to do. The pressure came on them, you know, so they started backing up. But that's when I found out that she was the lone trustee voting to remove the chief. And I would imagine that she probably had the same support in the beginning. And so when I found out that I wasn't sure about who would vote, I removed my resolution from the table so that it wouldn't be voted down. It wasn't any sense in putting it on the table when we already had the chief. And if it was voted down, it might have been tabled, et cetera, et cetera. So I went to the opposing trustees that I knew, because of where they lived--of their position. And I asked them, told them what I was going to do, and that I did not want them to table it. And they said okay, so I had full cooperation. And they were very honest about where they felt and what they could do. And so, it was a very cordial kind of opportunity for me to bring it back up. However, we removed it from the table, so it wasn't voted on. The people were, the pro-chief people were very happy. The people who wanted it to be removed were very sad, and they couldn't understand my action. So-- Speaker 1: So, they thought you'd sold them out or something (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. They, they, they didn't understand, you know. They were just--you know, the room was packed, and they didn't know what was going on. And some of them were crying, because they wanted it to come to a vote. Well, if it had come to a vote it would probably have been voted down. So, I believe in having more than one tactic, you know, and I believe in winning. And if it takes more time to win, then I have to go and regroup. It's not--it wasn't just the activity to get it out there and then vote it up or down. I wanted to win, because it was a very important issue. Story_ID: 610161 Speaker 1: I thought--I don't know if I asked this the last time, but since your specialty is special education, and that's a serious matter every year we talk about it, or anytime we talk about it. What do you consider today to be the state of special education in the public schools? Speaker 2: Well, there's a change. You know, we started out fir- in the beginning, years ago, back before 1975 before the Individuals Act was enacted in 1974 [sic. Education for All Handicapped Children Act of 1975], that's when we really had to go and--when all individuals with developmental differences were given the right to go to school. Because before that, if the school didn't have a place for you, you didn't go to school. And then when IDEA was passed [Individuals with Disabilities Education Act of 1990], every child had the right to go to school. Well, at that particular time I was a special education coordinator, so I had the privilege of learning the law and then teaching the law to all the principals in the Chicago Public Schools. So, there was a group of us who were coordinators. And my specialty is educable mentally handicapped. And we began to, we had to have workshops to teach all the teachers and all--first the principals. Because we were getting--we were beginning to get lawsuits in the public schools for principals not having the accommodations for the students, and they thought they could tell the parents that there was no room. That wasn't allowed after the law. The IDEA Act was never funded completely. It was only funded 20 percent. So, the schools were really strapped to provide all of the necessary programs for the students without the money. So, that hit the schools really hard. So, the Americans for Disabilities Act [Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990] was passed, and that accommodated--the accommodations--that's why we got the curbs and we have the braille on the elevator and all; you have to have access. So, as the laws continue to be passed--and parents, you know, brought this all about as they continued to advocate for their children more and more. And that involved more and more funds to be allocated from the federal and the state budgets to the schools and to the agencies to, to be able to provide these services. Story_ID: 610162 Speaker 1: So now we have moved into reintegrating--first we took the students out of the population and had special programs. Now, we're reintegrating them back into the population. And I think that's where all people should be; they should work together. And people are now more aware of individuals with disabilities, whether it be physical or mental disabilities, and they are providing some of the necessary opportunities, classes, and programs. You asked what is the state? Since so many have been identified and have come out of hiding, there's just, there's not been enough funds to take care of the needs. We know that the busses have access, and almost now every bus has access. They have a lift; that's physically. Emotionally, I think we're behind, and we are now looking at autism and finding out what is the cause of autism. Because at first you might have--at first when we started--and I'm talking about maybe even just ten years ago--there would just be very few classes for autistic kids, maybe one in a district, not one in the school. Now, individuals are being identified with autism in the masses. You know, it used to just be an unknown--it's an unknown ailment. Now, we're trying to find out what's causing autism and how to best treat it. And I can recall in the '90s [1990s] when they started the program on autism in the Chicago Public Schools; they just started a program for early childhood. And as they trained the teachers--because when we start a program we have to train the teachers. As we trained the teachers, it was like hit and miss. What do we do for these kids? Now, we are much better prepared in dealing with the problems of the autistic child, and we are finding cures for it. It used to be there was no cure. In fact, Dr. Bettelheim [Bruno Bettelheim], who had The Orthogenic--was at The Orthogenic School [Sonia Shankman Orthogenic School] at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], was one of the first educators who were professors who started working with autistic kids. And he met, he worked with the most severe. And only the rich could afford to go to The Orthogenic School. Now, we're in the state of revamping special education for services in the Chicago Public Schools for all individuals. And we, they have a regular teacher and a special ed teacher in the high schools in the same classroom. And the problem that might occur in some classrooms is that if you have a special child and you're responsible for getting all the kids to a certain grade level, sometimes the special child gets left out. So they're trying to remedy that so that all students will be included. So, at this time we're going through a change in how to educate special education students or students with disabilities to--mental and emotional disabilities so that they can get the best that they can get from the educational system. Story_ID: 610163 Speaker 1: Now, is there anything else we need to cover before we wrap up, or? Speaker 2: No, I just--the only thing I'm going to say is something about my family. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. I have a special ed daughter, and I was in special education before my daughter was born. And she had meningitis, spinal meningitis at eleven days of age. And she has a learning disability, and she just graduated from Northeastern University [Northeastern Illinois University, Chicago, Illinois]. And she has done so many wonderful things. And I went into special education because it was one of the few curriculums that you could get a master's degree in at Chicago Teachers College [Chicago State University, Chicago, Illinois]. It wasn't something that I had followed or pursued. There were four curriculums that you could take as a master's student. And so in 1961, I graduated with special education, and my daughter was born in '65 [1965]. And so, it gave me a lot of patience to work with her problems. And she had the meningitis and then she had grand mal seizures at the age of six, and it was like downhill from that time on. And she had a curved spine and all kinds of things. Now, she's doing really great. She's really great, and able to do all that she wants to do. Speaker 1: Okay. I know, I think we interviewed [HistoryMaker] Jorja Palmer a couple of years ago and she talked about her son with similar-- Speaker 2: Jorja's in my sorority [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.], in my chapter [Theta Omega Chapter]. Yeah, also my son, who has his doctorate from the University of Toledo [Toledo, Ohio], he's come back. He was at three different universities where he was the director of multicultural education. And let me just go back with that. One of the reporters, during the research when I started with the chief issue [Chief Illiniwek], looked at my son's history where he had been working with diversity for years. And he had presented out in Utah or somewhere, and they had pulled that presentation. And they said, "Oh, you've been involved in diversity a long time." Well, I didn't look at it as being involved in diversity--just issues that affected people. And so they, I said, "How do you know my son and how he started out?" 'Cause I don't know all of the seminars that he's presented at. And so they had pulled this particular seminar out where he had--maybe it was in Arizona where he had spoken. But he's very, he's a historian, and he's very interested in all kinds of things. So, he was one of my resources that I leaned upon. My husband, who recently passed last year also was a historian. And so I had a lot of help and insight from them in what I did, and all the things that I do. Speaker 1: Just for the record, give us their full names. Speaker 2: Floyd Carroll. Floyd--well, everybody--my husband is from Alabama. Also everybody in his family, everybody has the same name. His name was Floyd Carroll, and my son is Floyd [Floyd Carroll II]; he has my maiden name, Floyd G. Carroll. My daughter is Francesca [Francesca Carroll], and I'm Frances [HistoryMaker Frances Graves Carroll]. So, and everybody--there's seven brothers and sisters, and the Carroll family is very prominent in Mobile [Alabama]. But all their children have the father's name and the grandson. So they just, they have the same name. All you have to do is know one of the people's name, and you know that they all give their children in the family the same name...