 Story_ID: 5533 Speaker 1: So Mr. Cook we're going to begin with me saying that my name is Racine Tucker-Hamilton and I am the interviewer. And today's date is Wednesday, November 10th, 2004, and this interview is taking place at Howard University, WHUT TV in Washington, D.C. And our videographer today is Rick Warrick and our audio technician is Sam Hyder. Now if you would please for the record, tell us your full name including your middle name and spell it? Speaker 2: Okay, my name is Jacques Cook. My name has a, it's a French name, J-A-C-Q-U-E-S, Cook, C-O-O-K. Speaker 1: And no middle name? Speaker 2: No middle name. Speaker 1: Okay. And--. Speaker 2: (Off-camera discussion) Speaker 1: And would you please tell us the date and location of your birth? Speaker 2: I was born March 19th, 1946, couple of yards from here in old Freeman's Hospital in Washington, D.C. Speaker 1: And your occupation please? Speaker 2: I'm an attorney with the firm of Allen and Overy. Story_ID: 5534 Speaker 1: Would you please share with us your favorite food? Speaker 2: My favorite food I guess would have to be veal parmesan. And what was the second question? Speaker 1: Your favorite color? Speaker 2: Favorite color, blue. Speaker 1: Your favorite time of year? Speaker 2: The favorite time of the year for me is fall or spring. Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: It would be to Utah to go skiing. Speaker 1: And your favorite phrase or saying, do you have one? Speaker 2: No I don't have a favorite phrase or saying. I can't think of one so--. Speaker 1: That's fine. If one comes to mind--. Speaker 2: I'll think of it. Speaker 1: --let me know. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 5535 Speaker 1: Now if you will Mr. Cook let's begin talking a little bit about your mother starting with your mother's name, where she was born and where she grew up as a girl? Speaker 2: My mother's name was Vashti Smith was her maiden name. She was born in I think 1908 or 1909 in Baltimore, Maryland and she grew up in Baltimore. She, after graduating from [Frederick] Douglass High School [Baltimore, Maryland] there she attended Howard University [Washington, D.C.] where she met my dad [Will Mercer Cook] who was at that time an instructor, so--. Speaker 1: And did your mother ever share any stories with you about what it was like growing up in Baltimore? Did she, was she a member of that famous class at Baltimore high school? You know [U.S. Supreme Court Associate Justice] Thurgood Marshall went to Baltimore high school and [singer and bandleader] Cab Calloway, I mean Douglass High School. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Did she ever share any stories with you? Speaker 2: No, a little bit. I got bits and pieces and fragments of that. Of course at the time when I was growing up people like Thurgood Marshall would occasionally come to our house and he was an old friend of the families from those days. Of course I was not really aware of who Thurgood Marshall was or really what, what he represented. But certainly she did keep in touch with him over the years and my father as well and the same is true for Cab Calloway. My mother did mention him. I didn't get to see him except maybe once or twice when I was real young I was told. But yes, I, I was aware of that group and their influence, so--. Speaker 1: And did she ever talk about life in Baltimore as a young girl? Speaker 2: No, you know she didn't. She grew up around Druid Park Hill [sic, Druid Hill Park, Baltimore, Maryland] and in that area. My grandmother [Maggie Smith] talked to me more about, her mother who talked to me more about that area and what it was like than my mother. I--my grandmother had a, had a restaurant there and she, she knew everybody in the neighborhood and she was very, just well known and she kept in touch with all the people there. My mother didn't have that many close contacts with those people because after, after she moved away and went to school you know I don't think she had as many close, close friends in the Baltimore area although she had a, one close friend who, who we saw regularly. But, so, but yes it was a, it was--I, I don't think it was ideal. It was probably very tough. My, my grandmother was a, a single mom raising, raising my mother. She, she herself was not that well educated. She managed to however, to get my mother through, through high school and also to get her to college. So you know I've always admired her, her, her ability to overcome the obvious difficulties that she had especially when I look back now to see what, see what she's done. Speaker 1: What kind of work did your mother do? Speaker 2: When she was--well she, she always worked in the school system here. She, she was what they--she worked in administration. She did a lot of, she was an attendance officer and social worker. She did a lot of working with kids who were having problems obviously attending school and keeping on top of the families to make sure the kids went to school. And that was my early experience of her when she--cause when I was growing up she, she was working at the time and as, as was my dad of course. Story_ID: 5536 Speaker 1: How did your parents meet? Speaker 2: Well my, (laughs) as I understand it, it was somewhat scandalous. Speaker 1: (Laughs) Ooh, do tell. Speaker 2: My father [Will Mercer Cook] was teaching, teaching French and he was a young instructor at the, at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] and she [mother, Vashti Smith] was one of his students. And from what I understand my grandmother [Maggie Smith] wasn't too pleased about that relationship and so my mother actually transferred to I think it was the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] to, to finish up because my grandmother didn't like the idea of an instructor, her going out with an instructor. I guess today that would be the object for disciplinary action but it produced our family so I can't complain about that. Speaker 1: And is there a big age difference in your parents? Speaker 2: There was, I guess about close to a ten-year difference. I mean it wasn't that great. I mean it was maybe yeah, about nine or ten years difference, yeah. Story_ID: 5537 Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit about your father now starting with your father's name and what city he was born in and where he grew up as a boy. Speaker 2: My dad grew up in Wash--actually he was born here. His mother at the time was a--. Speaker 1: Here in Washington, D.C.? Speaker 2: In Washington, D.C. And his mother [Abby Mitchell] was an actress and, and singer and so she traveled a lot and it just so happened I believe that he was born here. And, and he, he grew up here and actually went to high school here. He went to Dunbar High School [Washington, D.C.] and he, he had very, very close ties to Washington [D.C.]. I mean you know all of his friends were from this area. He was very, he had, I mean he, he was in an era where going to high school was actually, especially Dunbar was, was considered quite an achievement for many blacks. And so the people that came out of that, that period and from, from high school at that time for the most part went to, went to, went to college and attended school and did advanced work in various, various fields. So they were pioneers in their time. Speaker 1: And would you please tell us your father's name? Speaker 2: My father was Mercer Cook. Speaker 1: Could you--? Speaker 2: Will Mercer Cook. He, he was born in 1904 and, in Washington [D.C.]. He had a very distinguished career during his, during his life. He died at the age of eighty-four. He--as I indicated earlier he attended Dunbar and, and also, and following, following attending Dunbar he, he went to Amherst College in [Amherst] Massachusetts where he graduated Phi Beta Kappa and following that he went on to get a Ph.D. at Brown University [Providence, Rhode Island]. And then, in French, he was a, that was his major in college and the field that, and, and romance language was a field that he was very interested in. So he, should I go further into that? Do you want to further his life, his life story? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah please, please. Speaker 2: Well after, after getting his Ph.D., he went to teach at Atlanta University [Atlanta, Georgia, now Clark Atlanta University]. He--and, and so my family early on my brother [Mercer Cook] and my mother [Vashti Smith] and father lived in Atlanta and I wasn't around at that time. I didn't come till much later, 1946. But during those early years my father worked in--and I think he went to, he also taught at another school. I don't know if it was North Carolina A&T [North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina] or one of the other Southern schools. But anyway that's, that's a period of his life which I'm not that familiar with. But clearly he was, he was very, very much involved in teaching at predominantly black schools in the South. He then came to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] and I believe that took place somewhere around the 1930s or '40s [1940s] shortly before I was born. And he taught romance languages here at Howard for, from, from that period until 1958 and really had most of his career here teaching at, at Howard. Following that he was, he moved to Paris [France] where the whole family moved in 1958. We, we--my father got a job with the American Society of African Culture which had an office in Paris and which was doing a certain amount of publishing with looking to develop relationships between African and Caribbean writers and U.S. black writers. And, and they had a publication which was, came out of Paris and my dad was one of the, one of the editors of that, that review. And in 19--in 1960 of course there was the election of John F. Kennedy and my father was then tapped to become U.S. Ambassador to Niger, the Republic of Niger and he had a distinguished diplomatic career from 19, I think it was about 1962 to about 1969 shortly, and then he retired. He, by then he was ambassador, U.S. Ambassador to Senegal where he was, where he spent two, two to three years I think it was as--. Speaker 1: And did the family live in--? Speaker 2: And we--the family lived in all these places, in Niger. I, I, while I was in Paris I went to school to, to a French school and, and then when he moved to Africa I, I, went and spent my last year of high school actually in Africa and got my, got the baccalaureate, the French equivalent of a high school diploma from, from that period when he was in Africa. And then, and then of course I, by that time I was going back to college and went back to the states to attend Amherst [College, Amherst, Massachusetts] to where my dad and, and my brother had gone. So, so that's a capsule of his life. He, he as I indicated he passed away in, at the age of eighty-four. He was, after retiring from the state department and he lived in this area until, until he died, so--. Speaker 1: And how would you describe your father? Speaker 2: Well I guess by today's standards he would be considered a really stiff guy cause he was, he came from a different era. It was clear that you know like I have pictures of him coming to my son's basketball games with a coat and tie on. That tells you where, where he comes from, or baseball games we would go to and he would wear a tie. Dad was a little formal. But of course people of his era were, were like that and I don't think he was much different in that regard. Especially young black professionals you know there was never, there was always the sense that you had to, had to project a, a sense of dignity and so that you wouldn't be stereotyped. And I think there was somewhat of, I mean it was an early indoctrination in that you know you always dress properly, you spoke properly you did not allow yourself to, to, to show white people who, who looked down on blacks in that period any, any, anything that they could, they could take advantage of to, to hold you down. So, so any event that's I think that's part of the, the person. I mean if you saw him then or today you would say yeah he's a pretty stiff guy you know. Story_ID: 5538 Speaker 1: And one thing I didn't ask you is how would you describe your mother? Speaker 2: My mother [Vashti Smith] was you know hard working, very, very dedicated mom. She made sure that she was a strict disciplinarian. I--the things that my kids get away with would never be tolerated in her household. Her mother similarly was pretty tough. As you can recall my grandmother raised her as a single mom. These were extremely disciplined people. Overall there was a work ethic about everything whether it was school or whether it's your professional life you, you, you were expected to do your absolute best and there was no, no exceptation, acceptance of anything less than an A performance. And I think that's what my mother inculcated in me. That's what my father [Will Mercer Cook] did, my father did the same. I mean they came from, from a period where to survive and, and indeed thrive at all, blacks had to be extremely disciplined. And of course that hasn't changed but the times have changed. So there's, there's a lot more looseness in the, in the culture than it was then. Story_ID: 5539 Speaker 1: How far back can you trace your ancestry Mr. Cook? Do you know if your family came from free people or slaves? How far back can you trace your ancestry? Speaker 2: Well again this is, it's rather interesting you asked that question because I've always, I really regret that I never got a full picture of my family tree or how, how, how--that far back. I mean I wasn't naturally curious about it in part because we had such a small family. There were not too many people that carried the oral history of our family with them and my father [Will Mercer Cook] was probably the, the one from whom I could get the most information about his side of the family cause his, his mother, Abby Mitchell was pretty old by the time that I came along. And of course I didn't, she didn't live with us she lived in New York so I didn't have that much close interaction with her. I had much closer interaction with my mother's grandmother--her, her mother, my grandmother. Speaker 1: And her name? Speaker 2: Her name was Maggie Smith. And Grandma Maggie gave me pictures of her, of her family but, but it was, it was much more limited because she did, she, she was alone. She didn't have an extended family. She had, it was pretty much the, the way I could see it there was, there was her and there may have been a few other people in her life who carried that, that history with him like her aunt. But I, I never really was plugged into that. Those, most of those people had passed away by the time I came along. But as far as family on my father's side the, we do know that it was mostly, they were freed slaves on my father's side who helped create the Cook family at the outset. From the bits and pieces of history that I've picked up they, these people lived around the Fredericksburg area in Virginia. And when things got very difficult for them to live there because of Jim Crow racism and the, the pressures built up over emancipation, they, they moved to Detroit [Michigan]. And there is a part of the family that clearly was established in and around the Detroit area. It's from that part of the family, the great, great grandparents back as, far back as I can trace it back to the early 1800s, that part of the family is, is the first part of the family that got truly educated and, on my father's side. These were people who early on attended Oberlin College [Oberlin, Ohio] and went, became teachers. One of, one of my father's great uncles and, and grandparents was, was an assistant to General [Oliver] Howard who created and, and administered Howard University [Washington, D.C.] when it first got started. And he was a secretary of the university. There was that part of the free slave group that clearly was a part of our family. On my grandmother's side unfortunately I, I don't think there were free slaves. They were mostly people who came from, came out of slavery and of course to be able to trace their family, their family ties has become almost impossible. My grandmother I think her mother was actually a slave at some point but we have no--I, I don't have the records of that and there was nothing written that I could pick up. Speaker 1: Did your father ever talk about, did he spend a lot of time on the road? Did he travel with his mother who was an actress and a singer? Did he travel with her a lot or was he pretty stationary? Speaker 2: No, he traveled with her a fair amount. In fact early in his life that's, I think that's what got him into learning French and wanting to travel. He traveled with her to, to Germany when she was doing, doing some singing there. She did a show or several shows there and he, he did relay to me that once he had been in Berlin [Germany] when she was appearing in an opera or something. So I guess he had an early exposure to, to Europe from her, but also his, his, his father was, was active as a, as a musician and took--was among the first black musicians to actually take a group to, to Europe. He had a jazz band and back in the early 1900s just--and, and traveled throughout Europe, appeared before the Buckingham Palace [London, England], he performed there. I mean he, so there was a, a little bit of all of this which affected my dad I'm sure in the way he perceived things. I mean cause he got to see that there was another life outside of the United States and that there were, there were areas of the world where blacks could walk freely without being discriminated against. I think that impressed him tremendously. I mean it's no doubt about it. Speaker 1: What was your grandfather's name? Speaker 2: Will, Will Marion Cook and he was a musician. He was, and this is part of the, the free, freed slave part of the family. He attended Oberlin. He also went to study in Europe at the, with Joe [Josef] Joachim in the, the Berlin Conservatory of Music. He was a highly gifted musician in his own right. He played the violin and, and--but when he came back to the states he encountered a lot of racism and discrimination which obviously didn't sit well with him being so talented and not being able to use your skills and, and forced him inward. And I think actually in a, in a, in a somewhat of a positive way it, it created a strong interest in black music because then having no outlet for his classic--he was classically trained as a, as a musician. He could you know he could play Beethoven and so forth. I mean he was, he was a just extremely gifted musician. But having that skill and not being able to apply it he had to turn towards black music and he had developed it. And he was one of the, the early pioneers in the area of jazz and black, black musicals, so--. Story_ID: 5540 Speaker 1: And tell me what is your earliest memory of growing up? Speaker 2: (Laughing) That's hard. I think anybody would have a time, hard time doing that. But I, earliest memory I guess was, would be of, of playing basketball on W Street and, which is a couple of blocks from here, 1st [Avenue] and W Street. We--and the, the football games we'd play in the street. You know in those days you didn't, you, you didn't have a place to play anyway so you had to, we'd, we'd had have our, we'd set the goals on either side of the street and you know we'd have to interrupt play for cars to pass by. I mean it's sort of an interesting way of playing, playing sports. Not the safest way but clearly that was, that would be my earliest memories I guess and also going down to, going down to Annapolis [Maryland] where we had a, we had a little cottage down there at Highland Beach [Maryland] where we would stay in the summer time. In those days of course there wasn't, nobody had air conditioning and so the only outlet for people if they wanted to get away from the oppressive heat in the summer time was to go to the beach and the beach meant Annapolis which was a major trip at that time. It took an hour and a half, almost ninety minutes to, to get there. You don't think about that today. I mean it's, that's just a, that's a, I mean I, I do that all the time for my daughter's soccer games and it's no big deal but, but then it was a big deal, so--. Story_ID: 5541 Speaker 1: And would you give us your siblings' names and their birth order including yourself? Speaker 2: I only have one brother. He was, he's seventy-four years old. He was, he's--I'm, I'm fifty-eight so there's a substantial difference in our ages. My brother--. Speaker 1: And his name? Speaker 2: His name is Mercer Cook and he lives in Chicago [Illinois]. He has, he had four, four children and one of his daughters lives in this area, Toni Cook (ph.). And he, he has two other children living in New York, so--. Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit about what life was like growing up and especially with an older brother where there was such a huge age difference. Did you all spend a lot of time together growing up? Speaker 2: Not really because by the time I came along in 1946, my brother had already gone on to college. So I saw him only really during vacation time when he would come home--. Speaker 1: So did you grow up as an only child pretty much? Speaker 2: Pretty, pretty much as an only child has its advantages clearly. He always perceived me as being a spoiled kid. He had to have, rough it out. You know I, I think when I came along things were a little better economically for the family. It was after the [Great] Depression so you know I, I probably got a few more things than he got. But we do enjoy a close relationship today and we've, we've, we talk regularly on the phone and so--. Story_ID: 5542 Speaker 1: What were holidays like in your house growing up? Were they very festive occasions or what were they like? Speaker 2: They were generally--well in, in those days I think there was a lot more sense of, of community among, in, especially among the young, well young or, or black families in those days who lived in the same neighborhoods. There weren't--we weren't as dispersed as we are today. All of my dad's [Will Mercer Cook] main friends from, in the early days were, were on the faculty at, at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.]. And because of that many of them lived in this, this community. One of his closest friends was Charles, Dr. Charles Drew and he lived three blocks from our house. We had his--Charles Drew's son was my closest friend and is still today one of my closest friends. So we've, and so we had a lot of, there was a lot of interaction among these families, all, all were faculty members and, and all had kids. And it was generally a very, it was a, it was a real sense of community. I mean I can safely say that we went back and forth to each other's homes. We stayed over at each other's, with each other and did a lot of things together as, as a community, so--. Story_ID: 5543 Speaker 1: Can you describe for us your neighborhood [Washington, D.C.], your community growing up? What was your community like? Speaker 2: Well, I--. Speaker 1: Do you remember the name of the street you lived on? Speaker 2: Yeah, 127 W Street, right, a couple of blocks from here, literally within walking distance. No, the area in and around Howard University [Washington, D.C.] was at the time a very mixed neighborhood in terms of socioeconomics. At the core of the, of the neighborhood was clearly the university itself. But around, on the periphery of the university you had a lot of Howard University properties. And there were also a number of faculty and key, key members of the Howard University staff who had major homes in this area and many of them were very nice homes. I mean they were, they were just well acquainted and well cared for homes. And so you had a middle class. There wasn't anything called upper middle class. Black people in those days there were just not too many very highly successful business people in the black community here in Washington [D.C.] or anywhere else for that matter. But this, this middle class of mostly teachers, doctors, dentists, lawyers lived, lived in close proximity of, of blue collar black people because this, we were all thrown together. And within--. Speaker 1: Did the families mingle with another though or did blue-collar families mingle with one another and you know the professional white collar families? Speaker 2: Well there was not, there wasn't any sense of class so much as you can well imagine. We all went to the same schools. There were, I attended in my, when I grew up a, a Catholic school [St. Martins Elementary School, Washington, D.C.] which was on T Street Northeast and all the kids in my school were from the neighborhood. We basically--and, and some of them were from, from the, from what we would describe as the projects. Some of the kids were from professional families. But, but there was--I didn't, I didn't sense that there was any real difference between me and anybody else and we all played basketball together and, and we would play in the streets together. The, there, there's no sense of entitlement of anything. And so I think in, in some respects we were a little better off than a lot of the kids today because there's so much distance, physical distance between people with middle class incomes and people who, who are less well off. So--. Speaker 1: Tell me what sights, sounds and smells remind you of growing up and remind you of your childhood? Speaker 2: Gee, sights? I guess the, the, the sight I remembered most was going to the Sullivan Theater on Saturdays. We would, the Sullivan movie theater was the only real entertainment we had in the, in the neighborhood and it was the thing that everybody did from all, all around in this area. We, on Saturday afternoons the kids went to the double feature at the, at the Sullivan. We lined up with our quarters and went to, to get popcorn and, and look at a double feature which would occupy us from twelve to about four or five in the evening much to the delight of our parents I'm sure. We also, we, we also did a lot of outside activities. Again, this was a period when television was just being introduced so you didn't stay indoors. Nobody stayed indoors. We, we'd go back and forth to each other's homes. We would play in the streets. There was a lot of street games. I can remember the, these long games we would play, stickball or baseball in the, in the, back in the, behind a parking lot or an abandoned lot near, near our home. Speaker 1: What sounds and smells remind you of growing up? Speaker 2: Sounds and smells? I guess the smell of, the strongest smell is French fries that, that were sold at a, at a local grocery store. Great, great--I mean these greasy fries that just were awful in terms of I'm sure I wouldn't want to have them today but at the time they smelled great and we used to go in there and get these little canisters of, of fries and, and take them out and eat on the sidewalk. That was, that's, that's one thing I can think of off the top of my head and, and--. Speaker 1: And what sounds? Speaker 2: Sounds, I guess the, the scream of kids in the street. You know I think we spent so much time in the street yelling and screaming at each other you know. We didn't use telephones. We, you'd get on the top of your stairs and yell across the street to, to some kid to come out and play, Donald or Pudgy or one of my buddies from, from the days when I was a kid. Those were the--and listening for, for sounds when you know, you'd know if your friends are at home. The minute we got home from school we'd run outside and play. The, that was, that's what you did. You didn't, after you'd get your homework you ran out and played, played outdoors until it got too dark and you couldn't see the balls anymore. You just went on home, so--. Story_ID: 5544 Speaker 1: What was the name of the elementary school you attended? Speaker 2: It was St. Martins Elementary School [Washington, D.C.] over on T Street Northeast, across the street from McKinley High School [Washington, D.C.]. It was, it was an interesting experiment because at that time when I started going to elementary school and I guess it was back in 1951 or so the, the Catholic schools were the first schools to integrate in the, in the district ahead of the public schools. And the neighborhood that I'm describing here is, was a, a multicultural neighborhood and multiethnic neighborhood. Italians lived down on, on North Capitol Street. There was a big Italian community lived around Gonzaga [College] High School [Washington, D.C.] and all that area around there. That was all white. And they had established these parish churches and also the schools that were around and, and they were all, they had white kids in them. There were no blacks attending those schools on T, on T Street. And McKinley High School was all white, so was Langley Junior High School [Washington, D.C.] which was across the street. So this whole area really was a transition area. And, and so when I went to attend St. Martins I was in the first class of, that, that was integrated. So we, we were very much aware at that time that something was--. Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was there any resistance to the--? Speaker 2: Not at the, not at, not at St. Martins. Not at the, not at--and that was the beauty, the beauty--I, I say it's, it's something just unbelievable when you look at the history of race relations in this country. The archdiocese of Washington [D.C.] was led by some very strong white, very strong white archbishop who insisted that first of all that the, that the Catholic schools be integrated but also insisted that the parents, the white parents had to accept it. And there was just, it was, it was off, an--it wasn't like this, there was a ground swell of, of support for, from the, from the Catholic, white Catholics it was rather from it came from the top down. So the, there was absolutely no, no tolerance at the, at the elementary school for, for any, any conflicts and it was made quite clear to the white community that that would not be tolerated. And the priests and, and, and nuns who were there, all of whom were white, there were no, there were no blacks. Speaker 1: Was your family Catholic? Did you grow up Catholic? Speaker 2: Well I did grow up Catholic and actually what made me grow up Catholic was the fact that my, my believed that if the Catholics were willing to do this on behalf of an aggrieved minority that there was, there was something in their faith which we should, should take seriously and my parents converted to Catholicism largely because of that because they felt very strongly in the integration and they felt that, that that was clearly going to be the future of the country. And there was no, they, they could not, they wanted their children and that's why they sent me to, to a, a, a situation like St. Martins. I think they were very committed to having, having this carried off successfully and having me grow up in, in an integrated environment. Speaker 1: Do you remember some of your teachers at St. Martins? Were they all nuns? Were all the--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They were all nuns. Speaker 1: Do you remember some--. Speaker 2: There were no laity. There were several sisters and they were all hard as nails. I think they. Speaker 1: Did any, any of them have a particular influence on you at all? Speaker 2: I think there is--all of them did in, in one way or another. I mean I, you know they were extremely rigid and authoritarian. I mean they were just absolute, there was absolute, no tolerance for, for, for any lack of discipline and they were extremely, they imposed rigorous scholastic standards on us and they would accept nothing other than, than a sterling--and they would throw people out of the school whether they were black or white if they did not conform to their standards. So it was, I guess--. Speaker 1: What kind of a student were you, during your elementary school years? Speaker 2: In elementary school well I, I was I guess what you'd call the, the nerdy academically oriented kid. I came from an academic environment so naturally my, my parents [Will Mercer Cook and Vashit Smith] expected nothing best, nothing but your best in school and that was the priority. Speaker 1: What were some of your favorite subjects during elementary school? Speaker 2: Oh in elementary school I guess I, I didn't have any particular one. I enjoyed mathematics and, and I, I, I did well in, in, in English as well. I enjoyed, I, I enjoyed the academic environment. It was very--I think I, I thrived in structured environments and it was very structured. It was extremely rigorous. And I had some very good classmates too so--. Speaker 1: Who were some of your friends during elementary school? Speaker 2: Oh I, I don't, I haven't kept in touch with, with virtually any of them. Over years have lost, lost touch. But every now and then I'll bump into some guy who says hew as in school with me. Speaker 1: You had mentioned a couple. I think you said Donald and--. Speaker 2: Well Donald Fisher was a, he was a, a neighbor. He did not go to school with me. He went to the public school. Speaker 1: But did you all play together? Speaker 2: Oh yeah all the time, you know. So--. Speaker 1: So like who were some of your friends in the neighborhood and when, during the elementary school years? Speaker 2: Well there was a, a fellow named Michael Green who was, that lived across the street from me. There was another fellow named, and I, I can't even remember his last name. It was, I think it was Pudgy Johnson. And Pudgy was his nickname but he was, that's best I can remember. He was--. Speaker 1: And during the elementary school years did you have dreams and aspirations? Like what did you want to be when you grew up? Speaker 2: When I grew up I guess I wanted to be, at the time I was thinking about becoming a--because in those days they were talking about rockets and things like that and I, I got very interested in saying you know I'd like to fly planes and stuff like that. I, I, at one time I was thinking about becoming a pilot. I thought that would be, got a lot of fun. And then I, then, but then I, I really also wanted to be a doctor. You know like most kids I changed my mind every, every month, so--. Story_ID: 5545 Speaker 1: What parish did your family attend? Speaker 2: St. Martins. It was the--it's right on North Capitol Street [Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 1: What were your experiences like at church? Speaker 2: Well all of, I mean all of the boys in my class, all of the boys I mean I think almost every one was involved in some way or the other in parish activity. We were altar boys or something and that was, that took up a good part of our lives. We also participated in CYO [Catholic Youth Organization] sports, which was the Catholic youth league. St. Martins, the guys I went to school either--I never got to play for the city championship but we all played basketball all the time and that team actually went and won the national, the city championship in the eighth grade when you could play for the--I was with the team until the sixth grade. Story_ID: 5546 Speaker 1: When you're twelve the family moves to Paris [France]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So what was that day like? Was it a big announcement? Did your father you know make a big announcement at dinner time or what was it like when you found out that you would be moving out of the country? Do you remember? Speaker 2: Well I remember. I mean I thought it was, I, I didn't look upon it with that much trepidation. I, I looked, looked at it as a great opportunity I, cause I had always--. Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) At twelve you did? Speaker 2: Yeah, because my, my folks [Will Mercer Cook and Vashit Smith] had always talked about their experiences living in Paris when they were younger and how it was such a wonderful city and there was this, you know we'd get on this big ocean liner to go there and you know all those kinds of things struck me as really exciting. You know it was going to be fun. Speaker 1: But twelve, I mean this is when things like sports and your friends, I mean those were like the important, the most important things. Speaker 2: Yeah, I think they were and, and I miss them and I, I think that in the end I did miss out on some things cause the thing was we were going there for, it was supposed to be for two years so I didn't think it was sort of the end of living where I was. In fact we kept our house. We weren't, we weren't planning to I don't think live in Paris forever. And so, and so it wasn't, I didn't perceive it as a permanent move right. In fact I kept in touch with my friends. I mean I came back that summer from after the first year I was there and saw my friends and you know had quite--yeah it was, it was, it was problem. Speaker 1: And what were your experiences like abroad? What was it like living in Paris? Speaker 2: Well it's interesting. It wasn't--in some ways it was, I was--I went through a period of what I would perceive as loneliness because I didn't have any friends there and I had to learn, not only get into a new school but I had to learn a new language so it was quite a challenge. I, but, I, I guess I had a gift for languages so I learned the lan, the language was the least of the difficulties. I mean I, I became pretty fluent in French rather quickly cause within a year I was able to take all the courses in school and do everything in school that I was required to do and, and so that, that was not, that was--it wasn't an obstacle. And I, and I made friends you know eventually and had, had some good French friends and learned to enjoy it. Story_ID: 5547 Speaker 1: Did you notice at the young age of twelve, did you notice that you were treated any differently than perhaps you were treated back at home [Washington, D.C.] and did you see the, the lack of racism there [Paris, France] or just what were some of your thoughts? Speaker 2: Well the interesting thing about the racism when you're twelve and, and the environment I came from was really kind of unique. First of all I went to this integrated high, integrated elementary school [St. Martins Elementary School, Washington, D.C.] where in point of fact I had good, good white friends when I was in, at St. Martins. I mean this was as I say a transition neighborhood. There were white kids who lived here and, and grew up here. And the, the Catholic schools did a pretty good job of policing that, the racism. And I remember one incident we had at, when I was at St. Martins. It was a white kid who we were, bunch of kids playing around and he got, got upset with--he was somewhat of a bully so he went and started yelling at me and a couple other kids and calling us niggers you know. And, well first of all that didn't go over too well but, but not only that but it got back to the, to the sister in charge and she grabbed the guy and just threw him out of the school. So, so we never, we--I mean although we had this, I think it was a somewhat idyllic environment because a lot of other people had far worse experiences with racism than, than I did. But I saw it on a difference, from a different perspective and I think it opened my eyes to--well it allowed me to, to not grow up with a lot of hatred or, or distrust of whites. I came to see that, that there was reason to be distrustful later on but at an early age I didn't have those negative experiences. I had more, more positive experiences and I think that in some respects is good, so--. Story_ID: 5548 Speaker 1: So the family stayed in Paris [France] until 1960? Speaker 2: They stayed in Paris until 1960 at which point then my father [Will Mercer Cook] took an assignment to go to Africa and that, that's when--. Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) To Niger? Speaker 2: To Niger, right. Speaker 1: And what was that experience like being in Africa? Speaker 2: Oh well that, that was really quite, quite exciting actually and because it was such a new thing for every--. Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I'm sorry Mr. Cook. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Let me ask you this. What were your thoughts about Africa at that time? You're fourteen. What were your thoughts about the continent of Africa and about the country of Niger, what were your thoughts about it? Speaker 2: Well, well at the time I didn't know too much about it. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: I mean cause these are newly independent countries. And I, all I could think of is Africa is Tarzan and the, I mean I had no I--you know, I was living with all the stereotypes that everybody else was. Fortunately my father had a lot of African friends so I had seen educated Africans. So I had some idea that you know clearly they were some well, well educated Africans. But I had no idea what the country, the, the countries were like and what the culture was like. So, but Niger at the time was among the more backward economically of the, of the, of the French, former French colonies which meant that you got to see an Africa--when, when I went there it was an Africa sort of in, in its original form. We had camels. There was only two, two streetlights in the entire city of Niamey. And you got to see people you know going around on camels and donkeys and living at a, at a subsistence level which you know you just don't see or hear about too much outside of, outside of Africa. So I got to see a Africa with all of the, the problems of, of a truly un, undeveloped country. And, and in some respects I, I--now that I look back on that experience I've always felt that you know I get a sense that we are so privileged to have so much in this country. And it's, it's a shame sometimes we forget that when you see people who really don't have anything and have to worry about whether they can feed themselves from one day to the next. I mean it's really, it's an eye opener, so--. Speaker 1: And what were your experiences like at school? Do you remember the name of the school you went to? Speaker 2: In Africa? Speaker 1: Mm-hm. Speaker 2: It was the Lycée Nacional [Niamey, Niger] which is the, the national university--national high school of, of, of Niger. I'm sure there are other high schools they have there now but at the time it was the only one that prepared you for the French, French university admission which is the baccalaureate exams. And so--. Story_ID: 5549 Speaker 1: And what were your experiences like in high school? Speaker 2: In high school I think it was pretty much like you would have expected anywhere. I mean the kids in high school--are you talking about in--cause I, I--part of my high school was in, in [Paris] France and part of it was in Africa [Niamey, Niger]. But the, the early part of my high school in France was pretty much just like you would expect anywhere. I mean parties and basically young adolescents getting to know girls and that kind of thing. And it was, and in France the kids are at that time at least were pretty much like the kids in the [United] States. I mean they had the, the same interests in music and what not and whatnot. Speaker 1: Did you know a lot of black French people when you were there in France? Speaker 2: Yeah we had some. My, we, my dad [Will Mercer Cook] had a couple of friends who were, who had actually attended Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] who were living in France and we got to know some of them and their kids and I got to know some of their children. I, I, there was an old friend of his who actually had taught here at Howard who was married. He was a Frenchman but he was, he was from Martinique and he lived in Leon [France]. And his family and our family knew each other very well. I, I went to spend some time at their house up in the French Alps. They had a little house and got to know their kids. They grew up as typical French kids but they were black kids. They--and so--. Speaker 1: What kinds of activities were you involved in, in high school? Speaker 2: In high school I just played basketball as I did here. Didn't--the French don't, aren't big on extracurricular activities cause their, their system heavily oriented towards academics and there's one exam that you have to take at the end of high school which determines whether you go to the university or not and that is an extremely rigorous exam. And only about, at that time only about 40 percent of the kids who take the exam pass it, so it's a very, it--needless to say you spend a lot of time studying, so. Speaker 1: Were there any academically related clubs that you participated in, in high school? Speaker 2: In high school not really, no. We didn't have clubs. No we, we just had sports activities and, and, and you would have to do that on your own if you wanted to do you know like get involved in music or something like that, so. Speaker 1: What year did you graduate from high school [ Lycée Nacional, Niamey, Niger]? Speaker 2: In '63 [1963]. Story_ID: 5550 Speaker 1: So when you were in high school, what were some of your thoughts about college? Was Amherst [College, Amherst, Massachusetts], was that what was going to happen? Your father [Will Mercer Cook] had went there. Your brother [Mercer Cook] had went there so did you--. Speaker 2: No I assumed that I'd go there at least to-- I had always just wanted to go there. I had no idea what it was like except that what my brother had told me and what my father had told me. So I just assumed that that was in the cards. I mean I, I, in retrospect I've told maybe well I think I wish I had gone out looking for different schools. Not that Amherst is a bad school by any stretch but I think I would have preferred to have gone to a larger university when I came back from, from [Paris] France, would have just made the transition a little easier. Speaker 1: So what's, what's Amherst like? What's Boston [Massachusetts] like in the early 1960s, height of the Civil Rights Movement? What, what's the climate like? Speaker 2: Amherst at that time--well first of all Amherst is not in Boston. Amherst is way out in the boondocks. It's a little, little country town. It's a university town. At the time it was really, you know there was only one or two traffic lights in the town and so it's a very remote rural area. It's up in the mountains near, near--and, and so it's a very beautiful setting and somewhat idyllic. At the time it was only, it was an all male school so--and there were only, when I entered Amherst there were only seven blacks in the entering freshmen class out of four hundred. So that tells you that affirmative action hadn't started yet. That, that clearly was to come much later. But the Civil Rights Movement did start and clearly that was the height of the civil rights movement and a lot of people got involved. Myself was involved. We, I was very active in that stage with the students for racial equality and--. Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What kinds of activities were you, civil rights activities were you involved in? Speaker 2: Well we did, we did a number of things, mostly in the Springfield, Massachusetts area. We did a lot of tutorials in, and we did a voter registration. A group of us went down South to help with voter registration. We were, one group in fact one of--there were, there were two groups that I--one, one I went on which was just sheer voter registration down in Virginia we did, we did that during a Christmas break. But one group went down to Selma [Alabama] and in fact a couple of them got hit during the, the, during the police riot that occurred there where they in effect clubbed the demonstrators and a couple of my friends were, were hurt in that process. So this is when I got to see racism from a different perspective and certainly I got very much involved in, in, in civil rights related activities. We, we raised money for various causes at the time and met people like Stokely Carmichael and you know so it was it, it was a very interesting intellectually and emotional period for, very defining moments for a lot of us who went through that. Story_ID: 5551 Speaker 1: So Mr. Cook we were talking a little bit about your experiences at Amherst [College, Amherst, Massachusetts]. And did you have like--what were some of the classes that you enjoyed when you were at Amherst? Speaker 2: Well I, I got particularly--well when I first started at Amherst I thought I was going to go into engineering or something like that. But as I--after about my freshman year I decided that I really didn't want to, to focus exclusively on mathematics and, and engineering studies. So I went about a change. I, I got more interested in, in economics and political philosophy and politics and so I took a lot of political science courses and economics courses. And, and of course because of what was going on in the world at the time, the transformation of, of Africa in particular. I had just been exposed to countries there that were undergoing change. The fact that our own country was undergoing rapid change and, and we had the Civil Rights Movement underway, all of these things sort of worked to focus my attention, energies and interests in, in the, in, on social studies issues. And so I, I had some excellent professors of economics. I enjoyed that particularly. I--. Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Do you remember any of their names, any of them come to mind particularly? Speaker 2: No--well there are a couple. There was a professor named Hugh Akin who was a professor of American economic history, a fascinating man in his own right. He had written a number of studies and, on the economics of slavery which I thought were, were really very thought provoking and interesting. He was also a mentor. He encouraged me to, to do graduate work. I had a lot of good, close and--interaction with him as, which you don't get in many universities. But he was a full professor and a very distinguished one, an older guy and he sort of took me under his wing and I appreciated that. And I think it, it made the experience a lot more enjoyable, the fact that I had that, that relationship with a professor. Also had some good friends, you know some of the people I keep in touch with till this day. One of my closest friends here in Washington [D.C.] is a, is a, an Amherst grad, a black guy who went to McKinley [High School, Washington, D.C.]. And we've, we've been close for you know ever since that period. And so yeah it was a, it was a frustrating experience in some ways because being a very small minority in a community like that isn't exactly the most comfortable relationship. I'd never been in a situation where, where race was a factor. Where indeed my--I felt being, that I was a minority. I'd been in French schools where nobody seemed to pay it much attention at all to a situation where yeah there was a sense that I'm different and that--and so I, I gained a better understanding of both my country and its limitations. I think you have to do that if you're to survive in this country anyhow. So--. Speaker 1: Did your father [Will Mercer Cook] and your brother [Mercer Cook] have similar experiences at Amherst? Did you all ever talk about that? Speaker 2: Yeah we, we all had very similar experiences in some ways. My dad had some very positive experiences and some, some very negative. Because when he was there, there were, blacks were even smaller in number and they--. Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It's hard to imagine being smaller than seven. Speaker 2: But, but believe it or not there were actually only I think only maybe two or three in his class. But, but not only were they smaller in number but they, there was still a lot of racism on campus. So for instance he, my dad had a beautiful voice but he couldn't, he couldn't participate in the choir because they, they had, they wouldn't allow blacks to be on the choir you know, which is odd. You would think that in Massachusetts that wouldn't be a big deal but you know at the time they said oh well you know the choir travels and there are places where it becomes difficult and therefore we, you know. So rather than choose places they could go where they wouldn't have problems they decided just to keep the blacks off, off the choir. So he felt very bitter about that. In fact at one point he left Amherst and decided that there was too much racism at the school and I'm sure he ran into a lot of you know very negative experiences with individual people at Amherst cause you know the, his, the generation of white people attending Amherst at that time was probably made up of a lot of old line, stuffy, waspish type racists who looked down on the black students there. And he left Amherst and decided he was going to--he just gave up in frustration. Not because he wasn't doing well but because he, he just didn't want to have to deal with that environment. He decided--. Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What were your brother's experiences like? Speaker 2: My brother had some experiences that were similar to that although there wasn't any overt racism at the school at that point. By that, by then of course he could participate in all activities and so forth. But, but he was still a very small--there was still a small number of black students there and, and socially it was difficult because you couldn't find girls to date. I mean it was just, it was, it was not pleasant. So--. Speaker 1: What was the town like? Speaker 2: Well the town of Amherst was really made up of, it was basically a rural town which had come, which was the whole economy of the town gravitated around the university. All the shops, everything was basically to, to serve Amherst on the one hand and the University of Massachusetts on the other which were the two main institutions in the, in the town. So it's a university town, not much to talk about. Not much in the way of restaurants. Not much in the way of nightlife, just, just those things that were there for, for the convenience of the students. So--. Speaker 1: And was there a Cook legacy there? Were there people who knew that you had an older brother and a father who were both alum and--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not really. I don't think we had any contact much with the local community. I think--we did, there were a couple of black families in Amherst, in the town itself which I got to know only you know very, very superficially. I mean you run into these people and you know they, while I was at the college and they would be friendly and so forth. Speaker 1: Obviously cause--. Speaker 2: But, but I--they didn't have any kids for me to, to interact with and basically were just, they would you know--and, and if I told them about my brother having gone there I mean I think I may have told them. I don't think they probably remembered you know remembered him from that period. Speaker 1: What did you get your degree in? Speaker 2: From Amherst it was a B.A. in economics. Story_ID: 5552 Speaker 1: And what were you thinking that you wanted to do with your life at this point? What happened to the astronaut dream? Speaker 2: That was dead. I, I think at that point I just wanted to, I actually didn't know what I wanted to do. In fact that was my mentor [Hugh Akin] at the school [Amherst College, Amherst, Massachusetts], the professor and I went and talked to him in my senior year and said what, what am I supposed to do? I mean I, I don't really know what to do. I mean and bear in mind at that point the Vietnam War was in full swing. Now not only did we have to contend with the civil rights issue but we were dealing with a war and people were being drafted and I had to worry about that. And so I, I decided I, I really did not know what I wanted to do. I, I went to, I went to, I went to, I went to visit schools to decide whether I wanted to go to law school or whether I'd go to grad school. And I decided well I guess I'll go to grad school and I ended up applying to Johns Hopkins [University, School of Advanced International Studies, Washington, D.C.] to the school of advanced international studies, because I figured I'd given what I, my experiences had been probably would be something to do with the international sphere. So, and that's, that's what I, that's what I ended up doing. I went, attended Johns Hopkins for two years and got a masters in 1969 in international relations and economics. Speaker 1: What were your experiences like at Johns Hopkins? You're Baltimore now so--. Speaker 2: No, no it's located here in Washington. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That campus is located here. Part of their campus is here. Speaker 1: So you were back here in Washington, D.C.? Speaker 2: I was back in D.C. by that time and of course my father [Will Mercer Cook] had returned from, from Africa, was now living back here retired. So any event I went to, went to grad school. I was worrying about the draft at the time also I was thinking about getting married and ended up getting married. Speaker 1: Where did you meet your wife? Speaker 2: I met her at the University of Massachusetts [Amherst, Massachusetts]. She was, she was a student there and part of a group of kids that you know we, we all--I had a lot of friends in her group and so forth and so we got--and that's, and so she was working here too and so we ended up getting married and that was in '69 [1969]. Speaker 1: So when did thoughts about law school start? Speaker 2: Well that didn't really, law school didn't start till after I had graduated from, from Johns Hopkins. And then I was wondering what I was going to do I mean whether I'd go in the [U.S.] Army, be drafted or whether--and, and at that point I had, had thought about going into the [U.S.] Foreign Service too cause that was another option. And finally I did get accepted to the foreign service and so I, I joined the foreign service shortly thereafter and--. Speaker 1: [Simultaneous] So you joined the Foreign Service in 1969? Speaker 2: At the end of '69 [1969] yeah after I had graduated. And that, that was to be a very good experience for me because basically I got to see a part of the world, I was going to get to see parts of the world I had never seen before and for me it was very exciting. Speaker 1: What did you do in the foreign service? Speaker 2: Well I did a number of different things but the first thing I did was they, they, they didn't have a job for me so they hired me but didn't have a place to send me so that was kind of frustrating. And for about three months I worked as, as an administrative assistant on assignments. And the good thing about being an administrative assistant on assignments is you got to see the assignments. So I finally found something for myself and assigned myself to, to go to Mexico. And I went, went there with, in, in 1970 really to work as the economic commercial officer they called it in Guadalajara, Mexico. And it was a great job, was a wonderful experience. Speaker 1: What were your responsibilities? Speaker 2: I, when I was, well when I was there I was supposed to go around and do economic and commercial surveys of, of western part of Mexico so I got to travel throughout Mexico. And by then of course I'd have to learn Spanish was another positive experience. I enjoy languages so I got to, to meet Mexican business people. I got to, to meet an awful lot of very wonderful people. I mean I really loved Mexico. I mean really the, the people and the experiences were very, very positive for me. I, I came back with a healthy respect for Mexicans and for, for their culture. I mean it was, it was good. Story_ID: 5553 Speaker 1: And so then what are you thinking you're going to do next? Are you thinking that perhaps you're going to make a career out of the [U.S.] Foreign Service or--? Speaker 2: Well at that point I decided well I really enjoyed the Foreign Service but I didn't want to be traveling all the time all over the world. I mean I, I figured that I had to find some way of doing something that was, that was of interest to me and that would involve maybe using some of my, my skills but at the same time would put me in a place where I'd want to live on a regular--and raise my family and so forth. By that time I had, had two kids. I want to, I don't want to be trudging around the world with kids. That's, that's too much of a problem. So I applied to law school and I got accepted to George Washington University [Washington, D.C.] which had a night program so I decided to do that at night, to go--and I, so I was transferred back to the state department to work in what they call the economic bureau of the state department. Speaker 1: And so this is 1970--? Speaker 2: That's 1972 and by then, so by, by then I you know had two, two young boys and from my first marriage. And the--so I went to school at night and it was--law school at night is not a treat. It was no fun, but I imagined somehow to get through it all without going crazy. Speaker 1: Do you remember any particular professors from law school who had a particular influence on you? Speaker 2: Yes and no. I mean I, I didn't really get too close to any of the professors. I mean when you're running to school at night you just want to get in, get your coursework done, get, take the exam and get going to your next one. Speaker 1: Sure, and it's hard. Speaker 2: And so really it, it's a different environment than when you go full time. I mean you have time to stand around and talk to the teachers and so forth. I, I didn't have time for that. I'd go there at night, you know and, and then rush back, do some studying late at night and get, pick up, pick up the next day, so. Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite course in law school? Speaker 2: I liked contracts and dealing with contracts and negotiations. And in fact that's the kind of work I'm doing now. But the, that, that was to me the most interesting part of, of law school. Speaker 1: What about evidence, was that a fun course for you? Speaker 2: Yeah I enjoyed that. Yeah, evidence was fun and civil procedure. I mean like the structure of these things. I mean I think though that was--I didn't like constitutional law very much. I thought that was just sort of wishy-washy. But you know that's, each person has their own preferences of things. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Sure. Story_ID: 5554 Speaker 1: You get your law degree in 1976 [George Washington University, Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 2: Yeah, and then I decided to, to actually apply and I went and got hired by a large law firm, Sidley & Austin which had an office here. It's a--(simultaneously). Speaker 1: Could you spell the first--? Speaker 2: Sidley, S-I-D-L-E-Y. Speaker 1: Austin, common spelling? Speaker 2: --and Austin, yeah mh-hm. It's a large Chicago [Illinois] firm and at that time it was rather interesting because law firms did not have any blacks in any positions in those days. This is, it's, it's 1976 or so you know. You could count on, left on your hand the number of blacks who were partners in any of the major firms. So I perceive that as a good area to, to make some inroads and I, I worked there for little over a year and a half and then--. Speaker 1: Were you hired as an associate then? Speaker 2: As an associate and--. Speaker 1: And what kind of work were you doing as an associate? Speaker 2: There I was doing administrative law which involved gas pipelines, something that people don't get too excited about. But it was the regulate--it was, it was a regulated utility and so it, it fell within the Federal Power Commission which is now called the FERC, [U.S.] Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, so. So--. Speaker 1: What was it like practicing law in the late '70s [1970s]? Just you know what was, what was the climate like in terms of the legal profession? Speaker 2: Well I think it was, the climate in, in that period was, it was not as, as robust as it is today. In those days the people didn't make millions as lawyers. That happened, that came later. But you could make a comfortable living but people really didn't go into the practice of law with the expectation that they were going to be millionaires. Nowadays you do find people who perceive they're going to major law firms is, is a ticket to, to millions. And I wasn't frankly attracted to law simply because of money. I, you know I just looked at as a profession. And that's the way I perceive it today. I mean I really don't find the, the monetary aspects of it to be that, that rewarding to justify doing something on a day-to-day basis simply because of the money. I have, I have friends who think exactly the opposite but to me it's whether I enjoy what I do and whether I enjoy the people I work with and really what, whether I feel I'm doing something that is, that I consider meaningful in, in, in some way, so--. Speaker 1: And the, the lack of African American partners, was that somewhat disappointing to you or were you thinking--? Speaker 2: Yeah I, I think the fact that there weren't that many mentors is a real problem for, for young black professionals. And I think it's important that you have some, somebody to help mentor you through that experience and that's one of the things I've done or taken the time to do in the practice I'm involved in now to try to work a lot more with the younger black associates. Give, give them some feedback. Give them some orientation as to where they ought to be going. I think it's without that help sometimes it can be a very challenging experience and one, a very frustrating one too because you really--it's like operating in the dark. You just don't have anybody to guide you. Speaker 1: So you're at Sidley & Austin for about a year and a half? Speaker 2: Yeah, and I, I really--. Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What do you do next? Speaker 2: Then I, well of course I, but by that time I decided I really didn't like the practice that I was involved in. It wasn't sufficiently in line with my, my fundamental interests. Story_ID: 5555 Speaker 1: And then I got an opportunity to go work for the Senate Budget Committee which at the time was being set up to oversee the budgetary process that, that had just been put in place to regulate government spending. And I, I had a friend, Karen, Karen Hastie Williams whose, whose husband Wesley Williams was one of the first blacks to become a partner at Covington & Burling, one of the major firms here [Washington, D.C.]. Well she became the general counsel and she hired me. And maybe that's a point as an aside because her father was William Hastie who was a federal court, federal appeals court judge. He was also a, a classmate of my father's [Will Mercer Cook] at Amherst [College, Amherst, Massachusetts] so this sort of, sort of all goes back within--. Speaker 2: That whole (unclear) degrees, here we go. Speaker 1: So here we go again. So, but, so she hired me to, to be one of the counsel and it was a great opportunity. I got a lot of experience there working with [U.S.] Senator Edwin Musk--Edwin Muskie. And--. Speaker 2: What is the environment like on Capitol Hill in the late '70s [1970s]? Speaker 1: In the late '70s well it was like everything else. You know young black professionals were, were few and far between in, in that environment even then. The, it was, it was only later that you saw an influx of blacks. Both, both as, because of the increased representation of blacks but also on the staff so the major, of all the senators. They only began to hire seriously back in the, I guess in the early '80s [1980s] and, and from there on you found greater, greater numbers of black professionals with Capitol Hill experience. Speaker 2: And this was a different side of Washington, D.C. for you. Speaker 1: Oh yeah. Speaker 2: Because you know you were much more familiar with the academic side--. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --of Washington, D.C. So was it kind of like an eye opening experience? Was it exciting? What--? Speaker 1: Well it was, it was exciting but it was also an eye opener in the sense that you see in, in the political sphere the, the, the senators and congressmen have a tremendous amount of discretion as to what they, what they can do. And so I was, wasn't accustomed to that. I mean you had a lot of what I, what we probably call hanky panky going on in, at several of the committees. I--recently for instance I remember one, one vivid memory I have. There was, there was a, a senator who had a staff person who was on our, on our committee, on the committee who when I talked to, to this young lady I, I got the impression she didn't really know anything. I mean and I sort of, I just wondered what, what was she doing here, you know? So, but in any event I didn't you know I didn't pay too much attention to it. But turns out three years ago she filed a complaint against that senator for sexual abuse. Turns out she had--he had hired her to be his paramour and as a, as his mistress really. And she came out in this, on television with all of this and so I, well yeah so yeah. This, this kind of stuff happens up there on a fairly frequently I'm afraid. But that's, that's what happens when people have unfettered discretion. So--. Speaker 2: So while the work was exciting to you--. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --you're seeing a whole different side of Washington [D.C.]. Speaker 1: Yeah. Yeah. Speaker 2: Did you think though that this really isn't where I want to be in terms of you know--? Speaker 1: Well I enjoyed, actually I enjoyed the work there because it was dealing with--on the committee you get involved in a lot of the policy issues, the big policy issues that Congress had to face. And I was working on things involving international organizations and U.S. contributions to the multilateral banks and these were all big, big economic and financial issues which I, I found fascinating and interesting cause I had been involved to some extent in that even when I was in the [U.S.] State Department. Speaker 2: And with an international twist too and that was your forte. Speaker 1: Yeah, so it was really, it was good to get into that to see the interplay between politics on the one hand and some of these big policy issues on the other. I, I think, but I realize that this was clearly not a career that you want to make out of it. I think it's something you want to get experience from. Story_ID: 5556 Speaker 1: After a little over a year and a half [on the legal counsel for the United States Senate Budget] I decided there was an opportunity for me to go work for one of the multilateral banks which are in the Inter-American Development Bank which is a, a regional development bank owned by the United States and all of the governments of Latin America. It's a, and, and it's, it's a semi-public organization and they make loans and give grants for economic development throughout the western hemisphere. And--. Speaker 2: And what were you doing there? Speaker 1: I was, I was on the legal staff and got to continue doing legal work in an area which again is more in tune with what I wanted to do anyhow. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: It got me back into Latin America which I enjoyed working with, worked a lot in--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Is this 1979? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I'm sorry Mr. Cook, okay. Speaker 1: And did a lot of work in the Caribbean, Barbados, Trinidad, Jamaica, all of these were countries that, that I got to visit and work with and work on. We did projects throughout the southern part of Latin America. I worked in Paraguay and Chile, Argen--virtually every country in Latin America. Brazil, I did a lot of work there and started learning Portuguese. So I, it was a great, great experience. I mean I spent twenty-three years there in various capacities. And then by 1990, 1989, after I had been there for about ten years, a little over ten years I was offered the opportunity to go head up their, their office in Jamaica and that's where I was for five years until 1994, '95 [1995]. Speaker 2: I'm sorry so you were with the Inter-American Development Bank from 1979 until 1999? Speaker 1: No, 19-- well 1989--. Speaker 2: 1989. Speaker 1: I was still with them. I hadn't left them but they offered me the job to go head up their office in--. Speaker 2: Jamaica? Speaker 1: In Jamaica cause they ran, we ran our activities out of the countries themselves and so I got to do the, to be the manager of their office there and--. Speaker 2: What were your experiences like in Jamaica? How, how was the Caribbean different from Europe, Africa, Mexico? Speaker 1: Well the Caribbean that, that's, the fascinating thing about the Caribbean is that you, the culture of the Caribbean is drastically different in many ways from the culture of the United States and of Africa. One, one interesting thing is that, especially in a place like Jamaica, you have a, a fairly sizable group of people who are extremely well educated, who have managed, who are running their own country and have, don't feel the sense of being oppressed. There is oppression, there is poverty, there is I mean and there is a lot of class conflict. But it's class, it's not race. It's not driven off of race. And so the thing that, that struck me is, is from my experience there was that, that you could have a black country where 90, over 90 percent of the people are black where the, the main issues are class and economics and where race really doesn't figure in the equation. And, and when you talk to Jamaicans you, you--it, it, there is no sense among educated Jamaicans that I know that they feel the least bit inferior to anybody. I mean they don't have any chip on their shoulder. They don't feel that, they don't, aren't distrustful of whites per se. They, they feel very self confident, most of the ones that I've known. Story_ID: 5557 Speaker 1: So Mr. Cook you were just talking a little bit about your experiences in Jamaica and how you could have this totally self-sufficient black country. Speaker 2: Mh-hm, and I guess that it, it was both encouraging in that regard that, that you could have a, an entire group of people growing up in, in, in a country where they developed a lot of self-confidence and have gone, and have demonstrated by going abroad and becoming very successful business people and so forth throughout the U.S. and, and Great Britain, they've done very well the Jamaicans, the immigrants who have come, come here. And it's part because they have that self confidence, that drive and so forth and I, and I came to respect that very much. Speaker 1: At the time that you were in Jamaica, was there the big drug problem that we were hearing so much about in the [United] States around that time just in terms of the Jamaican gangs and the drugs and--? Speaker 2: Yeah the, that's the negative part of the experience because you also see and I, I saw up close a lot of abject poverty. And, and, and it's in that environment that this drug culture has been able to, to grow and, and prosper. And it's, it's terribly unfortunate because it's led to a lot of violence in the country. There's a lot of--and the politics of Jamaica has, is, is, is very troubling because as I saw up close there is indeed a lot of corruption. There is also a political system which appears to have tolerated and, and in some ways stimulated the development of this drug culture. And it, it's, it's distressing. I don't know the solution to the problem. I hope, I would hope that the, the country evolves economically and socially in a positive direction that, that they will be able to attenuate the influence of, of, of drugs and gangs and so forth on the culture. But that, that I saw as an unfortunate consequence of a lot of the things that had been going on in the last twenty, thirty years. Speaker 1: So after you left Jamaica in 1994 what were you doing for the Inter-American Development Bank? Speaker 2: There, after that I, I came back to head up a group that, of lawyers that were going to be working on privatization and infrastructure development in Latin America. And I became I guess by, by default somewhat of an expert in that area of project financing and private sector development. I began lecturing a lot on that subject, wrote some articles on it. And, and I've been working in that area ever since, since 1994 really and I'm now--and, and three years ago I decided to leave the IDB [Inter-American Development Bank] and to go work for a private law firm, an international law firm, Allen & Overy which is one of the largest firms in the world. It's got over 2,600 lawyers all over the world. And we, we specialize to a considerable extent in this kind of work in the infrastructure and what they call structured financing of complex projects. Speaker 1: International projects? Speaker 2: International projects and we've been involved in some of the biggest projects in the world like the, the Eurotunnel. We, we--our firm was one of the lead, lead, lead attorneys in that. And, and so I've been working in Latin America on similar kinds of projects. I, I just had completed a closing in Brazil and done a lot of work in Brazil since then and, and Chile I just worked on a, on two major closings there involving toll roads. They're, they're putting in place these huge toll road projects which involve, they don't have toll, toll, you have to buy little clips and attach it to your car so you can speed through the, the, through the, through the toll roads without having to slow down. Speaker 1: Is that similar to like an E-ZPass that we have here in the United States? Speaker 2: It's like, it's like that but in, in their system they've put in sort of the state of the art technology which allows you, you never have to slow down. You just, it, it catches you wherever you are in the system and automatically sends you a bill at the end of the month. So it's a, it's a highly computerized system and it's what we eventually will have here I assume. And it's, it's like the E-ZPass. You'll have something like that but E-ZPass you have to go through sort of the, you have to slow down a little bit to even--this, this you don't have to slow down at all. Story_ID: 5558 Speaker 1: What are some of the biggest changes that you've noticed in terms of international development product, projects? Are there more of particular projects that are taking place nowadays compared to ten years ago so like more infrastructure projects? Speaker 2: Well everything now, well everything seems to be done on an international basis. I mean there is, you, you will have projects that are being developed especially in many parts of the, what they call emerging markets like Africa, Asia, Latin America. There's not enough money in those countries to finance those things so they have to go overseas to secure financing. And so basically the reason why you have to involve firms like mine [Allen & Overy] and bring in investment banks and so forth to put together these, these, these financing packages is because they're so complicated to do and, and negotiate. It takes years to put them together. So that's the kind of thing that we've seen more of in recent years because there's an appetite for this. You've got to build roads, you've got to build new power plants. You've got to put in place a lot of new infrastructure to accommodate ever-growing populations. I mean people, they, they demand electricity, they demand water. I mean all of these are basic services and they're, they're all under stress. And so unless you can have, provide those, that infrastructure and finance it, you'll find large parts of the world without electricity and water and, and being unable to develop and grow. Speaker 1: And can you kind of give us an idea, I know you said that these projects take years, are years in the making. But can you just kind of give us an idea of what happens in terms of putting this type of project together, you know kind of like from, from soup to nuts? Speaker 2: Well it's, it's going to be difficult to say in, in very few words but I'll try to summarize it as best I can. Typically what you have is you have a government which has identified the need to have a new road or, or a new transmission line put in place and it doesn't have the resources to do it. So it will go out and, and, and issue a call for bids internationally and firms from throughout the world will then go in and offer bids for, to, to provide those services and, and build those, build those facilities. Typically they will also put in place a company, what they call a special project company which is developed for the exclusive purpose of, of providing these services. So let's say you have an Italian company that wins a bid, which is one of my clients to, to build a transmission line. They, they have fourteen months under the terms of the concession which the government is giving them to go out, secure financing and build it. So I mean so that, they have, they, they're under a tight deadline that they have to do everything to get this thing up and running. That being the case then they come to my firm or they'll, they'll already have contracted us and they'll just say look we want to, we have to negotiate with these banks all over the world to come in here with financing and so we end up sitting down at, at, we'll, there will be a--the banks will give us what they call a term sheet which we'll say these are the terms of the loan. And we'll sit for months on end negotiating the term sheets. Well these term sheets are very complex documents but once we, once we come to an agreement we'll then draw up all the legal documents that go with that and we'll negotiate them and, and sign them. And then the monies will be disbursed by the banks to, to build these facilities. And, but they're closely monitored. In other words every, every nickel that goes into the construction of the, of those facilities is monitored by an engineer and a whole group of people that have been assigned by the banks the responsibility of making sure that the project is developed properly. And, and then once the project is constructed then it has to be repaid. And we are, typically the banks are repaid out of the, the funds generated by the project. This could be a transmission line where you have generators and, and or generating companies or distribution companies paying their transmission company to transmit the electricity. And hopefully it works its way down to the consumer and the consumer gets the electricity, pays for it. But every time a consumer pays, part of the money they pay to the, to the companies in, in their monthly bills will go to pay the banks overseas that have been that have provided the funds for the, for the project in the first place. So that's, but very complex mechanisms are put in place to, to capture the funds so that they all, so the banks aren't left holding the bag at the end of the day cause the bag, the banks insist on monitoring every, every dime that goes into the project and every dime that goes back through the, through the stream. Speaker 1: And what mechanisms or provisions are put in place to ensure that some of these poorer countries can actually repay the loans and can actually pay back what they borrow? Speaker 2: Well in these, the good thing about these projects is that on the one hand there's an awful lot of due diligence which is done to determine whether the capacity of repayment. And, and that's, that's where you bring in economists and financial advisers who sit around and try to figure out through doing modeling exercises which are very complex financial instruments. They, they try to determine if this project is able to generate the funds that are needed to repay these loans. If the project does not generate sufficient resources after they've run their, their, the models and the simulation exercises cause they say well the simulation exercises involve using computers to determine what would happen if various things happen? What, what if there's a, a national disaster or what if there's a hurricane that disrupts the whole line or what--and, and they run through these scenarios to determine what happens and how, whether there'd be a gap in financing. And that's what they, that's what these people are paid to do. And, and hopefully if they do their jobs properly there will be sufficient resources to repay. On the other hand, if the country because of what--its circumstances isn't able to repay them, the funds don't go there in the first place. That is, that's what the banks want to be sure of, that they can get repaid. So I hope that's (laughing), that's enough of an answer. But, but, but it's, it's a complex kind of business and because it's complex people sometimes shy away from it because it, it involves paying a lot of people a lot of money to, to do, to make sure that you've crossed all your Ts, dotted all your Is and gotten the thing right. And unfortunately that's, that is the downside of doing the business. I mean it's expensive. It's an expensive business. Story_ID: 5559 Speaker 1: Of all the countries where you lived and worked, which one did you enjoy most and why? Speaker 2: Well actually I think, when I think aback over it, still Mexico is one of the, been the, the place that I enjoyed most. I, I really have nothing but good things to say about Mexico and, and my experience there. I mean I was there at a time when I think Mexico probably was probably more interesting than it is today. But I got to, I got some really wonderful friends from that period of my life. I converse with them and email them even today. I mean I, it was a--and, and the country itself I think is just fascinating. It's so diverse in terms of its culture and it has a rich history and it's, and by, by--in terms of my experience I think it's probably the, the highlight. Speaker 1: And what do you think you learned most from working on Capitol Hill [Washington, D.C.]? Speaker 2: Capitol Hill I, I think the thing I learned most was how frustrating politics can be. It was probably the one reason why I shied away from getting involved in politics in the first place. I think it's, you have to have an enormous amount of both energy and patience to deal with that environment. I, I think, I admire the people who dedicate their lives to it. I mean when I saw these guys in the recent elections and how much energy they devoted to going around courting votes and giving speeches. I mean you have to admire just their sheer, the fortitude and perseverance. I mean its, it requires an unusual type of person to do that. Personally I could never do it. I know I, I can intellectualize or the issues and understand the issues but I could never go out and talk to that many people and do--it's just an incredibly difficult job. And I respect them who are able to do it, but it's, it's a difficult, difficult area. Story_ID: 5560 Speaker 1: What advice do you have for young people who may be interested in a career in international studies? Speaker 2: Well I, you know the one thing that is, that is, I found most frustrating is that I think not as many blacks are drawn into the international work as I would like to see. I, I--many--. Speaker 1: Why do you think that is? Speaker 2: I think it's primarily because there, there are a number of things. One is I think you have to be predisposed towards it in, in some ways. I think you have to have, have a, you have to have the, the, the interest in and the curiosity to, to want to, to live and work in, in, in foreign lands and, and not everybody has that. Speaker 1: Because if you've never been to another country before it's hard sometimes to--. Speaker 2: It's hard to you know step out of your familiar, you have to be, and, and learn other cultures and other languages and, and find that interesting. A lot of people are not willing to pay the price that involves, involved in, in learning about other cultures and, and languages. And it's, it's an effort. I mean it's not fun though. Learning languages is sometimes perceived as tedious and gee I can speak English so why should I have to do (laughs)--but if you really want to do international work you have to have some language capability. I think it's important to have that interest. The other thing is that I wish, I wish kids in the schools and one of the things that has disturbed me is that kids in the schools today don't spend enough time learning geography and learning about other cultures. I think they said Americans are among, have, are--I mean teachers have told me this, Americans have an appalling lack of knowledge about other countries and geography isn't even taught in many, many schools in the United States. So when people start saying you know well where is Iraq, you know or where is Senegal or where is South Africa or where, you know there are a lot of people in this country simply are not interested or not, not, not trained to learn about, about other places. Speaker 1: Or even the level at which foreign languages are taught in American schools? Speaker 2: Well it's, it's a greatly neglected area. Americans unfortunately have been able to get by without learning languages and they don't live in close proximity to other countries where you know they can easily assimilate and learn other languages. That, in Europe it's no big deal. A Frenchman can go to Germany in, in an hour to learn German if he wants. Spend a week, spend summers or weekends. So they can, they, they have the ability to learn languages and opportunities to do so. We, we just don't have that. They only, closest countries to us are Mexico and Canada and not everybody is clear, is close to, to either of those places and so we have, we have a problem in that regard. But, and so today you can't go around town without running into Spanish and we have a large immigrant population of Spanish speaking people. I think that will hopefully turn the country around to thinking more in terms of learning languages. And black people in the South are learning the difficulty of this. In, in Florida for instance blacks who go out and look for jobs are finding it difficult sometimes to get jobs simply because they don't speak Spanish. In many parts of, of Florida it's, it's almost a requirement, so--. Speaker 1: How may languages do you speak? Speaker 2: Well in addition to English, three. So, but I, I don't use all of them. French I hardly use anymore even though I spoke it fluently when, years ago. I use Spanish far more often now and Portuguese. But I've had a lifelong interest in languages. My dad [Will Mercer Cook] was into it. I sort of came to it naturally. But, but even so I think it's, I'd like to see more interest by, by others and I'd like my kids for instance, none of them have bothered to learn languages. You know I find it frustrating but hopefully one of them will eventually. Story_ID: 5561 Speaker 1: Mr. Cook when you look back at your life what stands out the most to you and why? Speaker 2: Well I, how, I guess what stands out to me is how fortunate I've been. I mean I, I come from a family that is, you know I just thank my stars from coming from that family. I mean I had some, some people in my family who distinguished themselves early on, who passed on certain values and ideas and certain ways of living which I, I've tried to carry forward. And I, I just also am thankful for the fact that I have really good kids. My kids all turned out so far pretty good and I'm, I'm hoping that they, they will learn a little something from, from me and, and other people in our family and, and carry on in that, that tradition. I, I must say I'm as less confident about the future than I was years ago because I, I think when I was younger I was much more optimistic than I am today. But I think we have a lot of problems in the country. We've come a long way in terms of race relations. I think that's a very positive thing. And as I look back on my life I'm glad to say that we don't talk about race and aren't as concerned about racial issues as we were when I was growing up and I think that's a positive sign too. My kids don't, don't seem to be as anxious and worried about racial issues as they were when I was growing up and I think that's, that's all for the better, so--. Story_ID: 5562 Speaker 1: And what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community? Speaker 2: Well my hope and concern--well my, let's talk about my hope. My hope is that we continue sort of the, on the path of progress, that we continue to improve our lives economically and socially in the country. My hope that is we face less discrimination than we did before and I think that's being born out by the facts. I think today black Americans are exposed to far less racism and, and overt racism and discrimination than they were when I was growing up. But as far, I mean there's, that's, that's clear. But I'm hopeful that that will continue that way and that it will improve even more. My concern however is that there's still large segments of the black community that, that this progress is not reaching. I, I see large segments of the black population that are hurting themselves in many ways by having kids out of wedlock, by getting locked in poverty early on and not being able to get out of it. By not getting a, taking advantage of educational opportunities when they are there. I see a lot of waste in terms of kids getting hooked on drugs and so forth which I think is, is awful. And I, and I think that that will do far more harm than discrimination ever could some of the things we are doing to ourselves. And I, I, I'm just hopeful that at some point that, that situation will be reversed by, by hopefully greater intervention, by, by organizations and individuals to, to help some of these people get out of the rut they're in. But I have no solutions. I just, those are my own personal hopes. Story_ID: 5563 Speaker 1: And when you look back at your life is there anything that you wish you would have done differently? Speaker 2: Oh yeah there are a lot of things. I probably don't want to burden you with all of my mistakes and things that I--but I, I, oh yeah I would have done a lot of, lot of things different. I probably would, if I had been a little more together when I was younger I wish I had gone to law school earlier right out of law, out of college. But at the time I didn't even really know what I wanted to do. And I, and I wish I had probably not changed jobs quite as much earlier on so I could have gotten more out of some of the jobs I was involved in. Speaker 1: Do you ever wish you would have chosen a different career path? Speaker 2: Not really no. I think, I can't think of another career path I would have chosen given the facts and circumstances that I was living under at the time. I probably would have liked to have had an opportunity to work more in New York, do some work in investment banking. That's something that I always was fascinated with. But at the time I was coming along there really weren't any opportunities for, for black professionals in that area. There was, that was one area where there were zero opportunities. Those opportunities came available years later and my nephew and my niece, both of them got involved in investment banking and did very well. I, I think I might have wanted to do some of that and I regret to say that those, that those opportunities just weren't there when I was looking around for jobs. So--. Speaker 1: And what haven't you done yet that you'd still like to do? Speaker 2: I'd like to do some teaching. I really would like to, and I'm not sure exactly where I would do that but I, I'm anxious to develop a, a new career teaching. I'd like to share with others some of my experiences. I'd like to teach at a graduate school or a college someplace where I could interact with young people. And I, I enjoy that today. I mean I enjoy the, the intellectual challenge of communicating with, with young kids and, and young adults. Speaker 1: How would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Well I, I think that the only thing I'd like to be remembered is by my kids that, that I was a good father and that I did the best job I could. I'd like to, I don't really want anything, anybody to say great attorney or anything. That to me is irrelevant. You know my father [Will Mercer Cook] told me before he died, he said the only thing that really matters is what your kids think of you when you die. And, and truthfully I think he's right. I think I'd like to be remembered by my family and my, and my kids as, as someone good and someone they look up to. Speaker 1: And is there anything that we haven't talked about that you'd like to add at this time? Speaker 2: No, not really. I think, I think we've covered everything. The--appreciate your being interested enough in my, my life to, to interview me and hopefully this will be shared with some people that may find it interesting at some point in the future. Story_ID: 5564 Speaker 1: Okay Mr. Cook who is in this one? Speaker 2: This is a picture taken shortly after my birth on June 3, 1946. This is a picture of my mother. And--. Speaker 1: Her name? Speaker 2: Her name was Vashti Cook, Smith-Cook, and my brother Mercer who at the time was sixteen years old. Speaker 1: [Jacques Cook as a baby with his mother, Vashti Smith-Cook, and brother, Mercer Cook, 1946. From the collection of Jacques Cook.] Story_ID: 5565 Speaker 1: This picture was taken at my graduation from high school in Africa and that's Niamey, Niger in 1963. Speaker 2: [Jacques Cook at his high school graduation, Niamey, Niger, 1963. From the collection of Jacques Cook.] Story_ID: 5566 Speaker 1: This is my third birthday at 127 W. Street Northwest. Speaker 2: What year? Speaker 1: In, the year is 1949. Speaker 2: Okay, and this is you right here. Speaker 1: And I'm in the middle with--yes. There you go. Speaker 2: [Jacques Cook (center, in white tuxedo) at his third birthday, Washington, D.C., 1949. From the collection of Jacques Cook.] Story_ID: 5567 Speaker 1: This is a picture of my, my dad being sworn in as ambassador to Senegal. Speaker 2: His name. Speaker 1: My father's name was Mercer Cook and the other gentleman in the picture is the Deputy Secretary of State, I think it was Chester Bowles at the time [sic, in 1965 Chester Bowles's title was Ambassador to India] Speaker 2: And about what year was this one taken? Speaker 1: This was taken in 1966 or-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Or 1965. Speaker 2: [Jacques Cook's father, Mercer Cook Sr. (right), with Chester Bowles (center), ca. 1965. From the collection of Jacques Cook.] Story_ID: 5568 Speaker 1: This picture was taken I believe in 1961 at my father's swearing in as ambassador to Niger. He is in the back and the person in the middle is John F. Kennedy. There, correct. Speaker 2: [Jacques Cook's father, Mercer Cook Sr., is sworn in as ambassador to Niger, ca. 1961. From the collection of Jacques Cook.] Story_ID: 5569 Speaker 1: I'm not sure exactly what year this was taken but I--. Speaker 2: You look about two. Speaker 1: I was about two or three. Speaker 2: So--. Speaker 1: And it was Christmas time obviously. Speaker 2: Okay. So--. Speaker 1: In Washington [D.C.]. Speaker 2: -- that was the late 40s [1940s]? Speaker 1: Yeah, late '40s [1940s]. Speaker 2: [Jacques Cook with Santa Claus, Washington, D.C., ca. 1949. From the collection of Jacques Cook.] Story_ID: 5570 Speaker 1: This picture was taken shortly after my birth on March 19, 1946. Speaker 2: [Jacques Cook as a baby, 1946. From the collection of Jacques Cook.] Story_ID: 5571 Speaker 1: This is a picture of me with my father at, I guess I was about three or four. This is at 127 W Street on the front steps of our house. Speaker 2: Late '40s [1940s]? Speaker 1: Late '40s [1940s]. Speaker 2: [Jacques Cook with his father, Mercer Cook Sr., Washington, D.C., ca. late 1940s. From the collection of Jacques Cook.] Story_ID: 5572 Speaker 1: This is self-explanatory. I, I guess I was about again four, four or five on a--probably a little younger than that, on my first tricycle. Speaker 2: Late '40s [1940s]? Speaker 1: Late '40s [1940s]. Speaker 2: [Jacques Cook, ca. 1949. From the collection of Jacques Cook.] Story_ID: 5573 Speaker 1: This I suspect was when I was about, about twenty and I think it was taken down at, down at the, at Highland Beach. Speaker 2: So about what year? Speaker 1: This would be about 1966 by then, yeah. Speaker 2: [Jacques Cook, Highland Beach, Maryland, ca. 1966. From the collection of Jacques Cook.] Story_ID: 5574 Speaker 1: This is a picture taken with my brother. Speaker 2: His name? Speaker 1: Mercer Cook and this was I guess when I was about three or four. And the house is 127 W [Street]. Speaker 2: So if you could just say the date again Mr. Cook, late '40s [1940s]? Speaker 1: Late, late '40s [1940s]. Speaker 2: [Jacques Cook with his older brother, Mercer Cook, Washington, D.C., ca. 1949. From the collection of Jacques Cook.] Story_ID: 5575 Speaker 1: This was taken in the late '40s [1940s] also with, by my father and is in the parking lot of 127 W [Street]. Speaker 2: And your mother's name? Speaker 1: My mother, Vashti Cook. Speaker 2: [Jacques Cook with his mother, Vashti Cook, Washington, D.C., ca. 1949. From the collection of Jacques Cook.] Story_ID: 5576 Speaker 1: This, this picture was taken in the, in, around 1950 and I must have been four or five and I'm standing in front of my house at Highland Beach. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Near Annapolis. Speaker 2: [Jacques Cook, Highland Beach, Maryland, ca. 1950. From the collection of Jacques Cook.] Story_ID: 5577 Speaker 1: This, this is a picture of my father in the late '80s [1980s] shortly before his death. Speaker 2: Okay, your father's name? Speaker 1: Mercer Cook. Speaker 2: And the woman in the photograph? Speaker 1: I can't remember at this date. Speaker 2: Okay, no problem. Speaker 1: But that was a, an old friend of his. Speaker 2: No problem. Speaker 1: [Jacques Cook's father, Mercer Cook Sr., ca. late 1980s. From the collection of Jacques Cook.] Story_ID: 5578 Speaker 1: This is a picture of, of me and my brother. I, I was--my brother Mercer Cook. And I was probably seventeen at the time, sixteen to seventeen. Speaker 2: So, I'm sorry I keep forgetting what year you were born. So what would you guess--? Speaker 1: In '40 [1940]--I was born in '46 [1946] so this would have, would have been around '62 [1962]. Speaker 2: [Jacques Cook with his older brother, Mercer Cook, ca. 1962. From the collection of Jacques Cook.] Story_ID: 5579 Speaker 1: This is a picture of me with my mother Vashti [Smith] Cook. I believe I was about ten years old, 1956. Speaker 2: [Jacques Cook with his mother, Vashti Smith Cook, ca. 1956. From the collection of Jacques Cook.] Story_ID: 5580 Speaker 1: This is a picture of, of me and my best friend from the neighborhood. I think we were both about four. This was probably in the late 40s [1940s]. Speaker 2: Okay, do you remember his name? Speaker 1: That was Pudgy [Johnson]. Speaker 2: Old Pudgy. Speaker 1: His last name I completely forgot. Speaker 2: [Jacques Cook with his best friend, Pudgy Johnson, Washington, D.C., ca. 1949. From the collection of Jacques Cook.] Story_ID: 5581 Speaker 1: This is a picture of me as an infant with my mother Vashti and my dad Mercer Cook at the beach. Speaker 2: Late '40s [1940s]? Speaker 1: Late '40s [1940s], yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: [Jacques Cook with his mother, Vashti Cook, and father, Mercer Cook Sr., ca. 1947. From the collection of Jacques Cook.] Story_ID: 5582 Speaker 1: This is a picture from elementary school. I was at--from St. Martins [Washington, D.C.]. I suspect I was about nine, ten, nine or ten years old. That would have been 1956, '57 [1957]. Speaker 2: [Jacques Cook, ca. 1956. From the collection of Jacques Cook.] Story_ID: 5583 Speaker 1: This is my passport picture from when I was in the [U.S.] Foreign Service. It was taken around 1969. Speaker 2: [Jacques Cook's passport photo, ca. 1969. From the collection of Jacques Cook.] Story_ID: 5584 Speaker 1: Okay, Will Marion Cook this is my, my grandfather. He was a, a noted musician and this picture I believe was taken when he was in his twenties, early thirties. So it would have been in 19, 19, early 1900s. Speaker 2: [Jacques Cook's grandfather, Will Marion Cook, ca. early 1900s. From the collection of Jacques Cook.] Story_ID: 5585 Speaker 1: This is a picture of my father, Mercer Cook. He still had a, some of his hair so I guess he's into his forty, late forties. Speaker 2: Okay, so I'm sorry. What year--? Speaker 1: That would, that would, that should have been in 1944, somewhere around there. Speaker 2: [Jacques Cook's father, Mercer Cook Sr., ca. 1944. From the collection of Jacques Cook.]..