 Story_ID: 290453 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm the interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Sir, could you state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Algernon Johnson Cooper, Jr. [HistoryMaker A. J. Cooper, Jr.] Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: A-L-G-E-R-N-O-N, Johnson, J-O-H-N-S-O-N, Cooper, C-O-O-P-E-R. Speaker 1: Is there a story behind Algernon? Speaker 2: Well, you know, I named my son Algernon [A.J. Cooper III], and so, you know, you always have to say something when you do that. I always said that it helped to build character, but actually my grandmother [Alice Cooper] had a friend from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] who was a minister whose name was Algernon, and she always liked that name, and so she named my father Algernon [Algernon Johnson Cooper, Sr.] after this preacher from Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, who had come to Philadelphia, as I understand it, from England and Algernon is an old English name. It's popular in a book called, 'The Barretts of Wimpole Street,' [Rudolf Besier] and Cooper is an English name and it means barrel maker. Speaker 1: Okay, Cooper, the one's who worked with copper and something-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: No? Speaker 2: Cooper, a Cooper is a barrel maker. It has nothing to do with copper. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He's just a barrel maker. Speaker 1: All right, can you give us your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: May 30th, 1944 in Mobile, Alabama, Saint Martin De Porres Hospital. Speaker 1: All right, okay. And, sir, what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm a lawyer. Speaker 1: All right, and what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today is June 21st, 19--I'm sorry, 2005. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: You're in the basement of my home at 727 Flamingo Drive, in Atlanta, Georgia, in my home office. Story_ID: 290454 Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that only require a short answer that we always have to ask 'cause-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --company policy and so, the first one is, do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Barbeque. Speaker 1: Okay, anything? Speaker 2: Anything, or ribs primarily, of course. Speaker 1: Okay, now do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Blue. Speaker 1: All right, a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Summer. Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: My summer home in Fairhope, Alabama, on the, on Mobile Bay. Speaker 1: Okay, and do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: That I can say on, on this? No, I don't. Story_ID: 290455 Speaker 1: Well, let me ask you about your family history. I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Algernon Johnson Cooper, Sr.] side. We'll start with your mother's side of the family. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Gladys Catherine Mouton Cooper. Speaker 1: Okay, can you spell that for us? Speaker 2: Gladys, G-L-A-D-Y-S, Catherine, C-A-T-H-E-R-I-N-E, Mouton, M-O-U-T-O-N, Cooper, C-O-O-P-E-R. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: If she was living, she would slap me, and I must tell you, I don't recall. Speaker 1: Okay, you really don't know her date of birth? Speaker 2: It's not that I--I don't remember. I don't remember. My mother's been deceased for, about fifteen years. Speaker 1: Do you have a guess you can give us as to approximately when she was born and where? Speaker 2: She was born in Lafayette, Louisiana, and she was born in approximately 1915. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: 'Cause she graduated from Hampton [Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] in the early '30s [1930s]. Speaker 1: Okay, now is, what do you know about the ancestors on your mother's side? I mean, how far back can you trace them? Speaker 2: Well, my mother's grandmother, Agnes Mouton, and my mother's father, Clarence Mouton, both had the same last name and they came, or they came from a long line of Moutons in Louisiana. My grandmother's grandfather was General Mouton [General Jean-Jacques-Alfred-Alexandre "Alfred" Mouton], whose statue is in the town square in Lafayette, Louisiana, and that's about as far back as I can go with my grandmother. Speaker 1: Okay, now this is, is this like a white Confederate general-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: General Mouton? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: And he's, I guess one of the, I guess, elevated figures of Lafayette, Louisiana, leading, or he was at one time? Speaker 2: Absolutely. I mean, the Mouton name is a famous and popular surname in Louisiana. Lots and lots of Moutons, many of whom moved to Texas, Los Angeles [California], and some to Catholic Mobile, Alabama. Speaker 1: Okay. Were the Moutons Catholic that you're related to? Speaker 2: Yes. Well, in Louisiana, in that time period, especially in Lafayette, you probably were either Catholic or you didn't go to church at all. Very few Protestants then. Speaker 1: Okay, so, now were your, being related to this General Mouton, does that mean that your family belonged to him or were they, there were some free blacks in Louisiana in those days, I don't know. Do you know? Speaker 2: Well I don't know either. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: There was a fair amount of interracial, out of wedlock activity going on, so I don't know how it actually came to be. Speaker 1: Okay, so there's no definitive tradition that you know of about who, what they-- Speaker 2: No, I, you know, I was born and raised in Alabama. We used to go and visit our grandparents. As a matter of fact I lived with my grandparents for a year when I was in the fourth grade, I believe, and went to the black Catholic grade school there, St. Paul's [School, Lafayette, Louisiana], and we still have lots and lots of cousins in Lafayette. The, [HistoryMaker] Marc [H.] Morial's mother's [Sybil Haydel Morial] from Lafayette. The president of Xavier [University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana], [HistoryMaker] Norman Francis (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Francis. Speaker 2: His wife is from Lafayette, so we used to tease him that all the pretty girls came from Lafayette. Story_ID: 290456 Speaker 1: Are there any stories passed down through your [maternal] family about life in the, back in the 19th century or the early part of this century, down in that part of the country? Speaker 2: Not that I know of-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --but it raises some interesting questions now at this age in my life that it would be interesting to go and find out. I think I'll do that. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's an interesting part of the United States, the South, but it's also the Gulf [of Mexico] which is a little bit different from, you know, not completely different but-- Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: --different from the interior. Speaker 2: Well, well, the Gulf is interesting. You know, from Pensacola [Florida], a port city, Mobile [Alabama], a port city, Biloxi [Mississippi], port city, on around to New Orleans [Louisiana], a port city, there was a constant influx of foreigners who were the people, who owned the ships and so in some ways, and most, and many of those cities, all of those cities I just mentioned, had a very large Catholic influence. For example, in Biloxi, Moss Point [Mississippi], Bay St. Louis [Mississippi], it's the home of the Josephites [Josephite Fathers and Brothers], which was a black Catholic order of priests, and an order of black nuns down there also, and it was thought that in many ways these towns were more tolerant than the interior of those states, Louisiana, Mississippi, Alabama, Florida, and I guess to some extent that was true and I guess I would say it's the extent that says you would get hung on a low limb rather than on a high limb. Speaker 1: Yeah, the, it's interesting to note that the Klan's [Ku Klux Klan, KKK] always against Catholics as well as blacks and Jews. Speaker 2: That's true. Speaker 1: Yeah. I think there was a version of the Klan in the Catholic part of the U.S. called the Knights of the White Camelia, 'cause they couldn't get in the regular Klan 'cause they were Catholics. So-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well that, that is interesting because I know, because I went to school at Notre Dame [University of Notre Dame, South Bend, Indiana]. The Klan was extremely active in Indiana and a lot of people don't know that. A great number of lynchings took place in Indiana. The Klan attacked the University of Notre Dame at one point, so, you're right. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. Story_ID: 290457 Speaker 1: Now did your mother [Gladys Mouton Cooper] have any stories about growing up in Lafayette [Louisiana]? Speaker 2: Well let me tell you. My mother had five sisters, or at least there were five girls in the family, she had four sisters. All four of the sisters went to Xavier [University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana], and my aunt, my mother was the only one who didn't, and she went to Hampton [Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] where she met my father [Algernon Johnson Cooper, Sr.] and one of my aunts was a cloistered Dominican nun in the only integrated religious community [The Dominican Monastery of Saint Jude] in the Deep South at that point in Marbury, Alabama. They were twenty-four-hour cloistered nuns, and we used to go there in the summertime and the other sisters would come. You know, my Aunt Helen [Mouton], my Aunt Marvel [Mouton] and Sister Hyacinth [Mouton] and my mother, and there would just be wonderful stories about Lafayette and we had a, my grandfather Clarence [Mouton] had a brother, Uncle Dick [ph.], who had a farm and animals and horses and mules and the girls used to go out to his farm and ride and even as youngsters we used to do that, but there were stories about family, food, fun, religion, close-knit families in Lafayette. I don't recall any stories about bad things in particular, at all. Speaker 1: Well, the good ones are all right to tell. Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean, you know, but, but it is interesting. Speaker 1: They didn't talk about any-- Speaker 2: Well, you know it's interesting, though, you have to think about this. This was the early 20th century, 1910, 1920, and Xavier University was the preeminent black Catholic university, well, it still is, and these are young women who were going away to college, okay, and that tells you something, okay. And so, when we think about history and tradition and the good fortune that many of us have, it's because way back then, we had grandparents who were educated, and we had parents who were educated and we got educated and our children are getting educated, and in spite of this long lineage of education, and the good fortune that it has brought in many, many ways, we still are in situations that are problematic in terms of race and social situations. Speaker 1: Okay, now is there, did your mother discuss why she went to Hampton instead of Xavier? Speaker 2: Well, yeah she did. She didn't want to go to the same place that all of her sisters had gone, and how it came to be Hampton I know, I know but I don't remember but she enjoyed Hampton. Speaker 1: That's pretty far away from-- Speaker 2: Louisiana. Speaker 1: --Mobile [Alabama], yeah. Speaker 2: She came, she came to Hampton from Lafayette. She met my father, who was from Mobile-- Speaker 1: Okay, so that's all right. So they met in college? Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Is there a, did they tell you a story about how they met or-- Speaker 2: Well (laughter), my father had a friend from Indianapolis [Indiana], Frank, I'll think of his last name in a moment, and they founded the Omega [Psi Phi Fraternity] chapter at Hampton, and so they were buddies, friends, and Frank introduced my mother to my father. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Frank Kersey, K-E-R-S-E-Y. His son is a lawyer in Washington, D.C. A very good lawyer in Washington. Story_ID: 290458 Speaker 1: Let me ask you about your father's side of the family. Of course you're a junior, right, so-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Yeah, your father [Algernon Johnson Cooper, Sr.] has the same exact name? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: What is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: My father was born in Mobile [Alabama] and he was born in 1912, I believe it was. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And his mother died, Alice [Cooper], when he was eight and he was raised by his mother's sister, Pearl Inge, I-N-G-E, Johnson and Ms. Pearl, or Shuge, as we called her, S-H-U-G-E, was the maternal head of our family, and she raised my father as her son. Her husband was William Madison and my aunt was Pearl Inge Johnson Madison. William Madison was from Pensacola, Florida and he and my great aunt, Pearl, founded a small benevolent society which became an insurance company, the Christian Burial Insurance Company [Mobile, Alabama], and then they founded several funeral homes, the Christian Benevolent Funeral Home [Mobile, Alabama], and they had funeral homes in Montgomery [Alabama] and Dothan [Alabama] and Atmore [Alabama] and Mobile, Alabama, and my father's father was from Florida as well, and his name was Osceola, Osceola Cooper, okay, and, there's a-- Speaker 1: Can you spell Osceola for us? Speaker 2: O-S-C-E-O-L-A, and he was a descendant, or as we understand it, a great-great-grandchild of Chief Osceola of the Osceola Indians. There's a picture of Osceola on the wall right there in front of you. Speaker 1: Yeah, right, right, I think he was a Creek, right? Speaker 2: No, no, no, Seminole. Speaker 1: Seminole, okay. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: And there's a long history of the Seminoles taking in black slaves, you know, who were escaping, and my father went to grade school and high school in Mobile and then went to Hampton [Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] where he majored in business and accounting and met my mother [Gladys Mouton Cooper]. Story_ID: 290459 Speaker 1: He [Cooper's father, Algernon Johnson Cooper, Sr.] came back to Mobile [Alabama] and went to work for the insurance company and then my mother [Gladys Mouton Cooper] and he got married and he brought her to Mobile and my great aunt [Pearl Johnson Madison] built him a house right next to her house on Delaware Street in what's called Down the Bay part of Mobile, Alabama, 603 Delaware Street, and her address was 601 Delaware Street. Speaker 2: Now when did they get married? What year was it? Speaker 1: Nineteen twenty-eight [1928], 1930, something like that. Speaker 2: Okay, maybe a little, okay, all right, okay. And so they relocated to Mobile-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --his hometown and, all right. And your father continued to, to be involved in all the businesses, the family businesses? Speaker 1: Yes, and he focused on the insurance company business, and my great-uncle [William Madison] and great-aunt spent most of their time running the funeral home and both of the businesses flourished and my parents had six children and managed to send us to college and three of us to law school and-- Speaker 2: Okay, now what was the name of the insurance company? Speaker 1: The Christian Burial Insurance Company [Mobile, Alabama]. Speaker 2: Okay, and does it still exist? Speaker 1: No, it doesn't. It was sold about ten years ago. Speaker 2: Okay, it was sold but does it still exist under that name? Speaker 1: Yes, um-hm. Speaker 2: Christian-- Speaker 1: Not under that name. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: What do they call it now? Speaker 1: I don't even remember. Speaker 2: Okay, so that's something. So they had, they must have been doing fairly well with all the funeral homes and the insurance business and, you would guess? Speaker 1: They did well. Story_ID: 290460 Speaker 1: Do you have any brothers or sisters? Well, I know you do, so, I, well, who are they? Just tell us, will you. Speaker 2: Yes. My oldest brother is Jerome Gary Cooper. My older brother, who's deceased, is William Madison Cooper. I have a sister, [HistoryMaker] Peggy Cooper Cafritz. A sister, Dominique Teresa Sheen, S-H-E-E-N, Cooper and a brother, Mario Magellan Cooper, M-A-G-E-L-L-A-N. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and you're the youngest? No-- Speaker 2: No, I'm in the middle. Speaker 1: --you're in the middle, okay, that's right, your younger brother is Mario. Speaker 2: There's three boys, two girls and one boy. Speaker 1: Okay, so you're between Peggy and-- Speaker 2: And William. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Story_ID: 290461 Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: An earliest childhood memory? I guess my earliest childhood memory would be getting our pictures taken by a photographer. That would be one. The other would be getting my first haircut. I had long, curly hair, almost down to my shoulders, and my mother [Gladys Mouton Cooper] did not want me to get a haircut and my father [Algernon Johnson Cooper, Sr.] just insisted. That was one of 'em, yeah. Story_ID: 290462 Speaker 1: Can you describe the neighborhood you lived in and what was some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: I lived in an all-black neighborhood [Down the Bay, Mobile, Alabama] which were comprised of what today, I guess you would call middle class black folks but what back then you would call, I don't know, the most well-educated, sitting cheek to jowl with the non-educated. We had a Baptist church, caddy corner on one corner, across the street, was a shotgun house, two, three, four shotgun houses. On the corner were the homes of two wonderful leading families. A woman who taught piano, the woman whose home Jackie Robinson stayed in when he came through Mobile [Alabama] with the Brooklyn Dodgers [Los Angeles Dodgers] farm team, the Mobile Bears. So, it would be what I would call a typical southern black neighborhood. You know, there weren't neighborhoods in the early '30s [1930s] that I know about in retrospect that were enclaves that we might have now, say like a Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois], that didn't exist, okay. There was black folks who lived together, different circumstances, but they lived together, okay. Now the, two blocks down the street, there was a place on the corner of Washington Avenue and Delaware [Street] called Fletcher's BBQ which was the favored barbeque, white barbeque establishment in Mobile at the time. Story_ID: 290463 Speaker 1: Fletcher's [BBQ, Mobile, Alabama] was segregated, as was virtually well everything in Mobile [Alabama], but black folks could go to the back window of Fletcher's to buy barbeque and so the smell of Fletcher's BBQ which was two and a half blocks away, would waft over our neighborhood so that was the smell. Listening to the music from this black Baptist church. Listening on the radio at night to this powerful radio station from Nashville [Tennessee]-- Speaker 2: WLAC. Speaker 1: WLAC. Speaker 2: That's right, the Hossman [Bill "Hoss" Allen] and all that stuff. Speaker 1: Absolutely. Our homes were two large--my aunt's [Cooper's paternal great aunt, Pearl Johnson Madison] home, our house, two large houses, lots of grass in the backyard and the, in the, in the expanse between the two homes and the front yard. So lots of playing in the yard, cowboys and Indians and, you know, all of this. Those are the memories. Ms. Orleans [ph.] who was our housekeeper who lived in our house for twenty years until she died, the ladies across the street who did laundry, young memory, okay. The ice truck coming, okay. The milkman coming. The vegetable wagon with horses, okay, coming. Speaker 2: Now, did they sing in those days and, or-- Speaker 1: Sure. Speaker 2: --in that part of the-- Speaker 1: Um-hm, yeah, and, and those were very early, early memories, okay. Speaker 2: That's something that doesn't happen now, that's disappeared from most neighborhoods. You don't have a ice man-- Speaker 1: Well you certainly have-- Speaker 2: --singing or watermelon man. Speaker 1: --well, obviously, yeah, you know, you don't have that but in many places, including here in Atlanta [Georgia], people still sell vegetables from the back of their trucks, okay, and that's not an uncommon occurrence, especially the smaller the towns. You know, if you're driving along, you know, if it's a two-way highway especially, you still see vegetable stands and so forth, people selling vegetables. Speaker 2: But the singing, that's the-- Speaker 1: Well, no, no, that, that has, you know, that, that's gone, you know. Speaker 2: That's something I, you know, I've even heard in Dayton, Ohio, you know, and I knew it was happening in the South but you know you don't hear that anymore, singers. Speaker 1: I, I'm sure that there's a reason. I mean, nobody's, you know, you got these radios and CDs and XM [Satellite Radio] and-- Speaker 2: Yup, there's how, outside, there was a watermelon song, the ragman had a song, everybody had a song. Speaker 1: Oh I know, don't get me to lying here. I don't remember the songs-- Speaker 2: Okay, okay. Speaker 1: --you know, particularly. I remember that we had an icebox and the iceman would come and he had these big pincers, they'd pick up the eight blocks of ice with them and bring 'em and put 'em in the icebox. Speaker 2: Okay, okay. Anything else? Speaker 1: About the neighborhood? Speaker 2: Yeah. What was it called, did it have a name? Speaker 1: Down the Bay [Mobile, Alabama]. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 290464 Speaker 1: Down the Bay [Mobile, Alabama]. You know, growing up I, you know, I remember, you know, my first bicycle. I remember, you know, riding the six or seven blocks to St. Peter Claver Grade School [St. Peter Claver Elementary School, Mobile, Alabama]. I remember as a young child, seven, eight, nine years old being an altar boy and riding down to Saint Martin De Porres Hospital [Mobile, Alabama] for six a.m. mass to be the altar boy and-- Speaker 2: Now these names, just to linger over them a minute, St. Peter Claver has a special significance to black people, right? Speaker 1: St. Peter Claver, Peter Claver was a black Catholic saint. Martin De Porres was a black Catholic saint and it is a punctuation point to the segregation of the Catholic Church in the South. Martin De Porres was a black Catholic hospital, okay. St. Peter Claver, black Catholic grade school, okay. Heart of Mary [Most Pure Heart of Mary Catholic School, Mobile, Alabama] was a black Catholic high school, okay, and when there were parades, you'd have the white Catholic schools all go first, then at the end of the parade would be the black Catholic schools, okay. That's a childhood memory that's seared into my mind, okay. The [Feast of] Christ the King Day parade. Speaker 2: Okay, did, well, when you were a little boy, what did you like to do and what did you dislike, you know? Speaker 1: Well, I loved to read. There was, once again, on Davis Avenue, the only black public library [Davis Avenue Branch of the Mobile Public Library; National African American Archives and Museum, Mobile, Alabama], and one of the first things my parents [Algernon Johnson Cooper, Sr. and Gladys Mouton Cooper] would do as soon as we were old enough was take us to that library and get us library cards, and on Saturday mornings there'd be a book reading club and you would get points for the books that you had read that week. I loved to roller skate and ride my bicycle, play baseball, go swimming, okay. There was the Davis Avenue Recreation Center [Mobile, Alabama] which had a black swimming pool. In 1930--no, in 1945, my great aunt [Pearl Johnson Madison] bought a summer home on Mobile Bay in Fairhope [Alabama] and she used to take us over there and, and my aunt had a strange, I'm quite not, I'm not quite sure how to explain it. She used to like to take the boys with her, but she didn't like to take my sisters, and the only reason I ever heard her express was that she wasn't doing anybody's hair. She didn't like doing hair, okay, and, which was always strange to me. And so it used to be the boys she would take, you know, and the boys would get to go and spend the night. We'd go across the yard, but those were the things. We had, I enjoyed going to Ms. Pearl's to spend the night, okay, because she'd always fix us a little bowl of ice cream, you know. I remember, you know, the slop jars and having to take the slop jars in the morning and empty them out. I remember, you know, listening in her living room to the radio to 'Amos 'n' Andy,' and I remember when she got the first television set in our neighborhood. Those are things I remember. Story_ID: 290465 Speaker 1: How would you describe yourself as a youngster? What kind of a kid were you? Speaker 2: Inquisitive, skeptical, assertive, a leader amongst my little, what my kids would call my little posse, back then, my little gang of buddies. I, there was a neighborhood theatre called the Harlem Theatre [Mobile, Alabama] I'm pretty sure, where you could go and see movies for a nickel. It was about six, seven blocks from our house on Dearborn Street, and I remember going there. I remember two-for-ones. Then when I got to be about nine, there was a larger white theatre downtown called the Saenger [Theatre, Mobile, Alabama] where black folks had to sit in the balcony, and I just had great problems with that, okay, and of course when you rode the bus, you had to sit in the back, and I had great problems with that, and Bishop Fulton Sheen, handsome silver-haired Catholic bishop who was the first television evangelist, okay (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I remember the show ['Life Is Worth Living'], yeah, Bishop Sheen. Speaker 2: --and he was a friend of the Dominican nuns at Marbury [Alabama], and he got to know our family from his visits to Marbury. My youngest daughter's name is Dominique Teresa Sheen Cooper. He used to say Mass at [Saint] Martin De Porres Hospital [Mobile, Alabama] and I was his altar boy. He used to come and have dinner at our home, and so we knew some white people. There was a bookstore in downtown Mobile [Alabama] owned by a Greek fellow, and it was the most popular bookstore in Mobile. My father [Algernon Johnson Cooper, Sr.], on a weekly basis, would go to this bookstore and buy books and he would take his children with him and I remember particularly going with my father to this bookstore and my father buying me books and the guy, and I'll now think of his name, would give me lollipops. And so, seven, eight years old, nine years old, I'd get on the bus and I'd sit in the front seat. I'd go down to the Saenger Theatre and I'd go downstairs, buy my ticket and walk in. Speaker 1: Nobody stopped you? Nobody tried to-- Speaker 2: Well, fair to say, white people had some confusion about whether or not I was white or black. The black folks knew I was black. White folks were, you know, confused about that. And so I'd just go in, okay. My parents were scared to death, okay. Speaker 1: Now you had this long curly hair in those days? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: And I guess with all the foreigners coming into a place like Mobile, they weren't, sometimes they weren't sure probably-- Speaker 2: No, this wasn't about that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Okay, 'cause I was too young to be a foreigner, you know. The foreigners were sailors, okay. The, so at one point my parents sent me to Lafayette [Louisiana] to stay with my [maternal] grandparents [Agnes Mouton and Clarence Mouton] for a year because I think they were worried about me. Story_ID: 290466 Speaker 1: Then as I got a little older, you know, sixth, seventh grade, yeah, I was scaring my parents [Gladys Mouton Cooper and Algernon Johnson Cooper, Sr.] to death because I, you know, I couldn't accept this, okay. So my brother [William Cooper] at that time was at Notre Dame [University of Notre Dame, South Bend, Indiana] and he was in the Naval Reserve Officers Training Corps, [N]ROTC, and he came home with this white [U.S.] Navy uniform and, you know, I was a kid and I'd, gee whiz, I want to be in the service, right. So, I got in my mind that I wanted to go to a military academy. And so, you know, my parents said, "Phew, anything to get you out of here because he's going to get himself killed." And so they started looking for Catholic military academies and they found Marmion Military Academy [Marmion Academy, Aurora, Illinois], a Benedictine, twenty-four-hour a day military academy in Aurora, Illinois, about forty miles outside of Chicago [Illinois]. On top of it, about thirty percent of Marmion's graduates every year went to Notre Dame, and by this time my older brother was about to go to Notre Dame. So the chief recruiter for Marmion came and spent the weekend with us, Father Damien [ph.]. I never will forget it. Now Mobile [Alabama] was still segregated. This was 1953. Speaker 2: You were like nine years old? Speaker 1: No, no, hold on, no. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Let me get this straight. This was 1958, okay. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Now, he liked Italian food. So he wanted to get some ravioli or he wanted to take us out to dinner. Well there wasn't an Italian restaurant to which we could go to dinner, a black family. So, I never will forget it. He went to the Italian restaurant, and I went with him and we went in and he ordered ravioli to go, and we brought it back to our home and we had, he sat at the dinner table and had dinner, and he interviewed me and whatever and I was accepted at Marmion, and I was the first black ever to attend Marmion, and when I got there I was the first black, I was the only black there and, you know, Illinois, here I am from Alabama and it got to be winter and that hawk was blowing in off of Lake Michigan and we'd have roll call at 5:30. We'd line up on the deck at six a.m. outside and march from there to the chow hall, and you're talking about cold. I thought I was going to die but I survived it, and I never will forget going home. For Thanksgiving I went to Chicago with my Uncle Chester Bethel and Aunt Inez [ph.] and had Thanksgiving with them. Then for Christmas I went home to Mobile, took the train, the L&N [Louisville and Nashville Railroad], and I had my uniform on and my parents were so proud and it was a pretty big deal. Story_ID: 290467 Speaker 1: During those days, I guess when you were about ten years old, you know, Brown v. the Board case [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954], was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Nineteen fifty-four [1954]. Speaker 1: --you know, ruled on in '54 [1954], yeah, and you know, subsequent to that, I mean, well, you know, after that you have a lot of civil rights activity making the newspapers and that sort of thing. Did you-- Speaker 2: Well you, you have to understand, you know, Brown was decided by the [U.S.] Supreme Court in 1954 and Brown had no impact in most places for a number of years thereafter. The NAACP Legal Defense [and Educational] Fund began filing lawsuits around the country to integrate public school systems, and filed Birdie Mae Davis v. The Mobile County Board of Education [Davis v. Board of School Commissioners of Mobile County, 1971] in 1958, okay. In 1970, I became the lead counsel representing the plaintiffs in that lawsuit. Speaker 1: That's twenty years [sic.] after? Speaker 2: Yes, okay. I appealed that lawsuit twelve times to the Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals [U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit, New Orleans, Louisiana]. Attorney general, oh my goodness it is hard, the attorney general at that time, well, the judge at that time was a person who became the attorney general, Griffin Bell. I testified at Griffin Bell's confirmation hearing supporting his confirmation, which some blacks opposed, but I knew Griffin Bell because I had argued in front of him twelve times, and Griffin Bell had been the strongest person possible in enforcing Brown v. Board of Education, and we beat the Mobile County [Alabama] school board twelve times and so between 1958 and 1970, they were still fighting aggressively to maintain both teacher segregation and pupil segregation in Mobile County. We were in the Catholic school system. In 1956, my father [Algernon Johnson Cooper, Sr.] took my older brother, William [Cooper], who was a student at Heart of--Most Pure Heart of Mary [Catholic] High School [Mobile, Alabama], the black high school, to McGill-Toolen [Catholic High School, Mobile, Alabama], the Catholic high school. [Thomas J.] Toolen was the bishop, the Archbishop Toolen, okay. When my father presented my brother to register in 1956, Archbishop Toolen became outraged. Now my father was arguably one of the, not arguably, he was one of the leading black Catholics in that diocese [Archdiocese of Mobile, Mobile, Alabama]. The Bishop refused to let him register my brother and refused to let my brother attend the black Catholic high school. So in essence, we were banned. So my brother had to go to live with his aunt in Detroit [Michigan] in order to go to a Catholic high school. And so he went to high school there for two years and then to Notre Dame [University of Notre Dame, South Bend, Indiana]. Speaker 1: Okay, for the sake of history, let's just note that, be safe to say the Catholic Church did not take the lead in desegregation in that part of the country. Speaker 2: Well let's put it this way. I would say Catholic revisionists would lead one to think that they did take the lead, okay. That there were places like Spring Hill College, a Catholic Jesuit college in Mobile which admitted someone in 1958 or whatever, okay. The bishop of this diocese, okay, was an avid segregationist and that's just a fact. Story_ID: 290468 Speaker 1: We interviewed a couple of years ago, [HistoryMaker] Bishop [Joseph] Howze from Mobile [Alabama] as well, you know, down in Biloxi [Mississippi], I think it was where we talked to him. He talked about some of the struggles in the Catholic Church as well but so, now did you, so, I guess I'll ask this question to find out, were you aware as a youth of the civil rights struggles going on in the country, and you seem like, I mean, you seemed not to want to go along with the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, but you see, you have-- Speaker 1: --status quo and-- Speaker 2: --you have to understand, and you have to sort of take it, you know, five years by five years, okay, and you have to say, well what civil rights struggle, okay. Now, one of the great civil rights cases was State of Alabama versus the NAACP [NAACP v. Alabama, 1958] where the State of Alabama tried to get the NAACP's [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] membership list. You know, Thurgood Marshall would sneak into Alabama to speak and sneak out, because his life would be at risk. There were civil rights leaders in Mobile. Wiley Bolden, Sr., who was my second wife's grandfather, was a great civil rights leader. John LeFlore was a great civil rights leader in Mobile, doing that which they could to protest police brutality, the problems with lack of public access, but it wasn't until the civil rights laws of the '60s [1960s], the public accommodations laws, the voting rights laws and so forth that there was any legal basis, okay, to accomplish voter registration and so forth. That is not to say that even before then, okay, there were voter registration drives where John LeFlore, Wiley Bolden, my father [Algernon Johnson Cooper, Sr.], other folks, would go down and attempt to register, okay. There was the poll tax. There were these registration examinations, okay, recite the first ten amendments to the Constitution, all of these sorts of things, okay. There was fighting going on, okay, and so, of course, in my home, with my father, with his friends, doctors, dentists, teachers, pharmacists and whatever, okay, you'd have to be brain dead not to be learning from osmosis about what was going on and we learned a lot about what was going on. My brother Gary [Cooper], you know, left before any of this started. He was away in the [U.S.] Marine Corps after college. My older brother [William Cooper] was at Notre Dame [University of Notre Dame, South Bend, Indiana]. A large part of the time I was in boarding school [Marmion Military Academy; Marmion Academy, Aurora, Illinois]. My younger sister, [HistoryMaker] Alexis Herman, were there in Mobile, you know, and they participated in sit-ins and marches and so forth and the summertime when we came home, we did all of this also. And so Mobile has a very, very active history of protest. Story_ID: 290469 Speaker 1: So what you were saying is that there was a lot of civil rights activity going on in Mobile [Alabama] and a lot of people keenly interested in the outcome of it and involvement? Speaker 2: Yeah. I don't think I said a lot, okay. Speaker 1: Well, the-- Speaker 2: There was a very active group of people, okay. There were some folks at Spring Hill College [Mobile, Alabama], one priest in particular whose name escapes me, who were, you know, activists, okay, and so, you know, growing up in Mobile, in my circumstances, it would have been difficult not to be aware and if one was sort of innately inquisitive and contrarian and these other things, it's something that you would take in readily, and I did. Speaker 1: Okay, so you had a temper--the temperament to be involved in this early on, you're saying? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I mean there was, there was something offensive to me about going to the back window of Fletcher's [BBQ, Mobile, Alabama], and having a black cook cooking this barbeque and handing it to me out the back window when white folks were going in the front. There was something innately offensive about that. Human nature makes that offensive. Speaker 1: Yes, it seems very strange to think, you know, it sounds like a strange scenario. He's cooking--a black cook is cooking it in a white establishment that-- Speaker 2: You know, not, not a strange scenario because this is the South. I mean, this is the place where you had to go into black bathrooms, drink out of black, a colored or a Negro only fountain, okay. This is where if you went to the cathedral you couldn't sit with the white folks, okay. If you went to a theatre, you went upstairs. So it was not unusual. This was what it was. This was traditional but at the same time, it's something that you innately knew or at least I innately knew that I didn't like. I found it offensive. Story_ID: 290470 Speaker 1: You go to Marmion [Military Academy; Marmion Academy, Aurora, Illinois] in Joliet, the only black student-- Speaker 2: Aurora [Illinois]. Speaker 1: Oh, Aurora, I'm sorry, I get those two places mixed up a lot, but Aurora, okay, and this, and you have, you're not, you don't, you're sort of a critic of your environment it seems to me, coming out of Mobile [Alabama] and here you are at military school. Now, everybody expects you to conform on some level. How, how did you fare at Marmion? Speaker 2: Um, I enjoyed Marmion on a lot of levels. I enjoyed the discipline. I enjoyed the camaraderie of being with guys who were my age and I learned enough at Marmion to know that I didn't want to make the [U.S.] military my career as my brother [Gary Cooper] had. I learned at Marmion a lot about racism. I learned a lot at Marmion about white people who cared about you as an individual and a human being. I learned at Marmion that individual successes were seen as tributes to you individually or your family but that failures were attributed to your race. I learned at Marmion that folks would accept you up to a point and the point being, you know, you'd be sitting around and it's time for going out on dates and folks were fixing up folks with their sisters but not you, you know, sort of thing, okay. Marmion was good for me, okay. It is a huge factor, I believe, it was a huge factor in shaping me into the person I became and inculcating leadership qualities at a very young age. Speaker 1: Now are there any teachers or mentors that you encountered either from, you know, going all the way back to St. Peter Claver [Elementary School, Mobile, Alabama] through Marmion that really influenced you that you, that you remember? Speaker 2: None at St. Peter Claver. There were nuns and none particularly reside in any harbor in my memory. At Marmion there were several, okay. There was a chaplain named Father Wulstan [Mork]. There was an algebra teacher who later became the commandant who later became the head of the school, Father Luke [Bohr], who was especially helpful. There was a man, flaming red hair, who was the head of the food services for whom I worked after school, and on weekends, and it was a prize job for a cadet to work in the kitchen. He taught me a lot. I mean, he wasn't military or anything, he was just a man. And one or two others but those were, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, so, now did you, well how did you fare at Marmion. I mean, I know you graduated from Marmion and went on to Notre Dame [University of Notre Dame, South Bend, Indiana] but did you, so you liked the experience and did you, you know-- Speaker 2: I liked the experience. I did less well on the military side than I did on the academic side. I graduated, I think I was a sergeant or something. I was editor-in-chief of the school newspaper. I did a little athletics, not much. Played football for a year, ran, was on the track team for a year or so. Speaker 1: The editor of the paper, that's quite, that's something. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Story_ID: 290471 Speaker 1: So, you pretty much had determined to go to Notre Dame [University of Notre Dame, South Bend, Indiana] like your brothers [William Cooper and Gary Cooper]? Speaker 2: I don't know if determined is the right word. I wanted to. As I said, lots of the guys at my high school went. Both my brothers had gone. Notre Dame is the preeminent Catholic university in America. A great academic school as well as being a leader in football, and so I wanted to go. Speaker 1: Okay. So, you graduated from Marmion [Military Academy; Marmion Academy, Aurora, Illinois] in, what year was that at? Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-two [1962]. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, and you started, I guess, Notre Dame the same year, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, you know, by the time I got to Notre Dame, there had been eight consecutive years of a Cooper being on that campus (background noise). Story_ID: 290472 Speaker 1: So when I got to Notre Dame [University of Notre Dame, South Bend, Indiana], my older brother, William [Cooper], was still there. There had been eight years of there being a Cooper at Notre Dame. So I knew the campus, I knew the, my way around. I knew the people there. I knew that when my oldest brother [Gary Cooper] got there in 1954, there were only five blacks in his class. I knew that when my older brother got there in 1958, there were only twelve in his starting class, okay. When I got there, there were only twenty-four blacks in the whole university. So, I understood and I looked forward to getting to Notre Dame and so when I got to Notre Dame in 1962, we were in the '60s [1960s] and everything that being in the '60s [1960s] meant, culturally, civil rights-wise, politically and so forth. So, even as a freshman, I became a leader at Notre Dame. Speaker 2: Now the president of Notre Dame (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Theodore Hesburgh, and I knew Father Hesburgh when I got there. His office was up in the [Golden] Dome and anytime the light was on in the evening, you know, anybody who had the guts to walk up to his office and he'd see him and I did that, not infrequently. And I founded the first civil rights commission at Notre Dame, and I thought there was something wrong about the fact that Notre Dame spent more money recruiting Africans to come to Notre Dame from Africa than it did recruiting African Americans to come to Notre Dame. I felt that if the United States was ten percent black Catholics, then Notre Dame ought to be at least ten percent black Catholics. And so, that led to a history of involvement in progressive things at Notre Dame. Speaker 2: Now Hesburgh was, he's a fairly progressive figure from the '60s [1960s] from what I understand (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, he became, as you will recall, the chairman of the president's [U.S.] Commission on Civil Rights, his reputation is being progressive, being a civil rights leader. I did not believe that that translated into what was happening at Notre Dame or what Notre Dame was doing with minorities and for minorities in South Bend, Indiana. You see, there's a little disconnect when you go to Notre Dame and there is a corps of maids who clean your room every day. All of these maids were Polish women, okay, who were poor and needed the work, and as you look around Notre Dame, everybody who worked there was white. There was one black professor when I got there, Adam [S.] Arnold [Jr.], in the business school who taught insurance. There's this disconnect, Father Hesburgh. Here you're out here saying this and here we are at home. And so, on campus and off campus I helped to lead, challenging those things. I ran for president of the student government in a three-way race. I had another friend, Mitch Lewis, who ran and we decided, he and I, that I should drop out and support the other guy, and the reason for that was we concluded that whoever I supported was going to lose, okay. And so I did. He lost, and the first thing Mitch did was appointed me to the cabinet of student government, okay, and everybody said, what is this, right? But we planned that. Story_ID: 290473 Speaker 1: Now, I wanted, while I was at Notre Dame [University of Notre Dame, South Bend, Indiana], to create a national African American student association. I couldn't quite figure out, I couldn't get it together. That led me, my first year in law school [New York University School of Law, New York, New York], to create the National Black Law Students Association [Black American Law Students Association (BALSA); National Black Law Students Association (NBLSA)] which we'll come back to later. Speaker 2: Yeah, we'll come back, yeah, but-- Speaker 1: But, but-- Speaker 2: --how many black students were at Notre Dame when you were there? I mean-- Speaker 1: Oh, when I got there, there were twenty-four. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: When I graduated, there were maybe forty, okay. We had sit-ins with the president, with [Theodore] Hesburgh over, they wanted black students to go out and do recruiting, and I'm like, okay, we'll go out and do recruiting but guess what? That really isn't our job. Our job is to go to school here at Notre Dame, okay. It's your job to go out and recruit. And so we had these things, and Father Hesburgh was patient and accommodating and didn't kick me out of school, and he was not mean, evil or any of those things. I liked Ted Hesburgh very much. He did a whole lot, but he didn't do the things that I thought he needed to do, okay, that he could have done, that he should have done and to this day, I was one of the founders of something called, BAND, Black Alumni [of] Notre Dame, and we just invested a lot of energy over the firing of the first black head coach at Notre Dame. Speaker 2: Yeah, Tyrone Willingham. Speaker 1: Right, and, and the issue remains, okay, what is the commitment to black Catholics, okay? Do black Catholics see racism as a mortal sin? Do black Catholics understand how painful and harmful Catholic racism has been to them? Many do. So, you ask the question, does the Catholic Church see racism, not just back then but now? Closing down inner-city Catholic schools and building new Catholic schools out in the suburbs, whether or not the Catholic Church has an affirmative action policy to employ black folks or even black Catholics. Well, let's see. We know child abuse is a sin. On the pantheon of sins, where does child abuse rate with the sin of racism? How many black children have been, have had their growth stunted, okay? What was the impact on my father [Algernon Johnson Cooper, Sr.] when Bishop [Thomas J.] Toolen wouldn't let my brother [William Cooper] go to the black Catholic high school [Most Pure Heart of Mary Catholic High School, Mobile, Alabama]? What was the impact on my brother when he had to go to Detroit [Michigan]? What has been the impact on racism as it affects black Catholic priests, okay? And how does this play out, okay? Now, if white boys who were altar boys had been abused, and they have been, if you would, receiving reparations, where then do black Catholics fit into that, okay? And, by the way, I'm sorry, were there no black Catholic boys who were abused? What's up with that? Speaker 2: Yeah, we don't seem to see them-- Speaker 1: Is that some anomaly, okay? Story_ID: 290474 Speaker 1: Going to Notre Dame [University of Notre Dame, South Bend, Indiana], again, was a wonderful experience. It taught me a great deal that I took into law school [New York University School of Law, New York, New York] and to life, okay. It taught me about reality. You know, I had a roommate my freshman year named Jay Reno [ph.], or actually a friend, named Jay Reno, and we ran for hall council the first month we were at Notre Dame and I came up with a slogan, "Make your vote pay, vote for Jay, Jay Cooper, Jay Reno," and we had the maids the night before the election, or the morning, when they made up the beds, put flyers in the beds so when the guys pulled down their sheets, there was our flyer the night before the election, and we both won. And, you know, so you made friends but you couldn't get your haircut downtown in South Bend [Indiana] in 1962 (laughter), there were still challenges and, and South Bend had a small civil rights community itself, okay. Dr. [Roland] Chamblee, you know, led it, but there were fights, you know. I never will forget one time we had a fundraiser to raise funds for black scholarships and [HistoryMaker] Dick Gregory's younger brother, Ron Gregory, was a track star at Notre Dame. So I had Dick Gregory, Little Stevie Wonder, who was fifteen at the time, and, and the black folk singer who just died, what's her name? Jazz singer-- Speaker 2: Odetta [HistoryMaker Odetta Gordon] or-- Speaker 1: Not Odetta, not folk singer, the jazz singer. Speaker 2: Just died-- Speaker 1: This year. Dark-skinned woman, anyway, so we were doing things, okay, trying to make Notre Dame we thought-- Speaker 2: Nina Simone you're talking about. Speaker 1: Nina Simone, right. Speaker 2: Nina Simone, right. Speaker 1: So, you know, let me tell you. So the concert wasn't a success and so I went to Little Stevie Wonder and said, "You know, we're going to pay you half now, can we send you the other half?" Not a problem. Speaker 2: That's when he was still just starting--he was starting-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --you know, just starting up, Little Stevie, yeah. Speaker 1: He was a teenager and went to Dick, not a problem, went to Nina, boy she cussed me out. She called me names I never heard in my life (laughter). I said, oh my goodness, I never will forget that. Nina Simone. Story_ID: 290475 Speaker 1: Well you were pretty active in the school then? Very, very active? Speaker 2: I was extremely active at Notre Dame [University of Notre Dame, South Bend, Indiana] and-- Speaker 1: Now your major was Latin American history? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: That's an interesting, I mean how did you manage to choose that as a major? Speaker 2: Well, in the freshman course of studies, well I wanted to be a history major 'cause that's what my interest was. I took a course in North American history which was Canada, the United States and Mexico and, you know, most folks, you know, they say America, they think the United States. They don't think Mexico, Canada, and I found the Mexican history to be especially interesting and I had a great teacher and so I decided to focus on Latin American history and that led me to, between my junior and senior year, I became a Foreign Affairs Scholar which was a program sponsored by the Ford Foundation [New York, New York], the state department [U.S. Department of State], Howard University [Washington, D.C.], and Kenneth Clark's company. Kenneth Clark, who just died this year, was a wonderful, wonderful black psychologist, historian, researcher, was a critical part of the Brown v. Board of Education [of Topeka, 1954] case, in developing the statistical information, and the theories that were used, and the Ford Foundation wanted to increase the number of blacks in the [U.S.] Foreign Service. So they embarked on a three-year program to bring top black college juniors and seniors to Washington [D.C.] for six weeks during the summer, and they would work either the state department, the [U.S.] Agency for International Development [USAID], one other agency, and we'd have seminars with famous scholars and work, and so I did that and I met some wonderful colleagues the same age who've gone on to be, you know, all of us decided to do different things, but became leaders. A few of us decided to go into the state department and, and so that was a great experience during my college years also. Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, so you spent a summer in D.C., that's, you know-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Another summer I worked for a roofer hauling, hauling squares from the ground to the roof, and I learned a lot from that job also. I learned that I really wanted to finish college (laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah, those kind of jobs do teach us that, yeah. Speaker 2: Yup. Story_ID: 290476 Speaker 1: As you were on the verge of graduating from Notre Dame [University of Notre Dame, South Bend, Indiana], or Notre Dame, and that's like 19-- Speaker 2: Sixty-six [1966]. Speaker 1: Okay, 1966, oh did you, when you were in college, did you ever, were you ever tempted to go to Mississippi, or Alabama or participate in Freedom Rides or voter registration or any of those activities? Speaker 2: Well, you know I wasn't tempted to go to Alabama, you went to Alabama 'cause that was home. Speaker 1: Yeah, right, that's right. Speaker 2: So you go home every summer and you participated in civil rights marches, picketing and so forth while I was at home. I wasn't tempted to go to Mississippi because, you know, Alabama's Mississippi, vice versa. There were some events that I didn't go to that I regret not having gone to, but I was in school, and my parents [Gladys Mouton Cooper and Algernon Johnson Cooper, Sr.] weren't going to be, I felt, too excited about me leaving school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so, no, I didn't leave school to go and do any of those things. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Did you go to the March on Washington in '63 [1963]? Did you? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. I just wondered but, okay, so in '66 [1966], now, how did you decide to go to law school? Speaker 2: Several ways. There was a black lawyer in Chicago [Illinois] who I got to know while I was in high school [Marmion Military Academy; Marmion Academy, Aurora, Illinois], Archibald Lescene, L-E-S-C-E-N-E, and Archie was a great lawyer. He was a partner in the top black law firm in Chicago that produced a couple black federal judges. I can't remember the name. Speaker 1: Judge Leighton [HistoryMaker George N. Leighton] or-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: George Leighton's partner, okay, and he was from New Orleans [Louisiana], and even before him there was a case in Cleveland [Ohio], the Sheppard case. Speaker 1: The Sam Sheppard, the-- Speaker 2: The Sam Sheppard, and it involved a private investigator who I used to read about and I, you know, so first I wanted to be a private investigator, this was when I was in grade school, and that sort of evolved into wanting to be a lawyer, and then I read a little bit about Thurgood Marshall, okay. There was one black lawyer in my hometown [Mobile, Alabama], Vernon Z. Crawford. Well there were two. Vernon was the only one who was practicing. I think the other guy had not passed the bar or something like this, and you knew black folks needed a lawyer, and I wanted to go back to Alabama and be a civil rights lawyer. Story_ID: 290128 Speaker 1: Sir, how did you choose NYU [New York University School of Law, New York, New York] for law school? Speaker 2: Well, it was a choice between Yale [Law School, New Haven, Connecticut] and NYU, and I had spent four years in a small town for high school [Marmion Military Academy; Marmion Academy], Aurora, Illinois, and then four years in a small town for college [University of Notre Dame], South Bend, Indiana, and so I didn't want any part of a small town again, and NYU is in the middle of Greenwich Village [New York, New York] and it was the roaring '60s [1960s] and it seemed like the place to be. And so, I decided that NYU was where I should go. Speaker 1: Okay, so, well, how did you, was it as exciting as you thought it would be when you got there? Speaker 2: Yes (laughter), every bit, every bit. You know, there's something about New York City that just doesn't exist anywhere else in the world. You know, whether it's London [England], Paris [France], you know, New York is sui generis. It's one of a kind. There is an anonymity in New York City which is just wonderful. At the same time, there's nothing that one could possibly want that doesn't exist in New York City, intellectually, culturally, it's just all there. Speaker 1: Okay, now, were there any teachers who influenced you there in any-- Speaker 2: Well, in 1966, NYU's law school was being buffeted by the winds of change and it was making an effort to increase the number of blacks in its student body. There were nine blacks in my entering class. Speaker 1: Out of how many? Speaker 2: Out of about (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Roughly anyways. Speaker 2: --out of about six hundred, and we knew we were good, we weren't quite sure that we were good enough, and so it meant that to a person we had a commitment to really be rigorous and study hard and do whatever was necessary to both succeed on a personal level and also not to let down our families and the folks at NYU who took a chance on us. The dean was Robert McKay, who was very important in all of this. There was a professor named Robert [J.] Childress, who's a Rhodes Scholar who had been an All-American football player at the University of Mississippi [Oxford, Mississippi], who became a mentor, and several other professors. Story_ID: 290129 Speaker 1: In my first year, I spent a lot of time laying the groundwork and organizing the National Black Law Students Association [Black American Law Students Association (BALSA); National Black Law Students Association (NBLSA)]. By the end of the first year, we had created our chapter at NYU [New York University School of Law, New York, New York] and organized a chapter at Howard University [Washington, D.C.] and at Columbia University [New York, New York]. At the beginning of my second year, I managed to get elected national treasurer of the American Bar Association's Law Student Division, which gave me an air travel card, the ability to travel around the country to ABA chapters, law student chapters at different law schools, and while there, to organize the black students at those schools into National Black Law Student Association chapters. Speaker 2: Now, was that the first name of it (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, well it was-- Speaker 2: National Black Law Student-- Speaker 1: --it started out as the Black American Law Students Association, BALSA. Speaker 2: Okay, right. Speaker 1: At some point-- Speaker 2: --I hear people call it BALSA-- Speaker 1: Right, they still call it BALSA. Its official name is now National Black Law Students Association. At some point, the word American was dropped so we could include people of color who were in law school from other countries. And so, by December, well, by November, we had twenty-six chapters around the country. We got the Ford Foundation [New York, New York] to put up five thousand dollars for our first annual convention, which was in 1967 at the University of Chicago Continuing Education Center in Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois]. We brought some two hundred law students there, paid their roundtrip airfare, their hotel and their food, and had a convention in conjunction with the first convention of the National Conference of Black Lawyers, all for five thousand dollars, if you can imagine. Speaker 2: Now, the National Conference of Black Lawyers, now when was that formed? Speaker 1: Same time. Speaker 2: Same, okay. Speaker 1: And, you know, BALSA was one of the founding members of the National Conference of Black Lawyers, and I was on the first board. Speaker 2: Now, who were some of the founders of National Black, the NCBL, the National Conference of Black Lawyers? Speaker 1: I'm having a mind blank because you took me off in a different direction (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, I'm sorry, I'm sorry. Speaker 1: I'll come back to that and tell you though. Story_ID: 290130 Speaker 1: Now at NYU [New York University School of Law, New York, New York] as professors, there were three black professors, [W.] Haywood Burns, who was one of the founders of NCBL [National Conference of Black Lawyers], Leroy [D.] Clark, who was one of the founders of NCBL, and Judge Robert Carter [HistoryMaker Robert L. Carter], who's now a United States federal district court judge in New York. Robert Carter was one of the lawyers on Brown v. Board of Education [of Topeka, 1954]. He was the general counsel of the national NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and Robert, and these three, and Haywood Burns represented the prisoners at, oh my goodness, what, what's-- Speaker 2: Attica [Correctional Facility, Attica, New York]. Speaker 1: --at Attica. Speaker 2: Upper New York. Speaker 1: In New York, from the uprising at Attica. He was a [NAACP] Legal Defense [and Educational] Fund [Inc.] lawyer as was Leroy Clark, and these were three of the most famous and avant-garde black lawyers in America who all taught me at law school at NYU and who all supported and helped in the founding of national BALSA [Black American Law Students Association; National Black Law Students Association (NBLSA)]. BALSA is now thirty-five years old, chapters on every law school campus in America. Eighty-five to ninety percent of the black lawyers in America today have gone through BALSA. It's had a profound impact on inculcating the values of duty to one's people to black lawyers in America. And so I'm especially proud of that accomplishment. The BALSA at NYU led in the fight against the New York Athletic Club [New York, New York]. If you, we provided volunteers at a number of demonstrations as observers in New York to help prevent police brutality. We worked in Harlem [New York, New York] in voter registration campaigns. We worked in Harlem with the leaders of rent strikes. We worked with [HistoryMaker] David [N.] Dinkins, Percy Sutton who also, you know, were big helpers to BALSA. In late '67 [1967], I received a call from [HistoryMaker] Earl [G.] Graves [Sr.] at Senator Ken- who worked for Senator [Robert F.] Kennedy because of my leadership in national BALSA, and I was hired to work on Senator Kennedy's staff, and I worked in his New York Senate office. When he ran for the Democratic nomination, I moved over to his campaign staff, and Earl Graves and myself and Johnny Ford were the only fulltime black staff workers. I ran the Watts [Los Angeles, California] campaign headquarters for the Kennedy campaign along-- Speaker 2: Now, I'm sorry, Johnny Ford, the mayor of Memphis, I mean, mayor of not Memphis [Tennessee] but-- Speaker 1: Tuskegee [Alabama]. Speaker 2: Tuskegee, yeah. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Not Memphis. Speaker 1: And the, and I was there on the night the senator was assassinated. I escorted Coretta Scott King on the funeral train from New York to Washington [D.C.] for the funeral. Now prior to that, when [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] was killed, the senator sent Earl and I here to Atlanta [Georgia] to help with the logistics of the funeral. So we were here for almost ten days doing that. I mean the night we left coming here, you know, there were riots going on in Brooklyn [New York]. Sitting in Paschal's [Motor] Hotel [and Restaurant, Atlanta, Georgia] I could see the flames from the riots here in Atlanta, and so those were the halcyon times of the '60s [1960s] and the movement. Story_ID: 290131 Speaker 1: What was the inspiration, or were there certain role models that, I guess, drew you to be involved in, I mean, to help found something like BALSA [Black American Law Students Association; National Black Law Students Association (NBLSA)]? Speaker 2: Well, there, there were a couple of things. I'd watch the struggles that [HistoryMaker] John Lewis seemed to be having in being accepted by older black civil rights leaders, okay. I watched how it seemed that black civil rights leaders, that there was no turnover, okay. And so part of creating BALSA was to create something that was truly student run, and where there was a built-in succession of leaders so it would not be owned by any one person, okay. It was my belief that not enough was being done to integrate the different components of the legal system beginning with the educational component which consists of black administrators, black professors, black students, the low passing rate to get into the bar, the dearth of black judges, okay, the dismal lack of blacks as partners in law firms, okay. And so, this is all of what was sort of going on, okay, because I was working in the summer at the [NAACP] Legal Defense [and Educational] Fund [Inc.], while I was in law school [New York University School of Law, New York, New York], I had friends who were young, black, aggressive lawyers, [W.] Haywood Burns, okay. One of my best friends was William [L.] Robinson, who was a lawyer for the Legal Defense Fund for twenty years, went on to be the dean of the law school [David A. Clarke School of Law] for the University of the District of Columbia [Washington, D.C.] and, you know, we used to spend Friday evenings in his apartment with his wife and little kids and folks like [HistoryMaker Dr.] Alvin Poussaint, and his wife and different folks, you know, and so I was like the youngest person there, but these were things that were happening, people who were participating in it, and we weren't just voyeurs. And so, when they had the sit-ins at Columbia [University, New York, New York], okay, the student sit-ins, you know, BALSA was involved. And so all of these things were leading into what we were doing, what I was doing, okay, working with Senator [Robert F.] Kennedy, okay, and how, how we were advancing BALSA, doing all of that. You know, when you just stop and think about it, you're in law school, Martin [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] gets assassinated, Robert Kennedy gets assassinated, you're a student activist, okay, this has a real impact on you, okay. You know, I remember meetings with John Lewis, [HistoryMaker] Julian Bond, a bunch of folks, when we're trying to get black preachers in Los Angeles [California] to let Kennedy folks come into their churches, you know, and the negotiations to do that, and how much it would cost to do that and John Lewis hearing these preachers saying, it's going to cost X number of dollars. Going over to the corner and crying 'cause he just didn't believe, you know, that preachers would come in and say, you have to pay us a hundred grand for us to make our collective churches available. And so, you learn a lot at a young age about what real life is and so, you know, you're twenty-one, twenty-two, and you're getting a chance, you know, a wonderful opportunity to see history from the inside. Story_ID: 290132 Speaker 1: Now, did you specialize in any one area of law when you were in school? Speaker 2: Well law school is not like that. You don't have specialties in law school. Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite-- Speaker 2: Well, I want, I knew I wanted to be in court. I wanted to be a litigator and so litigation was, you know, what I wanted to do most. Speaker 1: Did you see yourself as a, becoming a civil rights lawyer especially or-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, was there any particular time in law school where it was particularly difficult, or, I mean the whole thing or was some of it or-- Speaker 2: Well, let me tell you about law school. Your first year is your hardest year and after that it gets progressively easier, okay. I got my best grades the semester I was on the campaign trail with Bobby Kennedy [Senator Robert F. Kennedy] and I probably missed eighty percent of my classes (laughter) and so I don't know what, but no, law school was fun. I spent too much time doing things other than law school but I had great professors, it's a great law school, I just loved NYU [New York University School of Law, New York, New York]. It was a caring, considerate, encouraging place for a BALSA [Black American Law Students Association; National Black Law Students Association (NBLSA)]. The dean, I mean, let me tell you, at one point, we had gotten the university to, we had a black studies program, and we had gotten the university to hire a guy named [John F.] Hatchett as the head of the program, and he gave a speech one day and he called Vice President [Hubert] Humphrey and, and Albert Shanker, who was the head of the teachers union [United Federation of Teachers] in New York, racist bastards, okay, and without any consultation, the university fired him. So I led a strike. We shut NYU down for ten days. We had marches, Washington Square [New York, New York] full, and finally he was rehired, we reached a deal, we got a student center out of it, so forth and so on. Speaker 1: What was his name again? Speaker 2: Hatchett was the last name. Speaker 1: Hatchett, okay. Speaker 2: I forget, you know, you take me back thirty years now, okay. He did not take his job back as it turned out, but nevertheless it was a watershed event, and those were the days, so to speak. And when I graduated from NYU, I went to work for the NAACP Legal Defense [and Educational] Fund [Inc.] and I worked for them in New York for a year handling litigation around the country, especially litigation involving student rights. I then went back to Alabama-- Speaker 1: Who, who was there at that time? Was it-- Speaker 2: Greenberg was the-- Speaker 1: Jack, okay, Jack Greenberg. Speaker 2: Right, okay, and we had some challenging times. Story_ID: 290133 Speaker 1: And I went back to Alabama as a cooperating attorney representing civil rights clients, and became a partner in the firm of Crawford, Fields and Cooper [Mobile, Alabama]. Vernon [Z.] Crawford had been practicing for about twenty years, was the first black lawyer in Mobile [Alabama], and Frankie Fields Smith, who had graduated from Howard's law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.], who I subsequently appointed as the first black female judge in Alabama, and I practiced civil rights law, represented the private plaintiffs in the school desegregation lawsuit [Davis v. Board of School Commissioners of Mobile County, 1971], teachers, public accommodations. The first lawsuit I filed when I returned home was a lawsuit against Fletcher's BBQ [Mobile, Alabama], to integrate Fletcher's BBQ. It was an easy case because the facts were easy. We won, they lost, they refused to integrate so I went back to court, the judge levied a hundred dollar a day contempt fine. They still refused to do it. Went back and the judge put on a five hundred dollar a day contempt fine. Trust me, after about five days, black folks were coming through the front door, and that was a small victory for mankind but a great victory for me (laughter). Speaker 2: That's great. I mean, that's something, that's good to be able to come back and-- Speaker 1: Clean up something. Speaker 2: Right, right. So-- Speaker 1: But if you can imagine now, this was 1971, okay. Fletcher's was still segregated. Speaker 2: Okay, so, how long did you stay in Mobile? Speaker 1: Well, I practiced law in Mobile for several years. Story_ID: 290134 Speaker 1: Then, and one of my clients was the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] of Prichard, Alabama, which is right next door to Mobile [Alabama], cheek to jowl, and it was 50 percent black and 50 percent white, but it was strictly segregated. White folks ran everything. A few blacks had tried to run for office unsuccessfully, and so some folks encouraged me to run for mayor. So I looked at it and I said, "Hmm, this is interesting, the numbers are there." So I decided to do it. So I moved to Prichard, established residence, got a bunch of my friends from the [Senator Robert F.] Kennedy campaign and raised a bunch of money, and we ran a very sophisticated campaign, with polling, phone banks, things like billboards and the sort of thing they had never seen in Alabama, run by a black candidate, and we registered thousands of people. Election Day we had lines around the block. Little old ladies standing in the hot sun, and I won. I beat a three-term white incumbent, the first time in the Deep South that any one black had ever defeated any one white for an election. Prichard, at forty-five thousand people, was the largest city in the South at that moment in time that had a black mayor. I was also, at twenty-seven, the youngest black mayor in the country. I had help from a number of friends, Maynard Jackson, Percy Sutton, [HistoryMaker] David [N.] Dinkins, [HistoryMaker] Julian Bond, [HistoryMaker] John Lewis, lots and lots of folks, some who came and spent weeks, okay. Some who came and gave speeches, and I couldn't have done it, you know, without their help in, and I'm just so grateful for them. You know, when I look at folks like Percy Sutton, at David, there's so many things they've done in their lives to make so many others of us possible, and if they're ever listening or hearing this, I want them to know how much I appreciate all of those folks who helped me over the years, 'cause truly it's never been a one-man band, 'cause you don't get to do these things by yourself, and so I was elected. I became the mayor of a city that had two black policemen, almost no other black city employees except in the sanitation department. A city that had never had a budget, and so-- Speaker 2: Never had a budget? Speaker 1: Never had a budget. A raggedy, raggedy city hall, so I started raising money. We had no computer equipment. A small black foundation gave me five thousand dollars to buy some equipment. We started applying for federal grants. We brought in, literally, tens of millions of dollars of money. At this point, a fellow named [Travers J.] Bell [Jr.], who was the first black to start an investment firm [Daniels & Bell Inc.] on Wall Street, did their first municipal bond issue, and Prichard was it, and we built a new city hall and jail, okay. Shortly thereafter, we built a new sanitation department. The sanitation workers had a little shack that the white workers used. The black workers had to gather around a fire outside in the winter. We built a modern headquarters, showers, you know, the whole bit, and I founded the Alabama Conference of Black Mayors. Story_ID: 290477 Speaker 1: Sir, you're saying that the National Conference of Black Mayors [NCBM] grew from the Southern Conference of Black Mayors? Speaker 2: Which grew from the Alabama Conference of Black Mayors. Speaker 1: Now, you're getting good at this now, the Black Law Associate--I mean, the Black (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, BALSA [Black American Law Students Association; National Black Law Students Association (NBLSA)]-- Speaker 1: Yeah, BALSA-- Speaker 2: --quite candidly, provided the basis for me creating the Alabama Conference, the Southern Conference and the National Conference. And so we had a framework, okay. A framework for turnover of leadership. A framework for a board that gets elected in turnover, and so forth and we've had a staff since, you know, 19--I guess '73 [1973], '74 [1974]. Bernard Porsche was one of our early executive directors who's a leader here in Atlanta [Georgia] now. Michelle Kouruma, who for many years was our executive director until last year. I hired her. And so, NCBM now has over six hundred members and its offices are here in Atlanta and, you know, it's over thirty years old. Speaker 1: And it was, so, National Conference of Black Mayors was founded how long after the Southern Conference? Was it that same-- Speaker 2: Three years. Speaker 1: Three years, okay. So, it's '76 [sic.], I guess? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: And we have done a great deal of advocacy work, a great deal of federal fundraising for our mayors, a great deal of training of new mayors. We have a mayors' leadership institute, and I think it has clearly made a difference in encouraging leaders to want to be mayors, and in helping black mayors have a bridge over troubled waters if you would. A place to come together where they can share with one another things that, you know, who do you talk to if you're a mayor? And so these are people who do the same things that you do, and you have a chance to share and exchange and perhaps just vent (laughter). Story_ID: 290478 Speaker 1: Now, this is about encouraging leaders to become black mayors as, so often the leaders from the community don't, aren't the politicians, necessarily, in many instances and-- Speaker 2: Well, you know, as I look back over decades of black mayors now, we've had some wonderfully talented people, and I'm not just talking about the folks whose names, you know, leap to the front of your mind, but I'm talking about mayors of mid-size cities, mayors of small cities, okay, who brought dedication and leadership and talent, and who have been helped by mayors of large cities, you know, some would send surplus fire trucks, all sorts of different things through this vehicle called the National Conference of Black Mayors, and we are in crisis in a lot of ways, because a lot of black folks are saying, "Okay, we've got a black mayor but how's our life different? What have you done for us lately? What are you doing for us?" I mean, and you have to think about it, okay, and black mayors have to say, well, let's see, what are the extraneous factors that have inhibited my ability to deliver? And they have to say to themselves, well people don't want to know whether the sea was rough. They want to know, did you bring the ship into port, okay, and so those are challenges. And so, as we look forward, we have to say, well wait a minute, black folks are moving out of town, but all of a sudden you have blacks who are becoming county commissioners and chairmen of county commissions 'cause they've got black voters, but they've got the same challenges and at some folks, at some point, folks can just move so many different places, and African American elected officials have to take a step back and say, "Wait a minute, how do we measure ourselves," okay? What is a fair measuring stick? Are we receptive to some non-pedagogic criticism, okay? Are we receptive to criticism which is not pejorative but which is based on pedagogy, okay, and what is the pedagogy that you can define to say whether or not you, as a civic elected official, have accomplished different things, okay? There must be some measuring stick. Story_ID: 290479 Speaker 1: And, what is black fascism, okay? Speaker 2: Black fascism? Speaker 1: Black fascism to me is the notion that I'm black, and if you criticize me, you're not black. Black fascism is, I'm black and I got elected, and therefore I get to stay elected without regard to non-pejorative, fair criticism of one's accomplishments, okay. And how do we, as mature members of the body politic, evaluate our performance and the performance of our leaders, and ought not our leaders be evaluated, okay? And where in 2005 do we find the sources of that non-pejorative evaluation and criticism? Speaker 2: So that evaluation comes from National Conference of Black Mayors (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No it does not. Speaker 2: --on some level-- Speaker 1: No it does not. Speaker 2: --or it provides some of it? No, it does not? Speaker 1: Okay, no it does not. It does not. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Okay. It's not its role at this point, okay. I raised that issue because it seems to me, looking in retrospect as some place that we have to come to, okay. We have the Joint Center for Political [and Economic] Studies [Washington, D.C.]. [HistoryMaker] Eddie Williams is about to retire, he's done a wonderful job. We still do not have, however, a repository available to the general public of this kind of evaluation. I would suggest to you that the dearth of black voter turnout may be directly related to that. At his death, Maynard Jackson was in the process of trying to create an organization that did not deal with voter registration but dealt with voter turnout, that would say to African Americans, you ought to be ashamed of yourselves. Don't cry about spilt milk if you didn't go out and vote. How can we use new marketing, guerilla marketing, to get black folks out to vote, okay? Not to register anybody new. Forget about registering anybody new. If the black folks who are already registered would just go and vote, there's not an important election you can think of in the last twenty years that we would not have changed. So, don't complain about [President] George [Walker] Bush. You're the reason he's in office. Don't complain about a Republican conservative [U.S.] Congress, you're the reason Democrats are out of power. And so, you know, this brings us up to, you know, I leave Prichard [Alabama] and I join the Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] administration at the [U.S.] Department of Housing and Urban Development. Speaker 2: Right, under Moon Landrieu, but (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (simultaneous) Under Moon Landrieu-- Story_ID: 290480 Speaker 1: Before we get you there, what were the, what were your major challenges as the mayor of Prichard [Alabama], you know? Speaker 2: Oh, getting shot at. Speaker 1: That's a challenge. Speaker 2: You know, I got shot at three different times, dealing with a racist majority city council, okay, which was a constant battle. Dealing with the difficulty of getting a state to put into the city, major companies that wanted to relocate into Alabama, so that you would have a tax base to support the city. Those were the major challenges. Speaker 1: Okay, is there a highlight to your term as mayor that you can tell us about that-- Speaker 2: A highlight? No, there, let me tell you, there were so many. The Mayor's Youth Council. The number of kids who went on to do different things because of what we had accomplished. The fact that every major board and commission received black chairpersons. Luberta Portis chaired the planning commission, okay. Philonese Thompson chaired the housing authority, on and on and on and on, okay. The first black female judge, okay, Frankie Fields Smith, all of those sorts of things, the whole notion of giving a city to its people. I mean, I had lots of honors, lots of things, you know, but delivering a city to its people, you know, says it all. You know, since I've left, we've had five or six mayors, all blacks, save one, all of them have had their challenges, but it is there for the population, the citizens to decide, absent racism in terms of who gets elected, okay. Now, racism still has an impact on funding, on location of businesses, all of those sorts of things like any other town but black folks run it, they control it. They manage their own destiny. Story_ID: 290481 Speaker 1: You were recognized in '79 [1979] by the National Conference of Black Mayors [NCBM] as being a, with the Fannie Lou Hamer Award. Geez, that's not to be taken lightly. Fannie Lou Hamer is not a name that's tossed around lightly, so you must have made tremendous impact on other black mayors I would think? Speaker 2: Well, let me tell you. I've got so many mayors who were friends. We did a lot to help black mayors. Give you one example, one of my favorite examples. There's a small town right outside of Orlando, Florida which is the home of Zora Neale Hurston, okay. This town, Eatonville, Florida, had no paved streets, okay. I worked for a year and a half with the mayor of Eatonville. Wrote grants and got the money, NCBM. I got the money to pave every street in Eatonville, Florida. I've walked the streets when they were dusty. I've walked them paved. There's a sense of satisfaction in doing that. We have brought our conventions to big cities but we brought them to small cities. Santee, South Carolina, on the Santee Cooper River, hosted a meeting, a national annual meeting, of the National Conference of Black Mayors, okay. A town of, you know, a thousand folks, okay, all of those things, you know. I can remember one meeting we had in Tuskegee [Alabama] at the Tuskegee Holiday Inn and we had a party and, we had a party one night and it got to be about one o'clock and everyone was hungry and so the hotel manager was there, we all, we went down to the kitchen, went in the freezer, got out a great big pot of chitlins, now this is at the Holiday Inn, mind you. They cooked this huge pot of chitlins and took 'em up to the party. I mean, where, you know, where else but at a National Conference of Black Mayors could you imagine something like that happening. So, little things, big things, important things, funny things, all part of life, all part of the fabric and the context of, of that particular organization. We've had great presidents, Dick Hatcher [HistoryMaker Richard Hatcher], you know, Maynard [Jackson], over the years. Harvey Johnson [Jr.] recently, from Jackson, Mississippi. Story_ID: 290482 Speaker 1: How did the employment with HUD [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development] take place? Now you're-- Speaker 2: Well, I decided when I ran that I was only going to serve two terms. My predecessor had an eighth grade education. I was an NYU [New York University School of Law, New York, New York] trained lawyer. I had not planned, like my friend Johnny Ford, to be mayor for twenty-five years, I wasn't going to do that. Speaker 1: Yeah, from what you're saying, you don't think anyone should be mayor for twenty-five years? Speaker 2: No, of course not. Now that's preposterous as far as I'm concerned, okay. And so I was looking for an exit strategy. Moon Landrieu was a friend. He had just been appointed to HUD, I talked to him, come on. So I went up to be a special assistant to Moon and head of the Office of Small and Disadvantaged Business [Utilization]. HUD was the only agency that had not created that office, even though his predecessor had been black. So we created that office and got it up and running and then [President James Earl] Jimmy Carter [Jr.] lost the election, and I left there and went over to be executive director of the Congressional Black Caucus, and left there and went to be chief of staff and tax counsel for Congressman Harold Ford [Sr.], which I did for five years. And then I became a partner at a large law firm in Washington [D.C.] called Ginsburg, Feldman and Bress, and after that I started my own firm, and then I met a woman [BJ Hampton] here in Atlanta [Georgia] and we met on November the 3rd, got engaged on December the 6th and got married on December the 23rd. So I closed my law office and moved to Atlanta and here I am-- Story_ID: 290483 Speaker 1: So you were talking about, you and your brother are no longer partners-- Speaker 2: Right-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --because I've reduced the amount of work that I do. Speaker 1: Do you have, what are your ambitions at this point? Do you--you're still relatively young for this day and age. You know politics, you know, you've got a pretty good political mind it seems, you know. What do you-- Speaker 2: Well, I've got a huge set of archives which I am in the process of relocating from Washington [D.C.] here to Atlanta [Georgia]. I want to spend some time organizing those. I want to arrange a repository for those. I want to do some writing, some historical. I want to do some writing on some ideas that I have on politics and the present state of affairs. I still want to do some law practice. I suffer from acute depression, and it is very challenging. It's something that very few blacks talk about, but it is a fact and it makes life difficult in terms of your attention deficits, and so I'm trying to learn better to work with that, and the challenges that it brings. I'm thinking about doing something specifically related to blacks and black professionals and serious depression. I'm, it's still percolating in my mind (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How do-- Story_ID: 290484 Speaker 1: How did you know that you had acute depression? I mean, how did you find that out? Speaker 2: How did I find it out? I guess a doctor told me. You know, depression is an interesting sort of affliction, which doesn't have, I mean, it's not like as if you get the measles and you see bumps. There are periods of time when you have a malaise, when you're sad, when you think about not living, and at some point things like your children or your family are more important to you and you say, "Hmm, I better go and see what I can do about this," and you go and you talk to your internist, your family physician, and your family physician says, "Hmm, then why don't you tell me, A, B and C, I think you need to go and see this person," and you go and see that person and this person says, "Well guess what, you're not crazy, you have this sort of depression, and here are some things that we can do to help you manage that," and it's important that strong black people, strong black men and strong black women are willing to say, I need some help, okay. I really do want to live in this life and I want to try and be as productive as I can be or perhaps as productive as I used to be. And so I'm willing to see a psychiatrist. I'm willing to take medication and no matter how hard the struggle is, I'm willing to struggle. And so for a lot of us, it's sort of like, with homosexuality and AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome], it's not something that black folks by and large have been used to dealing with. There's a rare black family that does not have somebody gay in that family, okay, but yet and still, many black families don't want to deal with that, okay. Well, depression is sort of like that and being worried about our mental health, and considering our mental health as important as our physical health, is not something that black folks submit to very well, okay, and it's something that more of us need to, I think, step up to the plate on, and provide some leadership on. And so I'm trying to figure out ways to do that. So that's one of the other things I'm looking forward to trying to do. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. It just seems, it seems odd that someone who's made such a tremendous contribution would ever, you know, feel that depressed. I mean, you know, but I guess this is part of the problem-- Speaker 2: Well, one of the interesting things about depression is that it is a disease that is not understandable, because we don't know why it comes and frankly we don't really know why it goes, and you look at someone one day and you say that person is so vibrant, this, that and the other, and the next day that person has committed suicide and you don't quite see what happened between there and then. And so it is an important thing for us to recognize and deal with. Story_ID: 290143 Speaker 1: Sir, we always ask this question. What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: It's a deep question, let's start with the concerns. As I go around to law schools, I see 50, 60, 70 percent of the black students are female. I have a daughter [Lauren Cooper Green] who's getting married in a few weeks. I wonder what's going to happen to all of the other black fathers' daughters and who are they going to be marrying which leads me to raise the concern of what's happening to young black men, and what do we need to do to help young black men. The jail problem, well, that's a problem and it concerns me that so many young black men are in jail. It concerns me that there's so many more who aren't in jail but who aren't in school, who aren't in school and who aren't in higher education. I'm concerned about young black men who don't want to work, I mean who come to you and want a job, but don't want to work. I'm concerned about what's happening in terms of young black men in grade schools and high schools, where teachers think young black men, boys, are overactive, okay. And in middle school and in high school, what is it about our education system that we're not able to wrap our arms around these young black men and get them to understand education, scholarship? What is it that we need to do better to make this appealing and interesting, okay? Young BALSA [Black American Law Students Association; National Black Law Students Association (NBLSA)] students are active because they can compete with the rappers, okay, but we need to have so many, many more, young black role models. 100 Black Men [of America, Inc.] do a wonderful job, especially here in Atlanta [Georgia], but these are old folks. We got to get young people involved in mentoring young people. Story_ID: 290144 Speaker 1: Now, my boys [Algernon Johnson Cooper III and Ben Cooper] are brilliant young men. They were so bored with school, bored to death. In so many cases, they were taking classes, they had read things the teachers hadn't read, okay. They thought their teachers were boring not because of anything personal but they, they'd say to me, "Daddy, listen, high school can be over by the tenth grade," okay. What are we doing that's bold about this, okay? There's something that we are not getting right now, okay. This whole work ethic is a problem. I can't tell you how many entrepreneurs, how many, illegal immigrants, Ecuadorians, Columbians, Mexicans, people said, "Oh, woe is us, all of these folks taking jobs." Well guess what? These are folks who I am told are working. They come to work, they start working and they work until it's over and they work hard, and I am told by black business people that they can't find African Americans who will work. Now, is this an old saw? Is this us buying into racism, or is it a fact? Well, you know, is this a lie that we're just repeating, or is it reality? Something is going on, and those things are concerns, okay. What I spoke about earlier in terms of public official accountability, is a concern. If folks who say they're in charge, aren't delivering, we need to get somebody else, okay, and we have to be accountable. It doesn't matter what the job is. School board superintendent, police chief, mayor, congressmen, whatever it is, head of a non-profit organization, we have to have accountability, and it's a concern and it's not enough to say, "Well I'm black, so don't criticize me. If you criticize me, you're not really a brother or a sister." We can't have criticism based on your hair style, whether you wear a dashiki, we can't have criticism based on one's gender, or sexual orientation. No, that's ridiculous, okay. I don't want to hear about which church, whether you're a conservative Christian, a right-wing Christian, a Baptist, no, we need to have honest, non-pejorative, fact-based analysis, criticism, on how we perform and deliver, that's a concern-- Story_ID: 290145 Speaker 1: What is my hope? My hope is our children can go to school, get a good education, be able to compete in whatever it is they want to do, and succeed at it, without regard to their race, their gender, their religion, in whatever field. The most segregated times in America, church on Sunday, and when law firms have partnership meetings. Now, to be a partner at a law firm, you have to bring in business. Well if all of the folks who give business are white, a black partner has a hard time getting to those folks. If you go down the list of the Black Enterprise 100 and ask yourself the question, how many of these firms use black lawyers? You would be surprised especially since its black lawyers who made it possible to have affirmative action, okay. If you go down all of the lists published by Black Enterprise and ask yourself those questions, you'd be surprised at the answers. Now, so, part of this is, if you were a black firm and you need a sophisticated lawyer who does mergers and acquisitions, well you don't want to come to me, who's a one-man shop right now, okay. You might want to come and say, "Jay [HistoryMaker A. J. Cooper, Jr.], who's the best M and A guy who's got a larger black firm, or who's the best M and A guy who's a partner in a white firm, okay?" And then you'll get some answers, okay, but I don't think you should automatically say, well there's no one black who's sophisticated at doing mergers and acquisitions and therefore I'm going to use a white lawyer, okay. And white firms who get our business have to be taught and made to understand that if you don't use black professionals, you're not going to get our business. Universities like Notre Dame [University of Notre Dame, South Bend, Indiana], which hires black architects, black engineers, black lawyers, no, they don't hire them, I'm sorry. Oh, wait a minute. Notre Dame, by the way, you've got to start doing that, and all of these other institutions. And so those are my hopes and aspirations. You know, to think that it's 2005 and we're still in the shape we're in, well, that's a huge disappointment because in 1969 when I graduated from NYU [New York University School of Law, New York, New York], I knew we were going to change the world. Story_ID: 290146 Speaker 1: When you look back at everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would have done differently? Speaker 2: Well, you know, sometimes I say that what I should have done was been a great lawyer, and made lots of money and then use that money to do whatever I wanted to do. I have bunches of friends who did that, but I must tell you, after it's all said and done, no, there's not much I'd do different. I did the things that I felt called to do at the time. I think they were important things to do. I think they accomplished important things. I think I've had an impact on changing people's lives. I have three wonderful, wonderful children. I've had two great wives and I've got the wife [BJ Hampton] of my dreams now and so I've been a very lucky and blessed human being. I love my children and they're my greatest accomplishment, but if I die tomorrow, the National Black Law Students Association [Black Law Students Association (BALSA); National Black Law Students Association (NBLSA)], the National Conference of Black Mayors, I think are worthwhile epithets. Speaker 1: That's really the next question. What would you consider to be your legacy and I guess you're telling us that but, those two. Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean--you know, I may have a few other tricks up my sleeve, but as I said, if I died tomorrow, I've got these three marvelous children. My daughter, Lauren [Cooper Green], who graduated from Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia] in drama, who got a master's [degree] at the Tisch School of the Arts at NYU [New York University, New York, New York] and who's working on her Ph.D. in drama at NYU now, and teaches Spanish, and has done her first play, 'Rough Draft of My Life,' which was performed on the main stage at the Hip-Hop Theater Festival [Hi-ARTs]. My son, Jay [Algernon Johnson Cooper III], who is an actor, a model, a third-year student at the University of Maryland [College Park, Maryland] who was the host of BET's [Black Entertainment Television] 'Teen Summit' for three and a half years, who's now in the [U.S.] Marine Corps Officer Candidate Training School [Officer Candidates School], to my great dismay, but I love him and he's a leader, so he will do great at that and my son, Benjamin [Cooper], who is a, going into his sophomore year at Clark [Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] and both of my sons are older. Jay's twenty-five, Benjamin's twenty-two, and they've taken their time, but they've come around in terms of the education part. That makes me very pleased. Benjamin is a great writer, a great photographer, a rapper, rhymer, as his brother Jay is, but he is just so, so smart, Benjamin. He's written a novel, and so I'm terribly proud of them and I know they're going to make a difference on people's lives. So, you know-- Speaker 1: Okay, is there anything we haven't asked or discussed with you that you think we ought to touch upon before we ask our last question? Speaker 2: No, we've covered the waterfront pretty well. I've enjoyed this. Story_ID: 290147 Speaker 1: Well, the last question is similar to legacy but a little different. Sir, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Oh, I guess, I'd like to be remembered as someone who provided leadership, who thought outside of the box, and created new and different mechanisms for people of color to help one another. As someone who was a contrarian. Someone who was a race man, who loved people but especially loved black people. Had lots of white folks who helped him, okay. Who had lots of people who were friends, who I hadn't had enough time to let know how much I care about them. I think that, you know, I remember one time [HistoryMaker] Earl [G.] Graves [Sr.] sent me to Los Angeles [California] for [Senator Robert F.] Kennedy, and I walked in the airport and rented 112 cars and I got it done. As someone who didn't take no for an answer easily. Speaker 1: A hundred and twelve cars? Speaker 2: That's what we needed for the campaign and we had to get 'em and we had to get 'em before Gene McCarthy's [Eugene McCarthy] people got 'em, you know, and those sorts of things, understanding that where there's a will, there's a way. Understanding that, and I guess this is really critical, something I've tried to teach my children that they've learned marvelously well, and that is the issue of class, that riding raggedy beats walking cool, that being saditty is not cool, that having people from all walks of life enriches you more than it enriches them. Knowing that people who are less well-educated, who are less well-off or as important to you as people who are more well-educated and more well-off, being able to move amongst all sorts of people, and having all sorts of people accept you because you're down to earth and can relate. You know, if there's anything, you know, that my parents [Gladys Mouton Cooper and Algernon Johnson Cooper, Sr.] did for me, growing up playing hide-and-go-seek in caskets and going to funerals, and walking on collection routes with agents, collecting nickels and dimes, was to teach me about how important black folks are to each other and to us, and how we were no more important than they were, 'cause, you know, the quietest kept a lot of us who think that we're more important than other folks. There are a lot of folks who get into positions who don't want to talk to you anymore, okay, and who want to act, as we say, saditty. Those are the things...