 Story_ID: 371193 Speaker 1: So good morning Mrs. Cunningham [HistoryMaker Evelyn Cunningham] I am-- Speaker 2: Good morning. Speaker 1: I'm Shawn Wilson with The HistoryMakers. I will be the interviewer today. This is Neculai Burghelea, he'd be, he'll be the videographer. We're also being observed by your friend, Mrs. Marie Brown [HistoryMaker Marie Brown] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Marie Brown. Speaker 1: --and I will start by asking you just to state your full name including your middle name if you have one and spelling them all out for me. Speaker 2: All, all the names I've had? Speaker 1: Or just the full name that you go by. Speaker 2: Evelyn Elizabeth Long Sharon Cunningham Haynes Brown. Speaker 1: How many times have you been married? Speaker 2: Four. Speaker 1: So, what do most, what is your professional name? Speaker 2: Cunningham, Evelyn Cunningham. Speaker 1: So, how do you, would you just spell that for me so that we have the correct spelling of the way you spell Evelyn Cunningham. Speaker 2: I'm not, I'm, I'm not clear on the question. Speaker 1: Just, okay just spell Cunningham out for me so that we're spelling-- Speaker 2: Yeah, C-U-N-N-I-N-G-H-A-M. Speaker 1: Okay and you spell Evelyn the, the-- Speaker 2: E-V-E-L-Y-N. Speaker 1: Today's date? December 7th. Speaker 2: December 7, 2006. Speaker 1: The location of this interview? Speaker 2: 726 Riverside Drive, New York [New York], 10031 Apartment 8B as in boy. Speaker 1: And your occupation? Speaker 2: A retired journalist. Story_ID: 371194 Speaker 1: So, I'm gonna start by asking five simple sort of People magazine type questions, very short answers. Speaker 2: You're assuming I know what People, sort of People like questions are. Speaker 1: Yeah I'm assuming, but how, how about I say pop culture questions. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Okay. Speaker 1: Your favorite color? Speaker 2: What's that? Speaker 1: Your favorite color? Speaker 2: Any color. I like color. I don't think that, I don't think I, I have a favorite, yeah maybe red might be my favorite, yeah. Speaker 1: What's your favorite food? Speaker 2: Food, I don't have a favorite food and, and I don't have a lot of food I, I, I could describe as distasteful. I like food, but a favorite one I don't know. I don't think I have a favorite. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Time of year? Speaker 1: Yes ma'am. Speaker 2: Every day is okay with me. Not a favorite day, not a favorite holiday. Speaker 1: What about a favorite vacation spot? Speaker 2: Someplace I'd not been before. Speaker 1: Where have you not been that you'd like to go (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Anyplace. Australia. I've never been to Australia, and, and I, I'd like to go. I have no, no clue what it's like and I've never really died to go to Australia, else I would have gone. But maybe at this point since I know so little about it and I've never been there I'd like to go there. Speaker 1: What about a favorite phrase. Speaker 2: Favorite? Speaker 1: Phrase or a favorite saying, something-- Speaker 2: Saying? Speaker 1: Something you like to repeat or a mantra? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: No, you don't have a favorite phrase, any-- Speaker 2: No, it, it, it depends on the occasion and the reason, the people. I guess I'd have a lot, but one would just not hang out clear in my head right now. Story_ID: 371195 Speaker 1: Okay, we're gonna continue. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And you told me that your date of birth was? Speaker 2: January 25th, 1916. Speaker 1: And your place of birth? Speaker 2: My? Speaker 1: Place of birth? Speaker 2: Elizabeth City, North Carolina, Pasquotank County where the Wright brothers [Orville Wright and Wilbur Wright] invented the airplane, and my whole childhood was involved with the Wright brothers and with airplanes because-- Speaker 1: How so? Speaker 2: Because Elizabeth City is a very small place, and the Wright brothers what they were doing near the beach was building something that was unheard of, and everybody in this town was involved with the Wright brothers. My, my brother [Clyde Whitehurst Long] and I, my brother who was younger, we, we, we were very aware that this was something big and something important and we spent a lot of--my dad [Clyde Long] took my brother to--down to the beach very often where they were doing the construction, and my mother [Mary Whitehurst Long] was teaching me how to make cookies and I remember so vividly my father saying to my mother, "Honey, let Evelyn [HistoryMaker Evelyn Cunningham] come and see the brothers do the plane, stop, enough already with them cookies. She might wanna fly wanna of these things one day." This is the favorite story of the current feminists. I tell that story to them. I said my black father was a feminist and told me that I was as good as any man, and I could be anything I wanted to be and I, I, I, I love him, I worship him dearly for making me that kind of person, making me have those kind of dreams where it counted when I was very, very young. Story_ID: 371196 Speaker 1: And I wanna continue to talk about your father because he was such an inspiration for you. Where do you think he got the wisdom from to be so worldly towards you, you being a woman and growing up when women didn't have many rights? Speaker 2: He was, he was emancipated. I, I have not yet been able to determine whether my father was married once before he married my mother [Mary Whitehurst Long]. I can't, I can't, I've been trying for years to figure that out, but somewhere in his life either he was married or there was a woman before he married my mother whose name was Evelyn. She was a high achiever. I think she was a school teacher. That's all I know. I, I know she, she was very special. Speaker 1: Well how do you know that? Speaker 2: Because hits when I was young I heard about Evelyn. That's why I was wondering if he--I, I think he might have been married before. I'm, I'm just not certain. Speaker 1: Do you know when your father--? Speaker 2: And he-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --he, he was secure about women. He liked women, and he loved the fact that my mother, the, the Elizabeth City's [Elizabeth City, North Carolina] greatest dressmaker--we were, we were well to do in this little town because both parents worked and, and made good, good money. Speaker 1: Well, let's talk about your father a little bit-- Speaker 2: Yeah father yeah. Speaker 1: --and then we'll talk about your mother. What was your father's name? Speaker 2: Clyde Long, C-L-Y-D-E. Speaker 1: And do you know where your father was born? Speaker 2: No, no idea. Speaker 1: But, he somehow reside, he came to live in the town that you were born in. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And he met your mother in that town. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Do you know anything at all about your father's childhood? Speaker 2: About his character? Speaker 1: About his childhood? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: No? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: He never talked about his mother and father? Speaker 2: He, he probably did, but I don't recall. Speaker 1: But you don't recall. Speaker 2: You know a little, a child just worships her father. You don't care too much about your father's background. I know he, he had a pool room. He played the piano in the pool room. He made a whole lot of money, and we had a very, very big house. Speaker 1: How did he make his money? Speaker 2: In the pool room, and, and playing the piano. And he, and, and I also know and remember vividly that we were the first black family in Elizabeth City to get indoor plumbing. And, and, and when the, and, and daddy went to Norfolk, Virginia, to order the indoor plumbing. No kind of place you could get it in Elizabeth City, very tiny town, and when the, when the plumbing was delivered this, this is vivid to me he, he, he had them put it on the front porch of the house and, "You don't want us to attach Mr. Long?" "No, just leave it on the front porch." And my brother [Clyde Whitehurst Long] and I used to wonder why all of this plumbing had to be on the front porch, so daddy told me and I remember this so clearly. "I want everybody to see it, everybody, the white people and the black people to see that we have indoor plumbing, the bathtub, the toilet, the whole thing, the sink." So, it was a source of pride and truly people did come and walk around the house, a porch that swung around the house. So, and they did come and say, "Ooh look at what the Longs got. Ooh, they got indoor plumbing (laughter)." Which, which in retrospect is so funny and ridiculous. You know, I, I could not, I often wondered how did we deal with this lack of it before. Of course, we dealt with it like everybody some way or the other. Speaker 1: So, you said your father made his money in the pool room? Speaker 2: In the pool, yeah he owned the pool room. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: And, and he played the piano. He didn't pay himself to play it. I don't think. I don't imagine he paid himself to play the piano, but I, he, he, he--early on I, I, we knew that he wanted to move out of there, out of the South and get to New York [New York] so he could take on Duke Ellington. I heard that many times. Speaker 1: So, he was a good piano player (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) To take on--yeah, yeah coming to New York and take on Duke Ellington. Story_ID: 371197 Speaker 1: Do you remember any sights in the pool room, pool hall? Can you remember any of what it looked like (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No 'cause we were never in there. Speaker 1: You were never-- Speaker 2: Hardly ever. In the daytime, we'd come by there, but we were not part, my brother [Clyde Whitehurst Long] and I, he was younger. We were you know children. Speaker 1: Children, yes ma'am. Speaker 2: We just knew daddy [Clyde Long] had a pool room. Speaker 1: Can you, do you remember what the neighborhood was like that you lived in? Speaker 2: Nice neighborhood. Speaker 1: Was it segre- I'm, I'm assuming it was a black neighborhood, segregated. Speaker 2: Yeah, black neighborhood. Speaker 1: But you had the biggest house in the neighborhood, in the black-- Speaker 2: Yeah, it was a nice neighborhood. The, the black doctors and lawyers in Elizabeth City [North Carolina] lived in the neighborhood, so you know it was nice, yeah. It's a pleasant little town. I'm glad we got the hell out of it, but it was pleasant (laughter). I don't have any, I never saw a lynching down there, never was called a nigger down there, but then I'm very young you know, and daddy and momma [Mary Whitehurst Long] kept reminding us that it was another world out there besides Elizabeth City [North Carolina]. So, we knew, my brother and I knew that somewhere along the line we were gonna get out of it and go just somewhere. Story_ID: 371198 Speaker 1: Did your father [Clyde Long] read a lot? Speaker 2: Was he-- Speaker 1: Did he read a lot? Speaker 2: Read, yeah a great deal, great deal. But both my mother [Mary Whitehurst Long] and father--reading was big in the family, very big. We, we were first forced to read. Young, we didn't care too much about reading unless they had pictures, but quickly we got, my brother [Clyde Whitehurst Long] and got into the reading habit. My grandmother was a newspaper person in Elizabeth City [North Carolina]. The Daily Advance was the name of this stupid paper. It was a stupid paper. And that was the colored section, and it was social thing more or less. It recorded only weddings and funerals, but my grandmother's name, by Ellen Whitehurst. That, that was big to me. I think that's the birth of my desires, to see grandma, just plain old grandma. Who fusses with us all the time. That's her name in print, by Ellen Whitehurst, she wrote that. That was thrilling to me. Speaker 1: Now this was your mother's mother? Speaker 2: My mother's mother. Speaker 1: Your mother's mother. Her name was Ellen Whitehurst-- Speaker 2: Ellen. Speaker 1: --and she wrote the social column for, or, or the colored section and that, and that was your first, you feel your first inspiration. Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: Yeah. So, you received the newspaper in your home every (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: The newspaper was delivered-- Speaker 2: Oh yes, yes. Speaker 1: --to your home. Speaker 2: Always, always. Speaker 1: What ca-- Story_ID: 371199 Speaker 1: What can you tell me about your mother [Mary Whitehurst Long]? What are your memories of your mother? She was the best seamstress in town [Elizabeth City, North Carolina]. Speaker 2: When we came to New York [New York], she was the best seamstress in New York. She was a good designer. She was creative. Speaker 1: Did she make-- Speaker 2: She was soft and gentle, didn't raise her voice, never hit either of us. Worshipped my father [Clyde Long]. Was very, seemed to be a very happy woman, happy with her husband and her two children and her mother [Ellen Whitehurst]. She was so, I, I think even now sometimes I yearn to have my mother to lay my head in her lap and to cry and tell her my present problem, whatever it might be. 'Cause that was, that was the relief. That was, that was the best of everything to lay your head in your mama's lap and cry, and she would ask you why you're crying and you would tell her and she'd give you the answer and then everything was okay. Everything was okay. I'm so fortunate and I, I think, I'm, I'm thinking now about how lucky I was to have that and to have, have, have a father who you know loved me more than he loved my brother [Clyde Whitehurst Long], 'cause I was the girl, you know it. Everybody accepted it, and he, he prodded me all the time to dream, to want more, to try to do something. I'm so fu- I'm so lucky. I really am. Story_ID: 371200 Speaker 1: Did you see your [maternal] grandmother [Ellen Whitehurst] as somewhat of a feminist being able to see her name in the newspaper [Daily Advance] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, oh God, yeah, she was a feminist. She was the boss of the family. She even bossed my father [Clyde Long]. She was something. Boy, she gave orders and that was it. She was a fighter for rights. She, somehow along and I don't know the details and I haven't tried to find out, but she was related to the governor of North Carolina and she used that power constantly. When she learned for instance that the black teachers in Elizabeth City [North Carolina] were not being paid the same wages as the white teachers, grandma got on the bus and went to Raleigh [North Carolina], went to the governor's office she stormed--she's a little lady like this, little tiny lady, went to governor's office. They tell this story in Elizabeth City often and I think something has been written about it and said she shook her finger in the governor's face, "Blucher, did you know that the colored teachers weren't being paid as much as the white teachers?" "Ellen, what you talking about?" "I said--," you know, she pleaded her case and the pays were equalized immediately. She got on the bus and came back home. Speaker 1: What was the governor's name? Speaker 2: Blucher Ehringhaus [J.C.B. Ehringhaus]. Speaker 1: And was your grandmother mixed? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I don't know the details. Yes, she was very mixed. I've, I've never been curious so far-- Speaker 1: But you're a journalist. Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: But you're a journalist. Speaker 2: But then I was a child I'm talking about. Even, even now, now it's--I have no interest in pursuing it. I have no interest. Speaker 1: But, it's a pretty remarkable thing that she was related to the governor and had enough power to get on the bus-- Speaker 2: She fussed all the time. She got things done (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What were some of the other things she fussed about? Speaker 2: About her, her oldest daughter [Catherine Whitehurst] got a beautiful home in the white section. She couldn't pass for white, but she had a beautiful home. She was a school teacher. There were little pluses involved that grandma took care of. And, and whatever the whole story is I do not know, but everybody in Elizabeth City knew. And it, it wasn't a scandal thing. It, it was, not at that point an unusual kind of situation. It was just Ellen White- Ellen Whitehurst knows how to take advantage of a position she's in, and she does it on behalf of black people and, and she, she was looked out as a kind of a heroine, but no big deal. You got to remember that's not an unusual thing in the South. I, I don't mean to say you got to remember, but let me just say-- Speaker 1: You can say I got to remember, yeah. Speaker 2: --it's highly unusual, yeah. There's all kind of mixes, all kinds of crazy things going on. They were not sinful. Nobody was going to jail. Nobody was going to court to claim money for this child, this is yours and all that. Speaker 1: Right, right and that I do, I mean I know, I mean I grew up in Mississippi, as you know-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --and I know that in some parts of Mississippi the white plantation had two families, a black one and a white one-- Speaker 2: Yeah right, right. Speaker 1: --and he took care of both of them-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and the town accepted that he-- Speaker 2: That's right, you got it. Speaker 1: --had these-- Speaker 2: You got it yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Ehringhaus must have been a decent guy. Grandma didn't have to threaten him. She just-- Speaker 1: So he-- Speaker 2: --awakened him to things-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --that needed to be--for when she-- Speaker 1: He could have been her father. Speaker 2: Huh. Speaker 1: He may have been her father. Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: When he died, when my grandmother died, we, we had moved to New York [New York] and we're living in the Bronx [New York] and I was a teenager and people were coming in and out of the household at the time and the doorbell, I, I opened the door one day and it was this very tall white man was standing there and he said, "You must be little Evelyn [HistoryMaker Evelyn Cunningham]," and I said, "Yeah." He said, "I'm Blucher." He said, "I heard Ellen had passed, and I wanted to come here." And he came in shook hands with everybody and left and got on the bus and went back. Isn't that moving? He didn't stay long. Story_ID: 371201 Speaker 1: So, do you remember her husband, your [maternal] grandfather [Walter Whitehurst]? Speaker 2: Not at all. I think he died before I was born you know. Speaker 1: Do you remember your father's pa- parents on that side? Speaker 2: Unh-uh. Speaker 1: So, only that grandmother [Ellen Whitehurst] was the maternal, was the head of the house-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --of the family, the, the matriarch of the family? Okay. Speaker 2: My father [Clyde Long] was from another city, which I don't remember. His fam- and I don't remember. Oh, Uncle Jack yeah. He had a brother, Uncle Jack, who lived in Connecticut who had long left the South. Speaker 1: What did Uncle Jack do for a living? Speaker 2: I don't remember. We saw him fairly often. He seemed to be doing very well. He always gave me money when he came to New York [New York]. He gave me, for a birthday present he gave me a driver's license thing, Uncle Jack. We saw him about once a year (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How many-- Speaker 2: That was my father's brother. Speaker 1: Okay. So your father had one brother, how many siblings-- Speaker 2: I don't know if he had more. Speaker 1: More, okay, but you only knew the one? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: What about your mother [Mary Whitehurst Long] did she have any other siblings? Speaker 2: Only--no. Oh yeah she had a sister. Yeah. Speaker 1: What was her sister's name? Speaker 2: Mattie [Mattie Whitehurst]. She came to New York with us. Her sister Mattie always stayed with us wherever we were. When we came to New York, she came with us. Story_ID: 371202 Speaker 1: So, can you tell me a little more about your father [Clyde Long] taking you to the beach to see (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The Wright brothers. Speaker 1: --this, the Wright brothers, the excitement that your, your father understood something big was going on. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Did black and white people come to the beach to watch? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Everybody, it was, it was, everybody knew what it was about. Yeah, Or, Or, Orville [Orville Wright]. Speaker 1: Orville, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. I remember my father using his first name. Speaker 1: When he spoke to him? Speaker 2: Orville yeah. So, I don't remember in what context or why, but he was very much into that, that development there. Years and years and years later got to be grown and I was in my thirties I guess or forties before daddy died I, I wanted to take flying lessons and I told, he, he discouraged that. He said, "It's too dangerous, you don't need." I don't know what made him turn around, but I think he gave me the money. I'm not certain, but I didn't take any flying lessons. Story_ID: 371203 Speaker 1: What else did your [maternal] grandmother [Ellen Whitehurst] do to earn money? She had that, that--she wrote for the newspaper [Daily Advance]. Speaker 2: Yeah, for which I don't think she was paid. Speaker 1: How did she have, how did she earn money? Speaker 2: I don't know. She didn't have any special gifts or talent. I never, I never heard of grandma working. No, never heard of her working. And when we moved to New York [New York] she was really very old. Her, her, the things she liked most to do was get in, in the bathtub. She loved taking baths, and she was so tiny and fragile that we, we, were all frightened with her jumping in and out of the bathtub, so it got to be--my brother [Clyde Whitehurst Long] and I were assigned always to not let grandma get in the bath grandma, grandma. Not to let grandma get in the bathtub unless somebody was home. So, my brother and I loved that job. We would pick her up and place her in the tub and sit there and watch her splash around and then take her and take her out and dry her (laughter). Speaker 1: It was relatively new for her indoor plumbing. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, that's right, that's right. She loved to sit in the tub and splash in the water. Story_ID: 371204 Speaker 1: Just thinking can you remember the street you lived on and when you lived down South? Speaker 2: Remember the what? Speaker 1: The street you lived on, the name of the street, the address? Speaker 2: Gee, it came to me for a second. No. Speaker 1: It'll come back to you. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Can you describe some of the other neighbors there? You said there were doctors on the street, there are lawyers. Speaker 2: Doctors, yeah, doctors-- Speaker 1: Was the postman black when-- Speaker 2: --and lawyers. Speaker 1: Lawyers. Speaker 2: It was a good neighborhood. Speaker 1: Did the postman, was the postman black? Can you remember who delivered the mail to you? Speaker 2: No, I don't remember. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The doctor lived across the street. He had a big family, and he had children our age and everybody dreamed of me marrying one of the doctor's sons, and we didn't like each other from the get go, so that wasn't gonna happen. But, everybody thought that would be ideal, Clyde Long's daughter to marry the doctor's son. Story_ID: 371205 Speaker 1: So, what made the family move to New York [New York] and how old were you when you moved to New York [from Elizabeth City, North Carolina]? Speaker 2: I think I was about five. Still not certain about it, but around five because, because of the, the racism it was getting just worse and worse and worse. Speaker 1: But you said it wasn't too bad where you were. Speaker 2: Well, it was bad, but nobody was fighting it. You got, you got a new group of people come in and who resented quickly and, and, and the old-timers were used to it, so it was no civil rights battles going on. You resented it. You, you had little privileges when you could. You got little privilege when you could, but you weren't gonna fight it because basically the blacks and whites were friendly, but the, yeah really friendly, but the blacks were there and the whites were there and, and, and, and it didn't offer any discomfort to anybody. So, you didn't have any real civil rights fights going on until another generation came in, and we all realized how deprived we were and how depraved they were. So, daddy [Clyde Long] quickly saw it was gonna get worse, you know the racism and it will be some shooting or be some lynching or be some anger and we won't be living in happy harmon- harmony like we used to. So-- Speaker 1: And you're talking, we're talking about now at the time you moved to New York it's the early '20s [1920s]. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, right. Speaker 1: So, did he have plans of opening another pool, shop in Harlem in New York (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, no, he wanted to be a pianist in a nightclub. Speaker 1: So, he came to take on Duke Ellington. Speaker 2: That's right, and he had the roughest time in the world. He could not get a job. We were so poor that first two years. He could not get a job. He got a job running an elevator in the hotel New Yorker [The New Yorker; The New Yorker, a Wyndham Hotel, New York, New York]. He got a job with a taxi cab company. That's the two jobs I remember. And the taxi cab situation he realized very quickly if he owned the cab he'd make more money, so he, he, he, he either scuffled or borrowed or went and got money and bought a cab, and then he bought two cabs, then he bought three cabs. So, very enterprising bus- businessperson. And all of that in a new community, a new environment, but he, he understood very quickly the best way to make money. And he had no real, real, real marketable skills except the, the playing of the piano and I think we all understood that he was not gonna get a job in a nightclub in New York City as a pianist. Story_ID: 371206 Speaker 1: We were talking about your move to New York City [New York, New York] and your--you were telling me where you lived and you had a famous neighbor when you arrived in New York. Speaker 2: Yeah. Okay in New York City we moved downtown in the 50s, 50, between 50th [Street] and 53rd [Street] where most, most black people lived on the west side when people were coming to New York for the first time, very rundown neighborhood and all that. But, but it was near Central Park [New York, New York], near the--57th Street, near the beginning of Central Park and to take us away from the misery of that awful apartment we had which was in the basement my mother [Mary Whitehurst Long] and father [Clyde Long] took us to Central Park. 'Til today I know where everything is in that park. It's a wonderful place to take children. I know where the Shakespeare, Shakespeare Gardens are. I know everything about that park, so I don't remember too much about that little basement apartment. And, and in the basement you look out the window and the street is up there and my brother [Clyde Whitehurst Long] and I used to see people, so many people with dogs on leashes. Well in Elizabeth City [North Carolina] you never heard of that on a leash. What is that? Why they got their animal on a string? So, that was the worst sight for us. And my brother and I decided that people in New York they, they didn't like children, they liked dogs and they, and they'd take us to Central Park and the beauties of Central Park. These are the greatest parents in the world. They don't make 'em like that. So, we didn't stay down there long. We, then we moved to Harlem [New York, New York], 141st Street near the Cotton Club [New York, New York] where Duke Ellington was playing. That was, it was a nice building near the second corner, the second house from Lenox Avenue [Malcolm X Boulevard]. We finally were in Harlem, and we were happy in Harlem, and, and the building we lived in we thought was like a castle. We, we were comfortable in Harlem. We felt this, the Lord had meant this for us long time ago. We went to school and daddy got the jobs, got the cab jobs (cough) couldn't, had a rough time getting jobs driving a cab. He eventually bought a total of three cabs and made a little bit more money. We moved up to Edgecombe Avenue, Sugar Hill. We knew this was Sugar Hill. We were told about the, about the history of Sugar Hill, and we knew all about the celebrities and entertainers who were part of Harlem. Well, and we were extremely happy to be in Harlem and be among black people. Story_ID: 371207 Speaker 1: My daddy [Clyde Long] and mother [Mary Whitehurst Long] got connected with a bridge group. They was great bridge players and really nice people and their lives became even a little fuller with the, the bridge playing and my father got to be a master chair, whole lot of trophies. As, as things got better, I remember they travelled a lot to tournaments, to bridge tournaments, particularly in the summertime when they sent my brother [Clyde Whitehurst Long] and me to camp. Speaker 2: What camp did you go to? Speaker 1: (Unclear) and Power. It's St. Philip's Camp, St. Philip's Episcopal Church [New York, New York] camp. It's in New Falls, New York [sic.]. Great, great camp, and we went there so long I got, I grew up there got to be a counselor, you know, freebie so it was even better then when I, they didn't have to pay for us to go to camp because I had a job not--he, he didn't have it. He was--brother was younger than me, so, but I, I had a permanent job there, got to be a good swimmer. I was the swimming teacher and off the streets in the summer and our parents felt secure. They were--they started travelling to the bridge tournaments throughout the country every summer and knew that we were safe in camp. Camp was just wonderful. I, I loved camp. Do kids go to camp anymore--camp? Speaker 2: Yes, ma'am. Speaker 1: They do. Speaker 2: They still do (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) Oh great, great, great. Story_ID: 371208 Speaker 1: So, when is it, when do you think it turned around for your family in New York [New York] once they moved up to Harlem [New York, New York] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, oh yeah. Speaker 1: When did, when did your mother start designing dresses for the well-to-do black people? Speaker 2: They were mostly well-to-do white people. Speaker 1: They were mostly well to do white people okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, most of her customers were white. She had a reputation. Ms. Long--some people didn't realize she was black. My mother to me looks, looks very black. She had blonde hair, but she looked, she didn't look white to me. Blonde straight hair, but, but all the white assumed she was white or something, not black. So, she, she really--there are people who still remember Ms. Long [Mary Whitehurst Long]. They trusted her. The whole point about not being black was they, they didn't want no black dressmaker in their house to steal things. Mama told us about that, about some of the people she worked for. She was a brilliant designer. She was really, and, and these people got into the habit, were going to Europe all the time and going to Paris [France] and bringing clothes back for Ms. Long to alter for them. And of course Ms. Long would always tell them, "Well, we need six yards for that," meaning that three yards would be for something for me you know. So and, and I got a little, Mama gave me a little job of delivering stuff to people, clothes that she was altering or making and she told me once, she said, "Baby if, if ever you go one, if every you go to take one of the dresses to Ms. So and So or Ms. So and So and the doorman will not let you get on the elevator and tell you to go to the service elevator, just come out of the building go to the corner where the nearest telephone is and call me." And she repeated it. And sure enough, sure it happened all the time. One is Ms. Cohen [ph.], well you take the service elevator and I could take my little package and go to the corner and call mama and mama would call Ms. Cohen and say, "My daughter is there with your dress, but she can't get in the elevator they want her to go downstairs and get the service elevator," and of course Ms. Cohen would say go and give the doorman hell 'cause she wants her clothes. That, that routine was so funny. We laughed about it, but it worked. Story_ID: 371209 Speaker 1: It told me something. Speaker 2: What did it tell you? Speaker 1: It told me how to deal with it. It hurt me for a while because I, I wasn't really sure why I had to go to, I mean I'm a teenager now and really wasn't certain why I had to go to the service thing, entrance, and the doorman would say, "Who, who, who are you, who you wanna see?" "See Ms. Cohen [ph.], apartment so and so I'm delivering something." And I, I, I didn't know what the why of it and, and, and Mama [Mary Whitehurst Long] had made it such a no-no, to belittle myself, to go to the basement and all of that. She wanted me to fight back a little bit, and that was the way she did it. Of course, Ms. Cohen was gonna give the doorman hell. It might have helped along the line with other people. I will never know, but, but, but they all loved my mother so much and they wanted their clothes. So, that didn't happen maybe three times, but the second time it was easier for me to say, "Mama I, I, they won't let me in." Then Mama will call up, and she wasn't shouting civil rights marcher. "Ms. Cohen, my daughter is there with your dress. I have told my daughter not to go to the basement, not to go to a service elevator, to deliver to you at your apartment. Would you please tell the doorman to let my daughter in?" That was all. It was settled easily. Speaker 2: So how did you feel when you were able to-- Speaker 1: Humiliated. Speaker 2: No, but afterwards? Speaker 1: Huh? Speaker 2: Afterwards from your--when your mother made the call and you could take the regular, and you go back to the doorman and he comes down do you--? Speaker 1: I was, I was never frightened for some reason (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, but I mean did you, did it feel good when you-- Speaker 1: Of course-- Speaker 2: --your mother had the power to call Ms. Cohen and say look my daughter is not gonna-- Speaker 1: Sure, yeah of course it felt good. Speaker 2: Well what did that teach you? Speaker 1: It taught, it, it, it taught me you, you don't just take it. That, that's a relatively small thing in, in retrospect, and in the bigger picture lynchings and everything. That's a relatively (unclear) and I'm sure that still happens. And, and, and, and certainly there, there are people doing things in these apartments that they should go through the service elevator. There's no question about it, but I'm a neatly dressed little white, little black girl, you know, correct and everything, speaking properly, and, and I'm just going, going to go, I wanna go to the third floor to see Ms. Cohen. I'm, I'm, I'm not, I'm not the kind of person that you, that you know should go through the basement. So, the difference there became clear to me and it, it also cast my mother in another light for me. I never, I never knew my mother as all out civil rights fighter for rights, gonna kill somebody or be killed. She's quiet. My [maternal] grandmother [Mary Whitehurst] was a yeller you know down and everything, but my mother so lady like and calm. It, it, it was, it seem to be out of character to me, but I was proud that she stood up to a white person who was in the, who was more important, a white person is important, they run the world and, and little old mama got mad and stood up to her. I felt very proud of her 'cause to me she was out of character. Grandma probably, she probably would've jumped in a cab and come down there, you know. Speaker 2: So, your grandmother moved to New York [New York] with you also. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: How much longer did she live after you got to New York? Speaker 1: I can only guess was Sugar Hill [Harlem, New York, New York]. She died in the Bronx [New York]. Oh, no, no, no, no, no I, I, I can't, I can't (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Or did she die down south because the governor [J.C.B. Ehringhaus] came--when the governor came to the-- Speaker 1: No, she died in New York because they-- Speaker 2: And the governor came to New York. Speaker 1: Yeah, it was no longer governor of course. Speaker 2: Okay, right. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 371210 Speaker 1: Well do you remember going to school in New York [New York]? What do you remember about elementary school? Speaker 2: Yeah, P.S. over at--yeah, very pleasant. School was always very pleasant. Speaker 1: Who were you, who influenced you in school, some of the teachers? Speaker 2: One of the teachers was a mother of that Duke Ellington musician. What is, where is Marie [sic.]? Oh. Black woman, first black principal of a school was 149th Street [sic. 148th Street] between 8th [8th Avenue; Frederick Douglass Boulevard] and 7th Avenue [Adam Clayton Powell Jr. Boulevard]. She was a principal there at the first school I went to. I think it was P.S. 9 [P.S. 90, New York, New York]. Speaker 1: Okay. I'll look it up. I'll, I'll find out. Speaker 2: What's that? Speaker 1: I'll find out. Speaker 2: Yeah okay, yeah. Speaker 1: So, you went to P.S. 90. Speaker 2: Yeah and her, her son, the principal's son was a musician connected with Duke Ellington. Oh, what, what's, what's, what's her name who's sick, who lives on Central Park West? She, she, oh God, she, she, her husband is, late husband, is he late yeah, 57th Street they lived, what? Right now. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Billie. Speaker 2: Billie. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Luther. Yeah, [HistoryMaker] Billie Allen. Speaker 2: Luther Henderson. Luther Henderson's mother was the principal of that school. Thank you (laughter), you know them, you know the name yeah. Speaker 1: Yes ma'am. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So, his mother was principal? Speaker 2: Yeah, good school. Speaker 1: Well, what did you, what did seeing her as principal teach you about what you could do? Speaker 2: What is? Speaker 1: I mean did seeing--what did she teach, what did you learn from her about what you could achieve yourself? Speaker 2: About Mrs. Henderson [Florence Black Henderson]. She was very inspiring. The fact that she was principal of the school was, was you know very, it was obvious, although the school was in Harlem [New York, New York] you would expect the principal to be, be black, but I think, I don't think it was many black principals at that point. And she was, she had such dignity, and she was a beautiful lady and she dressed beautifully. Wonderful role model especially for young black girls. She was wonderful. And years later when I met Luther and, and Luther's wife we was good friends you know it was, it was thrilling and for me to tell her, tell them the effect that his mother had on my life, yeah. Story_ID: 371211 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What type of a student were you? Speaker 2: A good student. Yeah I was above average and I, I liked school. Speaker 1: Did you want to become a teacher? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: What did you want to become? Speaker 2: A writer. Speaker 1: Always? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: What writers were you--? Speaker 2: I was writing--my, my I good marks in composition, very good marks and I slowly realized I had great imagination and then I moved into wanting to go beyond that and taking it all very, very seriously. Speaker 1: When did that happen? Speaker 2: In, in, in P.S. 90 [New York, New York]. Yeah. I always wrote a lot for my own edification, just you get a little notebook I'd write things, write poetry. Speaker 1: What--? Speaker 2: And I think, I think I was, I think I was trying to please my [maternal] grandmother [Ellen Whitehurst]. Yeah, but it came easy and it's something I wanted to do and it took a little time before I realized I could make money writing. I never thought about it, but, it, it dawned on me that this could be my, my goal, my occupation. It can work, it could work and you can write a book, you can write poetry or work in the newspaper. There's a whole lot of things you can write, yeah. Story_ID: 371212 Speaker 1: Did you think about writing for a newspaper at that time because it was something your [maternal] grandmother [Ellen Whitehurst] had? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, and Heywood Broun and Westbrook Pegler. You remember them? You too young. They were, one of the--New York [New York], the major New York papers. These were the hot writers, Heywood Broun and Westbrook Pegler. Westbrook Pegler was controversial, some thought it was racist. Heywood Broun was a good guy. And the, these writers, these two men it's, it's, it's, it's amazing to me how these two white males who had no relationship to black people almost became kind of idols because I read them all the time, and I loved the way they wrote. But, my, my mother [Mary Whitehurst Long] and father [Clyde Long] always had newspapers in the house. I remember the floors always full of newspapers and I'm always on the floor crawling and I read these men and I, and recognized how powerful they were. That was an aphrodisiac for me, the power because most people talks about them and hated them or loved them. And I said, boy this is interesting. This is, these two guys they can, they changed the world. I really was deeply influenced by them and I, I, I'm try, I keep, I keep 'til today trying to dig out, out of me why. I knew they were white, I knew these were white newspapers, they had very little black news, but my mother and father read everything in the papers and they talked to each other and I listened. They weren't talking to me, was talking to each other, but I listened and the power of that these writers had, became so clear to me. Speaker 1: How, how did it become clear? Speaker 2: Because people talked about them all the time and they, they, they put in the paper what I thought was the, the end, the truth. They changed the world. They could write anything they wanted, and everybody has to take it because it's there. I thought they controlled the world. I spent, I spent a lot of time thinking about that. Speaker 1: So with the pen you thought that you could also-- Speaker 2: Yeah, right. Speaker 1: --have that influence and change the world. Speaker 2: Yeah and I would like to. Yeah and I'm so far removed from what they are. Not only am I not white, I'm a woman, but-- Speaker 1: But they say the pen is mightier than the sword. Speaker 2: Yeah, but, but you know, but I bounce back to this thing from childhood, "Baby you could, you could do anything you want if you do anything you want. You can be anything you want." Speaker 1: And whose voice was that always saying that to you? Speaker 2: Yeah, that's always there. Speaker 1: Was that your father's voice or your grandmother's voice or both? Speaker 2: All, all of them. Speaker 1: All of them. Speaker 2: Yeah. Their, their, their, their rationale was preventing me from being downtrodden. Speaker 1: Did you see any similarities between your grandmother having that byline and those two, the two writers that you admired so much? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, and I, yeah, but, but grandma's was, was a long time ago. I, I realized with grandma, but she, no--. Grandma put in perspective to, for me at that point that she, she was a she, so I, I, I didn't even--so that was no block. It removed that possible block. You know so grandma did it, you know, so and it's very doable. Yeah, so I, I, I might have been stopped or dissuaded or give it up if I had not known that grandma was writing too. You know 'cause these two powerful white men who are influencing me at this point, and I didn't understand all of what I read that they wrote, but, but I did understand how powerful they were because people kept talking about them. Speaker 1: Were they--did they write, write about race relations at all (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No. Speaker 1: Not at all. Speaker 2: No. Isn't that--? I thought about this so much you know. I said, I, I try to figure out is it something else that I've forgotten, but-- Speaker 1: But maybe it's just the tool you saw that they was-- Speaker 2: I know, they were respected. They were highly respected and, and the papers were always there. See now not, I don't think in every black home there are newspapers. I, and, and that dawned on me late in life. I assumed all black people read all newspapers, and it took a long time before I realized that most black families did not read newspapers and if they did it was the News [New York Daily News] or the Post [New York Post] or the Amsterdam News [New York Amsterdam News]. I just had no awareness of that, and, and I think that, that their reading the papers and leaving it around the house and not pushing me to read it, but having it available so in case I wanted to pick it up and I, I did. You know, I was a reader in school, I'm literate and all that and I see something interesting and I wanna read it and I read it. Story_ID: 371213 Speaker 1: So, when you graduated high school and you were thinking about college how did Long Island University [Brooklyn, New York] come up for you? You wanted to stay close to home? Speaker 2: Long Island? Speaker 1: Is that--? Speaker 2: I wanted--? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Hunter College [Hunter College High School, New York, New York]. Speaker 2: Is it Hunter? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): The next and then LIU. She graduated from LIU. Speaker 2: Oh okay so she went to Hunter okay. Speaker 1: Yeah Hunter High. I went to Hunter High. Speaker 2: Hunter High. Speaker 1: Yeah from 136 [P.S. 136] in Harlem [New York, New York] here. You know Hunter High is an elite school. You have, you have to be extra bright or something right? Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Yes. Speaker 1: Or take an examination. So I got into Hunter High. I never, I never considered I was a particularly bright student, but I think, I think what, I think part of, of my getting into Hunter High was that my mother [Mary Whitehurst Long] or grandmother [Ellen Whitehurst] or father [Clyde Long] came to every PTA [Parent Teacher Association] meeting. If my mother and father had to work, my grandmother would be at the PTA meeting, and the teachers, the teachers loved me because my, that they said her family is on our side. They would not miss a meeting, and they would ask questions. And, and, and this is an aside, but at, at that time P.S. 136 on 135th Street was notorious for having lesbians kids there at the time I was going there, and it was well known, everybody talks about it. And I was, my, my seat in my class was between two girls who were lovers, and they used to pass notes to me to pass. She would say pass this to there, and I was scared as hell 'cause they would threaten me if I didn't. At first, at first I didn't want, I turned my back and act cute. "You better pass this note to her or less we're gonna beat your ass." So, I finally told my mother you know what was happening and, and I was crying, was hysterical 'cause I wanted my mother to tell the teacher to tell them to get, leave me along, not realizing I could make it worse you know for me, but when I told my mother, my mother said, "Honey just keep passing the notes (laughter)." I swear I, I thought Mama was gonna go down there and kill everybody and she said, "Honey just keep passing the note. You only, you only go, you only got a half a year more there and they out of there (laughter)." That's the best advice she could give me. And both of these girls were big. They were fat, and sometimes the notes would rest there and I'd read a little bit (laughter) you know and be shocked. But when, when Mama told me just, "Honey just pass the notes (laughter)." So, and so I qualified for Hunter High, took the exam and got in there. Story_ID: 371214 Speaker 1: At this time you were still thinking about becoming a writer? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: What writers were you reading? What black writers were you reading at the time? Speaker 2: I was reading--I don't remember. Speaker 1: You don't okay. Speaker 2: I read everything, but I don't remember. I knew who the obvious people and writers were-- Speaker 1: Like Baldwin [James Baldwin] and-- Speaker 2: --at, of the, of the time. Who were the obvious writers then? Speaker 1: What year are we, let me just-- Speaker 2: I'm, I'm thinking about the, when I'm in high school-- Speaker 1: This is when-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Unclear). Speaker 1: Oh, still in, no-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Sixteen- Speaker 1: When I'm in high school. Speaker 2: She, she went-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): The late '30s [1930s] or early '40s [1940s]. Speaker 2: Early, it would be the early '40s [1940s] maybe? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): So, maybe Richard Wright had come, I'm not quite sure, but Richard Wright maybe, perhaps. Speaker 2: Do you remember reading anything that stood out for you? Speaker 1: Unh-uh. Speaker 2: Nothing? Speaker 1: No, I, I did well at Hunter [Hunter College High School, New York, New York]. It, it was supposed to be an exclusive school for super bright kids and everything, and it was one other black girl that when I went in, but they weren't all that super I, I don't think. I think for the most part we were, we were, the Hunter kids I think at that point were kids who came from families who were disciplined, who passed the test (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Involved, and parents who were involved with their children's education. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, non-trouble, non-trouble makers. Yeah, I don't think they could be described as super bright kids, but it's, it's great, it's great to be in the school and to graduate from the school. Story_ID: 371215 Speaker 1: We're gonna talk about at this point you're in Hunter High School [Hunter College High School, New York, New York], your parents [Mary Whitehurst Long and Clyde Long] were very involved in your education, and you, did you work on the school newspaper at Hunter? Speaker 2: Unh-uh. Speaker 1: No. You were still only writing for yourself poetry, short stories. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: So what, what was happening in Harlem [New York, New York] at the time? Did anything in Harlem influence what you were writing? Speaker 2: Not that I recall. I don't recall much of that. Speaker 1: What do you recall about Harlem when you were in high school? Speaker 2: (Pause) Well, I recall being in love with Harlem. Speaker 1: What about it were you in love with? Speaker 2: And, and with the celebrities, the people that I read about su- and the Sugar Hill thing and 409 Edgecombe [Edgecombe Avenue] and all the famous people, the Paul Robesons, Yankee Stadium [New York, New York]. Everything was happening in Harlem. I just loved it to death. And every, my, my, my brother [Clyde Whitehurst Long], my mother and father all did too. Things that we had heard about, read about. It seemed like since we were in Harlem we were not, we didn't think too much about it or didn't experience any kind of discrimination 'cause we were, we were all together here in Harlem. Speaker 1: Did you experience discrimination downtown? Speaker 2: I don't recall any, any discrimination. I probably, there probably was some, or probably was and didn't recognize it, but nothing really overt. When--our first, our first time in New York [New York], first day in New York Mama took, Mama took us to Macy's [R.H. Macy and Company Store; Macy's Herald Square, New York, New York]. It, it was during the time when they just put the escalators in, and we got on the escalator at the first floor and Mama said look, look down at all the people and, and you know all these thousands of people in Macy's. It was awesome. And then, and she put it in perspective and said, she said there are more people down there than people who live in Elizabeth City [North Carolina]. She probably was true, you know, but, but that made it clear how awesome was New York 'cause we're just talking about one store and oh my God. And then with this New York thing, with my brother and me they took, they took us downtown a lot to just sightsee, and the buildings, the buildings. I used to say, "Mama looka yonder." Mama said, "Bop, stop saying looka yonder," (laughter). She had the roughest time breaking me of saying looka yonder. Now that's southern stuff, looka yonder. But, yeah those buildings in New York, "Looka yonder Mama" (laughter). Mama said, "Bop, look up there darling," (laughter). And so yeah they had a time breaking us from talking, talking Elizabeth City talk you know. Story_ID: 371216 Speaker 1: So, at Hunter [Hunter College High School, New York, New York] when it's becoming close to graduation, but before graduation were there any teachers at Hunter who had influenced you as much as your principal [Florence Black Henderson] at P.S. 90 [New York, New York]? Speaker 2: Unh-uh. Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: One time at Hunter High there was one other black girl there. Speaker 1: And who, what was her name? Speaker 2: Huh. Speaker 1: Do you remember her name? Speaker 2: No, but I know a relative of hers who lives near me. Speaker 1: Who's her relative? Speaker 2: Trudy [ph.], Trudy and Leslie [ph.], this girl was related to Trudy. You know my friends Trudy and Leslie? Yeah, but she was somehow related to them. We weren't friendly. Speaker 1: But, she was the only other black student. How did that feel for you coming from Harlem [New York, New York] that was almost exclusively black-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and doing downtown to a school where you were the only black student? Speaker 2: One, one of two. Speaker 1: One of two. Speaker 2: Yeah, it, it was, it was boring. Hunter was boring, but I was up the task. I was smart. I got, I passed. I got out of there, I graduated. I didn't take part in any extracurricular activities. On the other hand, I don't know if I was ever asked to take part. I don't recall being asked any to join one of the classes or anything. I might have been, but I don't recall it. Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: I just wanted to hurry up and get out of there (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And get out. Story_ID: 371217 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) When was the turning point? When did you decide that you were going to pursue studies in journalism? I, I know that you said you wanted to go to Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York]-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --but it was too expensive. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: But by then when you decided to go to Columbia, it was journalism that you were interested in. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So how did you, when did that become apparent to you that journalism was the path you wanted to take? Speaker 2: Probably very much earlier than that. You know I used to write little stories all the time for myself (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, it was during that time that you just decided-- Speaker 2: --in a little notebook yeah. Speaker 1: So, decided--you--tell me what happened after Hunter High School [Hunter College High School, New York, New York] because you went to Hunter College for a short period-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and then Long Island University [Brooklyn, New York]? Speaker 2: Yeah right. Long Island had a very good journalism school. In fact, very good and, and it was an up and coming school, had a great basketball team and a black guy was this focus of the basketball, a guy named Dolly King [William "Dolly" King], a great big heavyset guy. There were not many blacks in LIU [Long Island University], but the minute I got there they tried to match me and Dolly King up, so he wouldn't, so they wouldn't have to worry about him getting together with any white girl and that was, that was burningly clear. But, Dolly and I didn't particularly go for each other you know (laughter). We were friends. We remain friends, but he had a girl and I had a boy, a boyfriend, so you know yeah we don't have to play this game for these people. These crazy people here, so (laughter). The second experience at LIU they immediately put me in the basketball team. You had to, you had to have a sport for after, after classes and so. "Well, Evelyn [HistoryMaker Evelyn Cunningham] now you, you, you will be on the girls basketball team." I said, "I don't wanna be on the girls basketball team. I don't play basketball." "No, but you're, you're tall. Yeah you gotta." They made me get on the girls basketball team 'cause I'm black. I know why. You know they figure I got natural talent like all black people for basketball. So, I, I stayed for a while. I got pictures of me as a basketball player. And then I, I, I was bored. I didn't like, I, I'm not a basketball player you know and forcing to-- Story_ID: 371218 Speaker 1: She said, "What, what, are you--what, what sport, what are you gonna do then?" I said, "I wanna be on the fencing team." "You wanna what?" "I wanna be on the fencing team." "You got your equipment?" I said, "I know y'all got the equipment. You give it to me." You got, the, the thing you put on your head and you got this thing. So, they got me on, they let me get on the fencing team. I said, "I wanna be the captain of the fencing team." So, Mama [Mary Whitehurst Long] and daddy [Clyde Long] when I went home I said, "I am now in the fencing team at LIU [Long Island University, Brooklyn, New York]." And Mama, daddy, daddy said, "Will they let you bring the--," the, the, what do you call this? It's this thing and epees--, "will they let you bring it home?" I said, "No, why?" He said, "Because I can clear all the stuff out of the hallway here and you can practice at home up and down the thing, you know, need a practice space 'cause we want you to be good." I love these, I loved this mother and father so much I can't begin to tell you. So, they let me bring the stuff home, and sure enough daddy cleared everything outside. Every day I could practice. Before you knew it, I was winning everything and I was made captain of the fencing team, this black person. We up, at home we just laughed and laughed and said, "They trying to make a basketball player and you wind up being the captain of the fencing team." I said, "Yeah." That, that, that's probably the start of my life. You know please don't tell me, put me in a, in a thing and tell me I must do this, I just do that. Let me fly you know. Okay if I drop that, that's okay. You know I can get up and try again. But-- Speaker 2: Well, I bet you were the first black captain at LIU on the fencing team (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Are you telling me? (Laughter) In fact, we had a match with a college in Staten Island [New York], Wagner. They had a fencing team, and we had scheduled a match. They were the champions, Wagner, Wagner College [Staten Island, New York], and a week before the match was to come on we were the finalist Wagner pulled out and said publicly, "We will not play with them because you have a, a black person on your team." Ain't that, ain't that, ain't that the dumbest thing you ever heard in your life? That got all kind of publicity, and of course with the--shortly, an apology you know all that stuff and we had the match and of course I won. You know I beat everybody. You know, no, not even halfway trying. So, but it was so stupid of them to do that, to say that and make that public. Speaker 2: How did you feel when they made that public? Speaker 1: Huh? Speaker 2: How did that make you feel? Speaker 1: I wasn't, it made, it, it, I wasn't humiliated. I wasn't downtrodden. I didn't feel like, oh God the world is against me. I said how dumb can they be? I said this is the dumbest thing I ever heard of in my life; that's how I felt. I said I, I won this thing. They made, they made me win this thing. Really dumb. And of course the apology came afterwards. Everything happened. They wanted me to come and go to the Wagner College, all that stuff. I just got out of it completely, you know, and I won that battle. I knew that it, you know, have to stretch it out. It was just somebody over at Wagner was very dumb, very, very dumb. Speaker 2: And this is New York City [New York, New York], I mean you'd expect that thing down south,-- Speaker 1: Yeah about it, that's right. Speaker 2: --but you know-- Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: --you're in the big city and-- Speaker 1: It was some key racists there, but whoever it was, I don't know it might have been a teacher, might have been a student, I, I don't know. Speaker 2: How did the university react? Speaker 1: Huh? Speaker 2: How did Long I, how did Long Island University react to Wagner's statement that they didn't want to play--? Speaker 1: They tried to keep it all quiet. Yeah, my school didn't want to, LIU didn't want to make a big thing that would last for a long time. Probably because they were vulnerable some, in some areas that I don't know about. Story_ID: 371219 Speaker 1: So, after you graduate from LIU [Long Island University, Brooklyn, New York], what happens next in your life? You, is that when you go to Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York] for one year? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: What happened? I guess I started working for the Courier [Pittsburgh Courier; New Pittsburgh Courier]. Speaker 1: Well when did you do a short stint at the New York design school? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Did I go to the New York School of Design [New York, New York]? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): I don't remember reading about it. It could be at some point. Speaker 2: I don't know. Do I-- Speaker 1: Okay. And you're not, and you, but you did do a short amount of time at the Columbia School of Journalism [Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism, New York, New York] at some point you went to Columbia? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: No you didn't. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, from Long Island University you have an aunt who knows someone at the, at the paper, the Courier-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and you start pursuing a job and tell me the story of how your aunt helped to get you this job? Speaker 2: The man who was the head of the New York [New York] bureau, the New York edition-- Speaker 1: What was his name? Speaker 2: --she was dating him, my aunt was. Speaker 1: What was his name? Speaker 2: Rousseau. His last name was Rousseau. Edgar T. Rousseau [Edgar Rousseau], yeah, and he has big eyes for my Aunt Mattie [Mattie Whitehurst]. Of course she asked, "Can my niece be interviewed by you?" or something. "Of course, of course," and that's when I got the interview. He told me could I type, daddy [Clyde Long] bought a typewriter and-- Speaker 1: He asked you, did you have a typewriter? Speaker 2: Yeah, no, no he didn't ask me-- Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: --he told me, did I type? Yeah. Speaker 1: And you said? Speaker 2: I, I did not have a typewriter, so I said yeah I can type not well, not fast, like most people, not well, not fast. So daddy bought the typewriter, and we practiced and everything and then-- Speaker 1: Well, who was it that made you clip out the articles from The New York Times and then rewrite them so that they could-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: That was Mr. Rousseau? Speaker 2: Yeah, right, that's right and I'm told, I'm told they still do that, and the papers still do that. Read The New York Times and rewrite it (laughter). I read The New York Times and I read The Times, the Post [New York Post], the News [New York Daily News] every day, every day of my life. Story_ID: 371220 Speaker 1: So how long were you at the paper [Pittsburgh Courier; New Pittsburgh Courier] before they gave you your own column? Speaker 2: Before they gave me what? Speaker 1: Before they gave you a column? Speaker 2: Not--I got the column before I went and moved to Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania]. Yeah, for some reason. Mr. Rousseau [Edgar Rousseau] let me write a column and then Dan Wheeler at the home office in Pittsburgh they would use my column in the other editions without my knowing it. Then they decided to bring me to Pittsburgh so I could learn a little bit more about how the newspapers are put together. Speaker 1: Well, you had learned earlier by reading those two writers [Heywood Broun and Westbrook Pegler] from The New York Times [sic.] that the pen was mightier than the sword, so how are you at this point having your own column, how are you setting out to change some of the things you were seeing in the world and in your community? What things were you writing about that you wanted to see change? Speaker 2: Mostly untouchable things, controversial things. I went, I went as far as I could. I don't, I don't remember one time when they really killed the whole column because it was maybe bad taste or too controversial. But, I, I really liked, from the get go wanted to take on untouchable subjects. Speaker 1: And what were untouchable subjects? Speaker 2: Something you not popular, and, and I don't mean, I don't mean ridiculous things (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well race was race, racial issues unpopular? Speaker 2: But the black, but the black press was so confined to a certain way, a certain style, certain kinds of-- Speaker 1: What was that style? Speaker 2: It, it, it overemphasized social events in my opinion you know and-- Speaker 1: Well, this is your story we're talking about, so. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. It, it over emphasized the things that weren't important. I did not, it shied away from controversial things for the most part and less discriminating, just plain old overt discrimination yeah. They, they, they didn't play it cleverly, I thought. Speaker 1: So it sounds like-- Speaker 2: It was so much yelling. Speaker 1: --you're saying that they took their lead from what the white papers were writing-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah Speaker 1: --and not inventing their own stories. Speaker 2: Right, right, that's right, that's right. Speaker 1: What story-- Speaker 2: It's crying, it's seeking and seeking support, it's crying the blues or wanting somebody to get on your side. It was so, poor pitiful me. I, I thought it was devoid of humor except Bootsie, Bootsie cartoons. But, the black press is so devoid of humor boy. It still is and, and we're the funniest people in the world you know and, and when we can laugh at some of the foibles it, it makes a big difference. So, I, I, I think, I think I started out with a feeling of breaking some of the rules, and I think some of the people in charge of the Courier and until today I don't know who they might be 'cause it's hard to, the publishers of the paper I, I never knew where they stood politically 'cause I never saw them. I met the, but never saw them too much, never talked with them. But, I wanted to get on the untouchable thing, not bad taste things, but stop crying your civil rights blues, please. Get off my back I'm tired of that, you know. It's story after story, after story of, of sad things, discrimination things and, and devoid of humor completely. Speaker 1: And you wanted to write what? Give me an example of something that was considered untouchable, a subject matter that was considered untouchable? Speaker 2: (Pause) Sex. Speaker 1: How did you want to talk about sex? Speaker 2: Any kind of way, not bad taste, not shocking, but, but, but-- Speaker 1: But tell me what, what aspect (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm trying, I'm trying to remember. Speaker 1: It's okay, okay. Speaker 2: I'm trying to see, see, trying to recall if I had written anything that I'm talking about. Like, like laughing at ourselves. We--black people never laugh at themselves, seriously. It's all grim. And we're, and it's so many wonderful things to be laughed at. Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] said to me when, when, when, after screaming that we get involved in the civil rights out of Pittsburgh. Speaker 1: Uh-oh hold-- Story_ID: 371221 Speaker 1: You had just mentioned Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and he told you something you were about to say. Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah, yeah. Let me, let me start with that. Speaker 1: Okay, so go ahead you can start with it. Speaker 2: Okay, when they--I'm living in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania]--and when I moved to Pittsburgh they started send me out to hot stories and everything because I, I was screaming about covering ladies club meetings and fashion shows. I said I can't, I'm, I mean, please, please I can't do it. The world is churning and turning and moving, and you got me out here at this woman thing. I appreciate it, very grateful for a job and all of that, but can I get this, some heavy stuff. I said to Bill Nunn the, the editor-in-chief [of the Pittsburgh Courier; New Pittsburgh Courier]. So, he, "What the hell is you wanna do?" I said, "I wanna be in Alabama. I wanna be in Georgia." "For real?" "Yes for real." So, they, they said, "Okay we'll send you there." I said, "When?" "Now, at any time." So, they sent me. Yeah, I, I forget what the first stop was, but I know I was going down south for the first time to cover as a newspaper reporter, and I was dying to meet Martin Luther King who I met casually and quickly in New York [New York] at one point, but I wanted, I wanted to see him in his environment. I wanted to see his family. I wanted to see the people's reaction to him. It's so much. I knew this man was important, no question about it. So, I get down, down his part of the world and meet him of course and he, he's such, he's such a sweet guy, just wonderful, everything I dream of, the perfect leader. One day he said, he said to me, "Sister Cunningham [HistoryMaker Evelyn Cunningham] I don't know if you can ever adjust to what I'm about and what, what we are doing down here, what we are trying to do down here." I said, "What do you mean?" He said, "Well you ain't nonviolent" (laughter). So I, I fell out. I said, "Oh yes I am," (laughter). He said, "No, no you, you wanna kill," (laughter). He said, "You're mad." I said, "That's right I really am." So, we became very good friends 'cause I realized that I couldn't, I realized that I really could not wholeheartedly just go to church and sing and pray and, and do the God. I wanna kill some white people, you know, 'cause they're mean and evil. Some of them, some people who've done terrible things. But, he put it that way to me and we laughed and joked about it. I admitted that yeah, I think I might be a little nonviolent 'cause I think I'd pick up a gun at a given moment and, and do something terrible. But, but after that we were, he was so nice to me. He was so--he gave me any time I wanted. He advised me on some personal things. He, he--I dearly loved that man. He's everything he's supposed to be, and some people in retrospect questioned you know whether or not he really was the great leader. I say yes he really was the great leader, believe me, really was. He had his family to kiss everybody and, and one, one, one day I asked, I told him I wanted to read his doctoral piece ['A Comparison of the Conceptions of God in the Thinking of Paul Tillich and Henry Nelson Wieman,' Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] that gave him his doctor thing, his Ph.D., and he said--I said I really would like to read it and I, I really wanted to. I knew it would be heavy. I knew I probably couldn't understand fully all of it, but I wanted to see it, so he told me to come by the house. And I went by the house and he went in his study and bought this big package out to me and I got up to go he said, "Sister Cunningham you are not taking that out with you. You will sit here and read it if you want or come back and read some tomorrow, read so more Wednesday, read some more Thursday, but it is not moving out of this--." I said, "Oh God." I said, "Oh oops." I said, "Yep, yep, yep, yep, yep," so (laughter) it was very funny, but imagine me thinking that I could walk out there with his thesis. But, I, I did it in pieces. I came back and some parts I eliminated. Story_ID: 371222 Speaker 1: What were the challenges in writing about him? Speaker 2: Challenges? Well none. I didn't feel any challenge. What do you mean by that? Speaker 1: Well, I mean you got to see a very friendly side of him and a personable side of him, and, and, and the, and the world saw him as, as this leader, so when you were writing about him, were you write, did you write about him as sort of the great leader of the world or did you have a personal inside story (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I didn't do too much of personal insight thing. I didn't do too much of it. I cherished it. In fact, a lot of famous people I, I shy away from that, and, and not because they've asked me. It's not, it's not, it's not that or not, not because I'm afraid or have any fear of revealing another side. I, I just, I cherish what it is that I don't write about. He--I, I could have done a column for the tongue and cheek column about him telling me I'm not, I'm not, a nonviolent thing, but I wouldn't, I wouldn't dare. I could have, but I wouldn't. That would, that would, that would create some doubt in, in the minds of his true followers and raise questions in their minds about now who is this man that we love and adore and cherish and believe in. Speaker 1: Would it raise questions because they couldn't see the humor (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't, I don't want to destroy anybody's, anybody's feelings about somebody. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: I have, I have the profound respect for Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]. Speaker 1: And I do as well, but what I was trying to (unclear) is you got to see a humorous side of him and you said that we as a people were always so serious, and I'm just wondering did you ever share the humorous side of him through your writing? Speaker 2: Yeah, like him telling me I'm nonviolent, I'm not nonviolent and I wrote about that. Yeah, you know, I, I, I--heroes and heroines I have worked hard at never diminishing them, and some of them I could kill them, I mean, it would depend. It's some of them, and, and but they don't deserve it, they don't deserve it. I'm, I'm very, I'm, I'm very strong on that not destroying people's illusions. If it's, if it's a bad guy or a bitch or something I'll, I'll say so, but some of the weaknesses are--unh-uh. Thurgood Marshall is a big hero of mine. Story_ID: 372503 Speaker 1: And we were going to talk about because you, you, you carried, covered so many stories, you said you don't remember the details of them all, but there is one in particular that you really remember, and that's the one, the, the sit-ins, when the students were sitting in, and you had (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: --a conversation with Percy Sutton. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So, if you can tell me that story and how that came about. Speaker 2: Yeah, okay, right, okay. Good, good, good. Speaker 1: So, you were covering sit-ins and you called Percy Sutton and what happened? Speaker 2: Yeah. I, I called Percy Sutton to simply just ask him could I join and go down with the group, but he said, "No we don't want any coverage you know, you don't need to go." So, I went of course. So, it was so ugly. It was so--the minute I got to this diner. It was a diner, this diner refused to serve blacks, so three men were behind the counter. "Y'all can't sit here, we don't serve niggers." So, it, it, it's, it's still shakes you up. You, you hear about it, you read about, but every time it happens it shakes you up again and say I can't believe what I'm hearing. I can't believe this is now, this is today. I can't believe this kind of hatred exists. All of this goes through your mind, but here it is these terrible people. They knew in advance, of course, that the, the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] leaders are coming down there. They didn't know a female reporter was going to be there, so I'm sitting there and I'm really frightened 'cause I'm seeing maybe for the first time the worse kind of hatred and anger and, and possible killing. I'm seeing this vividly, vividly, just by the language, the way they insulted, the things they said and how they said, the men behind the counter of the diner, which was--to these NAACP leaders, who were trying to be served. They, of course, the leaders all anticipated this. This was all done on purpose. They wanted to be arrested. They indicated a little surprise at me being there. They--I was not known as an NAACP leader and it soon, and they soon realized that I was a reporter and so they said awful dirty things to me very loudly. And we're all sitting there, these, these insults are going back and forth, but we are waiting for the police to arrive that's why we're just there to arrest all of us. That was, that's the idea. Speaker 1: You included? Speaker 2: Yeah. Except when they came to arrest everybody, one of the policeman reminded another policeman that the law, I believe, he said says that when a woman is arrested she must be arrested by a woman cop, which may or may not be true. I'm inclined to believe it is, it was true because what advantage would it be for leaving me there. But, they arrested the men and I was left there with these terrible men behind the counter. I think there were five of them shouting insults to me that I cannot even repeat. I, I've never been that frightened in my life. I, I was, and, and I'm wondering if they're gonna rape me, 'cause that was suggested as part of the insults they were throwing at me. I said are these four men gonna rape me? Are they gonna kill me, or is, is this woman police person whose gonna arrest me is she really gonna come? And I prayed quietly. I didn't, I, I just prayed quietly, and, and was so frightened wondering could I withstand what I thought was gonna happen to me, could I try to kill myself. It, it was not anger that I had it was just plain fear, just plain fear, the worse kind of fear. Story_ID: 372504 Speaker 1: The woman cop came sooner than I had expected, thank God. Her name was Ms. Kennedy [ph.], Officer Kennedy. She handcuffed me, took me to the car, took me to jail, and put me in there. In those--I, I, I don't know if it was five minutes or ten minutes or fifteen minutes that I just, I just had to sit there and hear all these insults being hurl, hurled at me and wondering---I really, I really was wishing for a way I could kill myself because I was thinking the worse kind of things, but none of that happened. God intervened and going to jail was a piece of cake you know, it was heaven (laughter). And they, we had a trial the next day. Speaker 2: Did you have to stay overnight in jail? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: We're you the only female? Speaker 1: Huh? Speaker 2: You were the only woman. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Were you-- Speaker 1: I just stood up all night in some little jail. Speaker 2: So you had a trial the next day, okay (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Because that whole thing was at night. I don't think it was a long night. The sit-in had started at night, so I, I don't think it was a long night. I do know I just stood, stood there and held onto the rails and had the trial the next day which lasted about five minutes and we were all found guilty and fined a hundred dollars each. Speaker 2: What was the paper's [Pittsburgh Courier; New Pittsburgh Courier] response? Speaker 1: Hm? Speaker 2: What was the newspaper's response to your being arrested and fined one hundred dollars? Speaker 1: They just did a straight story on it. I didn't want it dramatized or anything. I, I, with me I, I don't, I don't, I, I wanted, I didn't get killed, I didn't get raped, the worse did not happen. With me I thank God and we don't need to dwell on my personal fears. That, that, that to me--and, and what I was thinking was, was that I didn't want to sound like a cry-baby woman reporter, you know, you get it. Yeah, so, so I had a rough day, but you know it's over. Speaker 2: So, were you often the only woman reporter? What other women were covering the movement in the South as writers? Speaker 1: Not, not, nobody--that's one thing King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] used to kid me about a lot. He used to ask me about you know why everything. He was curious about my passion for covering hard stories. Speaker 2: And you answer was? Speaker 1: Well, he, he was, his curi- his, his inquiries and curiosity was subtle, and, and my answers were subtle, you know, I, I, I didn't, I didn't preach. I didn't say a woman should write as good as a man writes; none of that stuff. I said, I'm a reporter. You know he, he didn't give me any lecture, but he--a lot of people ask me, a lot of other kind of people why you like them kind of stories. I say 'cause they're, they're the most important stories. They're more important than the stuff they want me to do. Story_ID: 372505 Speaker 1: In Birmingham, Alabama, where Bull Connor reigned supreme. I forget what the specific incident was. There were so many incidents in Birmingham, but, and all, most all of them involved around Bull Connor, so arriving there you usually seek out other reporters, you know what's happening? And by this time a lot of New York [New York] reporters were down there, male and white, and I asked a guy I said, "Hey you guys you interviewed Bull Connor, have you interviewed Bull Connor?" "No, I can't get no way close. He don't like nobody from the North you know anyway," said, "this is rough down here. This, this man is crazy." I said, "Well I'm inter- I want, I would like to interview him soon." He said, "You don't have a shot at all." I said, "I guess I don't, but I'm going to try." One day Bull Connor as usual was just standing in the middle of the main street. You just always you could find him there holding court with reporters or just yelling and shouting and being happy. And I slowly walked over to where he was standing and said, "Mr. Connor is it possible for me to interview you? I am a newspaper reporter." He said, "What paper are you with?" I said, "I'm with the Pittsburgh Courier [New Pittsburgh Courier]." "Oh that's that nigger paper up north huh?" I said, "Yes sir." I could kill myself for saying yes sir, in retrospect, but that's what I said 'cause I was scared. And he looked at me and just laughed and said, "No way." He didn't literally say that word no way. I forgot what the word was, but it, it was the same as no way, so I walked away very fast. I did not pursue it. I didn't, I didn't say anything fly or fresh. This man was capable of killing me in the middle of the street and, and claiming self-defense or whatever. So, the other reporters asked me, "What did he say?" And I was telling them you know. So, during that time a lot of people down there were asking me about why you're here you know. I said, "I'm a reporter," you know, "and this is the hottest news in the world right now, and I don't like covering card parties." Story_ID: 372506 Speaker 1: One nice man in Birmingham [Alabama], black man who owned a little restaurant and he, he owned a restaurant and a small hotel, and I have forgotten his name. He, and he, he had, he had friends in New York [New York] that I knew and was very, very nice, and he offered, he told me I could stay at his hotel for nothing as long as I was in Birmingham, and he, and I would stay just for two or three days, but each day he had somebody send me a whole lot of food. It was so nice. And, and, and that was the kind of reaction I got from a lot of black people in communities. They didn't, didn't know me really. They all know about the Pittsburgh Courier [New Pittsburgh Courier], they all knew about the Pittsburgh Courier and they were curious about me being a woman and, "Why am I there?" You know, all of that and wasn't I scared. So, they was so really, really nice to me. One family, in which the father had been killed because of the vote thing. This was in another city, at another time. He had been killed, his house had burned down. He had a wife and three children. And it's a terribly sad story. I, I, I, I met the family and spent a lot of time with them and got to know them very well. They had relocated somewhere far away in the woods and, and very poor, very unhappy. It was so sad. I spent a lot of time with them. I spent an overnight one day. I slept on the floor of their house 'cause I wanted, wanted to be with them and hear, hear them and, and try to comfort them. And the next morning when I slept on the floor and they, they said some nice things to me and said that, that they wanted to express their appreciation or something. They gave me a great big bag of oranges 'cause where they were living was orange, orange grove and I was so moved by that simple bag of oranges. This family was the family--it was a lot of publicity about their, the father being killed and a lot of movement to rebuild a home for them, and the black architect in Los Angeles [California], the late black, whose name I've forgotten--had a very--he was one of the few black architects in the country, but he volunteered to design and help make, make real a new home for them. I, I don't recall where all of that actually came to be, but I know the plans were worked out. He drew up the plan, drew up the plans for the house. Money was raised for it, and I'm assuming that it all happened. I'm, I'm just not sure right now. Story_ID: 372507 Speaker 1: Well how did you move from the paper [Pittsburgh Courier; New Pittsburgh Courier] to hosting your own radio show? Speaker 2: They had a, they had a woman, Betty Granger, who was a writer at Amsterdam News [New York Amsterdam News]. She had this half hour or an hour show every day on WLIB [WLIB Radio, New York, New York]. She left the paper I think, and she moved or something. They asked me, LIB asked me would I come and do this hour show every day and at that point I'm, I'm, in, in New York [New York]. This is before I'm relocating and 125th and LIB was on 125th Street, so it was easy for me to leave the office and go and do a half hour show. Was it a half or hour? 'At Home with Evelyn Cunningham.' It was fun. It was new to me, a new experience, but it was great fun and one, one of the traumatic days for me was being on air the day, the time when Kennedy, that President Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] was killed and, and, and, and not--Sunday the, the crew is through the glasses telling me that the president just got killed and I'm, I'm yakking about some ridiculous and knowing how to transferring one to the other, which I, I, I just said help you know. So, what they did is put on some very, take me off air and put on some very sad funereal music with no comments. By then, everybody in the world knew that Kennedy had been shot, so, so they did it by music 'cause I, I had no way of articulating what, what I might have felt without even knowing any detail about it, just he'd been killed and so as I was the, the dra- dra- dramatic high point of my time there. I had a lot of fun with the program. I brought--the first guest it was Malcolm X which the owner of the station was frightened by, didn't think that was a wise choice for me to be interviewing Malcolm X on his station, but Malcolm was wonderful you know. Speaker 1: So, did you bring Malcolm into the studio and interview him there? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. He asked me, Harry [Harry Novik] did, he was, he, oh God he almost died when I told him Malcolm X was my first guest. I think he wanted to fire me right then, the first day, but, but I knew Malcolm well and I knew he was a good guest, very articulate. I knew he, I knew he also would not say anything that would disturb the station, so, but, but Harry Novik was frightened by him. Story_ID: 372508 Speaker 1: Do you remember King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] assassination? Speaker 2: Not, not much detail about it, just the, the tremendous sadness about it. I think I, and I think when I learned about that I wanted to be by myself. I didn't want to call up friends. I didn't want to say remember when. I just wanted to be myself. I was very, very saddened by that, extremely so. I thought about the family, about the kids. I thought about, I wondered if he had any way of anticipating this, he knew his life would be short, yeah. It was--I, I, as the boys used to tell on the paper at the paper [Pittsburgh Courier; New Pittsburgh Courier] would say you, you really, you, you live with the stories. I said yes I do. I, I, I interview people who will cry and I cry, and it's not make up, you know, I'm feeling what they're telling me. I do get involved and always have and, and some of these people I've advised developed into real friends. Story_ID: 372509 Speaker 1: I think one of my strengths has been knowing what questions not to ask of somebody well known. All reporters want to get a well-known celebrity, get a story, get all the news inside dope and everything, but I think, I think beyond that I think I had a talent for knowing what not to ask which is, which is the way I, I think I got a job with Nelson Rockefeller, knowing what not to say, talk about. Speaker 2: What did you know not to talk about with Nelson Rockefeller? What were things you were not going to talk about (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He was telling things that he should not be telling me, and I, I, I put my pen down, and he never forgot it. He talks about it, and that's when he asked me to, to join his team. Speaker 2: Now how did you come to interview him in the first place? Speaker 1: I asked the paper I said I wanna, I said how about--he was running for governor, running for president and I'm a Republican unapologetic and, and I had met him, of course, many times, but we're, we're not tight friends or anything. I didn't even know if he remembered my name, but I asked the Courier [Pittsburgh Courier; New Pittsburgh Courier] I said this man is running for president again, I said how about interviewing him. They said yeah good idea, and I called, I simply called the office, his office and told them I would like to interview him and they gave me a date and a time. And, and when I got there on time, he was on time, and we spent almost three hours. Speaker 2: And you, go ahead you spent almost three hours. Speaker 1: Huh. Speaker 2: You said you spent almost three hours together. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And it was what you didn't ask him you think that led him to-- Speaker 1: No, he, he just opened up. He was so candid, and, and at the time the newspapers were making, the columnists were make little remarks about, about him, his wife, were they having problems and what not and I, I just, I didn't get into any of that. I didn't care about that, and that was not why I was there. And, but he gave, but he, he, he told me a lot of confidential things. Speaker 2: Are there things you can reveal now? Speaker 1: No. Not, not that, that they're important or earth shattering or would have meaning today. In fact, I probably wouldn't remember. If I, if I looked through my notes I could, but I, I knew, I always know what's off the record and, and sometimes I don't, I don't care. Sometimes I do care. It all depends on a whole set of circumstances, but I, I, he, he trusted me. I wasn't about, I wasn't about to get, do, involve the, the governor of New York and is he, is he and his wife together or whatever. You know that that's not important in the world I am working in. Story_ID: 372510 Speaker 1: So, how did he come to ask you to come on board, on his team (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right at that same interview. At the end of the interview, he asked me he said, "How would you, I wish you'd join my team. Will you consider joining my team?" And I said, "Yeah you got me." It was, that simple. Speaker 1: And what did you do on--? Speaker 2: He told me, he told me to, he said great and he got on the phone and he called his secretary. He said, "Make an appointment with Ms. Cunningham [HistoryMaker Evelyn Cunningham] with so and so," and he told me to call so and so and, and find out, and, and, and set up a date for me and so and so, I don't remember what the name of the guy was and it was a man, and talk about my joining his team. All of this is the same meeting, and then I asked him I said well what, what is it that you want. I know it's a political thing. I know that. I love politics, but I, I said, "What is it you really want me to do now that I'm on your team?" He said, "Well the first thing I want you to do is be--," and he gave me a title, specialist assistant to Jackie Robinson. I said great. He said, "You know Jackie, don't you?" I said, "Very well." So, I said, "What does that mean?" He said, "Well Jackie's on my team right now." He had--Jackie had just retired from baseball. He and Nelson Rockefeller love each other. They were good friends from, from day one, good friends, and he, he wanted me to as special assistant to Jackie Robinson to, to travel with Jackie to help Jackie with making speeches, writing speeches, and do the whole political thing and plus when we, when we'd go to different territories Jackie Robinson call and it would be a packed crowed. They'd come to see Jackie as, as the governor said. He said they really don't come to see me, they come to see Jackie. He said but they're there and, and Jackie introduces me, so that's the way I worked with him. I would help Jackie. I would suggest. I never said help Jackie 'cause Jackie was fiercely independent and told me in front that, "I can write my own speeches Evelyn." I said, "Okay, okay I know you can," so it, it was, it was nice. It was really, really lovely. I loved Jackie Robinson. I love his kids, and, and you know and, and, and, and the governor then rented out an empty building, empty, next door to the office on 51st Street [New York, New York], where Jackie and me worked out of politic- this is a political setting and we had a staff and worked, worked beautifully together. It, it worked great and sure enough the meetings would be packed, but they came to see Jackie. They didn't come--and, and, and, and, the governor knew it, but he knew how to play on it too. So, that, that was, that was great fun. I, I, I loved that time and, and then one day he told me well I'm taking you away from Jackie. I said, "Ah, you can't do that." "Yes I can." He said, "I'm creating a division for women [Women's Unit, Office of the Governor] responsible to me," he said to him, not, not just a, a little, a little thing to, to, not just a bunch of little women. He said, "It is an office of women in the governor, in the governor, the office of women in the governor's office," and he said, "I want you to run that" so that was nice. That was nice, and that's what I did for the rest of my years with him. Story_ID: 372043 Speaker 1: You were mentioning that Rockefeller [Nelson Rockefeller] said okay Evelyn [HistoryMaker Evelyn Cunningham], you're no longer working with Jackie Robinson I want you on this women's initiative, and you started to work with him on women's rights, administration. What was your role? Speaker 2: What was my role? I was the head of it. Speaker 1: So as the head of it-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --what were you, what were your responsibilities? Speaker 2: To make the world better, the State of New York better for women really to oversimplify it. To, to look at the women's interest, and one thing specifically he said to make, he said every time a very important commissionership job for instance becomes available I want some women to be candidates. I, I will hopefully, I hope to have women to head the commissions. We don't have enough women here. He, he, he's got a very solid reputation for advocating and being helpful in women's rights. One, one, one little aside, at one point during the life of the Women's Unit it was called the Women's Unit of the governor's office [Women's Unit, Office of the Governor]. There's a picket line of women in, in, in Albany [New York] screaming, ranting, and carrying on. He said, he asked me to find out what's the problem, you know, what, what, what were they against and what was the issue. So, sure enough there were a lot of women, the Betty Friedans of the world out there shouting and carrying on. I came back I said I hate to tell you governor, but your daughter is in the picket line (laughter), your daughter is out there. You better talk to her so find out what's up. And, and truly she was there. She wasn't really enthusiastic, but she felt strongly about the issue and that was, that was kind of, and he was, he was blown away by that. But, he already has had, the family has had great reputations for women's rights and everything. So, whatever things popped up they were resolved fairly easily, but he wanted an ongoing thing. He wanted his complete staff to understand that we are under no circumstances ever going to discriminate against women. Story_ID: 372044 Speaker 1: How were black, how did black women fit into the women's rights movement? Speaker 2: How they fit into it? Are you suggesting that black women are not interested in that or-- Speaker 1: Well, I'm wondering if they were interested. Speaker 2: --in, in women's right things? Well I, I must tell you black women generally, I don't mean I must tell you, but my impression is that black women generally are not into the women's right issues because they have issues that are far more important to them, to us. And what does women's rights mean actually? As one black woman said to me. You know does it mean I, I couldn't get that job that I want at my company at that level under any circumstances because I'm black, and it's not because I'm a woman, so and which is true. You know I had to think and I think that's why the governor [Nelson Rockefeller] gave me the responsibility 'cause I, I had another point of view about women's rights, and the women's rights was always viewed in term, in, in, in terms of Betty Friedan, my friend, at the time, and the, the pickets, the marching, the demonstrations. That is not a black woman's thing. It never has been, and I don't think it ever will be. But, Betty Friedan was very, very much involved with us because we had some power and, but on the other hand the governor made available to me a lot of important white women who could, who could help me and so many arenas for women. It, its, it's subtle and it's clever, and it's important. What, what is her name who is very sick right now. There's a lot of court litigation going on. She's, she's over a hundred years old. It's in the papers every day. Marie, what's her name who's in the paper, the white woman who's, who's very sick. Her son [Anthony Dryden Marshall] has won suits against him. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Brooke Astor. Speaker 2: Oh yes, yes. Speaker 1: Brooke Astor, yeah-- Speaker 2: Brooke Astor, yes, yes. Speaker 1: --yeah, yeah. Thank you. That whole-- Speaker 2: Her and her son are fighting about the money. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah. So, I meet people like Brooke Astor who is a won- to me a wonderful, wonderful woman. I hate what's happening to her right now, but this woman, most people don't realize how much she has contributed to black things and how much she has gotten herself involved in issues of women, particularly black women and she has become--I, I never would have met her under any other circumstances, and she's not a feminist like Betty Friedan or anything, but Brooke said to me one day she said, "You know you, you try to get me involved in some parade, a women's parade down at 5th Avenue," and she said, "that's not my thing you know," so she, she said later to a lot of people, she went down to 5th and watched the parade and Betty Friedan and that group, all the cra- all the feminists who were well known were marching and then, then Brooke says, "And then I saw Evelyn [HistoryMaker Evelyn Cunningham], aww, I went out and joined the parade." I legitimized the movement for her, and she often expressed it that way about that parade. I love that lady. I'm so sorry about what she's going through right now, but, but she's on target. You know white women's, women's rights or black women's rights, two different worlds, two different worlds. I don't even use the phrase when I'm talking to black women, women's rights. I, I, don't even, I don't even identi- identify myself as Rockefeller's women's rights person. It's, it's, it's a cynical kind of phrase to most black people, and, and, and since I'm a black female I know firsthand the things that I, I think we care more about than, than the average woman thinks she's discriminated against you know. Story_ID: 372045 Speaker 1: Well how--do you feel that women should have been, women should also have been under the heading of affirmative action, that women should have taken part in the benefits of affirmative action (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I, I don't know. I have, I, I just don't know. It's complex and I think earlier I would have said yes, hell yeah, but it's more com- complicated than that. It, it, it's, and I can't, I can't say it, hell yeah now. There, there such, such different issues. But you know way inside of me I wanna write about that the difference between white women and black women. It seems (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Can you just tell me the differences, some of the differences? Speaker 2: --it seems like, it seems like such an obvious thing, but it's not obvious. It's so subtle, and, and, and involved in that in, in a discussion or a thought of writing about black women involved in that is black men. It's touchy. Speaker 1: Well, aren't white men involved with writing about white (laughter) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, no I just said black men purposely and that's exactly what I mean. Speaker 1: Well go ahead talk to me. Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter). Speaker 1: I'm interested in your, just your thoughts on it. Speaker 2: I know, I know, it, it's a, yeah. There, there are a handful of black women who have white friends, white women friends, a handful of good friends and talk, and talk and share personal things, but not a whole lot, not a whole lot. I'm trying to think do I have any close white friends. I know a whole lot of white women who I admire, respect, and like and all that, but I'm trying to think close, close white friends I don't think, maybe three. And that, that, that, the meaning of that is not negative, nothing negative it's just that they don't know me and I don't know them really. Speaker 1: And color is the barrier that separates that? Speaker 2: Yeah, I think so, I think so. I think there are a lot of white women who want, who are good at heart and want to really know and be real friends with black with certain black women and don't know how. I don't know many black women who want to know and be real friends with white women. I'm not, I'm not saying it don't exist. I'm saying I don't know them. Speaker 1: Yeah, your experiences. Speaker 2: There's a, there's a white woman who lives in this building and she's been here a long time like I have who I love her death. She loves and adores me and I, I, I never think of her as white. I just never think of her as white, Donna. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Donna [ph.]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Is, isn't she a special kind of white person? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Yeah, I never think of her either as (laughter), you know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You don't think of her as black. I don't, I don't mean to say I think of her as black. I just don't think about her color, and there's not many, I, I can't beyond Donna. I'm trying to think. I know there must be two or three others. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Phoebe [Phoebe Jacobs]. Speaker 2: Who? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Phoebe. Speaker 2: Yeah Phoebe, right. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): That married Louis Armstrong. Speaker 2: Yeah right. But, and it's, it's, it's not, it's not a negative thing. It's a-- Speaker 1: Well are--okay go ahead it's a what. Speaker 2: It's like indifference. Speaker 1: Indifference. Speaker 2: Or yeah indifference I guess. Story_ID: 372046 Speaker 1: You said it was, or I've read and you can tell me if it is true or not, that it was Rockefeller [Nelson Rockefeller] and Shirley Chisholm that, or somehow they helped turn you into a feminist, was it-- Speaker 2: They helped what? Speaker 1: Show--turn you into a feminist. Do you consider yourself a feminist? Speaker 2: Not in the sense that it's generally used. You know, women's rights that word offends me. Speaker 1: It offends you? Speaker 2: Um-hm, it really does. Speaker 1: Why does it--? Speaker 2: It suggests to me that we don't have right, oh well, yeah, it suggested we don't have rights and I think we don't use our rights. I, I don't know, I, I cannot give you an example and I know there must be examples, but I cannot give you. I cannot recall, I cannot remember being discriminated against because I'm a woman. I'm sure it's happened. Speaker 1: Or you couldn't-- Speaker 2: It was bound to happen. Speaker 1: Yeah, you couldn't tell-- Speaker 2: It was bound to have happen, I just don't remember. Speaker 1: --whether or not it was race or the fact that you, of your gender. Because the two--I'm, I'm, I'm asking you, you know, whether or not you, your, the discrimination that may have come your way you were not able to distinguish whether or not it was because of your race or your gender. Speaker 2: Right, yeah, yeah, yeah quite true. Speaker 1: And maybe that happens with most black women and it's probably easier for them because the discrimination against the blacks have been, we've been aware of it for so long-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --that maybe, I, I mean I'm just trying to maybe it's-- Speaker 2: Yeah, no you're making a lot of sense, yeah. Speaker 1: --just that, that it's, that it's easier to see yourself being discriminated that way as opposed to-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --aligning yourself with white women-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and discrimination. How did you meet Shirley Chisholm? Speaker 2: How did what? Speaker 1: How did you meet Shirley Chisholm? Speaker 2: Shirley Chisholm. I don't remember, I, I don't remember not ever, not knowing her. I used to live in Brooklyn [New York]. She Brooklyn right? Didn't Shirley live in Brooklyn all her life? Yeah. Before, I think I, I knew her before she even had political ambitions. A wonderful lady. Really, really--I loved her so much and, and she was very funny, very funny. Not much has ever been written about how funny she could be and what not. Yeah and she told me once that she would forgive me for being a southerner instead of a West Indian. She, she, she had me for a West Indian. I think I had an accent of some kind when I came here. The people often mix up the accents, the southern and the West Indian and she was, she was dear to me, very, very special, very special, a feisty little lady, boy. Every, everything, everything Shirley said I agreed with, yeah right on, right on, whether I did or not. Speaker 1: And why did you do that? Speaker 2: 'Cause I believed her, I liked her a lot. I liked her fighting spirit. I liked the way she, and she was professional too. With all of that, she was a true professional in whatever she did, a stand-up person. Speaker 1: Did you ever talk with her about women's rights? Speaker 2: No, no. I don't think women's rights was a top priority in her life or my life. I don't think, yeah-- Speaker 1: Well-- Story_ID: 372047 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, how did you do the job [director, Women's Unit, Office of the Governor] so efficiently if you didn't see it as a priority? Speaker 2: I'm not saying I, I'm not, don't, don't, don't think that I don't think it's pri- a pr- it is a priority, but it's not the top priorities, it's not near the top. There is no question about that. I think, I think, I think too many of us women use that. I, I, I know, I know specific cases, which I can't discuss with you, 'cause they're very personal where women's rights was used badly 'cause it was not a matter of women's rights. It's, women's rights is a cliche. It's a cliche. It, it's not really what that, what the word means. Speaker 1: What does it mean? What is, what about it is a cliche? Speaker 2: What are women's rights? What are women's rights I ask women sometimes? Speaker 1: Maybe the right to vote. Speaker 2: Yeah, well what do you mean you know, yeah the right to vote-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --the right, what, yeah what are they? What are they? What is it? Speaker 1: I mean I don't know I'm just throwing off things that-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --women may have said, maybe the right to vote-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --maybe the right to do the job a man does and be paid the same amount of money for it-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --maybe, I don't know. Speaker 2: I, I, maybe with me, maybe I'm convinced that there's nothing that women can't do. They're not discrimination--discriminated against. I can't, I can't give you many examples where I know for a fact that a woman was discriminated against because she's a woman. Story_ID: 372048 Speaker 1: Let me ask you this and I'm jumping forward just because we're talking about women. Do you think this country is ready to have a woman president? Which do you think will happen first, a woman or an African American? Speaker 2: Yeah I think it's ready because it's, and because it's Hillary [Hillary Rodham Clinton]. Speaker 1: Well-- Speaker 2: If it was somebody else, I don't think it would be ready. Speaker 1: Well, which do you think will come first an African American or a woman? Speaker 2: President? Speaker 1: Yes ma'am. Speaker 2: Woman, no question. They really ain't ready for an African American. Woman. Speaker 1: And you said Hillary. Speaker 2: Hillary is gonna be the first woman, got everything going for her. Speaker 1: What does she have going for her? Speaker 2: Her husband [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton]. Speaker 1: Well that's a man. Speaker 2: Her own person, yeah, well that's what she got going for her. Sure, she's been there. She wants that bedroom again up there in Washington [D.C.]. I admire her. I'm not a big A number one fan, but I admire her. She's smart. I think she's the proper person at this point in the life of America to be president. I can't think of another woman. There might, there, there probably are, but I don't know them. Story_ID: 372049 Speaker 1: And, and I'm, I'm a Republican, strong, strong Republican, no apologies. Speaker 2: Why do you have to qualify that with no apologies? Speaker 1: 'Cause I, 'cause I'm always have to explain it, especially to all my black friends. Speaker 2: Why do you have, what, what about it you have to explain to them? Speaker 1: Why I'm a Republican. Speaker 2: And what do, and what, what do, what explanation to you give? Speaker 1: I got a simple answer, a very simple answer and nobody and it stop, it stops, nobody could, my answer is it is stupid, in my opinion, for a whole race of people to belong to one party and that ends the conversation. I, I never have had, I've never have had anybody, I know there were rebuttals, they got to be rebuttals, they got to be challenges to my point of view, but I never hear it. I never hear it. And I still believe that. It's stupid. Democrats don't have to do a damn thing for us. Republicans don't do a damn thing for us 'cause it's (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Well let me ask you this are you satisfied with the, the outreach the Republican Party has recently given to, I mean are--let me ask what do you think about the party today? Speaker 1: I think the Republican, I, I'm very pleased with the fact that they're reaching out, they're trying very hard. I'm very pleased with it and, and I wanna know how hard they are gonna continue to be. Speaker 2: What conversations do you have with Dr. Gloria Toote [HistoryMaker Gloria Toote] about the party? Speaker 1: Very--since she moved to California I don't hear from her. We don't, I, I talked with her about three months ago and it's the first time I've talked with her in over a year. We're just out of touch. We have wonderful conversations about politics. She's, she's re- she's really more of a staunch Republican than I am. She's very good, she's good for the party. She's very smart. Speaker 2: (Pause). Speaker 1: She's very smart you were saying. Speaker 2: Yeah Gloria, yeah. Story_ID: 372050 Speaker 1: So you once said that you felt that the barriers that women perceived were largely attitudinal or you know had to do with their attitudes. Speaker 2: Run that again. Speaker 1: You, you once said that the barriers for women are largely in women's attitudes, meaning maybe the perception women, maybe women perceive that they're being held back and it's really not the case, it's all in, in one's attitude to whether or not you're being discriminated against. Do you still feel that way? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Can you say you feel that way more today than you did before or about the same? Speaker 2: More today, more today. Yeah it's, it's--black--and the other kind of discriminated--racial discrimination we blacks have often used that is because I'm black that I don't get a job. Because I'm black this so and so is 'cause I'm black. Sometimes it's true and sometimes it's exaggeration. Sometimes it's not. Sometimes it's an excuse, but we still, we still do it a little bit. I think women are doing it more than blacks are doing it now. I think that--I can be wrong maybe it's not that, that far, but I, I, I seem to hear it more often and I hear it more from white women than black women. Story_ID: 372051 Speaker 1: Well what do you think about the press today overall? Speaker 2: The press? Speaker 1: Yes ma'am, newspapers, the way stories are being covered. You get The Times [The New York Times] every day. What do you think about the job the press is doing today? Speaker 2: The, pre- The Times in the last few weeks, The Times have made some major changes in its style the last few weeks and, and major changes. As I read it every, I read The Times and News [New York Daily News] and Post [New York Post] every day. The major change--in fact a couple of issues there look more like the Amsterdam News [New York Amsterdam News] than The Times. It was so much black stuff, and, and it was, it was like overnight, it was very sudden. It was no gradual kind of thing because I read it every day and suddenly one day damn the (unclear) from cover to cover is black, nothing but black news. Black pictures, black weddings, everything black. I said what, has The Times been sold. Who did, who bought The Times you know. It, it, it's almost funny, but it, but it's damn interesting and, and, and I keep wondering where are they going to land. Okay suddenly overnight it got so much black news, then they're not gonna do this every day, they can't do this and survive. What is the long range plan is what I wanna know. Are they gonna hire more black reporters? Are they gonna change the top editorial composition? What is they, where, where is it there, where are they going to land, 'cause they can't go on like this. The Times for a week there I know was losing readers who didn't want every page you turn black news, black news, black news. And there was certain people I know who cancelled their subscriptions. I don't care about this black news. That's interesting, but you know. Speaker 1: What do you, what is considered black news? Speaker 2: What I consider news, involving black people, that's all news involving black people and identified as black. Sometimes very often you know person is not identified as black. One day, one day Times I, I don't, I don't know which day. I kept that edition for a long time, but I don't have it anymore. I was almost offended by too much black news. I said it's overkill, it's overkill, and then and you saw, I saw or imagined the change in the news in the Post because of The Times, new Times. You know how far are we gonna go, and, and news in the Post and black news it's--that's why I have to read all the papers. I have to. I can't live without reading all of them to see what position they're gonna take, you know, the killing, the guy, this oh God. I stay up, I stay up so much reading everything and the different versions and the different takes on this by these three papers. It's, it's amazing. I think they're all in a stage of flux right now. I think all three papers are gonna settle down soon to what they wanna be. I would prefer The Times going back to being what it was. I, I appreciate the coverage of black news, but some of the coverage is unnecessary. I can't give you an example, but a couple of stories there were not great news stories. They were, they were black, but they, they were not great news stories. But, some advisor has said we gotta get some black readers and of course the competition between the Post and The Time- the Post and the News is something else. Story_ID: 371240 Speaker 1: Republican woman, I'm it. You know not all the time, but-- Speaker 2: So, the Republicans needed a black Republican woman in 1975 and Richard Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] calls on you and you go to work for him. Now you remember working for him on the Committee on the Rights and Responsibilities of Women [Secretary's Advisory Committee on the Rights and Responsibilities of Women]-- Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: --but you don't remember exactly what your tasks were? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: Well how did you-- Speaker 1: You got another name and who was involved with it? Who else? Speaker 2: Well, it was--the report was called The Matter of Simple Justice [sic. A Matter of Simple Justice]. Speaker 1: I remember that, I remember that name of the report and who wrote it? The report came from something. I was involved with it? Speaker 2: The report came from you, some, you were involved with the report. Speaker 1: Was Gloria [HistoryMaker Gloria Toote] involved in it? Speaker 2: No ma'am it didn't show that. Gloria didn't show up as being involved with it. Speaker 1: Yeah, I remember the title well. I remember, I think I remember it being a source of pride, but, I, I don't remember too much else. Speaker 2: Well I'll try to find that report, okay and-- Speaker 1: Yeah, please let me know. Speaker 2: So, do you remember Nixon as, as, as a man, as a president, as, but-- Speaker 1: Not much, not much. Speaker 2: What do you remember just about the whole Watergate? Were you disappointed? Speaker 1: About what? Speaker 2: About Watergate? Were you disappointed? You were a Republican. Speaker 1: I, I, yeah I know and I, I never quite understand, understood the full measure of Watergate. I had, I had awful, awful time understanding. I don't know why, I don't know resistance, not wanting to understand, that could have been, could have been. Speaker 2: But you understand what he did? Speaker 1: Yeah-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --yeah, yeah, yeah I, I do understand that yeah. Speaker 2: And what he did, yeah, okay. Speaker 1: But, there's so much--I don't know. I guess, I guess I was not in love with Richard Nixon. Story_ID: 371241 Speaker 1: How did you feel about, and this is, I mean just wanting to know just some of the other presidents that were of the Republican Party, Ronald Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] or Gerald Ford [President Gerald Rudolph Ford, Jr.]. Did you have any feelings towards them one way or the other? Speaker 2: No, I never, I never met the man. I never was in the same room with him. I knew him as a movie star and, and that's about it. What, what I think, what I think I'm, I'm, I'm feeling is that, I'm feeling the years where I wanted to, since I decided I was gonna be a Republican I wanted to know more about it. I wanted to get closer to some of the power brokers, and I wasn't. It was no reason for me to be closer to the power brokers. Hence--what made me stay with it the same reason to stay with, stay, same reason to stay with it. Speaker 1: And that reason being why should one, why should one party hold all the black folks. Speaker 2: That's right, that's right, that's right. I hate, I can--Charlie Rangel [HistoryMaker Charles B. Rangel] is a friend of mine from childhood. His wife [Alma Carter Rangel] used to live in this building. His, one of his two staff people lives in this building. His paren- family I see, see and talk with them all the time. Charlie had never been, will never be my hero. We, we laugh and joke when we see each other. There's no obvious animosity. He might talk behind my back. I might talk behind his back, and the thing that, the conversation we have when we do meet and we do have time to have a conversation is the following: "Charlie do you know how this--I--(unclear)--I say, no I say you know exactly how the state office building [Harlem State Office Building; Adam Clayton Powell Jr. State Office Building] in Harlem [New York, New York] came to be?" He said, "Yeah, yeah don't, I don't wanna hear it Evelyn [HistoryMaker Evelyn Cunningham]." I said Connie Motley [Constance Baker Motley] was borough president went to Nelson Rockefeller and said, "Governor Rockefeller, we need a state office building in Harlem and I wish you help me get, make it happen," and Nelson Rockefeller said, "Of course there should be one there good, good idea," and proceeded to make it happen. To what extent he put his own personal money in there I don't know, but it happened so far overnight, and Connie Motley correctly gets credit for it. However, as I say to Charlie constantly and I say to all of them, Percy [Percy Sutton], all of them, "When are you guys gonna put a plaque in this Harlem state office building? Even if it's that big, saying it was built by Nelson Rockefeller." And they all try to change the conversation. I'm so, I'm so angry about that. I'm gonna, I'm gonna keep bugging everybody about that, and the Rockefellers are known as people who love black people. Black people love the Rockefellers. They supported every black college [HBCU] in the world. Black people liked the Rockefellers because of what they have heard, not that they know them, but what they've heard and their, their practices and their hiring of blacks and everything. And, and some of the Rockefeller money--the state built that thing so fast because Rockefeller made it fast, and I, I think it's such a bad thing, such an unjust thing not to have a little thing, of course I wanted to name it after him. I know that wasn't gonna happen in Harlem. It was a Democrat community and that's not gonna happen, but giving credit to this, this man (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well going--who made it all-- Speaker 2: --who made it possible that's all. Story_ID: 371242 Speaker 1: Talking along those lines, I wanna give you credit for being one of the founders of 100 Black Women [National Coalition of 100 Black Women]. Speaker 2: Ah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: How did that come about? Speaker 2: It came about because a lot of black women, and I'm one of them, who--what is the word, it's not resent, what is to disturbed by, by the, the black women's clubs. I'm trying to think of what are their names. Speaker 1: Social clubs. Speaker 2: Social clubs that, that, that aren't, they don't have open memberships. You know you have to have a proper mother and father. You have to have gone to a certain college. What is that word? Elites, trying to see-- Speaker 1: Debutante. Speaker 2: Yeah. You have to be, you have to be-- Speaker 1: Pedigree, certain. Speaker 2: What's, what, what's the name of one of the clubs? Speaker 1: Links [The Links, Incorporated]. Speaker 2: The Girl Friends [The Girl Friends, Inc.], The Links. Yeah what, yeah those kind of clubs. You know you can't, you know they just don't want ordinary black women, ordinary women, so I have long resented this. I have been asked to join some of those clubs, but it's not my thing. So, eight of us, eight of us got together at somebody's house. Speaker 1: Whose house? Your rings. Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: Just playing with them makes the sound. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But eight of you got together at someone's house. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Whose house? Speaker 2: I think it was Edna Beach. I'll find out definitely. No, it was girl who was a politician. And we talked about this, the club, the, the black women's club that didn't want certain women in the club and didn't want other kinds of certain women, very elites and we, and yet it was crying need for a major important black woman's club, just club. So-- Speaker 1: It sounds like and you tell me, it sounds like this goes back to the days where you did, where you wanted your [maternal] grandmother's [Ellen Whitehurst] column to be more than just a social column. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, right, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, right. You, you wanted this connection with women to be-- Speaker 2: And women, women's interest, black women's interest. Speaker 1: Black women's interest. Speaker 2: And nobody way worse than who your daddy was, so and, and, and surprisingly it was supported by a lot of women, you know who were never asked to join The Links and never will be asked to join The Links or, and some of the other. There are three or four of them, not a whole lot of them. Nobody has ever asked and still they want some kind of community, some kind of, of relationship with other black women, so out of that came this creation of the Coalition of 100 Black Women. What, what's, what's the criteria? You have to be a black woman to join, and now we have chapters all over the country and a good reputation. I'm not particularly active right now. I mean you know ninety years old you have to get out of something. You know you can't go to all these damn meetings (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Let's talk about some-- Story_ID: 371243 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Let's talk about some of the other boards that you've sat on in the past or that you're currently involved in. And no, I know, I'm, I'm gonna talk to you about just some of the ones, not all of them, but I just want you to tell me why they were important to you, the Apollo Theater Foundation [New York, New York]? Speaker 2: 'Cause I, because I'm a black female who lives in Harlem [New York, New York] who lives in a black community who understands the Apollo [Apollo Theater, New York, New York], who goes and supports the Apollo. Speaker 1: And you get along with Charlie Rangel [HistoryMaker Charles B. Rangel]. Isn't Charlie Rangel-- Speaker 2: Huh. Speaker 1: Isn't Charlie Rangel one of the head something, isn't he on the board of the Apollo also? Speaker 2: He, he, he put his, which he got off and put his wife [Alma Carter Rangel] on, yeah. Charlie and I are very civilized. It's a joke. We both, we both know it's a joke, but we're highly civilized and we praise each other in public and all that, and I'll be at his funeral, he'll be at my funeral, you know, so. Speaker 1: So what about the Citizens-- Speaker 2: But. Speaker 1: --the Citizen Committee of New York City [sic. Citizens Committee for New York City]. Speaker 2: That's a prestigious organization, and I'm not active anymore because I can't afford the Citizen Committee. They give the annual dinner at the Waldorf [Waldorf Astoria New York, New York, New York], and the tickets are one thousand dollars. I think they may have, may, might be another black on the board now or maybe, I don't know. I think one of them is Percy Sutton's son, but Oz Elliott [Osborn Elliott], former news guy, social figure, I know and they--some white people who are friends of mine look on me as different, and that ain't no compliment to me and I, but I understand what they mean and it has never come to the surface. You know Evelyn [HistoryMaker Evelyn Cunningham] will never embarrass you. She will never split a verb at the wrong party. Speaker 1: Right, but let me just ask something here to you-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I know that, that much. Speaker 1: --right. You do understand because you carry some of that yourself. It's the same reason you said to me as that little girl you deserve to go up that elevator and delivery that dress and not go down to the basement. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You're well spoken. You know how to dress. You know how to carry yourself. It makes you who you are, not to say yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I, yeah I, I know, I know, I know some of the real reason they never expressed and sometimes I, I like it and sometimes I don't. But the Citizens Committee is so, the connections are so great. And really they're looking desperately right now for some blacks 'cause every, they, they, blacks are in and out--the black people, the few black people that have been on that board have been so bored by it and they're ahead. They, they, they're busy too. The kind of people they want, they're busy. So, and, and it's nothing in there that they want. Speaker 1: Well I'll-- Speaker 2: I use those guys, I use them. Speaker 1: I'll only mention a couple of more of these because you've done so, you've been on so many boards, but the Jazzmobile [Jazzmobile Inc., New York, New York]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I'm gonna list the ones I have, and you tell me which of the ones that have really meant something to you. I have the Jazzmobile, Louis Armstrong, Urban League, Alvin Ailey [Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater], and Bank Street College [Bank Street College of Education, New York, New York], Dance Theatre of Harlem [New York, New York], and the Studio Museum of Harlem [sic. Studio Museum in Harlem, New York, New York]. Speaker 2: The Urban, the Urban League was a short deal. It was the, the New York Urban League and I think they put me on the board because I worked for a newspaper. That's all get publicity, free publicity. Story_ID: 371244 Speaker 1: Well back to the newspapers, I asked you about the, the state of just the press in general. I want to ask you that same question about the state of the black press? Speaker 2: I don't know much about the state of the black press. I worry about it, but I don't know much about it. I don't know what the papers are. What, what's, what's the pro, what's the best black paper right now? Speaker 1: Well I-- Speaker 2: Where is, in what city? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Chicago Defender. Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: The Chicago Defender is really, I subscribe to that in Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 2: Did you get the Defender? Well, the, the Courier [Pittsburgh Courier] has the new, is new. Now it's called the New Pittsburgh Courier. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): The same company. Speaker 2: Same company yeah. And you, well the Amsterdam News [New York Amsterdam News] is still-- Speaker 1: The Courier doesn't have to have a New, New York [New York] edition? Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Uh-uh. Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): The Amsterdam News, the Los Angeles Sentinel. Speaker 1: The Sentinel is a good paper. Speaker 2: What's the question about the-- Speaker 1: Just, just you know you worked for a number of years at a black paper. What was your goal? Speaker 2: What was my-- Speaker 1: What was your goal? Speaker 2: My goal? Speaker 1: As a, as a reporter when you were working at a black paper. Your aim was to do what? Speaker 2: My aim, my personal goal is to do stories that landed on the front page, whether they were women stories or you know horror stories. And my goal never was to work for that white paper. Speaker 1: Right, but your goal as a black reporter is, was it to, let's say to give a voice to the voiceless? Do you feel that, that black, the black press--why do you feel there needs to be a black newspaper? Speaker 2: Are you assuming that I think that there's a need? Speaker 1: Well I'm assuming yes. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Do you feel there needs to be one, today? Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm not sure. Yeah there's a need. There is a need, and it probably always will be a need. Speaker 1: What was the need when you were working for? Speaker 2: Black news, simple. Black news that white people didn't, white papers didn't know, didn't understand black news. They didn't understand what was important to us and most of them still don't. Speaker 1: Now are-- Speaker 2: The New York papers do understand what's important to blacks. Whether they use and write it or hire black writers is another question, but they understand what blacks want in their newspaper I do believe. But, they, they, they look at their subscribers and see how many people read, read The New York Times who live in Harlem [New York, New York]. Story_ID: 371245 Speaker 1: What are your hopes for the Harlem [New York, New York] community? Speaker 2: Well right now I'm mostly involved with the Columbia University [New York, New York] hassle, you know this business of Columbia needs more buildings and needs all of those big warehouses over on Broadway and there not owned by blacks, but the housing thing is important if, if, if they, if we have to get a whole new set of housings it's gonna be chaotic. It's gonna be (unclear) so much of us 'cause the houses gonna be first rate. It's gonna be expensive. However, because of the protest against Columbia, and I've been to a couple of the protest meetings, not taking sides, but I just want the, I wanna know what's happened, what's shaking. They got some angry people protesting and giving Columbia hell and editorially both The New York Times and the Post [New York Post] have supported in a kind of way the community that opposed to Columbia. Columbia now has turned around and what they are, they are dealing out jobs like you cannot believe for, for black people. They are aggressively courting us and, and it's real, it's very real. It's something they probably should have done a long time ago, but the good side is--(unclear)--and I don't know what we do from this point. We keep fighting Columbia or go out and get that job and they, they aggressive with this thing and it, it's well planned, it well, it's being well taken care of. Day by day it gets more and more hopeful. I, I, I do not know who this affects the fact that they still build schools, been working on big buildings in Harlem. But, but it is so interesting, it's like--I, I, I've got the feeling, and I, I've not been to these meetings, but I got the feeling that somebody at Columbia, not the president, but some of the real opinion makers over there woke up one morning, "This is serious shit. We got to do something to make them happy. They're mad and we still gonna get our buildings 'cause we got the money and the power. We've got to do something to make them happy," and that's exactly what's happening. Speaker 1: Well, I'd wish you write about it in exactly that way. Speaker 2: Right at, at this moment I don't know what tomorrow brings. In fact, I don't know what today brings. Story_ID: 371246 Speaker 1: What is it you wanna be remembered for? Speaker 2: Being recent friends and having, and having, being the luckiest person in the whole wide world for having the right mother [Mary Whitehurst Long] and father [Clyde Long] and grandmother [Ellen Whitehurst]. I can't, I can't begin to tell you what being loved by your mother and father and grandmother and being made secure and being told over and over and over again you can be whatever you wanna be and nothing can stop you and, and beyond the family they're friends like that. So, I guess I wanna be remembered as being just the most fortunate woman I know. Story_ID: 371247 Speaker 1: Tell me about that recent trip to Albany [New York], the one you took yesterday? Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: Tell me about the trip you took yesterday to Albany? Speaker 2: The most outstanding thing about the trip yesterday was I am still in the state of shock at the people who remembered me. I cannot get over it. I cannot get over it. People I don't remember, I don't remember their faces, their names and then it, it was like guess who is here? [HistoryMaker] Evelyn Cunningham is here. And, and-- Speaker 1: Where did you sit? Speaker 2: Somebody told me Al Marshall is over there, over there, go see if Al is dying to see you. I went over the Al Marshall's table and, and, and they pulled up two or three chairs, so I sat at that table until the formal program started and then people came over to me and-- Speaker 1: When the formal program started, were, you sat next to the governor. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah and-- Speaker 1: And tell me the story he got up and told about you when he worked with on the Rockefeller campaign? Speaker 2: Yeah I, he, he--governor what's his name Pataki [George Pataki]. Speaker 1: Pataki. Speaker 2: Yeah, he was briefed of course like you know these people--I know that game-- Speaker 1: Yeah of course. Speaker 2: --cause I used to do it. Speaker 1: But still, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, I know the game and brief him on-- Speaker 1: But to be acknowledged. Speaker 2: --who to be, who to be cool to, who to be, who to overdo to and all that, but he had been briefed and he, he, he, in welcoming people he mentioned me, Evelyn Cunningham and I said oh God, you know what is all this. He said I gave him a hard, he said she gave me a hard time when I was working, I was younger, and I was working on the Rockefeller campaign. He made that up. Yeah, he made it up, but it was nice. I liked it. I liked the sound of it, you know, but everybody there would remember me you know she's the one that gave the governor a hard time. Story_ID: 371248 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, I have one more question for you. What do you want your legacy to be? Speaker 2: I don't know what that means. Speaker 1: I don't know what it means either, but (laughter)-- Speaker 2: You asked me what I wanna be remembered by-- Speaker 1: Well-- Speaker 2: --and, and-- Speaker 1: Well you know what when you're not on this planet anymore and you're some other place, what do you want, what do you want about yourself to live on in this place? Speaker 2: I, I guess the same recent friends. Yeah. Speaker 1: What memories do you want us to still have? Speaker 2: Memories that I fought very hard to, I fought very hard as a newspaper writer to, to get away from women's--(unclear)--to do hard news. I, I really--that's important to me 'cause I really raise hell about that. They say but you can get killed. So what, the boys can be killed too, so what. You know I wanted to be a well-rounded newspaper person and can't be well-rounded cov- covering up card party every Wednesday. No way, Jesus. Speaker 1: Well, we thank you very much for your time today, and thank you for being a HistoryMaker. Speaker 2: Thank you, thank you. I'm so comfortable with both of you, I really am. Interviews make me nervous sometimes especially if you run into hostile interviewers who wanna get at something deep and don't tell you what it is, you know, and all that and sometimes I, I know how to shock 'em too, and they, it's unprintable, you know. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): It can't be recorded on video so shock us, go ahead. Speaker 2: Shock us. How do you shock them? Speaker 1: I am not gonna tell you. I can't repeat, yeah, well you know. Speaker 2: Thank you. Speaker 1: This is has been so enjoyable. As I, as I said before, you're such a professional. Speaker 2: Thank you very much. Speaker 1: And you're so good and I'm very, so, so comfortable. Speaker 2: Thank you. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Thank you very much. Speaker 1: I'm gonna follow your career. Speaker 2: Thank you very much. Speaker 1: Are you gonna keep in touch with me-- Speaker 2: Yes ma'am. Speaker 1: --let me know what you're doing, what's happening. Speaker 2: I'm going to, I'm going to let you know what I'm doing, and I'm going to invite you to things that you should be a part of...