 Story_ID: 5855 Speaker 1: My name is Racine Tucker-Hamilton, and I am the interviewer. And Matthew Hickey is the videographer. This interview is taking place on Thursday, January 13, 2005 in Washington, D.C. And if you would, please, for the record, tell us your full name, including your middle name and spell it? Speaker 2: Linda, L-I-N-D-A, Washington, W-A-S-H-I-N-G-T-O-N, Cropp, C-R-O-P-P. Speaker 1: And if you would, please, tell us the date and location of your birth? Speaker 2: October the 5th, 1947, Atlanta, Georgia. Speaker 1: Your occupation? Speaker 2: Legislator. Story_ID: 5856 Speaker 1: Would you please share with us your favorite food? Speaker 2: Greens with tomatoes and onions (laughter). Speaker 1: Your favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Summer. Speaker 1: Your favorite color? Speaker 2: Well, I have two, red and blue. Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: The beach. Speaker 1: And your favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: "I'm challenged, but not overwhelmed." Story_ID: 5857 Speaker 1: Let's begin now talking about your mother, starting with your mother's name and where your mother was born and where she grew up as a girl and that kind of thing? Speaker 2: My mother's name is Margaret, M-A-R-G-A-R-E-T, Beasley Washington Waller. Speaker 1: And where did--where was your mother born? Speaker 2: She was born in Atlanta, Georgia and she grew up in Atlanta, Georgia where she attended high school and Clark College [later Clark Atlanta University]. Speaker 1: And did she ever share any stories with you about what life was like for her as a girl when she was growing up? Speaker 2: She did, and her mother did also. My mother was just fantastic and a major part of my life, and always frugal, always thinking ahead and planning ahead. And she grew up during the Depression partly. And as a young girl, she would take coal--they would heat their house with coal. She would take coal when they got their delivery of the coal and she would take some of it and hide it. And during the time when they would run out of coal, and they were very low and they couldn't get coal right then or didn't have the money to get the coal right then, she would then come out with the coal that she had hidden, and the family would be able to stay warm. And I would always hear that story about my mom. I thought that was really sort of a look into the type of person my mother is. Speaker 1: And what kinds of stories did she share with you about the type of city Atlanta was when she was growing up? Speaker 2: It was a segregated city. It was also a city where it was hard for women to move forward into certain types of jobs. It was fun for their lifetime, you know, for them to be together in their community, it was a sense of community, a very strong sense of community and family in Atlanta. It was a sleepy, Southern town, somewhat, you know. You think of Atlanta now as being very cosmopolitan and very--but at that point, Atlanta was most definitely a very small, Southern town. Speaker 1: And what kind of work did your mother do? Speaker 2: Well, she did an awful lot. She worked with an insurance company for, part-time, and then she also worked for the government. She was one of the earlier individuals who actually worked with computers. So when the computers first came out, she worked with computers. Speaker 1: Wow, and what did she--? Speaker 2: Well, actually, my mother worked two jobs (laughter). She ended up--she and my father [Richard Allen Washington] divorced when I was little. And my mother ended up working two jobs. So her first job would be with an insurance company, and then her second job was with the government as a computer operator. Speaker 1: And is that what she did when you were a girl growing up? Speaker 2: That's what she did when I was growing up. And sometimes I would go into the office with her, you know, not often, but sometimes. And it was interesting seeing the--computers were huge then. We think of these little tiny chips now, but computers were as large as this room, one computer. And so she worked with that. The room was always cold 'cause they always had to keep them very cold. Speaker 1: And did she ever share any stories with you about life at Clark University? Speaker 2: Not really, not an awful lot. She just enjoyed it. She enjoyed going, and she had a sense of learning, and so she shared that with me, the sense of folks making you think that you could do what you wanted to do. Speaker 1: And how would you describe your mother? Speaker 2: My mother is the, a believer and sort of like an optimist. The story is often told about my mother when she was carrying me. My grandmother [Elisa Edwards Beasley] would say it, and my mother would tell me that when she carried me, she did certain things. She--that she doesn't do now, she didn't do after I was born and not way before the time that she was carrying me. But my mother would do things like, she learned how to play bridge. She played bridge and she sewed. She read. She tried a whole lot of things and it was because she believed that while she was carrying me, if she did those things, then they would somehow be part of who I am. And, you know, ironically--and that was a little before the time when people were really thinking that, you know, when she started doing those types of things. I play bridge. I'm a pretty good bridge player. I can reupholster, I can sew, I can tailor. I can do almost all of the things that she did when she carried me. My grandmother used to say, 'Jack-of-all-trades' and--earlier on in my life, master of none (laughter). But I really had the ability and can still do an awful lot of things. And my mother says that it was because those were the things that she exposed me to while she was carrying me, and then actually, as I was growing up too. She kept that exposure alive for me. She didn't continue to do those things (chuckle), but she kept exposing me to those things. Story_ID: 5858 Speaker 1: Let's talk now a little bit about your father, starting once again with your father's name and where he grew up as a boy and that kind of thing. Speaker 2: My father's name is Richard Allen Washington. And he also was born in Atlanta, Georgia and grew up in Atlanta, Georgia. I don't know my father very well because my mother [Margaret Beasley Washington Waller] and father divorced when I was three years old. They say I look an awful lot like my father. I know my father's family quite well, and we stayed extremely close even though I, I did not know my father. But my mother said she and my father were divorced, that she was not divorced from his family. And they are still my family. So I, I have stayed very close to his family, but--and they didn't live too far away from each other. My father's family, my aunt and uncles and all attended college and graduated from Talladega [College, Talladega, Alabama]. For example, my father's sister is still living, up in her eighties. She does things like go out and volunteer with the border babies in the hospital two or three times a week at eighty-five. And she's phenomenal. My father's mother, many folks say I'm an awful lot like her in the sense that she belonged to an awful lot organizations the same as I--a lot of organizations, very active, very involved. So to that extent, I guess I have a little bit of my father's mother in me. And so I, he was--I don't know much about him. I know more about his siblings. Story_ID: 5859 Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit now about your grandparents, starting with your maternal grandparents and their names, and if you had the opportunity to spend a lot of time with them growing up, just what they were like? Speaker 2: I did. My maternal grandmother's name was Elisa Edwards Beasley, and my maternal father's name was Arthur Beasley. He was in insurance, back at that day, when you would go back and sell insurance door-to-door, I think they called them nickel policies and all. And that's what he did. And my grandmother used to go--and she was a housekeeper for people in Atlanta [Georgia]. She would clean their homes and everything, but I spent an awful lot of time with them. I would go and stay in the summer actually with my grandparents and my mother's [Margaret Beasley Washington Waller] sister in Atlanta. So that's why I know a little bit about Atlanta. I grew up in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], but because my mother was a single mom, when I got out of school during the summertime, I would immediately go down to Atlanta. I would either take the train and it seems impossible in those days, I would take the train by myself or the airplane by myself and go down. They'd meet me at the train station. If it was the train, it was during that time when you would carry a lunch on the train in a shoe box. And the reason was because there was still segregation. And--plus, I don't think my mom really wanted me wa-, wandering around too much on the train, but it was still segregation on the train and in the airports and things like--such as that when I first started out. And I would go to Atlanta and stay with my maternal grandparents during that time. My grandfather was a comedian. I think he could have been stand-up if he had had an opportunity. And as much of a comedian and jokester as, as he was, my maternal grandmother was extremely straight-laced. (Chuckle) I mean it was straight lace all the way. And she didn't drink anything at all, and, and my grandfather loved to take a little drink every now and then and my grandmother would hate it and she would say, she would say to him, "Arthur, that stuff is gonna kill you." And I can hear her saying--hear him saying, no, 'Jensie' (ph.), I'm gonna kill it first. (laughter) Speaker 1: What were the train rides like? Do you remember them in particular? Speaker 2: I do. I would have my dolls and, and coloring books, little activity books. And they seemed very long. You would leave, I would leave Philadelphia probably around 6:00 o'clock in the evening, 5:00 o'clock in the evening and I would have the box of food, and that was what I would eat during that time period. I would color, play with my dolls. Sometimes there would be different people on the train who would somewhat befriend you. I--what would happen, there was the travel aid--Travelers Aid Society. And my mother would always make sure that they knew that I was on the train and would always befriend a conductor who was to look out for me. And they would, you know, it was a different world then. And they would make sure I was okay, and frequently, I would sit next to someone who, an older woman it seemed, and who would always, you know, sort of look out for me also. And it was nice. I would have my books, and I would read my books. It was a nice trip. It seemed so long. You know, the, the real question, "When will we get there?" The question always came out. It was exciting. By the next morning, when I would get to Atlanta and get off, all of my mother's family would be at the train station to greet me. It was a big occasion for me to get there, and I would come from Philadelphia where the pattern of speech for a little more crisp than it was in Atlanta, which was truly Southern with a very deep southern dialect and drawl. And we would go through, probably for the first hour, "Listen to her talk," (laughter), you know. And, because for them, it seemed extremely proper. The funny thing now as I remember this, when I go back to visit people in Philadelphia now--I've lived in Washington, D.C. for so long, and Washington is technically a Southern town also. But I've lived in Washington for so long now, when I go back to Philadelphia and I talk to my friends there, they look at me and they say, "Where did you get that Southern accent?" (Laughter) So them now, it seems as if I have somewhat of a Southern accent, but when I would go to Atlanta, they really would love to hear me talk. And different people would say, "Say something," (laughter), and it was always a difference. Speaker 1: And why did your mother move to Philadelphia? Speaker 2: Looking for other opportunities because she felt as if Atlanta, being the segr-, segregated place that it was, that there were not the opportunities available for her. And after she and my father [Richard Allen Washington] divorced, she wanted more than what she thought Atlanta could offer. And at one point, my mother and father had lived in Philadelphia early on in their marriage. And so she decided she'd give that a try and go back to Philadelphia and see what could be done with that, what opportunities were available for her. Story_ID: 5860 Speaker 1: And what about your paternal grandparents, did you know them well? Speaker 2: I did not know my paternal grandfather. He had died by the time I was born. I know of him. He was, he had been extremely successful. He had done well in his business. I think part of it was insurance, and I'm not certain what else. But he had been successful enough to be able to give each one of his children a home, so he had success. My grandmother, I knew of her as a homemaker, very active. I always had such a positive image of her as a child--she died early on, unfortunately. She, her clothes caught on fire, and so she was, she was--died from the results of that fire. Instead of falling down and, and trying to put it out, she ran and it, it made it worse. And it was during the time when they had those little heaters that would sit on the floor. We have those heaters now, but they're, they're safer. At that point, you could actually see the flame from the type of heaters that they had then, the additional floor heaters. And she was preparing for one of her club meetings for that night, and her clothing caught on fire. And unfortunately, she died from that. But I always remember her extremely favorable because, once again, I think she was bending over backwards because my mother [Margaret Beasley Washington Waller] and father [Richard Allen Washington] had separated, that she would just get me everything she thought I wanted. And I just always remember her getting me all types of clothing and books and toys, and for a child at that point, you know, that was something special. And she was active, so I have fond memories of her, but unfortunately, she passed when I was about, about eight. Speaker 1: And what were their names? Speaker 2: Carrie Washington and my grandfather's, paternal grandfather's name was David Washington. Story_ID: 5861 Speaker 1: Do you know if your family came from free people or slaves? How far back can you trace your ancestry? Speaker 2: On my mother's [Margaret Beasley Washington Waller] side, we can trace them back several generations. They had came from slaves in Georgia on, on one side, on my grandfather's [Arthur Beasley] side, a very large family. And actually on my maternal grandfather's side, we've been celebrating family reunions probably for about sixty years. My grandfather was one of twelve children, six boys and six girls, and, and every summer the family would go back to the old family homestead in Crawfordsville, Georgia, and we would have the family reunion. As, in later years, we now sort of travel in different places in the country every so often, and have them. My mother did it once in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], for example, a cousin a couple of years ago did it in Cincinnati [Ohio], but we always do it at least three to five years at least in Atlanta [Georgia] now. And every so often we'll go back to the 'Old Homestead' as they call it in Crawfordsville, Georgia. And they were--they had land down there after they became free and all. On my maternal grandmother's [Elisa Edwards Beasley] side, her parents were Indians so they were part of Indian tribes down in Georgia. Story_ID: 5862 Speaker 1: What is your earliest memory of growing up? Speaker 2: I, I think there, there're a couple of memories, but somewhat blurry, but I remember my mother and I going to the train station and spending time together. We didn't have a lot of money--I, I didn't realize it then (laughs), and that was a, an outing, an afternoon outing, to go and sit down at the train station and watch the trains come in. But that was a way, after my parents [Richard Allen Washington and Margaret Beasley Washington Waller] separated, for us to go out and do something different. And actually, I really liked it because it provided an opportunity for me and my mother to really bond and, and talk and, and just enjoy each other and see a little bit of life, something extremely simple, but I remember it. Speaker 1: And what was family life like for you? Can you kind of give us an idea of what a typical day was like for you? As a girl, you'd wake up in the morning and then what? Speaker 2: Well, actually, it probably was a bit different. I was a latch-key kid, you know. My mother worked two jobs, and at one short period, she actually worked three jobs. She would go to work from 9:00 to 2:00 [P.M.] at the insurance company. She would go to work from 4:00 to 12:00 [A.M.] with the government, and because she was in com-, computers, that was the type of job that you could always get extra work. And there was a time period where she would leave the government job at twelve and go to one of the major oil companies and work there from about 1:00 to 3:00 o'clock in the morning. And she did that because she was raising me by herself, but, quite frankly, she wanted to provide me with all types of opportunities. She wanted to expose me to everything, you know. We lived in a fairly decent neighborhood. She bought a house, you know, had transportation, but that was because she worked hard to get all of that. So I came home--I would have a lot of things at home. I didn't realize until later I had a lot of things at home because she wanted to make sure I stayed in the house, because I came home without her being there. And so she was probably trying to do things to make sure that I stayed active in the house. So I, I had a lot of things that maybe a lot of other young people didn't have at that time. But I would wake up in the morning, and basically get myself up once I reached a, a fairly young age actually, and get myself ready for school. I went to Catholic school [Holy Child Catholic School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], and I--so I didn't have too much of a, a choice in what I wore. I wore uniforms (laughs), you know, for twelve years of education. And I would, you know, eat something, maybe. (laughs) And at that point, I didn't take my lunch. I would--the school--all the schools that I went to, you could buy your lunch. So I always bought my lunch, and I think part of that was because it was easier on my mother who worked so much that she didn't have to make the lunch, you know. And I would buy the lunch at school, and go to school. Education was always presented as something that was extremely important, that you had to learn, I mean continuously from my mother and my grandmother [Elisa Edwards Beasley], it was with the idea that you have to get an education. You have to get a good education. You have to learn, and each day is worth living if it's something that you learned on that day. It may be something little that most people may not think of as important, but just one fact, that you can learn, and then you've lived a day worth living if you've added to your knowledge base. Speaker 1: Were you ever lonely growing up? Speaker 2: Possibly. At some time--I, I was an only child, obviously. And what I had found that I could learn to entertain myself. It's a certain, I think gift that only children have, and we tend, as I look at other people and talk to other people, we tend not to be as lonely as maybe people with siblings, who all of a sudden find that they're by themselves. I was not because I had so many things around that would get my attention, and I would do things. And that's also possibly why I do a lot of things like sew, reupholster, because my mother would always put those types of things in front of me or expose me to these things so that it would be something to keep me busy, and I would really wouldn't have the opportunity to get as lonely as maybe other people--as other people may. When I was in high school [Little Flower Catholic High School For Girls, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] I had my own dark room. I mean, who ever thought of, of someone having a dark room in high school at that time? But it was because it was something that I had an interest in, and whenever my mother found out I had an interest in something, she went gung-ho for it (laughs). And so I would, I would develop pictures, and so that would keep my attention. You know, I, I took music, played the piano. That kept me busy for a while. I only wish that I had the innate talent to play piano where I could just sit down and play it, but I have to look at the notes and sort of study them. So I didn't get lonely in the sense of, of knowing it only because I stayed busy, and also I'm a television--TV fanatic. I love television, even to this day. And so I would look at television also, and to the point that I would immediately go in and maybe turn television on, even if I was reading something. So it was sort of company in the background. There was always something going on in the background. Speaker 1: What were some of your favorite television shows growing up? Speaker 2: 'Julia', which was--'Julia', that was later on. I liked that. It was the first time I really saw a black person, you know, in a, in a role, and I enjoyed that so much. Would you believe something called 'The Hit Parade' and perhaps I liked that because it was something that my mother and I would sit down together and we would look at. And it was, it was one of those, I guess, variety shows that would come on. And they would sing whatever the latest songs were. I think it came on a Saturday night, and whatever the latest song was, someone would come on and, and sing that song. Consequently, right now, I could probably sing, if it started--if I had a voice (laughs), sing a lot of the songs that folks would say, that's not necessarily part of your culture, but I can just rap off the roll--the words to music, and I liked--I enjoyed that very much. Story_ID: 5863 Speaker 1: Can you kind of describe your community for us, describe your block for us? Speaker 2: Well, at one time--at one point, let me say at one point we lived in public housing for a couple of years. But I grew up for the most part on 19th Street. It was a, a changing neighborhood when we first moved in, it was a mixed neighborhood. We were probably the second black family to live in there. It was row houses--a, a lovely street, I think even today it's still a, a nice street. The houses were stone houses. It was down the street from LaSalle University in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and the Central High School--the new Central High School, which is one of the premier schools in Philadelphia. And it was a street where there were not an awful lot of children, but there was another girl my age on that street, and so we were sort of it, and became friends--a few younger people. Eventually--it started out as a mixed street, eventually, all of the whites moved out and it became predominantly black. And it was a, it was a nice, a very lovely street actually, tree-lined. I was fortunate to be in that type of neighborhood and the type of house, that type of street, but it was because I had a mother [Margaret Beasley Washington Waller] who worked very hard to make sure that I got there. Speaker 1: And tell me what sights, sounds and smells remind you of growing up and remind you of your childhood? Speaker 2: Boy, that's a hard one. Sights, smells and sound. (pauses) With the sounds, I guess some music--some of the music that's out. And my mother and I had an eclectic taste or I guess I got mine from her because she, she played it. She had an eclectic taste in music. So I guess the of the music. Speaker 1: (Background interruption). Speaker 2: Okay, and what smells and sights remind you of growing up and remind you of your childhood? Speaker 1: The tree-lined street I lived on, the subway that, that I took going to high school [Little Flower Catholic High School For Girls, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] every day, taking a subway; going over to relatives' homes, seeing the subway for me in Philadelphia was something that I remember. And the smells, we would go on family picnics. So it's, I guess the smells of, of going out and having picnics in the park. Story_ID: 5864 Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit now about elementary school. What was the name of the elementary school you attended or the grade school? Speaker 2: Well, I attended--actually, I attended three. One was Blessed Virgin Mary in Yeadon [sic, Darby, Pennsylvania]. For a short period, I lived with my godmother in Yeadon until my mother [Margaret Beasley Washington Waller] got herself situated in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. And I would go home on the weekends, and I would stay with my godmother during the week. And then I went to [Our Lady of the] Blessed Sacrament School in Philadelphia and, but I spent the majority of my school time from the third through the eighth grade at Holy Child Catholic School in Philadelphia. Speaker 1: What were your experiences like at Catholic school? Was your, was your family Catholic? Speaker 2: No, actually, my family on my mother's side, they were Baptist, and on my father's [Richard Allen Washington] side, they're Methodist. I believe my mother just wanted me to go to a Catholic school and get a Catholic education. And I was baptized Catholic. My godmother was Catholic, where I started out at Blessed Virgin Mary. And so I was baptized Catholic and went through Catholic school from the first through the twelfth grade. And it was--at that point, actually, until I went to high school [Little Flower Catholic High School For Girls, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], all of my teachers had been nuns. I never had a teacher who had not been a nun, and they were--they tended to be a little strict--, Speaker 1: A little? (laughs). Speaker 2: (Laughs) --at that point. I probably had a good education, however, with that. Even when we went to lunch, when we ate, it was somewhat of a learning experience. I, I recall at one, one day, we had to actually go through how you're supposed to chew your food. And we had to count the number of times we chewed our food and could not swallow it until after we got to that number. I believe it was like thirty or thirty-five times, you would--you were supposed to chew your food before you swallowed it. And that's the type of thing that, that we went through with a Catholic education. You had--I got rapped on the knuckles a couple of times. I was a talker--imagine that. (laughs) And I recall on my report card--in fact, my mother still has that report card that says, "Linda is an excellent speaker, but a little too talkative." Speaker 1: And what were some of your favorite subjects in grammar school? Speaker 2: I always loved history and math. Those two subjects were all--for whatever reason, they were always my favorite subjects. I loved math until I got geometry--that knocked that out of me, (laughs) but prior to that math was always one of my favorites. And history, government and geography, we took geography at that point. And I loved that. Speaker 1: And who were some of your friends during grammar school? Speaker 2: Well, I recall, particularly at Holy Child, I had a lot of friends who lived in the neighborhood and two very good friends, Linda--at that time, her name was Good, was a good friend of mine and Violetta Derrick, they were two of my best friends. Linda and I almost did everything together. In fact, we told everyone we were cousins. (laughs) And people grew up thinking we were cousins with, both of our names were Linda. And we stayed friends for many, many a year, and we would, you know, go back and forth at each other's homes. And it was to the, to the point that if we were to visit each other, we had to walk the other one halfway back home. (laughs) So, you couldn't just walk out of your house. You had to walk the other half--other one, halfway back. Our families knew each other. My mother felt very comfortable with my going to her, to her house. In fact, if my mother wasn't home, there weren't too many people who could come into our house. In fact, one of the rules was that I could not allow anyone in the house, but Linda could come in, and I could go to her house. But my mother always had to know where I was. Speaker 1: And during grammar school, what type of student were you? Speaker 2: Actually, I was the, a very good student. I usually got excellent grades. I, I scored fairly well on, on the tests that we would take. And what would happen, I think as a result of that is that the nuns would then look at you a bit differently and push you possibly more. I think it was beneficial for me, but it may not have been good for some of the other students. I went to a school that was predominantly white. There were very few blacks usually in my, in my class, maybe two or three. And as I look back on it, sometimes because I, I was a fairly good student and did well on tests, they may have pushed me a little more than they pushed some of the other black students because I was 'The One'. And so it was good for me but it may have not been as good for some of my classmates who may have had just as much ability, but you know, we all bloom at different times in our lives. Story_ID: 5865 Speaker 1: What was the Catholic experience like for you, like, what was it like going to--did you all go to mass every day? Speaker 2: No, we didn't go to mass every day, but we went to mass every Wednesday, I believe it was. You had to go--it was one day in the week where we did have to go to mass. And we had to go to mass on Sunday and sit with your class. So at that point, we would go to--. Speaker 1: Whether you were Catholic or not, you still had to go on Sunday. Speaker 2: Well, you know, I just remember everyone being a Catholic. I think it's different in the Catholic schools now because their population has decreased so much, and they're trying to get attendance. But at that point, everyone in my school was a Catholic. I don't recall anyone not being a Catholic. And so everyone went to mass. You sat with your class, you didn't sit with your family. You--if you went to church later on with your family, that's another thing. But we all had to go to 9:00 o'clock [A.M.] every single Sunday, and there was a certain place that you would sit every Sunday with your class. The nuns would be there, and so that was just--and, and roll was taken. They knew (laughs) if you missed too from Sunday, from going. Speaker 1: And so that was your church experience. You and your mother [Margaret Beasley Washington Waller] would go to mass on Sundays? Speaker 2: No, my mother didn't go. I was sent, I went to mass. (laughs) Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My mother, who worked all the time, she was probably resting more. But if she went to church, she went to a Baptist church. There were certain, certain activities where she would go to the Catholic church with me. Story_ID: 5866 Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit about what type of child you were during the grammar school years? What, what type of young girl were you? Speaker 2: I was one who probably wanted to do well. I always did my homework. Whatever was expected of me, for the part I did. I, I think it was probably an outgrowth of seeing my mother [Margaret Beasley Washington Waller] work hard and, and maybe at that point, I didn't want to cause her any problems or anything till I got to be a teenager, (laughs) and the aliens took position. (laughs) But as a child, you know, in elementary school [Holy Child Catholic School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], I usually did my homework. I, I never recall going to school without having my homework completed and done fairly well. I always wanted to be first almost. I, I look at my grandson now, and for almost everything, you know, he wants it to be a race. And, and he wants to win, I mean, and if I ever want him to do something, I'll just have to say, "I'll beat you." (laughs) And he takes off because he, as he told me just last weekend, he says, "'Befree' (ph.) I always wanna be first." So I don't know if that was a little bit of me. I don't think I could have articulated that when I was his age--he's only five, I don't think I would have been able to articulate that. But I did always want to do well. And I wanted to know that I could do something, and if it was a challenge I wanted to try to meet that challenge. I, I would not give up on stuff. I would, I would keep at it and do things, but I, I don't recall not doing my homework. I didn't want to be somewhat chastised, you know, for not doing something. Speaker 1: And during that time, did you have dreams and aspirations? Speaker 2: I did, well, I always wanted to be a nurse. I mean if someone had asked me, what, what was I gonna be, I would be a nurse. I don't know if that's because 'Julia' was a nurse in the television show, that I wanted, I have no idea. But I wanted to be a nurse, and, and at one point, I would say a CPA [certified public accountant]--that I wanted to be a CPA. I just knew that I was supposed to go to college. That had been instilled in me, that I was gonna go to college. Outside of that I really didn't know much more. Speaker 1: Where did the thought of becoming a CPA come from? Did you, did you know a CPA? Speaker 2: I didn't, I have no idea. I have no idea from where. I didn't really know a CPA. I liked math, and the only thing I can think about is that I liked math and my mom may have said, "Well, if you like math, these are the things that you could do when dealing with math." But outside of that, I just have no idea how a CPA--because I had not had that type of interaction with one. Story_ID: 5867 Speaker 1: During the junior high school years, can you tell us a little bit about what type of young lady you were starting to become? Speaker 2: With me, with my school, it was first grade through eighth grade. And then when you finished eighth, then I went to high school, and my high school [Little Flower Catholic High School For Girls, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] was then from ninth grade to twelfth grade. I would take, I was taking dancing. Once again my mother's [Margaret Beasley Washington Waller]--her desire to keep me busy (laughs). I was taking dancing so that would keep me busy on Saturdays. I did ice skating. That would keep me busy on Saturdays. I was in the Girl Scouts [of the U.S.A.]. That would keep me busy during the week, and also during, doing activities. And actually, I think the Girl Scouts ended up being a major influence in my life. Once again, I think my mother got me involved in the Girl Scouts to keep me somewhat busy in something wholesome, but it ended up really being a major influence because what ended up happening, once again, it was something I wanted to do well. And we would earn merit badges. So it became somewhat competitive for me to get as many merit badges as I could get, and I wanted to get a whole lot of merit badges. But in order to do the merit badges, you had to do certain activities. And there were all different type of, of merit badges and, and the Girl Scout book would, would spell it out for you, and it was sort of like a roadmap. You would have to do this. You may have to do it for X number of days or put X number of hours into it, and you would have to document it. And once you did it, then you could get that merit badge. And at that point, we wore these sashes. And my, my goal was to fill my sash with merit badges all in the front and have so many that I then had to start putting them in the back. I still have that sash (laughs) and, and I did fill it up. And--but how Girl Scouts, I think, had an impact on who I am a little bit. I recall going to camp once. We would go to camp at the Girl Scouts and stay maybe for a week or two. And at camp, we were all supposed to different things to chip in. We didn't have anyone to do the work for us. We were supposed to do the things like help to cook a little bit, and certainly to clean up our tents and also to clean up the dishes and everything--to wash the dishes and everything. Well, the first time that I went to camp, I really wasn't into helping cleaning up and washing the dishes, and I didn't want to do that. And so I, I went to Girl Scout camp, and I, I--everyone else was doing their work. I remember the camp leaders later on say that I was not a very good Girl Scout or camper and it was because I did not want to do the chores, and I did not do the chores. Well, I did not like hearing someone say that. The next time I went to camp, I was the very best Girl Scout and participant that there could be. But that was a, a lesson learned for me that everyone had to be a part of--you and to be a part of the team if you were there, that in order for everything to succeed, you couldn't just sit back and watch everyone else do something. And I don't know why that made such an impact on me, but I remember it to this day. And I think later on too, another part of girl scouting that helped me during, I think, probably what was a very formative period in my life was, it was another merit badge that I was trying to get. And it was dealing with volunteerism. And I decided to go and volunteer at a senior home and I--cause you had to put in X number of hours of doing some type of volunteer work. And so I would go in and, and volunteer, and do things with the seniors such as combing their hair. I even helped to get bed pans for them and, and do some other things. But it gave me a view of dealing with older people, and I--older people who are, are fragile and infirmed, and I had never had that experience before. But I think it instilled in me a sense of helping someone else. And I, I ran across some very wonderful people who had so much to share of their past life, and it sort of instilled in me a need for us to volunteer a little bit. And so from that point on, even after I had put in the number of hours to earn my merit badge, I kept working there on a volunteer basis. My mom [Margaret Beasley Washington Waller] was happy 'cause it kept me busy (laughs), but I continued to work there for a long time. And from that time on, I, I somewhat did volunteer work in doing different things. Story_ID: 5868 Speaker 1: What was the name of the high school you attended. Speaker 2: Little Flower Catholic High School For Girls [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], and when I went away to college, I just could not bare to say that I had attended Little Flower Catholic High School for Girls so when folks would say where did you go to high school, I said, Flower High (laughs). Speaker 1: And what were your experiences like in high school? Speaker 2: They were, they were good experiences, some learning experiences. I was student council leader. In my high school that was, that was---actually, that was my first election process because you had to--they had to vote you in to be on the student council. And the student council at my high school, it was somewhat of a, of a powerful position in the sense that everyone in your class would vote for you, your grade. If you were in the ninth grade or tenth grade or eleventh grade, everyone in your class would vote for you to be on the student council. And the student council, one of the reasons why it was good, you got to leave class early, and you came back to class a little later. You would leave class maybe three minutes before it was over and you could come in three minutes after it was late. And the reason is--remember now, this is a Catholic school, and there were very strict rules of how you changed class--you went from class to class. Like you could only walk on the right side of the hall, and you had to go up the steps on the right side of the hall, and then there were also certain periods where you were not allowed to talk during the chan-, the changing of classes. You just had to do it in, in quiet. There were certain times that you could, but other times that you could not. And you had the student council members who were monitors throughout the hall. We were spaced throughout the halls and on the stairwells to help keep the traffic going, and if someone talked, we could actually send people to detention. So we had, we had little tickets, I guess, little slips that we would carry, and we would write down their names, their section, turn them in, and if they did something that, that we thought were wrong--was wrong, then we would turn it in, and they would actually have to go to detention. And if you think of that in today's world, it's a wonder you'd lived through it. (laughs) But, you know, that for, for young people to have, that's somewhat powerful (laughs), when you think about it, that you could send your classmates--, Speaker 1: Very powerful. Speaker 2: --to stay after school. And we even functioned in the cafeteria during lunch period. You would help people get into the cafeteria. And we had different posts of duty that we would stand, and usually for our school, a certain period before the end of the lunch period was a period of silence where everyone had to keep silent. So we would then be on duty and could then pass out the slips for detention. We would be in the bathroom on duty 'cause people were not supposed to talk in the bathroom. Remember this is a Catholic school--strict Catholic school. And, so but that was, that was formative in that you had to work with the elections in an election process. And--so that was extremely helpful. I was class president, and in that, you worked with your nun. You were responsible for getting their Christmas present and all of that kind of thing, which was, at that time for me, it was something exciting and good. Speaker 1: And what other activities were you involved in high school? Speaker 2: In my high school, you could not be involved in too many activities. If you were in--because we had a lot of students. It was a fairly big school and what they were trying to do is to give everyone an opportunity to be involved in different activities that would take up your time. So for me it was the student government. For a short period, it was music, with the band, but for me, it was predominantly student government where I spent my time. Speaker 1: And were you still aspiring to be a nurse when you were in high school? Speaker 2: No, at that point, teachers had taken over so I was gonna--I was gonna be a teacher. And would you believe for a short period, I was even gonna be a nun. (laughs) The sanity came back (laughs), but for a short period, I mean I had been exposed to nuns all the time. And, you know, they were saints. You know, they were great. So at one, for one short period, I was gonna be a nun, and quite a few people from my class, actually, when they finished high school, that is where they moved on. And some of them I was shocked, they were the biggest devils (laughs), and they decided they were gonna be a nun, you know. But at that point, I, I suspect I, I somewhat switched, and as I moved on in high school and I wanted to then be a teacher. Speaker 1: And what kind of student were you in high school? Speaker 2: I was a very good student again in high school, and fairly good. I still wanted to do well, to excel. I don't think I was as good as I was in elementary school [Holy Child Catholic School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], but I was always one of the better students, not the best. But I did well, my grades were usually pretty good. We got numerical grades. We did not get A's, B's or C's, but usually my grades were somewhere from the eighties [percentile], in the eighties or the nineties. So I did, which I guess would be an A or a B. And every so often, I would get a C. I, I never failed anything in high school--I waited 'til college [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] to do that, (laughs) but I never, I never failed anything in, in high school at all, although geometry tried (laughs), very, very hard. But that was a subject that was not one of my best. Story_ID: 5869 Speaker 1: And you had mentioned earlier that you had an interest in photography when you were in high school [Little Flower Catholic High School For Girls, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. How did that interest develop? Speaker 2: I, I would read a lot. I would go to the library, spent--I spent a lot of time in the libraries, and I--in the libraries around. And I always liked a 'how-to', you know, how-to section and the how-to books. And during one of my periods, I saw, 'How to Develop Your Own Pictures'. I said, "That's it. I want to do that." And so I would read about it. If it was something that I showed enough interest in, that I may really want to do it, then my mom [Margaret Beasley Washington Waller] would usually follow up with it and start with the equipment on it. It was something that I did that I must not have followed through too much because later on I, I decided I wanted to sew. And my mom wasn't certain that I really wanted to do it, and she had just spent some money on something that I didn't follow through well. So she went out and got the sewing machine. But it was an old, old converted sewing machine, probably it was the type, the, the bobbin, the place you put the bobbin was--you probably wouldn't even know, but it was a bobbin shaped, sort of bullet-shaped cylinder that you would put the bobbin in, instead of the new round ones that they use now. And it used to be the type of sewing machine that you actually used your, your feet, and you would push your feet back and forth on a pedal. Well, that wasn't the kind I got, but it was converted from that where it, it was like a modern pedal, but it was a old converted type that you would have to put your feet, and your feet would go back and forth like this, both of them, to make the machine go. So she got that, and it was less costly--to see if I was really interested in it. And it ended up being something for which I had great interest in sewing, became fairly good. I had an aunt who was--actually her sister, was an outstanding seamstress, and she would--she lived in Atlanta, and she sewed for an awful lot of well-known people. She was very, very talented. And she would help me--I would spend summers with her too, and she would show me different things about sewing. And I ended up being a, a fairly good seamstress. I can tailor, and I, I stayed in it, but I remember one dress that I had made. And I put this dress on, and one Sunday, I decided I was just gonna walk all around the neighborhood in this dress 'cause I just thought it was so gorgeous. And whatever I did, my mother was the type that said, "Oh, baby, great, it's just an outstanding--oh, you're wonderful." I, you know, it could be awful as I look back at it now, but she just, "Oh, I don't know of anyone else could--who could do something as good as you're doing it, you know. You--you're doing a great job." And I, I remember this one dress that I made, and my mother just said it was, "Outstanding, fantastic dress." And I remember putting that dress on, and I really, from the time I got back from mass, and you usually got out of mass at 10:00 o'clock [A.M.], and I headed out with, with my girlfriend at 10:30. And we just walked all through the neighborhoods and everything, and I was in this dress, head high and, you know, shoulders back, very proud of my dress. I looked at that dress years later. The zipper in that dress, instead of going straight up and down, it actual went in a diagonal line. (laughs) I, to this day, don't know how I did that. I tease my mom, I said, "How could you let me walk around all in the neighborhood with that dress on?" And she said, "Because you then did another dress and another dress and it was perfect. I wanted to encourage you." And I think that's something that I have carried on throughout my life. And it has been very helpful that my mother did encourage me to do anything and to try anything. 'Madame Butterfly' [by Giacomo Puccini] had come out at one point, and so I decided I was gonna walk around the house and sing opera. Well, I started singing what I said was 'Madame Butterfly', and the only thing that went in the whole song was I kept repeating "Madame Butterfly" to the highest tone that I could--Awful, just awful. But my mother said it was "Great. It was outstanding." (laughs) But you know, that type of thing, it, it led me to believe later on in life when I became a teacher and a guidance counselor is that that's what we needed to do with our children, particularly, our black children is not to say, "Oh, no, you can't do it," but to let them know that they can do it. "You know, you can do whatever you want to do," and encourage them and tell them how great they are because then it's a sense of, of importance that they will get, that will encourage them and help them to move forward. And I took that experience from my youth to my adult experience in trying to teach and counsel young people to do more than what they're doing currently. Speaker 1: And what year did you graduate from high school? Speaker 2: 1965. Story_ID: 5870 Speaker 1: Were you starting to become interested in civil rights when you were in high school? Speaker 2: No. I, I really wasn't. I was somewhat sheltered, candidly, from a lot of that. In high school [Little Flower Catholic High School For Girls, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] you heard me say how rigid my high school was. I do know that there were problems--racial problems, but my exposure in Philadelphia was a bit different. Going to Atlanta [Georgia] as a child, I certainly saw it there. I, I recall, for example, my mom [Margaret Beasley Washington Waller] and I would drive to Atlanta a lot also, and I recall one time driving to Atlanta and going into the bathroom. And I had just gone into the bathroom, and this man came into the bathroom and pushed it open and said, "What are you doing coming in here? You can't use this bathroom. It's a white bathroom!" And I, you know, I sort of looked, and I said, "It's pink." (laughs) And it was--I went out and I told my mom, I says, "Mom, that man, he doesn't know his colors--," I was a little girl-- "He doesn't know--he says this is a white bathroom, it's a pink bathroom!" I sort of got an education from my mother (laughs) at that point about what was going on. Speaker 1: Do you remember like anybody going to the March on Washington [D.C.]and talk about that, that kind of thing. Speaker 2: I do, the, all of that happened when I, while I was at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], and actually, my awareness increased at that point, and the March on Washington [1963] occurred while I was at Howard and, and you know, we start-, a lot of us did, and we went down there, and we went down to, on the Mall where people came from all over because of poverty. And taking a part in that, and I think that's where I got a whole different level of exposure about the problems that we all have. Shirley Chisholm spoke at my graduation, and, and that was a--an influence on me to, to hear from her. So it--that was a major factor, I think, and, and things that concerned me later on. I had a, a professor at Howard who, as part of our course requirements, made us do some volunteer work. And actually, I did my volunteer work here at the District [of Columba] in the Board of Elections and Ethics. And so I got involved in politics then in that, in that way. Story_ID: 5871 Speaker 1: So how did you make the decision to attend Howard University [Washington, D.C.]? Speaker 2: When it came time for me to start selecting colleges, my mom [Margaret Beasley Washington Waller] and I basically sat down and started looking at those types of schools that I would be happy. I, I wanted to go to a larger school, not necessarily a small school in a larger place. I looked at Penn State University. My mom said if I went to a black school, it was gonna Howard or Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia], and so I applied to Penn State and Howard, actually, that, that's what I ended up applying to. Penn State accepted me, but they sent me to their Altoona College [later Penn State Altoona, Altoona, Pennsylvania] freshman year. At that time, they would not let freshman go to the main campus, which is University City [sic, University Park], in Pennsylvania. They wanted the freshman to be on a smaller campus. I was not gonna go to Altoona, and so Howard was it. And it was close enough to home and all, and it, it offered the types of things that I wanted and it had a wonderful, outstanding reputation of their graduates, with regard to their graduates. So I thought that would be a good experience. The, the thing is though, you know, when I went to Howard, I'm out of this very, very strict Catholic background. And when I first went there and started class and the professor would come in, I actually stood up because at my school, when the nun walked in, you had to stand up. And so, it took me a (laughs) couple of times to realize I didn't have to stand up when the, when the professor walked in. But it was a different, totally different experience for me coming out of the extremely strict controlled, Catholic environment. Speaker 1: And what were your impressions of Washington, D.C. at that particular time? What was the city like? Speaker 2: Well, you know, I had visited Washington on numerous occasions. I had relatives here. In fact, some people here think that I graduated from high school here 'cause I had cousins here. So I would be in Washington, and so I knew. Washington to me was somewhat of a smaller, sleepier city than Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. Philadelphia was a huge city, a very ethnic city, and Washington did not have the same type of ethnicity that Philadelphia had. You know, Philadelphia had different types of neighborhoods, whether you were in a predominantly African American neighborhood or a Jewish neighborhood or Italian neighborhood or a Polish neighborhood, it had, it was an ethnic city. And when you had an ethnic city, you had ethnic foods, and you had a good culture of foods, food, restaurants and things like that. Washington did not have that. It was very interesting. I don't think Washington, at that point, had--I felt the food was not good. They had what they called a cold-cut sandwich. I came out of a hoagie town and the steak sandwich, you know. People go all around the world to, to get a Philadelphia hoagie or, or a steak sandwich. And so Washington did not have that. Washington did not have the type of cultural programs that Philadelphia had. You did have the Smithsonian [Institution] but you didn't have the, the theater and some of the other things that, that Philadelphia had, and I always grew up with that. My mother, again, exposed me to all of those types of things. And I did not see that same level in Washington at that time. It's a whole different city now. Washington has as much as any city nationally or internationally with regards to the cultural exposure, whether we're talking about the Kennedy Center [for the Performing Arts] or we're talking about the, the [William] Shakespeare Theatre and, and Studio Theatre. It's so much here. And the restaurants, I mean they have just grown so much here in Washington. But initially, when I first came and went to Howard, it, it seemed to not have a lot of that. It had some other things, some of the international flavor, but not the other types of things that I was used to in Philadelphia. Story_ID: 5872 Speaker 1: And was there a certain level of activism here that you hadn't necessarily been exposed to? Speaker 2: There was--eventually, yes. There was, because it, it came to be where, you know, Stokely Carmichael, for example would come on campus, SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] was starting up. While I was at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], we took over the A Building, and so people got active on campus, and it was a whole different level of activism that certainly I had never had that type of exposure being in a very strict, Catholic environment where if you didn't even learn your catechism you were expelled, you know (laughs). So it, it was totally different, and yes, I think it was something that was very good. You, you had the, the Civil Rights Movement going strong. You had individuals who had participated in Brown vs. The Board of Education [of Topeka, Kansas], being president [James M. Nabrit] of our, of our school actually, of Howard. And so you did have a whole different level of involvement and exposure for me that I did not have in my more sterile environment in Philadelphia, growing up in, in the Catholic schools and the Catholic education, which is sort of very sterile and, and, you know, stayed. Speaker 1: And so you had stated briefly that during your time at Howard, you did some volunteer work for the Washington, D.C. Board of Elections? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit about what some of your thoughts were at that age in terms of Washington, D.C. and the whole voting rights issue? Speaker 2: Well, you know, it was one of the things that, that sort of struck me was that Washington did not have the ability, would you believe, to vote for the President of the United States. They didn't have representatives in [U.S.] Congress and that was one of the things that, that I do recall from Philadelphia, in Pennsylvania, you had all of that. And I found it really striking that, in the nation's capital, that they did not have some of the same ability that everyone had everywhere else in this, in the, in the country, right here, Washington, D.C., the seat of the free world where we always championed democracy. And the residents right here could not vote for the President, nor could they vote for their own representatives in Congress or the Senate nor could they vote for their own mayor. The mayor of Washington, at one point--there were three commissioners, as a three-commissioner form of government actually. And so you didn't see that type of involvement that you see from elected leadership now. And later on, even when there was a mayor, it was a mayor who was appointed by the President of the United States. So it still was not a mayor who was elected by the people. Washington was, was fortunate in getting someone, however, like Walter Washington, who did get involved in the community. But actually, the fact that it was an appointment by the President, that mayor if it had been another personality outside of Walter Washington's, could have stayed isolated and away from the people that he represented. While I was at Howard, [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] was assassinated and Washington was a place, unfortunately, who did not take it very hard--and we had fires and, and Washington burned. I was in a dormitory on 16th Street at that time. And you could go up on the roof of sort of a tall building, and you could look out over the city, and you could see fires all over Washington, D.C. where people were saddened and shocked and outraged at the assassination of Martin Luther King, and the city was in turmoil. I remember Walter Washington then, who was mayor--and not elected by the people, but appointed by the President--we saw trucks, I guess it was the National Guard that came into the city to bring everything under control. And I remember Walter Washington standing strong and standing tall and saying we're not going to basically attack the citizens of the District of Columbia. So that was somewhat--a life lesson also, to see him take on and challenge very powerful people for what he thought was right and best for the people he represented. And, and that was something that I think I have always remembered. Speaker 1: And do you think that, you started to develop an interest in politics at that particular time or did that come later? Speaker 2: It, the seed was planted, but there was no growth there yet. I believe the seed was planted. My interest in politics probably came later on when I was doing other volunteer work. One of the requirements for a class at Howard was that we had to do some type of public service, volunteer service, and I opted for service with the Board of Elections and Ethics in Washington. And in doing that, that was my first exposure to it, and so I got interested in that. And it just so happens that right after I graduated from Howard. Speaker 1: And what year did you graduate from Howard? Speaker 2: In 1969, and soon thereafter, there was the first election in Washington, D.C. for elective office, and it wasn't for, it wasn't for Mayor or City Council. It was for the School Board. And there was an individual who was running for the School Board at that time named Marion Barry. And I decided to get involved in that campaign, and so that was my first actual involvement in a campaign. Speaker 1: And what did you get your degree from Howard? Speaker 2: I got a degree in Government, and I had a double minor in History and in Education. Story_ID: 5873 Speaker 1: When I graduated from Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], and I was trying to decide what I was going to do, I--one of the things was in education. And so that was always a possibility to teach, but I had decided that I was going to do something different. And I actually had accepted a job in the private sector, and I was supposed to have started that job in September [of 1969]. My mother [Margaret Beasley Washington Waller] and I were traveling the year that I--summer that I graduated. And so we had decided we were gonna travel, and we did. So I was gonna start the job in September--it was a, it was a great period. It was a period where, at that point, Affirmative Action was coming in and so it was great for African Americans, and it was great for women. And I was what they called a 'two-fer' at that time. You know, if you had anything on the ball at all, you know, you could probably get a fairly decent job, and I had been offered a, a really decent job in the private sector. And I had accepted it. Speaker 2: What kind of job was it? Speaker 1: It was in executive training for General Electric [Company] actually. And I had accepted the job, but it was also the time period where I got engaged. And so then I, it was a matter of living in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. My fianc was in Washington [D.C.], and I decided that perhaps a long-distance marriage wouldn't be good to start out. And so I, I then turned the job down before I started. I was expected to start and I turned it down, and I went into teaching here in Washington. Story_ID: 5874 Speaker 1: Did you meet your Howard--your husband [Dwight Cropp] at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.]? Speaker 2: I did, however, my husband was a teacher at that point. And when I did my student teaching at Howard, my husband was one of the teachers who had been assigned, three student teachers from Howard. He was, had been dubbed an excellent teacher, an outstanding teacher. And what happened was the school system wanted to expose as many students to him as possible. So usually, a teacher would get one student teacher to come under them, but they wanted to expose many more so he actually had three that were assigned to him. I was one of them. The problem was, I did not want to have a male teacher. So I went in, saw it was a male, was very upset, went right back to Howard and tried to get out of his class. And they told me I could not get out of his class. So I said, "Okay." I married him (laughs). So it was, it was sort of fast in the sense that I went into his class in, in February. We got engaged in July and got married the following November [1969]. And now it's thirty-five years later. Speaker 1: Wow, that's wonderful, that's a wonderful story. Speaker 2: And I'd do it all over again (laughs). Story_ID: 5875 Speaker 1: You began your teaching career in Washington, D.C. Public Schools in 1969? Speaker 2: In 1969, September of '69 [1969]. Speaker 1: And what were the schools like during that time period. Speaker 2: The schools were different than they are now, not the same as when I was coming through. You had student who did want to learn, but you also had student who were starting to have some challenges in the community to their, their willingness to learn. You still had students who looked at teachers as being something, somewhat special. So that if you spent that little extra time with them, you could really make a mark with them, an impression on them and help them to achieve and, and to excel. One of the, the biggest problems that I found though was that in some instances the expectation level for our students was not as high as what I thought it should have been, for us to push and challenge them. And I think that was my biggest concern. Speaker 1: And how long did you teach in the public schools? Speaker 2: I actually taught for one year, and I decided to go back and get my Master's. So I taught for one year, and then I did--I was the, the teacher that would go in and, when a teacher wasn't there normally--substitute teacher. The following year I did substitute teaching while I worked on my Master's--it almost killed me. I did it in two semesters, I took fifteen--. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Your Master's? Speaker 2: My Master's in two semesters. I did fifteen hours one semester, twenty-one hours the second semester, and I said, "Never again." I, I wanted to get it over with quickly. I think that was a bit much though. You know, it was like all day, all night, just studying, reading, writing. Speaker 1: And what year did you get your Master's degree? Speaker 2: 1971. Speaker 1: And you got your Master's degree in what? Speaker 2: Guidance and counseling. Story_ID: 5876 Speaker 1: From there you became a guidance counselor? Speaker 2: From there I became a guidance counselor, and I worked in Ward Eight in the District of Columbia as a guidance counselor. It was probably one of the better experiences that I've had in my career. I recall some people saying, "Don't go to Ward Eight. Go to another area of town, it'll be much easier." I went to Ward Eight, low income area of the city, and I'm gonna tell you. I met some of the brightest students you ever would want to meet. The problem was that their exposure had not been to the level that it could have been. The problem was that I don't think people believed in a lot of them, but the worse thing was that many of my students didn't believe in themselves, and that's when I was saying that what--the experience that I had had with mom [Margaret Beasley Washington Waller] and, and saying to me, "You can do it. Oh, you're doing a great job." Those were the types of things that I saw that we needed to do with our young people. I recall there was one young girl who had some serious problems in her family. And she was talented, however, as an artist. And she just didn't believe that she could do anything. And so we put together this little art show for her, and with her paintings, and actually I have one of her paintings--we, we bought them, you know, the different people from the faculty. And we bought--we brought friends there and did her little art show for her and all. And I still to this day have one of her paintings hanging in the dining room of my home, from a seventh grade student in trying to show them that you have so much that you could give. Another student, for example, would say, I'd say, "What do you want to do with your life? What is it you're gonna do?" And they didn't have a vision for what they wanted to do with their life or if so, it wasn't necessarily a positive vision because they just couldn't see beyond that. And, and it made me realize that we have to help our young people to have a vision and let them know that they can go up against odds because if they don't have a vision, then they make that their reality. And I think that, that was--when I understood that no matter what you're doing with these young people, we have to do something to expose them to different things, get more people involved in their lives, more so than, than where they are, and make them believe that they can achieve and they can do other things. Unfortunately, one of the things that has happened, I think, in our society for some of our younger people, particularly, who may be in a certain economic level, is they did not see things outside of their environment. So how would they know that this is what they are supposed to do, if their environment only shows them one thing? Speaker 1: And how long were you a guidance counselor? Speaker 2: I was a Guidance Counselor until 1980 when I was first elected to the Board of Education. Story_ID: 5877 Speaker 1: Why did you decide to run for the [Washington D.C.] Board of Education? Speaker 2: Well, as I told you when I was in college [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], I started volunteering in the, on the political scene. And I kept it up. I continued to volunteer. I would work in campaigns, and you know, when you get involved in campaigns and things such as that, it's a whole new network of people. It's just a culture out there of people who--the political junkies, as such, people who like working in campaigns and doing things like that. And education, obviously, was my background, and at one point a group of people came and said, "Linda, we think you ought to run for the Board of Education." And I said, "No, I'm not interested in doing that." And they said, "Put up or shut up. You know, you keep saying you think that this ought to happen." By this time, I was involved in the PTA [Parent Teacher Association], doing other things to try to make the schools better. My husband [Dwight Cropp] and I had decided, for example, before we got married, and we talked about certain things. One of the things we talked about was that we were gonna send our children to public schools because we were gonna try to make public schools better We believe that one of the problems that we're having with public schools now is that everyone is abandoning them. There was one where, where folks went to public schools, and that helped to make them better. But with everyone leaving the public schools, then you don't have that mix. You don't have that, that way for folks to learn from one another. So people in my neighborhood, we had committed to make our neighborhood school better because we were gonna send our children there. So I got involved with the public schools in, in making a decision to send my children there. And we were gonna make it better. So my husband, Dwight and I, had said, "This is it. We're gonna do the public school thing." Speaker 1: Interesting that you would have that perspective as a person who had never gone to public school. Speaker 2: I had never gone to public school. But I, my background in school, remember, was the social sciences. So I looked at things, and at this point, I saw where things were, were changing. And I was trying to figure out what the difference was, and one thing was that I saw happening was that people were leaving public education. And maybe in my own background, I was one, who, who did leave, you know, when my mother [Margaret Beasley Washington Waller] sent me to Catholic schools. But you used to have the thing where the teachers in the neighborhood sent their children to the same school. The minister's children went to the same school, the undertaker's children, the doctor's children, but now, that wasn't the case. And as I started my career, and I was looking at the children with whom I was working, I saw that there was a need for that type of exposure of just different people so that folks can learn from each other, all the way around, that there could be that learning. So I got involved with my neighborhood school on the PTA. And so then individuals came at one point, and they said, "We think you ought to run for the Board of Education." I said, "Oh, no, I'm not interested in running for public office at all." And they said, "No, put up or shut up." And I did, and that was the start of my elected career. It was an off--Board of Education was an office for which you had to run and become elected. And I ran and was elected as the Ward Four representative to the Board of Education. Speaker 1: And how long did you serve on the Board of Education? Speaker 2: I served on the Board of Education--I was elected in 1980, started my service in 1981 and I served from 1981 through 1990. Story_ID: 5878 Speaker 1: I ran for the [Washington, D.C.] City Council in 1990 and started my term in 1991. Speaker 2: So why did you decide to make the transition from [Washington D.C.] Board of Education to City Council? Speaker 1: I had not actually planned on running for the City Council. Education was just something in which I had an interest and a concern. I thought that after a while you needed to leave. Personally, I don't think you need to stay in one particular office for too long. I think you need to, to leave it and let someone else come in and then try to make those changes that needs to happen. So I had decided I had stayed my time in education on the Board of Education. And it was time for me to, to move. Actually, I was gonna move into the private sector at that point, and once again, in working with people and talking with people and, and being involved in this political culture, the folks said, "Linda, listen, we need you in the city. You've been involved in the city. We would like to support you for the City Council." At first I actually, I had said, "No." And a lot of those folks had started supporting another individual, another candidate. And people came back, and said, "Look, we need you to think about this." And I changed my mind, and I did run, and I was elected in 1991. Story_ID: 5879 Speaker 1: Your husband worked in the [Washington, D.C. Mayor] Marion Barry administration? Speaker 2: Yes, he did. My husband, Dwight Cropp, we got married in 1969. Actually, he started out, he was--I met him, he was an educator, but he was about to leave the school system at that point because he wanted other experiences. I actually took over his classes when he left. I took over his classroom and his class assignments when he left. And he did many things. He was a Yale [University] Urban Fellow, worked with the Office of Education. He worked as an Assistant to the Chairman, actually of the City Council at one point here in the District of Columbia. It was an appointed chairman at that time, appointed by the president. And he worked for superintendent, Hugh Scott. He was one of his chief assistants when he was superintendent of schools. Marion Barry was then elected as president of the Board of Education, and he recruited it from the superintendent to work with him. And then when Marion Barry was elected mayor, he once again recruited my husband, Dwight Cropp, to come and work on his staff, and he was Secretary to the District of Columbia. Story_ID: 5880 Speaker 1: Were some people surprised that you were actually the one running for office and not your husband [Dwight Cropp]? Speaker 2: Yes, (laughs). People really were. I mean my husband, he's a brilliant man and well known, thought of highly. I mean he is really thought of in an extremely positive way and well deserved. He's a wonderful man. And so everyone, I suspect probably just assumed that, that he would be the one in elected office. And it's really interesting that it ends up that here I am. And I even thought that. I, I saw him as being mayor for example (laughs). He could something like that. But, you know, when you look at our personalities, you can see it. And elective office, people sometimes only see the glamour part, but there're some other things that go with elected office that you need a certain type of personality to be able to deal with. For example, if you, you come home after a very, very trying and tiring day, and you get home and the phone rings and there's a meeting of the community. And folks want to see you at that meeting, and you had your mind set on coming home and relaxing, and you have to turn around and go right back out to that meeting, I could do that kind of thing. I can switch up very quickly. My husband is very planned, and so that type of life would not have suited him well. Story_ID: 5881 Speaker 1: Chairwoman Cropp, your 1990 election, you ran against Marion Barry, former [Washington, D.C.] Mayor Marion Barry in that election. Can you tell us a little bit about that race? Speaker 2: Certainly, we were running for the same seat. Actually, what happened was he had been Mayor by this for three terms. He had run into some difficulties. So he decided he was gonna run for a City Council position, and it happened to have been the same seat that I was also running for. And it was a time period where I felt that I was the better candidate and also that perhaps, Marion Barry needed to move in a different direction and the city needed to move in a different direction. And I thought that I would be better positioned to help that, help the city transition into that different mode. It was somewhat of a difficult election in the sense that, you know, I, I believed actually that Marion Barry had done a lot of good for the city. He obviously had some difficulties as we all have. His difficulties were probably a little more public than most. So it was somewhat of a bittersweet election for me because I had campaigned for Marion Barry in the past. Many of his campaigns, I was a part of it and worked very hard to make sure that he was elected. And, but so that was the, the somewhat bitter part to now run for the same seat that he was running for, and believing that I was a better candidate and what the city needed at that time. Speaker 1: And what impact do you think his drug arrest had on the city? Speaker 2: I think it had a big impact on the city. Unfortunately, for Washington, it's not really a true democracy. We don't govern ourselves. Every piece of legislation that we pass has to go through, would you believe, the Congress of the United States. We have to go and present our budget to the congress, as chairman of the council, every year I go to the house and I go to the senate, and I present our budget to Congress. Ironically, many people throughout the country think that the federal government supports Washington, D.C. and they don't. We raise our own revenue. There are many other states and, and local jurisdictions who get more money from the federal government than we do here in Washington. In fact, at one point during my testimony, I presented that to some of the people who were on the committee challenging what Washington was doing. And I presented to them, this is what your jurisdiction gets from the federal government, much more than what Washington gets. And so the people and the citizens of the District of Columbia ought to make the determination with regard to how their dollars are spent. So that's a fact that a lot of people across the country are not aware, that we raise our own money. We send more people to fight in the wars than many people in some of the other states. We pay more federal taxes than many other jurisdictions pay. However, we have no voting representation in Congress. And unfortunately, ofttimes members of Congress want to have direct input on what happens in Washington, and they want to use Washington as their laboratory, things that they can't do in their own jurisdiction that they represent--"We'll let Mickey do it here in Washington." "We're gonna make them do it--," but they can't do that in their own jurisdiction. And so because of the problems that Marion Barry had, that ended up being nationally known, and internationally known, it had an impact on the District of Columbia. And I, and I thought and I think a lot of other citizens, that it would have had a negative impact on us if, if he was elected. But beyond that, I just personally felt that he did not need to be in that environment for, for himself at that point, that, that he needed to have that period to, to heal himself from whatever. And so at any rate, he did not win that particular election. Speaker 1: And going into the election, did you think you could beat him? Speaker 2: You know, this is from my mom [Margaret Beasley Washington Waller] again. I thought I could win (chuckle). Yeah, I went into that, I went into that race believing that I could win. I had a message to tell the citizens. I wanted to start working toward change for the District. The District was going through a bad period. We were then starting to run out of money, become insolvent. I felt that I could bring about the positive changes, and also, would you believe, help the city to believe in itself again, very much like I think we, as individuals, my students had to believe in itself because the District had received so much negative press and all then and a little later on that the citizens and--the citizens themselves and the city itself did not think that it could do, I think everything that we could do. Story_ID: 5882 Speaker 1: What are some of your thoughts today about the city [Washington, D.C.] and particularly, about the re-gentrification that's taking place in the city? Speaker 2: You know, the city has gone through a huge metamorphosis. As, as I had said earlier, the city was starting to become insolvent, and in fact, eventually, a financial authority had been appointed by congress. Part of it, I believe, was because they were trying to get back at Marion Barry again, who eventually ended up being elected mayor again, you know, coming back as Mayor. And I don't think a lot of people liked that. And that's why I said earlier, you know, I don't know if it was all good for him to, to come back at that point because [U.S.] Congress took it out on the city. And they did some things to the city, and one was appointing a financial authority. We did have problems; our bonds were near junk-bond status. But I have to take this opportunity to say, though, that the District was functioning under some very trying circumstances. The District of Columbia, for example, was the only city, the only city in the country that had to pay 50 percent of its Medicaid. Medicaid is usually paid by the federal government and by the state government. The District of Columbia was the only city in the country that had to pay for the incarceration of its felons. That's usually a, a cost that is borne by the federal government and by state governments. The District of Columbia that used to be under the retirement system of the federal government now had its own retirement and pension fund, but the money that the people had put in there, the federal government didn't give it to the District. So the District, not because of anything it did, but because the federal government had not sent the money with the people who were retiring, it helped to make--all of these factors helped to make the District insolvent. And I submit that if you had any other jurisdiction, any other city or state that had to pay--the city in particular, that had to pay fifty percent of its Medicaid, they had to pay for the incarceration of its felons, and they had an unfunded pension liability that they didn't create, they would have gone under much earlier than the District of Columbia saw its problems. So the District of Columbia did have problems. There were some management problems. I don't want to say that there weren't any management problems. But you would have been able--we would have been able to sustain those, but it was those other problems that really created this big concern for the District. And we had the financial authority that was imposed on us by Congress. And there were certain rules and guidelines that we had to do to, to come out from under them. We went in there with a $528 million dollar deficit--accumulated deficit, that we had. And they had given us like eight years to come out from under the financial authority. Well, what we did, we--I don't think any other jurisdiction had the ability to do. Not only did we come out from under it, way before they had expected us to come out from it, under it. We ended up with a fund balance of about eight hundred million dollars. Right now, as most--many, not most, but, but several jurisdictions across the country are getting negative bond ratings or negative future outlooks, the District's future outlook from Wall Street [financial district in New York] is positive. Our bond rating has increased. That is not occurring other places in the city. People are flocking to the District of Columbia. Businesses are coming to the District of Columbia. We've opened up a Home Depot [home improvement store] that usually doesn't even open up inside of a city. You know, that's a suburban type store. It's opened up in the District of Columbia. It has done better business in the District of Columbia than most of its other stores that are opened other places. We have Best Buy [electronics store] that has opened up in the District of Columbia; usually something that opens up in suburban areas, not in the city. It too is doing well. We, we are at a point now where the District is doing so well, but we are also suffering from how good we're doing. Property values are going up because everyone wants to come here. Houses that were selling just a few years ago for eighty and ninety-thousand dollars are now selling for five-hundred-thousand dollars. And these are, are simple row houses, townhouses that have, that may be a hundred years old or fifty years old. And they're selling for five-hundred-thousand dollars now. And when you look at that, and you look at the taxes that would be associated with those homes, it's quickly getting to the place where the average person cannot afford to live in the District of Columbia. Speaker 1: And the average black person. Speaker 2: The average black person or the average young person. I mean it's really, it's, it's to the point--and we're talking, we aren't talking about people who are not working. These are, could be young professionals or young people just starting out their careers who can't afford the, the high rent, fifteen hundred to three thousand dollars a month rent for something very small and it's not necessarily your top-of-the-line apartment, that they would be living in. And housing that would start in what you would think would just be an average place, starting at three, five-hundred-thousand dollars for these houses. So there has been great concerns about gentrification occurring here in Washington. That's one of the things that I'm trying to address. And, in fact, I have introduced a sense of a council resolution that will have mandatory inclusionary zoning. And the essence of that is that if we have a developer building housing in the District, let's say a hundred units for example, it has to be a certain number of housing, but let's just use a hundred units. They have to keep a certain number of those units at affordable prices. And we would give them certain set-asides or certain advantages so that they won't lose money. But we're coming up with ways in the city to try to make sure that we keep affordable housing here. We have funded over the past few years the house of production trust fund, production trust fund, and I think we've done better than any other city across this country in funding this trust fund. And the whole purpose of this is, is to give developers an opportunity to go out and just build affordable housing so that we do not run people out of this city who are of modest income means and, and people who are working every day though. The worse thing that could happen to Washington [D.C.] or I think any other city, is to become a city of only the very rich and the very poor, and you do not have as part of the fiber and fabric of your city, a strong middle class, and a strong emergency, younger group, who are starting out to be part of the future of your city. Speaker 1: And, you know, some have said that as gentrification is taking place, as Washington, D.C. become whiter, then we perhaps will see voting rights here in the city. And what's your response to that? What are some of your thoughts about that? Speaker 2: That's a possi-, that's a possibility. You know, I think part of what the biggest problem is for voting rights, I don't think it's as much race as it is party. The concern is that if Washington, D.C. had its votes for the senate and the house, that there would be two more Democratic senators. Washington is an overwhelmingly Democratic town, so much so, the modified home rule that we have--this, this doesn't exist anywhere in the country. Would you believe the legislation that Congress passed to cre-, to give Washington the type of home rule that we have, where we can elect our mayor and elect our city council members, it requires that two seats on the city council has to be non-major party seats. In other words, people here can elect whomever they want to elect for a public office. Two of those seats are reserved for people who are not in the majority party. The majority party is obviously Democrats here. It always has been. So that you have to save two seats for people who are not Democrats. That never happens anywhere in this country. The citizens have the ability to vote for whomever they elect. Story_ID: 5883 Speaker 1: In 1997, you made history here in the District of Columbia by becoming the first woman to chair the City Council. What was that accomplishment like for you? Speaker 2: It, it was good. It was, it was a milestone because I thought that I could make a difference. Would you believe my official title is Chairman, and I often--when I go up on the [Capitol] Hill, I, I, I usually say that. And I remind people, and I always say, the title is chairman because I don't think they ever thought a female would end up being chair of the council of the District of Columbia. It was a wonderful accomplishment. It was also a challenge. It said that the citizens of the District of Columbia believed that I could make a difference. But it also meant that Linda Cropp had to live up to that belief and had to work hard to, to validate the confidence that the citizens had shown in me. So I've tried to work hard and, and make a difference in the lives of the citizens and make Washington, D.C. a much better place. Story_ID: 5884 Speaker 1: Major League Baseball in Washington, D.C. There, there was--it almost didn't happen. Let's talk a little bit about that and why you felt that it was important to, in your words, stand up for the citizens of Washington, D.C., even if it meant Major League Baseball not coming here? Speaker 2: You know, in dealing with that issue, that was probably one of the hardest issues that I dealt with. It wasn't the most important. You know, I've dealt with education, I've dealt with health care for the people I represent. I've dealt with the need of housing. I've dealt with substance abuse problems, incarceration problems. Baseball, if you had said, on a scale of one to ten, where would that fall in the area of which you've dealt with, it certainly wouldn't have been one of the major ones. But it ended up being one of the toughest issues that I've ever had to deal with. And what happened was, you know, we in Washington wanted baseball. We haven't had it for thirty-three years, and we wanted it. And it was something we were trying to get. And I joined with the mayor [Anthony A. Williams] in trying to bring Major League Baseball back to Washington, D.C. And I truly wanted it, and I was out there as a cheerleader saying "Rah, rah, rah, come on." The problem occurred when I finally saw the agreement that had been signed by the mayor and Major League Baseball. And that agreement that I finally saw after two years of, of encouraging baseball to come was an agreement that was really harmful to the District of Columbia. The people that I represented were, many were vehemently against that because everything was in favor of Major League Baseball--multimillionaires, but it was up to the city to not only pay for everything for the stadium, but the risks to the city was just, in my mind, outrageous. And it seemed to me that I had to take a position to reduce the costs to the citizens that I represent and to reduce the risks for the District of Columbia. But in doing that, it was said that Major League Baseball would leave. I had to very quickly make a decision what I was gonna do. Was I gonna stand up and try to protect the people who elected me, who I represented or was I gonna bring baseball into the city at any costs. And I made the decision I could not support baseball coming into the District of Columbia at any costs. I represent the citizens of Washington, D.C., and I had to do something to protect them. When I go about my work, I often ask myself quietly, "If this were your money, is this how you would spend it? Is this how you would behave?" And I had to say, "No," on the agreement that was before the council. If it were my personal money, I would not do it that way. I could do no less for the citizens of the District of Columbia. So I decided I had to, to take a stand, raise some concerns and try to make it a better deal for the District. Well, I had not imagined what would have occurred by doing that. You would have thought that for some people I was taking away their first-born, just because I wanted something better for the people I represented. The agreement, would you believe, we were asked to pay and build something that would cost the city six hundred million dollars, which is a lot of money, when we had a lot of needs in this city. The mayor, to his credit, I had said from the beginning we could not take money out of the general budget. And the mayor, to his credit did not take money out of the general budget. So it was other ways in which we were gonna pay for it, but still it was something that was very risky and costly to the citizens. If we built the stadium in three years, there was nothing to say that they couldn't pick up and leave, like they did before. We built a stadium once before and the [Washington] Senators [professional baseball team] got up one day and left the District of Columbia. We just got finished paying for that one. I didn't want that to happen to my, my constituents again. If something happened and we didn't finish that stadium on time, the District was at serious risk for having to pay fines, terrible fines. We were providing a place for them to play, but it was just that the stadium was not, would not be ready, but not through any fault of the District of Columbia. I didn't think the citizens should have to pay tens of millions of dollars in fines when it was not completed through no fault of their own. So I just decided to take a stand. I listened to the people that I represented, who many of them had great concerns about this baseball deal and decided that it had to change in order for it to come to the District of Columbia. I was told I didn't know who I was up against. I was told that, that Major League Baseball will not negotiate with me. They will get up and leave. I was asked was I prepared for Major League Baseball to get up and leave. Speaker 1: Were you? Speaker 2: I was. You know, my mother [Margaret Beasley Washington Waller], my mother, again, told me once, you know, "When you're bargaining you have to be ready to lose the deal. People have to know that aren't going to accept anything. If people think that you will just accept whatever they put out for you, then they're gonna keep doing you in and the only way that you will be able to get a good deal if you are bargaining with people who are used to bargaining well, is that, Linda, you're gonna have to be willing to walk away from the deal. And they're gonna know, have to know that you're willing to walk away." And as long as they thought that I, and the city, was going to accept anything that they put before us, they had us over the barrel. But I think once they realized that I was willing to walk away from that deal, then they were ready to negotiate. And what we were able to get is something much better for the city. If they walk away before we finish paying for this stadium, baseball is gonna have to pay for it. They have to pay half the costs of the insurances. Our liability and our risk for not completing the stadium has been reduced significantly. And in addition, we're now looking and reviewing proposals that will enable us to have half of the stadium to be paid for with private dollars and not the District's dollars. I think it's a much better deal for the District of Columbia. We will have a baseball team, and in the final analysis, after an awful lot of grief, it was good. You know, I had to think a long time of a saying that's actually in my office behind my desk, a saying of Mother Theresa's when she said, "God, I know you won't give me anything I can't handle. I just wish you wouldn't trust me so much." (laughs) And I said that an awful lot during this fight with Major League Baseball. Racism came out big time with this. I think that was one of my biggest surprises. Not just with, you know, the issue of do you want baseball or not, but I started getting hateful letters and hateful e-mails and I, I still had to stand up and, and try not to let that phase me as I was doing what I thought was right and, and best. You just wouldn't imagine some of the hatred that came through during that time period. The worse people were really the sports writers. They just gave out total misinformation. And it was an education for me with them. Their only interest was their job, the fact that you were talking about a baseball team, and they wanted to be able to, to say a baseball team. And they just saw this woman, Linda Cropp, as stopping a baseball team from coming, never looking to see what the impact was on the citizens of the District of Columbia, who had to pay for this. But I, I just decided that I had to remember what my mom said and just--you have to stand tall with, with what you believed in. My husband, Dwight [Cropp], was just a wonderful support for this, during this period, which was a trying period. I suspect for him too, to see all of this going on. And so my family, and citizens, I got so much encouragement from different citizens who also said, you're doing the right thing. Ironically, after it was all over, I started getting e-mail and letters again, from people who had sent some of the negative ones, apologizing and saying they really hadn't looked at the issue. They were going with the emotion of wanting baseball, and that now that they have had a time to step back and look at it, they saw that I was right and my position was right. But that was two months of, of pure hell, constantly that I went through. One person called once who was in support of my position and said, "You know, you're our Joan of Arc." I said, "Yeah, but Joan of Arc died at the stake." They said, "Hey, you got to go for a good cause (laughs)." Story_ID: 5885 Speaker 1: How would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: I would like to be remembered as doing what was necessary to make this place a better place for people; having a positive impact on the lives of individuals; whether or not they were the people who I represented or people I met. My mother [Margaret Beasley Washington Waller] used to always say when I was little, "Say 'Hello' to everyone you pass in the street, no matter who they are. You say, 'Hi,' to them, and you say a kind word, and, and maybe that will be something to send them off in a positive direction." So I would like to be remembered as someone who, who made life better for people in this world, in some way, shape or form. Story_ID: 5886 Speaker 1: Could we some day see Mayor Linda Cropp for the District of Columbia? Speaker 2: I, I don't know. You know, I have a lot of options, a lot of things to think through. I was also taught, not only by my mom [Margaret Beasley Washington Waller] and my husband [Dwight Cropp], and, and supporters, they said, "Never close any doors." You know, you never close any opportunities. You always leave your options open. That's always an option. I just have to think through if that's the place for me and will I be able to serve. Story_ID: 5887 Speaker 1: What do you believe your legacy will be? Speaker 2: I, I think I have a legacy. Actually, you know, it's interesting with this baseball that's so fresh on my mind. I think it's a, it's a legacy I hope to show people that no matter how small you are or how small people think you are, that you should be willing to challenge, to question and to bring about change for the best. And you have that ability to do it if you believe it can be done. Story_ID: 5888 Speaker 1: Wat advice do you have for someone who may be interested in a career in public service, who may be interested in a career in politics? Speaker 2: Always remember that you--you're there to represent people. It's not about you. It's about the people you represent, and always stay grounded with the real world that you're just one of those people that you represent...