 Story_ID: 256275 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm the interviewer today for The HistoryMakers, our videographer is Scott Stearns. Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Sure, it's [HistoryMaker] Christopher R. Cloud, C-H-R-I-S-T-O-P-H-E-R, R is for Ragin, R-A-G-I-N, Cloud, C-L-O-U-D. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Four, fifteen, sixty-nine [April 15, 1969] and I was born in Washington, D.C., at Providence Hospital. Speaker 1: Okay, sir, what is your occupation? Speaker 2: President and CEO of AMISTAD America Incorporated. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today is Valentine's Day, February 14, 2005. Speaker 1: Okay, and where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: Presently we're in New Haven, Connecticut at our main corporate offices at 746 Chapel Street, New Haven. Story_ID: 256276 Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions I am compelled to ask. Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: They only require a short answer. The first one is, do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Do I have a favorite food? Yes, sushi. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: The spring. Speaker 1: A favorite color? Speaker 2: Blue. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: St. Croix, United States Virgin Islands. Speaker 1: And, finally, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: "To whom much is given, much is required" [Luke 12:48]. Story_ID: 256277 Speaker 1: Now I'm going to ask you about your family history. Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [HistoryMaker Sanford Cloud, Jr.] side. We'll start with your mother's side. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Sure, my mother's full name is Diane Marie Brown Cloud. Speaker 1: Okay, can you spell that for us? Speaker 2: D-I-A-N-E, Marie, M-A-R-I-E, Brown, B-R-O-W-N, Cloud, C-L-O-U-D. Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: My mother was born in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. Her date of birth is November 11th and I don't know the date. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have any idea? Speaker 2: She's fifty-eight, I believe, so forty something, '44 [1944], '46 [1946], somewhere around there. Speaker 1: Yeah, right, '40 [1940], '50 [1950], yeah '46 [1946], it sounds like it's about right. What do you know about your mother's side of the family? How far back can you trace the ancestors on that side? Speaker 2: A great deal actually. My mother's side of the family is from a little place in South Carolina called Sumter, South Carolina [sic. Summerton, South Carolina] and her side of the family are both Ragins and Watsons, hence my middle name, Ragin. My grandmother, Mae Dell Ragin Brown is my grandmother and my grandfather on the other side is Oscar Brown. Now my grandfather was from Philadelphia, himself, born and raised. My grandmother's from South Carolina and I know about her parents and her grandparents so that would make them my great-great grandparents. His name was William Ragin. He was an Irish fellow who was a horse trainer who ended up having a relationship with a black woman, presumably a slave, probably in the middle to latter part of the 19th century, and hence the rest of my family. It's a big family on the Ragin, Watson side. My grandmother is one of, I believe, ten brothers and sisters, all of whom have passed but two. On my, on my grandfather's side, he had a brother and I had a great-grandfather, Henry Oscar Brown who lived to be 102 years old. He was from Georgia and came up from Georgia to Philadelphia when he was a young boy, probably six, eight years old, worked primarily in the railroads as a sleeping car porter and actually fixed some of the railroad, laid some of the rail lines and so on and so forth. He was quite the character. Drank whiskey well into his hundreds and walked every day and quite a character. I remember him very vividly, very fondly. Great stories about growing up down South and being on the train and, you know, when he was a young man, he used to carry a pistol strapped to his, black man in Philadelphia carried a pistol to his, to his hip, and I still have memories of him. I mean, he was 102 when he died so I was probably, I don't know, sixteen, seventeen, maybe even older when he died. Speaker 1: Okay, is he any relation to the famous [HistoryMaker] Oscar Brown [Jr.], the musician? Speaker 2: No, no, no. My grandfather was quite the entrepreneur though. Not my great-grandfather but my grandfather, he owned a car dealership and, you know, the pharmacy and a couple of Burger Kings in Philadelphia, so they were solidly middle class as it were for Philadelphia standards in the '40s [1940s] and '50s [1950s]. My grandmother, I mean my mother, went to Girls High [Philadelphia High School for Girls, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] which was an all-girl preparatory school and then she graduated and went on to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.]. And so as a young person, they used to go down to the Jersey Shore in Atlantic City [New Jersey] and they'd come all the way up to Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts] and Buzzards Bay [Massachusetts] and stuff when they were kids. So my, my mother grew up in a well-educated middle class background. Story_ID: 256278 Speaker 1: My father's upbringing was a little bit different. He was from Hartford [Connecticut]. Speaker 2: Now can you give us his full name and spell it for us? Speaker 1: Sure, [HistoryMaker] Sanford Cloud, Jr. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: S-A-N-F-O-R-D, C-L-O-U-D, Jr. Speaker 2: And, and what's his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 1: My father was born on the 27th of November and he would have been born, I guess, in '44 [1944], my mother [Diane Brown Cloud], '46 [1946], yeah, '44 [1944]. Speaker 2: Okay, okay now, you were telling us about his, the ancestors on that side. Speaker 1: Yeah, my father grew up in Hartford. He was the oldest of three siblings. His brother, Gilbert [M. Cloud], and his sister, Janice [Cloud]. His parents were Sanford [Cloud], Sr. and Inez Morgan [Cloud], which is my twin brother Adam's middle name, Adam Morgan Cloud, Christopher Ragin Cloud. We both took the middle names, our middle names are our grandmothers' maiden names. Grew up in Hartford. They grew up with a great deal of love but my grandfather never had more than a sixth grade education. He actually worked for, goodness, almost fifty-some odd years for a series of different owners of a Cadillac dealership in Hartford. He was a mechanic. My grandmother, when she worked, didn't work much but she, 'cause my grandfather felt strongly that she didn't, it was definitely a different era back then, but she worked from time to time at G. Fox [& Co.], which was a major department store here in Hartford. Both of them not formally educated but real salt of the earth people and the Cloud family has been in Hartford for, let's see, at least five generations now. My great-grandfather, Robert Cloud, brought the family here from Stone Mountain, Georgia. My grandmother's side, Inez Morgan, came from America [sic. Americus, Georgia] so they were from the general, same general area. To hear my grandfather tell the stories, there was a preacher, I guess from down south, and this happened a lot in the Great Migration for blacks up north. You know, one would come and determine that it was okay and that there were jobs and there were opportunity and the rest would follow. So my grandfather, great-grandfather, Robert Cloud, came up here, they had a plot of land, first in Wethersfield [Connecticut], then in Enfield [Connecticut], and were farmers, basically, and would, on the weekends bring their stuff in to market street, downtown Hartford, State Street, and sell it, so on and so forth, big family, another big family, nine, ten, and my grandfather was the oldest of all of them. Speaker 2: Now, about what year did they come to this area? Speaker 1: I, I think 1906, somewhere in and around there, straight to Hartford, and, you know, I remember growing up with just a tremendous amount of, not just my immediate aunts and uncles, but a lot of cousins and a lot of family friends. The Cloud name, you know, because I had my, my grandfather's brothers and sisters were all fairly accomplished themselves, you know, musicians and some of my family members are, on that side, are very musically inclined, so, I grew up with a lot of that and I couldn't go anywhere as a kid and say my name and people not know who I was, you know, because they knew my Uncle Paul [Cloud] or my, my other uncles and such. So it was a, and we lived very close to my grandparents growing up, the ones that were here in Connecticut. My, my great-grandfather tells the story, I guess, is that our, our original family name is not Cloud, it's Stemrich [sic. Stembridge], which was a Scottish name. Stemrich, this fellow Stemrich in Georgia-- Speaker 2: How do you spell that, that, do you know? Speaker 1: I'm not sure, I'd have to ask my dad. Speaker 2: But it's-- Speaker 1: S-T-E-M-R-I-C-H [sic.], I'd imagine, Stemrich, English, Scottish name. Anyways, he [Joseph B. Stembridge], he had a relationship with a, obviously with a, with a black and Native American woman who would have been my great-great grandmother [Mary "Molly" Cloud], and it was not a wanted relationship. She took, when she gave birth to her children, gave them her last name, which was Cloud and so that's how we've dealt, we never used the Stemrich last name. It's a, I think something very similar that many African Americans can equate to in their history and relate to, I should say, in their history. Speaker 2: Okay, that's an interesting story. That's, yeah, you're right. The same thing that's true in my family on my father's side. Speaker 1: Yeah, absolutely. Speaker 2: Yeah, same thing, yeah. Speaker 1: So I, I remember one, a very emotional time, was when we went back, I must have been, I don't know, twelve, fourteen years old, we drove from, in a bus, from Hartford to Georgia so that my grandfather could go and see Stone Mountain where he was from and my grandfather had been in World War One [WWI] in the Pacific, in the Pacific Rim and, you know, had a horrid experience as a black man, hated flying and refused to fly. He never flew his entire life so we took a bus for twenty-some hours from Hartford to, to Georgia, and I just remember him, being a child, I must have been twelve, fourteen years old and him crying, you know, being on the, on the grounds where he remembered as a child because he was about eight or so he tells me when he came up here in 1906. So, I have a great deal of family history. My sister [Robin Cloud] and others have done a, one of your questions was is there a family tree and there is some work that the Cloud side has done and, at our, about three, four years ago on my, on the Ragin side, the Watson side, my grandmother [Mae Dell Ragin Brown] and her sisters and cousins have done some research about the Ragins and the Watsons. So, we have a good sense of knowing who we are and where we come from, at least for the last four or five generations, very solidly. Story_ID: 256279 Speaker 1: Tell us about your father, just briefly. Speaker 2: Sure, Sandy, as everyone calls him, [HistoryMaker] Sanford [Cloud], Jr., my father grew up in Hartford [Connecticut]. He was, how I put it, as the oldest, he always had a lot of responsibility for his brother, Gil [Gilbert Morgan Cloud], and his sister Janice [Cloud]. He went to the public high schools, Northwest-Jones [Elementary School, Hartford, Connecticut]. He went to [Thomas Snell] Weaver High School [Hartford, Connecticut], what's now called Weaver High School. Went off originally to Arizona State [Teacher's College; Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona] to become a golf pro because, as a young person, he learned that as opposed to carrying the paper or doing jobs like that, he went up to the all-Jewish country club, Tumble Brook [Country Club, Bloomfield, Connecticut], and he used to caddy and liked that a lot better. He certainly liked the money better and that's where he fell in love with the game of golf as a young person. He was also a pretty well-known pitcher in high school and a basketball player and so on and so forth, a good all-around athlete, and the game of golf, I think in, when you speak to him, he'll tell you, has probably had one of the largest influences in his life because it's carried through thematically the, I think the way that he, that he grew up, the lessons he learned about being a gentleman and about following a code of ethics and response--being responsible and so on and so forth. That's something that he gained at a very early age and he just loves the game. He's a hell of a golfer, I must say. And, you know, he went to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.]. He says on the first day he met my mother [Diane Brown Cloud] and, across on the campus at Howard, and that was the end of it. They got married in [Andrew] Rankin [Memorial] Chapel [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] and my brother [Adam Morgan Cloud] and I were born, as I said, twins in [Washington] D.C., and it's been a wonderful life. My father's my hero. He is the person that I probably have the most respect for in my life and it's certainly influenced, not that my mother has not, but in a different way as a father. I think I feel very fortunate that I've had a strong black man as a father who has been able to guide me and lead me and he's always been there for me and I, I have nothing but the greatest amount of respect for him for doing that. Story_ID: 256280 Speaker 1: How many siblings do you have or is it just you and your brother? Speaker 2: No, it's, I have a twin brother [Adam Morgan Cloud], identical twin brother, he's seven minutes older than me, he never lets me forget it, and we share a younger sister, Robin [Cloud], who is five years younger, six years younger. So, it's Robin, as the youngest, and my brother and I. Story_ID: 256281 Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: Hum, earliest childhood memory? I think one of the earliest childhood memories I have is being about three or four and my parents [Diane Brown Cloud and HistoryMaker Sanford Cloud, Jr.] took us on a trip to San Francisco [California]. So the first time being on a plane and so on and so forth, and we met, we went to visit my godfather and godmother, John and Sandra Britton [ph.] in San Francisco, because they lived out there at the time, and I remember being on that very windy street in San Francisco that they lived not far from, and there's a picture of my brother [Adam Morgan Cloud] and I, you know, all dressed up, looking identical, and-- Speaker 1: It's Lombard Street, I think. Speaker 2: Yeah, Lombard Street, and having, these little Chinese fisher cap, the fisherman's caps on, and remembering thinking how fascinating it was that this street wound the way that it did and being in a new place and going out to the ocean on the West Coast. I remember that as clear as day and I, again, I think I must have been three or four years old. I also remember, you know, growing up and my great-grandfather [Henry Oscar Brown], who used to sit both of us on his knee and he would take his little pocket knife and he used to carve peach pits and make little baskets out of 'em and that goes back even further, you know, being on his knee down in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. So, great memories as a child, you know. Our house on Plainfield Street in Hartford [Connecticut]. My dog, Buffy [ph.], all those kind of things. Yeah, I remember a great deal, actually, about my childhood. A very pleasant childhood and, and I think it, it's formed a good deal of who I am and the way I approach things based on the positive upbringing I had. Story_ID: 256282 Speaker 1: Well, what was some of the sights and sounds and smells of childhood? Speaker 2: Of childhood? My mother's [Diane Brown Cloud] a great cook. So, I remember that distinctly. I remember a lot of family. Now, remember, now, I grew, I was born in '69 [1969], so I also remember my parents and great parties. A lot of music, always, from Bob Marley to Earth, Wind & Fire to Minnie Riperton, you know, Aretha Franklin. I mean, I grew up listening to all that Motown. Now, I still listen to it now, you know. Every--when I was in high school [Northwest Catholic High School, West Hartford, Connecticut], I would listen to old school stuff and people are like, why you listening--how come you're not listening to LL Cool J because that was just the stuff that was in my head growing up and I remember Sunday brunches and our neighbor, Tom Harris [ph.], would make, you know, blueberry pancakes and the whole neighborhood, and all these adults, I had all these fascinating adults in my life growing up, white and black and, you know, so on and so forth, a very diverse, for Hartford's [Hartford, Connecticut] standards, neighborhood. My father [HistoryMaker Sanford Cloud, Jr.] was a lawyer so like a lot of his law partners they would swap houses and have big brunches and things like that, so I remember that greatly, and because my father was in politics, too, there was always a lot of commotion around our house. You know, people always stopping in and wanting to talk to my dad, either early in the morning, late at night, you know, phone calls and, you know, help my son get out of jail, that kind of stuff. And so, I, I always remember it being a very vibrant atmosphere, you know. A lot of discourse and interchange, you know. A lot of family events and activities because my grandparents [Inez Morgan Cloud and Sanford Cloud, Sr.] and cousins and things were very close. Some of my cousins lived right down the street from us. So, yeah, a lot of, a lot of family memories. Story_ID: 256283 Speaker 1: Now what school did you attend? Speaker 2: A couple. The first school I went to was, was Renbrook [School, West Hartford, Connecticut], which is a private school and my mother [Diane Brown Cloud] was a teacher there at the time, one of the few black teachers at Renbrook. Speaker 1: How do you spell that, is it? Speaker 2: R-E-N-B-R-O-O-K, Renbrook. It's up in West Hartford [Connecticut], in the suburb right next to the town, right next to Hartford [Connecticut]. And that was interesting because, you know, we were the only, not the only but, Twanette Johnson [ph.], myself, my brother [Adam Morgan Cloud], maybe one other kid, there were only four or five of us in the entire school that were black, and because my mother was a teacher there, you know, it was, had that dynamic as well, you know, but I remember having to drive over the hill. From my house in Hartford, I could see what's called Avon Mountain [Talcott Mountain, Avon, Connecticut], which is the, which is where the school was, and I remember sitting there, on Plainfield Street, and what I thought was the most pleasant place to ever grow up. I didn't think or yearn for anything else because we had what we wanted, love and I had, you know, big wheels and bicycles and all that kind of stuff, a lot of friends and family, so, but I remember thinking, there's a, there's a whole another world up in those mountains, or beyond those mountains. The fact that I could see them from my house really drew me and then the experience at Renbrook was interesting being, as I said, the only black kid. We went from there to, let me think, Noah Webster [Elementary School; Noah Webster MicroSociety Magnet School, Hartford, Connecticut], which was the neighborhood school, because we moved not long after to a place called Terry Road which was maybe, I've always lived within about a mile of the same place where we started out, and so we went to Noah Webster, which was a great elementary school. Speaker 1: Was that-- Speaker 2: It was very diverse. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Public school, public school, but of the Hartford public schools, elementary schools, it was the top, the best of the best in Hartford at the time. It probably still is now, today, and I, I still live like five blocks from that, from that school. So we used to, we used to either get driven or, it was far enough that we could ride our bikes when we got older there. Junior high school I went to Kingswood Oxford [School, West Hartford, Connecticut] which was a private school. Had a boarding school but I, we didn't do the boarding because we didn't live far from it. Speaker 1: You said, Kings-- Speaker 2: Kingswood Oxford. Speaker 1: Kingswood Oxford. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That was seventh and eighth grade. It also had a high school but after seventh and eighth grade, my parents decided that we needed to be in a more diverse environment, if I remember my father's [HistoryMaker Sanford Cloud, Jr.] words, and I remember being really upset. You know, we had friends and all this and he said, "I think it's important for you all to do this" and that was the end of it. There's no debate or discussion. We went to Catholic school, for high school, which was, and it turned out to be fabulous, Northwest Catholic High School in West Hartford, Connecticut, and I loved my high school experience. I ran track, I played soccer. I had a very broadening experience there and at one point I was president of the class, I think either my junior or senior year and just, you know, good memories, good fun and never regretted it really. Story_ID: 256284 Speaker 1: I, I remember, however, being in high school [Northwest Catholic High School, West Hartford, Connecticut], probably in my junior year, that's when you start to apply to colleges and the guidance counselor, you know, saying to me, 'cause I had my mind made up. Everybody I knew, close to my parents [Diane Brown Cloud and HistoryMaker Sanford Cloud, Jr.], had gone to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], and I said, well, I'm going to Howard. I marched in, my brother [Adam Morgan Cloud] and I both said, we're going to Howard. She says, well, why don't you think about UConn [University of Connecticut, Storrs, Connecticut] or think about, you know, Columbia [University, New York, New York] or places like that and I said, no, no, that's all right, I've got my mind made up. And she was adamant that we ought to apply someplace else and I was equally adamant that I wasn't going anywhere else. I applied to Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] and I applied to Howard. I went down and visited Morehouse, didn't care for Morehouse that much because it was, one, too far and I just, I didn't have a sense for the South, not that far south at least, and because my parents had gone there and as a child we used to go to the Howard reunions, you know, in the fall. I had like bison stickers all in my room as a kid and, you know, so it was an easy decision for me. I found out my junior year, in the spring of my junior year, so I coasted through senior year knowing that I was going to get in. We got an early, both of us got early admission because of our grades, I guess, and also because our parents were, had gone to, were alumni. So, that was a very easy decision for me and it was a right decision to make, quite frankly. Speaker 2: Okay, so your brother had the same idea? Speaker 1: Oh, yeah. My brother and I are truly identical twins. We're what they call, "mirror image twins." I'm right-handed, he's left-handed. If I walked out of this chair for this interview and he walked in, he could pick up where I left off, we look that much identical. Speaker 2: Gee whiz, I mean, what does he do now? Speaker 1: My brother works for a company called Loop Capital Management [Loop Capital] out of Chicago [Illinois], actually your hometown. He's, he is in charge of their region, from Maine to Florida, the whole East Coast region, and does a lot of bond deals, a lot of acquisitions and high finance stuff. We've taken kind of two different parts in our life and really the first time that we split was when I moved out to St. Louis [Missouri] and he decided to stay in, in [Washington] D.C. and he went onto Howard law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.]. My father, being a lawyer, he being, wanting to be a lawyer, I figured that two lawyers in the family was enough. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So I took a different path. Story_ID: 256285 Speaker 1: Let me go back to grade school, maybe, and did, now you went to a grade school that, you were the only black student for a while and then another one that was diverse. Did you have any black history in grade school? Did they talk about black history much? Speaker 2: Oh, no, no, no, certainly not at Renbrook [School, West Hartford, Connecticut], maybe a little bit at Noah Webster [Elementary School; Noah Webster MicroSociety Magnet School, Hartford, Connecticut], maybe a little bit at Noah Webster, but it was-- Speaker 1: Yeah, you were born like right, in the, in that age when black history was coming into prominence, you know. Speaker 2: Yeah, we're talking about the, elementary school was the '70s [1970s], you know. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Excuse me, and you would have thought that it would have been that but you have to remember that Connecticut is "The Land of Steady Habits," my friend, and when we say that here, that means that people and things really don't change much in Connecticut and people like things the way they are. They don't like to ruffle feathers and at least not outwardly. So, you know, the thought of discussing things like what was going on in the world, particularly as it relates to, to black and white issue, certainly was not something that would have been broached. I remember Robin Gonzalez [ph.] and her sister, Julie [ph.], were Puerto Rican girls. They lived around the corner from me and they were one of maybe two Hispanics [Latinos] in the school. There were, there was one Asian family, the Changs [ph.], Leslie and her parents, and her brother, Michael [ph.], but that was, that was really it in terms of diversity. It was black and white and it was predominantly white. It was predominantly Irish Catholic, Italian, for the most part, and, you know, very few, if any, Jews in our, in that school at least. Now, in Kingswood [Oxford School, West Hartford, Connecticut], there was a great deal of Jewish, Jewish students but it was, you know, a microcosm of what the city was at that time, you know. Hartford [Connecticut] was a place that had a lot of West Indian population who came in the '40s [1940s] and '50s [1950s] to pick the tobacco and to pick the apple orchards and things and that migration of Hispanics and West Indians was, and is today, the predominant makeup of Hartford. And my neighborhood growing up, you know, it was a predominantly white neighborhood and all of the white families, once they either died or they decided to move on and move to the suburbs, and it became increasingly black. Like now, I think, if you were to go back to Plainfield Street, if there's a white family there, I would be shocked. I would be shocked if there still was at this point. Now it's predominantly black and West Indian and, and probably a few Spanish, in the Blue, this is the Blue Hills section of, of Hartford. Speaker 1: Okay, has the black population of Hartford grown over the past few years or gone down? Speaker 2: No, no, I would say it's, it's probably decreasing of, of traditionally African Americans, it's decreased. Story_ID: 256286 Speaker 1: The increase has been in Hispanics and in West Indians which I think is fabulous. I mean, a quick story, I mean, I remember growing up, I must have been about five or six years old, my mother [Diane Brown Cloud] used to go to this cleaners right on Albany Avenue, which is the heart of the main thoroughfare of the north end of Hartford [Connecticut], and there's a bakery there, still there today, Mr. Scott's bakery [Scotts' Jamaican Bakery, Hartford, Connecticut]. He's a great man and I remember waiting in the car for my mother to get stuff out of the cleaners which was next door to the patty shop, and I remember these guys talking and what I thought was a foreign language, and my brother [Adam Morgan Cloud] and I just sitting in the window, just fascinated listening to this dialect that they were talking, and my mom came back into the car and I said, "Mom, what language is that?" And she's like, "Boy, what do you mean, what language is that? That's English, it's Patois," and her explaining to me what Jamaican, in particular Jamaican Patois was, and I was just fascinated by that, that whole Jamaican culture and I grew up in it and I still have a great affection for it. That's what later led me to do my studies at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] in Caribbean, Caribbean studies because I've always been fascinated. My limited ability to speak Spanish and my travels to Spanish-speaking countries has been a result of my upbringing and my just fascination with other cultures. Those two in particular, the Caribbean cultures for me have always, because there's such a melting pot of, of the world when you look at the history of Puerto Rico and Cuba and Jamaica, and so on and so forth, the French and the Spanish and the Dutch and the English all come together with the Taino and the Arawak Indians [Native Americans] and such to me is, you know, a real fascinating place and to this day when you asked me where I like to go, I go to St. Croix in the [U.S.] Virgin Islands because it has that influence, you know, and I'm always, I'm always fascinated and will probably continue to be when I get old enough to retire, I'm sure I'll end up somewhere down there. Story_ID: 261154 Speaker 1: Tell me, when did you first, or who first gave you some instruction about black history and culture? What was it about? Speaker 2: Sure, I, I think one of the great benefits of having a mother [Diane Brown Cloud] who's a teacher is that my mother did that. She was also the RIF lady, Reading Is Fundamentals. So, as children, we read voraciously, you know, all sorts of books and all sorts of things. My mother was the primary one. All of my family members really had a good sense of, of themselves and therefore of African American history. I think the first professors that I ever had, oddly enough who taught me about African American history, didn't happen until I went to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], in a formal way, didn't happen until I went to Howard. I had professors who were great professors but no one in high school [Northwest Catholic High School, West Hartford, Connecticut] talked about, what I would call, serious African American history, black history. It wasn't a major part of any curriculum and, but that was okay, I think for me, because I knew I had it at home and I understood, you know, who W.E.B. Du Bois was and I understood who Booker T. Washington was at an early age, you know, and that, that black men had and women had created wonderful things and made generous contributions to not only the formation of this country but to the world. So, I had no lack of sense of self or any sense of feeling any way inferior to anybody else, personally, or for the contributions of my, my ancestors, which I think was, and remains, very important for me and certainly for any children that, that my wife [Stacy Cloud] and I ever have. I think you have to do that. I grew up in what I call a great deal of black love from my parents who have been married now for, I'm thirty-five, been married for thirty-eight years. I mean, they still act like they first met, you know, like they're, you know, in their honeymoon stage, which is really great and I don't know anything about divorce from that angle and none of my godfathers or my family's friends, none of them are divorced either. So I grew up with those strong images. You know, my grandparents [Inez Morgan Cloud and Sanford Cloud, Sr.] on my father's side were married for fifty-six years before they died and, you know, I think, in the end, it probably killed my grandmother. When he died two years later, she died after him because she really just couldn't, you know, be without him. So, those sorts of images, those sorts, that sort of reinforcement, you know, in, in large part is made me who I am but learning formally about African American history, I'm certain it didn't happen until I went to Howard. And I, I shudder to think what would have happened had I not gone to Howard, quite frankly, and had not had the opportunity to learn what I did. Howard opened up my eyes in so many ways as a, you know, black kid from a little New England town [Hartford, Connecticut], going down there and learning and reading and seeing what I saw and experiencing what I did, it was life altering. Story_ID: 261155 Speaker 1: Now you graduated in, was it, '87 [1987] or-- Speaker 2: Ninety-one [1991]. Speaker 1: Ninety-one [1991]. Speaker 2: I went in in '87 [1987]. I'm a lot younger than I look. Speaker 1: I mean from, I mean from high school, you graduated from high school in '87 [1987]. Speaker 2: In '87 [1987], yes, yes. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and you said you were like a class president in high school? Speaker 2: In high school I was, I was at Northwest Catholic [High School, West Hartford, Connecticut] and I, you know, that was, I don't even know that I ran, I wanted the job. I think someone said to me, Chris [HistoryMaker Christopher R. Cloud], why don't you do this, and I did, and it kind of, I probably did it, now that I think about it, because it probably would have looked good on my resume or something but not because I had any sense that I wanted necessarily to be a leader at that point, you know, but I know I enjoyed it and I know that from that point on, it was something that I always look back favorably to and I think it, it was the first time when I, I selected to do something that was more than just for myself in, in a political way, you know, as small as high school politics is, but I, I was fascinated by the process. I was, I've always been fascinated by politics because of my upbringing and having people like Senator [Chris] Dodd and Senator [Joseph] Lieberman around my house and, you know, conversations with these kind of people. You know, as a kid, [Bishop] Desmond Tutu visited, you know, my family and things like that. So, I've always had-- Speaker 1: That's a big deal, not only-- Speaker 2: --this interest, I all--let me tell you something, he has, he has an aura about him as a fourteen-year-old person that just blew me away and blew me away and I, I'll never forget it, I'll never forget it. There's a great picture of my father [HistoryMaker Sanford Cloud, Jr.], has it on his desk, when he came to visit he had dinner with us, and we used to have exchange students at my house when we were kids. The very first one was a young woman from South Africa who had, who had been through all of the turmoil of apartheid in South Africa and she came and lived with us. She went to UConn law school [University of Connecticut School of Law, Hartford, Connecticut] which was two blocks away from our house. We had a Danish girl and a German student, kid from Toronto [Ontario, Canada] and so on and so forth. So, I had these fascinating adults, or college-aged kids, you know, who lived in the, in the hallway down from where my brother [Adam Morgan Cloud] and I lived, and it was like seeing and living in another part of the world and Mia [ph.] was her name, was the South African girl, and she had a whole family that she left in South Africa, just to pursue her, just to pursue her education here in the United States and Bishop Tutu started this exchange program with some folks here in Connecticut and my father was one of the first. My parents were the first family to, one of the first families to agree to keep these students and it was life-changing, you know, to hear her stories and so on and so forth. Story_ID: 261156 Speaker 1: When you were growing up, was church a big part of growing up at all? Speaker 2: As a young person it was. We went to church every Sunday. Went to a congregational church in Hartford [Connecticut] and then, of course, I went to [Northwest] Catholic [High] School [Hartford, Connecticut]. That probably turned me off to organized religion after that and I intermittently I would say, you know, I don't, I have a deep and abiding faith and a belief in, in Jesus and in the Lord, an omnipresent being. I'm not a formal religious person and I guess I feel in many ways that I don't need someone to tell me about my relationship with God. I feel like I'm God-fearing. I feel like I have grown up in the church and understand the principles and the, the ethics and such of it and fascinated by this. As a matter of fact, oddly enough, when I was in high school, people used to say to me, "Chris [HistoryMaker Christopher R. Cloud], you ought to be a preacher when you grow up," you know, because I, as a kid, I used to get up in front of church and speak and so on and so forth and I was involved in high school in a, it's kind of a leadership program for young people that delved into some of these issues and such but I was never taken by it, never taken by the formal notion of it and I used to sit and think, all these sinners here in church, I see the same people in there professing on Sunday and then go out and whatever it was, drink, beat their wives, whatever it was, you know, do all these deviant behavior and I, I became a little bit jaded by it. I think, though, the older I'm getting, the, the closer I'm getting back to church and back to, back to God. My wife [Stacy Cloud] has had a great part of that and we've begun to start going to church more and more these days, me somewhat reluctantly, but I still go and it's a funny thing is that every time I go, I enjoy it. It's not like I don't like it, it's just I haven't made that commitment to the physical presence of being in church but I feel like I'm very, a very Christian-oriented person and try to live my life that way, quite frankly. Story_ID: 261157 Speaker 1: Still, I'm going to get you out of high school [Northwest Catholic High School, West Hartford, Connecticut] in a minute but-- Speaker 2: Please. Speaker 1: --when you were there, did, were you involved in most of the typical high school activities while you were, when you were a student, you know, I mean in addition to running for office, did you, were you, did you play sports or did you-- Speaker 2: Sure, sure, oh yeah, I ran track. I was a, quite a track star, actually, my brother [Adam Morgan Cloud] and I, both, and I played soccer but I ran cross country, indoor and outdoor, and that took up all three seasons. After my freshman year, I played soccer, freshman year. And then I ran track and loved it, really did. I even contemplated doing it at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] but the balance between books and athletics and I was never going to be, you know, excuse me, I was never going to be a track superstar, you know, and get a full scholarship, so that seemed like a hardship I didn't need to put myself through, quite frankly. And so I gave up on any kind of formal athletics after I, after I got to Howard. I did play tennis, avidly, in high school. I didn't play on the team but I was a pretty decent, still, a pretty decent tennis player and I play golf now. Golf is something I grew up with. I used to caddy when I was a kid, eleven, twelve years old, that's how I used to make money on the weekends with my father [HistoryMaker Sanford Cloud, Jr.] and all of his lawyer buddies out at the Country Club of Farmington [Farmington, Connecticut], but, you know, I did judo and other things. I was always into different stuff, lacrosse, you know, and black kids didn't play lacrosse in junior high school [Kingswood Oxford School, West Hartford, Connecticut], I played lacrosse. I played on the baseball team in junior high. I actually played on the high school team when I was in eighth grade because I was pretty good at baseball and I still enjoy most of those things but golf is my primary passion right now, cooking and golf are my only primary passions. Speaker 1: Okay, tell me of all the, what were your favorite subjects in school and how did they like frame your career ideas when you were a senior? I mean, what did you think you were going to be and what did you really like in school? Speaker 2: I think, I probably thought I was going to be a lawyer because everybody told me I was going to be a lawyer. I loved history, still do. Every part of my life I love history. I love geography hence my interests in traveling which has maintained itself. I hated math, still do. I liked English, I liked, you know, the different readings from [William] Shakespeare to the Greek classics and the tragedies and all those sorts of things but history was probably my favorite subjects and then I guess what would be called in high school, like a civics politics sort of thing was my other interest and hence when I went to Howard, it became very easy that my major was in black political science and my minor was in Caribbean history, which were all things that I gravitated to and I think in part because I knew them so well, I lived them growing up. I mean, my father was a politician and so as a kid we'd go to Hal's [Aquarius Restaurant and Lounge, Hartford, Connecticut], you know, restaurant which was the black diner, you know, on Sunday morning and we'd talk politics after church. And I would sit there and be at those things and he'd take me to political functions, my brother and I, dressed us up in little bow ties and we'd go and, you know, have those kind of interactions and it's funny, even today, when I go up and I worked at the [Connecticut State] Capitol, I would bump into people who knew me when I was four and five years old and say, you know, it's odd that some of these people are still doing the same things that they are but, yeah, it was, I was fascinated by it, I still continue to be fascinated by it. I'm a staunch Democrat and believe very much in the political process and, and the ability it has, I think, to do good. It's not easy often. Politics, in my opinion, comes down to numbers. When you've got the numbers, you win, when you don't, you lose, and it's miserable when you don't have the numbers and, unfortunately, right now, at least in the United States Senate and the [U.S.] House [of Representatives], they're having a hard time under this [President George Walker] Bush administration but I, I love politics and probably always will. Speaker 1: Did you like to debate it, issues in high school (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Absolutely, absolutely, absolutely. On little debate teams and things like that, yeah. All that stuff is what I, what I was engaged in. Story_ID: 261158 Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite story from history that, that, you know, or a set of stories that fascinated you? Any one phase of history hold more interest than another? Speaker 2: Slavery, huge impact on me. I'm always fascinated by the Egyptian cultures, the Mayans. I'm interested in, in the Chinese dynasties and the longevity and the creativity and the respect that they have for nature and for their elders and so on and so forth, fascinated by 'em. I'm fascinated in the colonization history that Britain and Spain and France did and the impacts we still see today by the terror that was wrought by slavery. I'm just, I am fully and utterly captivated in how one people could subjugate another so craftfully, so indelibly that, you know, it has spanned four hundred years plus of time and still has us, as a people, divided has us, mis-educated has us, in many ways in, still in slavery, more mental than, than physical but it's an abhorrent, it's an abhorrent behavior that I just can't understand how people do. I mean, I understand the nature of slavery and the profit-driven motives and so on and so forth and some of the religious connotations that drove it but the fact that it happened and that it still continues to have an impact on us today, continues to fascinate me. So if there was any particular point, I would say, I would say, you know, the period of, of slavery, slavery in the Caribbean as I was saying to you before we started the interview, for me, has been fascinating. I spent a lot of my time there. I'm not interested, I shouldn't say I'm not interested, I have not traveled extensively in Europe but I have traveled extensively through the Caribbean and I've been to South Africa. I've been to [Republic of] Sierra Leone. I've been to Cuba and those are places, for me that fascinate me. If one of your questions is where would I go next, I'd like to go to Brazil and see what Brazil is like and not go to Rio [de Janeiro, Brazil], necessarily, I guess I'd have to, but I'd want to see Bahia [Brazil], up north and see the black portion of Brazil and to see how that has, what the impacts of that, the Santeria and, you know, the religious elements, the food. I mean, when you, when you can sit as I did in Sierra Leone and hear the drums there and then come and go to a place like Georgetown, South Carolina and see the connection between the Gullah people and the rice farmers of what's now modern day Sierra Leone, the Mende people, it's a direct link. I sat in, in Freetown [Republic of Sierra Leone], I was there two years ago for about ten days, and I felt like I was home and people would come up to me and they would talk to me as if I was a Sierra Leonean. Yeah, I guess maybe I looked like them, short and bald and such but, I thought it was fascinating and I continue to be fascinated by it. European history doesn't interest me much, I mean, only to the extent that they were so conniving and clever to subjugate black folks the way they did. It still disturbs me a great deal. Story_ID: 261159 Speaker 1: Did you have any teachers in, in high school [Northwest Catholic High School, West Hartford, Connecticut] or grade school that were like, that were especially helpful to you or-- Speaker 2: I did. I had a Spanish teacher, she was Panamanian and she probably wouldn't know this but I think she helped me a great deal because I was a pain in her back side. I was the class clown in her class and I didn't pay attention to her and, you know, at one point she had to call my mother [Diane Brown Cloud] in and, you know, but you know what she was trying to say to me was, I care about you, that's why I'm being so tough on you and it took that conference with my mother for me to realize it. I wish I could have--Mrs. Barrett [ph.], that was her name, and she was so tough on me and I, in return would be a smart aleck, you know, and say smart things and so on and so forth, but I think in, at being one of the few black kids in the class, she took a special effort to give that tough love, as it were, and I saw that as her, you know, coming down on me but really she was trying to support me. I remember her fondly and I appreciate what she did for me. I had, I had a guy named mister, oh goodness, I can't remember his name, but he was, Mr. Berard [ph.], Mr. Berard in seventh and eighth grade [at Kingswood Oxford School, West Hartford, Connecticut], he taught Spanish. He was a French guy who taught Spanish, actually, but he was a fascinating character. He had been in World War Two [World War II, WWII] and the French Resistance and told these fascinating stories and so on and so forth and I, I owe a lot to him because he interested me in the foreign language and in different cultures and so on and so forth, which was odd coming from him but he was a great, great teacher. And that's all junior high and high school. A Mr. Donohue [ph.] in high school read us 'The Yearling' [Marjorie Kinnan Rawlings] and stories like that. He played the piano. He was like this classic gentleman's gentleman, you know, who knew all of Edgar Allan Poe's stories and poems and things and Robert Frost and he would read us every day a different poem and things like that. So it was, it's just, it was, you know, I've always had a real interest in learning more and I don't think learning stops with your formal education. I think you ought to, if you have the ability, you ought to continue to try and do that. So I still do that today. I still read, you know, a couple books a month, on different subjects, biographies, I'm fascinated by them. I'm reading [President William Jefferson] Bill Clinton's right now, things like that. [President] John Adams' biography. It's just that kind of stuff and I love, oddly, spy novels. I love all the Robert Ludlum's and things like that but, yeah. Story_ID: 261160 Speaker 1: What teachers did you gravitate towards at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.]? Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Dr. Lorenzo Morris was my political science professor and he was also my guidance counselor through Howard. He was a fascinating guy. He was from Chicago [Illinois], actually. A real, real opinionated, you know, fascinating guy and he took a liking to me because I used to give it back to him as good as he would give it and we ended up becoming actually very good friends and even outside of school, after I graduated, of course, and we would meet socially and have a drink and so on and so forth and I think the other person who probably had the greatest impact on me was a woman named Dr. Olive Taylor and I love her to death and every time I'm in [Washington] D.C., Howard's campus, I try and stop by and see her because she changed my entire feelings about education. She's the first one who told me, formally, about the Amistad, you know incident [United States v. Libellants and Claimants of the Schooner Amistad, 1841], and I thought that she was the most dynamic, smartest black woman I'd ever met in my life. She used to come to class with a mink coat and would lay her mink coat down on the chair and would say, all right, today we're going to talk about something you all haven't heard about. She said, forget 'Roots[: The Saga of an American Family,' Alex Haley] I'm going to tell you the real story and she would just lay into it and it was like being in a movie, you know, or, or having somebody just reveal these unknown truths to you that you kind of may have felt yourself but you didn't know how to articulate them but she did, boy, and she would lay it out and God, she just changed, not only my life but the lives of so many young people and she was loving, she was that, had that motherly quality about her with all of her students and so I took every class I could from her, every class I could. Dr. Taylor [ph.] was my Caribbean American, I mean, my Caribbean studies professor. He was from Jamaica but he grew up in, in Canada. He had this fascinating British accent and I thought he was always very Cockland [ph.]. I took Caribbean history because I'd been there a couple of times as a kid. I figured I couldn't fail if I'd been there, you know. At least I knew a little bit about it. So, there were just a myriad of teachers and influences. Howard had an indelible impression on me that I think I'll never outgrow and it's very deep in my, in my blood. My parents [Diane Brown Cloud and HistoryMaker Sanford Cloud, Jr.] went there, my sister [Robin Cloud], my brother [Adam Morgan Cloud], my wife [Stacy Cloud], went to Howard, so we're a big Howard, Howard family. Story_ID: 261161 Speaker 1: Did you meet your wife at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.]? Speaker 2: No, my wife is younger. I've known my wife literally all of her life. She and my sister [Robin Cloud] went to Montessori together. She comes from a big Hartford [Connecticut], black Hartford family as well, very prestigious, well-known family, the Hurleys here in Hartford and, because she was five years younger, I really never paid any attention to her. She was my sister's friend, you know, and we had similar paths, different high schools here in Hartford but she went away to Howard and her mother and my mother [Diane Brown Cloud] have been friends for thirty plus years and I remember about, about four, five years ago, I was at a restaurant and her mom was there and she told me, "Oh, Chris [HistoryMaker Christopher R. Cloud], you know, Stacy's coming home, you guys ought to get together," and so on and so forth, and I said, yeah, okay, whatever, you know. I don't even remember what this girl looks like, you know. And, one day I'm at that same restaurant and this woman was there at the bar and I came up to her and I introduced myself and she says, "Hi, I'm Stacy Hurley" and I said, "Oh my God." I looked at her, she's gorgeous and I said "I guess I should have taken your mother's advice." Long story short, we courted for a while. We got engaged in Cape Town, South Africa and we got married January 17th, 2004. So, it's been a great relationship. She, she is the best thing that ever happened to me, certainly. Story_ID: 261162 Speaker 1: Just back to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] again for a minute (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, sir. Speaker 1: We were talking about some of the, the teachings of Olive Taylor and some of the other professors. Is there, is there like a, some core revelation that you got from those classes that you, that you didn't get any, you know, before you got to Howard? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: I mean because you, you know, I'm just riffing off of the statement that she would make in class and forget about 'Roots[: The Saga of an American Family,' Alex Haley] -- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --this is the real story. Well, what is the, I mean, the real core of the story? Speaker 2: I think that the revelation that I had was that one, that learning could be fun, that history could be fun, and I always kind of sensed that but she made that very clear to me. Secondly, that black people have made tremendous contributions to this country, many of which are not celebrated, many of which are not known, and that we come from a strong, rich history of, in culture, and people that we, as black people, and others ought to respect and I'm not so certain that, without that knowledge, I would have necessarily felt that way, you know. I mean, I grew up basically growing up in white schools my whole life and no one ever said anything about any black heroes. No one ever said anything about, you know, Dr. [Charles R.] Drew and his work on blood plasma. No one talked about Alain Locke or James Baldwin, you know. No one talked about Phillis Wheatley and the first African American to write a, to write a novel. No one ever said any of those things to me when I was growing up, you know, maybe in passing with my parents [Diane Brown Cloud and HistoryMaker Sanford Cloud, Jr.], but no one formally taught me that and to feel inspired as a black person and being in a sea of black people who were equally smart, equally with different stories and backgrounds. Black people from Alaska. I didn't know there were black people in Alaska when I went to Howard, you know, or what the black folks from Texas were like from, you know, the Fifth Ward [Houston, Texas], people from New Orleans [Louisiana] and so on and so forth. It was to me, and we were all this rainbow of, of colors, you know, I mean, you meet black folks and my brother [Adam Morgan Cloud] dated a girl who was so light she damn near white, but she was black and you told her anything else and she slapped the, slapped the bejesus out of you, you know. So, to have that kind of empowering sense and that there were black professors, I never had a black professor until I went to Howard who were bright and intelligent and engaging and who cared, you know, and those excuses of racism didn't work in the classroom. You know, you couldn't say, oh, you know, this professor gave me a bad grade because, you know, I'm a black person. That didn't work and so I, it was engaging, it was stimulating, it was, it was empowering as a black, young black man, and coming from a little place like Hartford [Connecticut] to Howard, it opened up my world to know that there, I wasn't alone, I was not alone, that there were black people who grew up with money, there were black people who grew up whose parents were doctors and lawyers just like mine were who, you know, vacationed at Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts]. I didn't feel like an oddity anymore as I did as a young person. Speaker 1: Okay, that's quite a bit. Speaker 2: Yeah, absolutely, very empowering and it lasts today, and I think if you ask my wife [Stacy Cloud], she'd say the same thing, or my brother or my sister [Robin Cloud] or any of the, any of my close friends. I still have friends from Howard. I graduated in '91 [1991]. I still have friends, a close-knit group of them who are all equally accomplished as I am, equally could be on this program, this [The] HistoryMakers program, and all of that is because, not only what their parents did and their family members did for them, but the experience that we had at Howard and we're all thick as thieves still after all these years. Story_ID: 261163 Speaker 1: When you were at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], did you, were you engaged in, did you get involved in activities on the campus? Were you involved in any student organizations? Speaker 2: No, no. I, I basically, my first year was spent on what I call adjusting to the freedom that was given to me and that, a lot of that meant drinking a lot of beer and a lot of, a lot of beer and hanging out and partying a great deal. I remember my father [HistoryMaker Sanford Cloud, Jr.] telling me after my, my brother [Adam Morgan Cloud] and I both after our first year, he said, all right you know what, he got the first year grades, he said, I'll tell you what, you all either shape up these grades or you're coming home and I'm sending you to Greater Hartford Community College [Capital Community College, Hartford, Connecticut] which was like half a block from my house and that was the only threat he needed to give and all that, rest of that nonsense ended and we got back and got real serious and was able to graduate with a decent GPA average but, yeah, it was, it was quite the experience, it was quite the experience and I wouldn't change much of it, quite frankly, and then being in [Washington] D.C. as well, the broader D.C. metropolitan area was also a fascinating place because I had great experiences, internships. You know, I worked with [Senator] Chris Dodd and another job at Senate for Democracy [ph.] and so on and so forth. So I found it to be a very stimulating environment. Speaker 1: So you worked for Senator Dodd as a Howard intern, from Howard? Speaker 2: Yeah, as an intern. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, I worked at the office, back here in Connecticut and I also worked for the office in D.C. and oddly enough my father had worked for his father, [Senator] Thomas [J.] Dodd, when he was the United States senator. So, we have some very strong family connections and he was one of my, one of my mentors and heroes growing up, too, Chris Dodd. I thought he was, he still is one of the most elegant, eloquent people I know and as far as elected officials go, he's one with character and, and someone who, you know, I could certainly give of my time and my resources to help and support. Story_ID: 261164 Speaker 1: My minor [sic. major] at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] was black political science. They actually have a major, black political science and my minor was in Caribbean history which were, as I remember Dr. [Olive] Taylor saying to me, you know, Chris [HistoryMaker Christopher R. Cloud] that and seventy-five cents would probably get you, if you're lucky, a bus pass, that'll be about it but it was a strong liberal arts education and to your earlier question, I didn't go into college knowing what I wanted to be. Hell, I'm still figuring out what I want to be but I knew that I had some passions and that's really what's driven me in all of my career decisions. All of my life choices have been whether or not I feel that I'm passionate about them and my work here recently at AMISTAD [America Incorporated] certainly has been an example of that and whatever I tend to do next will hopefully afford that same opportunity to be passionate about it. Speaker 2: Okay, now, so you came out in 1991-- Speaker 1: Correct. Speaker 2: --right, and what did you, I know a lot of people they take political science, they know they're going to go to law school or something like that, well that happens too, or they pursue a higher degree in history or, or political science to teach it, what were your ideas at that point? Speaker 1: I needed a job, that was my, that was my first thinking. You know, I probably credit my father [Sanford Cloud, Jr.] for this in some ways because he used to come and visit me in [Washington] D.C., both of us, in D.C. and he used to come because he was on the board of an organization called the Council on Foundations, which is a nonprofit, umbrella group for foundations throughout the country, actually throughout the world, their membership, and the fellow who was the CEO at the time was a black man named Jim Joseph [HistoryMaker James Joseph] and Jim is a UCC [United Church of Christ] minister, he's been ambassador [to South Africa], and all these wonderful things. He's in the [U.S.] military, he used to head up the Cummins Engine Foundation [Cummins Foundation] and Jim, as the CEO, created an opportunity for me, which I am forever grateful to him because it gave me a look into this world, this independent, this third sector called philanthropy which I really knew very little about, at all, and the other thing is that I was dating a girl at the time who worked at this place and she had said to me, you know, we're looking for something and my father happened to be on the board there and so low and behold, long story short, I ended up working there. And I worked-- Speaker 2: This for the Council of Foundations? Speaker 1: For the Council on Foundations, that was my very first job. I ended up working in the corporate foundation area and there were at that time about 196 members. So everyone from like The Coca-Cola Foundation to Shell Oil [Company] and Kraft [Foods] and so on and so forth, Monsanto Fund, a guy named John [L.] Mason, black fellow at Monsanto, and he came back into my life later on but there were these fascinating discussions about philanthropy and what we should do to address education issues or all these other social concerns. One of my, part of my job was to do a lot of the research on the corporate members. And so I used to staff the library element and so I would, was an odd kid who would sit and read all of these annual reports of these foundations, you know, the Knight Foundation and how James and John L. Knight [sic. James L. Knight and John S. Knight] made all their money in the newspaper industry and so on and so forth, and it was fascinating to me how the Coca-Cola, you know, people started and the Ford Foundation [New York, New York] and so on and so forth. And my job was to catalog all these things and if anyone ever had a question about what the foundations did, who the board members were, blah, blah, blah, I was the person who had all that kind of information. And as the staffer in the corporate area, every time we had board meetings or regional associations of the grant makers, I would, you know, help put together the agendas and send out the mailings and so on and so forth. And I, I was interested, clearly, and fascinated by it and that, ever since that job. Story_ID: 261165 Speaker 1: I only left that job [associate at Council on Federations] to take this Coro Fellowship in St. Louis [Missouri] which was a leadership, postgraduate leadership fellowship program for about nine months in St. Louis. I was one of forty-eight young people chosen in four different sites, New York [New York], Los Angeles [California], San Francisco [California] and St. Louis. And so I did that for a year and then I worked for SB, what was Southwestern Bell at the time, as a consultant. And after doing that, I said, I guess I woke up one day and I said, what in the hell am I doing in St. Louis? All my family is back east, you know, I don't know anybody here and I ended up going home and the first job I got when I came home was working for a fellow named Eric Coleman, who at the time was a member of the House of Representatives in the State of Connecticut. I did that for one session with him. He decided to run for the [Connecticut] Senate, for my father's [Sanford Cloud, Jr.] old seat in the 2nd Senatorial District and then I worked for him for at least four more years and then was tapped to do the job here at the AMISTAD [America Incorporated] by a former neighbor who used to, who lived on the street that I grew up on. So, in a short period of time, I've done a couple of interesting things but the root of all of that started with this work in philanthropy because every other job I took, people said, oh, they saw philanthropy and so this guy must know how to raise money which wasn't necessarily true but I let them believe that notion and I got the subsequent jobs as a result of that. So I thank that young woman that I dated, I thank my dad and I thank Jim Joseph [HistoryMaker James Joseph] who gave me my start and oddly enough, Jim came back into my life. When you look on my resume, you'll see that I did this program, Emerging Leaders Programme in Cape Town, South Africa for 2003, 2004 and Jim was the director of that and I remember having dinner with him in Connecticut a couple of years ago and he mentioned he was doing this and I got into the second class of that and that was, again, another life-changing element for me to spend time in Cape Town and meet some of the fascinating people that I, that I did in South Africa, so-- Speaker 2: Did you get a chance to meet Nelson Mandela? Speaker 1: I did not while we were there, unfortunately. I did not, and he was no longer president when I was there. Speaker 2: Right, Mbeki was. Speaker 1: Thabo Mbeki was but I did get to meet a whole number of, of political types while I was there. I got to visit the museum and see the cell where he was and, you know, it, Cape Town had a, had a big impact on me, most recently had a huge, two places, three places that probably had huge impacts on me in the last five years. The first being Cuba and going, being able to go to Havana [Cuba]. I took an educational trip with some colleagues there because the history of the Amistad incident is, of course, intrinsically linked to Cuba. Speaker 2: Yeah, it was a Cuban-- Speaker 1: Havana is where, outside of Havana is where the revolt was held. So, we went down there to look at the archives and to plan for a trip of the [La] Amistad to Cuba and the Cuban government was happy to make that happen. Unfortunately, this administration was not as eager so we've had to put that on hold. So that was one place and the other was [Republic of] Sierra Leone worship where I was in the winter of '03 [2003]. And then South Africa, clearly where I've been now twice, so-- Speaker 2: You were there in '03 [2003] as well, right, South Africa? Speaker 1: Yeah, '03 [2003] and '04 [2004], I was there earlier this year for the second, for the roundup of the, of the trip. Speaker 2: Now when did you go to Cuba? Speaker 1: I went right before my first trip to South Africa so that would have been in '03 [2003], I think was either in April or May of, March of '03 [2003] is when I went to Havana for a couple of days. Story_ID: 261166 Speaker 1: When were you tapped for this job as CEO of the AMISTAD [America Incorporated]? Speaker 2: Almost eight years ago. It'll be eight years this August of '05 [2005] we're in February now, so, about seven and a half years. I was working at the [Connecticut State] Capitol, working late one night and I got a phone call from a guy I hadn't heard from in years name Chris Cox and Chris was the vice president at Mystic Seaport [Mystic, Connecticut] at the time and the Seaport had been in the news that they had been tapped as one of the locations for [Steven] Spielberg to shoot the film ['Amistad'] and Chris called me and he said, "[HistoryMaker Christopher R.] Cloud, I, I want to talk to you." I said, "Sure, Chris, how you been," blah, blah, blah. He says, "Listen, I want you to come down to Mystic, talk to me about the fact that we're building this boat, the [Freedom Schooner] Amistad." And I said, "What do you mean you're building the boat, the Amistad?" He said, "Yeah, we're building a boat. We got this money from the state" and his exact words to me were, "We need a preppy black guy like you to lead this effort" and I thought that was hysterical. I said, all right, well, and Chris is, he's one of those, what I call, cool white boys who, who is pretty down and understands black history and so on and so forth, he's actually on our board now, but anyways, Chris called me and he said, come have lunch with me and the last thing I remember about Mystic as a child was I had gone down there for some kind of school trip. I remember, as Connecticut goes, it's about as white as you can get, you know. I used to joke when I first took the job and I said, the only thing black in Mystic was me and the road, me and the pavement, you know, but I went down there, I visited with him and a few of the staffers at the Seaport, they came up and had a, kind of an informal interview with me on a, on a boat ride here in Hartford [Connecticut] and I said, what the hell. I was looking to do something else. I was tired of working for the guy I was working for at the, at the office. The choice was either, I do something else or I run and run for his seat and, you know, run my boss out of his office and I chose, I chose to take something else and that was this opportunity to work for this organization I never heard of, AMISTAD America, that had been formed only a year earlier, in '96 [1996]. So this was July of '97 [1997]. August of '97 [1997], the 14th was my first day on the job and I worked in two offices, one at Mystic Seaport and one I had here at Hartford at the Phoenix [Life] Insurance Company [Hartford, Connecticut], what we call the boat building in Hartford. I remember my first day on the job, Bob Fiondella, Robert Fiondella who was the chairman of the board, I mean, chairman of the company, CEO and chairman of the company, I got in about nine [o'clock], 9:15, something like that, he comes up to my desk about 9:30, knocks on my door, he says, "Hey, I was here at 7:15, where were you?" I said, "Oh, I had no idea I had to be here at seven o'clock." He says, "Oh, I'm just kidding with you." That was the way that I started my relationship with him. He was quite the character but he was a big supporter. He was our first and largest corporate supporter and gave me a lot of advice and counsel and help in this process because, literally, I knew absolutely nothing about boats other than the little Sunfish that, you know, I used to sail when we were a kid here on the shore, we used to have a house, we shared a house with a family down on the shore. So I knew the rudimentary elements of sailing but by no stretch of the imagination was I a sailor but I did know the story and I did know the importance of the story-- Story_ID: 261167 Speaker 1: I knew that it had a history here in Connecticut, New Haven [Connecticut] and Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut] and I knew about James [W.C.] Pennington because I went to Faith [Congregational] Church [Hartford, Connecticut], which is where he was pastor. Speaker 2: Go to the congregational church? Speaker 1: Yeah, the UCC [United Church of Christ]. Speaker 2: So that was the Faith--his, the church that he pastored, okay. Speaker 1: Yes, Faith Congregational Church. Speaker 2: He's an interesting character. Could you kind of give us a-- Speaker 1: Oh, sure, very interesting. Speaker 2: --a little background on J.W.C. Pennington? Speaker 1: J.W.C. Pennington was a UCC pastor who first came to Connecticut and was at Dixwell Avenue Congregational Church [New Haven, Connecticut]. He then went up to Hartford [Connecticut] and was pastor of this fledgling church here in, in Hartford which later became Faith Congregational. It used to be called [Talcott Street Church, Hartford, Connecticut], I'll get it wrong, but I can't quote it right now, it'll come to me, the name of the church originally, but nonetheless it was the church that my grandparents [Inez Morgan Cloud and Sanford Cloud, Sr.] had gone to, the church that my parents [Diane Brown Cloud and Sanford Cloud, Jr.] had gone to, and a church that we went to for, as young people. We went between Horace Bushnell [Congregational Church, Hartford, Connecticut] and Faith Congregational Church and Pennington was an abolitionist, a minister, a wonderful writer and an advocate for, for the abolition of slavery and he was tasked to support the Africans when they came here and had the second court case in Hartford and was instrumental in beginning what was then called the Union Missionary Association which later became the AMA, the American Missionary Association. Now the AMA, you may recall from history, started some of the historical black schools and colleges in this, in this country, the HBCUs, Talladega [College, Talladega, Alabama]-- Speaker 2: Yes, right, exactly. Speaker 1: Berea [College, Berea, Kentucky], Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee], Howard [University] School of Divinity [Washington, D.C.], so on and so forth, for poor whites and for newly freed blacks in the South. So the Amistad [La Amistad], its legacy, is not just the, the fact that it was the first time that the United States Supreme Court considered Africans more than just chattel or slavery, but indeed free, born human beings but also gave way to these historical black colleges 'cause some of those same people who started the Amistad Committee which started the Union Missionary Association which started the AMA and then the AMA later forged into what we now know as the United Church of Christ today which is based in Cleveland [Ohio]. So that long history, from 1839 until today, exists. And so many of the-- Speaker 2: So, wait a minute, now this is going too fast now. Speaker 1: I'm sorry. Speaker 2: Union, J.W.C. Pennington-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --founded the Union Missionary Association. Speaker 1: He was a member of it-- Speaker 2: Was a member, okay. Speaker 1: --and was presided over the first meeting in Hartford and we actually have the notes from that meeting where, and the case [United States v. Libellants and Claimants of the Schooner Amistad, 1841] that they discussed. The reason that they came together was the Amistad case because they were trying to pursue the, the United States district court here in Hartford, in New Haven, to free these Africans and they took petitions from various members of the community, the abolitionist community. Gillette, for example, Francis Gillette, who was one of the founders of the Phoenix, this is why Phoenix Home Life Insurance Company [Phoenix Life Insurance Company, Hartford, Connecticut] was one of our founders because as an abolitionist here in Connecticut he was very avidly opposed to that. Arthur [Tappan] and Lewis Tappan, who started what is now Standard and Poor's, Dun & Bradstreet, the American Mercantile Exchange [Mercantile Agency] is what they started in New York City [New York, New York]. And so all of these individuals came together, not necessarily because they were fighting this on a, on a civil rights element but there was a very religious connotation, strong and avid of a religious connotation of this that, this was a sin against God not just against man but against God. So you got this kind of loose configuration of abolitionist from New England, predominantly, Connecticut, Massachusetts, Rhode Island who all came together in Hartford in 1840 for the signing of this, of this Union Missionary Association meeting and the Amistad was the impetus for that work. So, you know, this great history that exists here in Connecticut and if you go into Faith Church today, there's a huge portrait of James W.C. Pennington with this history. Pennington was supposed to, did not, was supposed to travel back with the Africans and start a missionary school in [Republic of] Sierra Leone but, in fact, he, he opted not to and others did, however, and they formed this union, they formed this AMA Missionary school in, in Sierra Leone with some of the African captives, Kali in particular who was the young boy. There's a photograph of him standing outside of this some years after when he's an older man, 'cause mind you he was ten when he was kidnapped on board the Amistad. So this fascinating and rich history that all happened here in Connecticut. Story_ID: 261168 Speaker 1: We have to remember, this was like, you know, a world shocker in 1839, this, these black pirates as they were considered, you know, these slaves who had revolted and who had overtaken the ship who'd been seen up and down the Long Island Sound. Speaker 2: Now let's, let's just go back and trace the story. Speaker 1: Please. Speaker 2: May as well just, just outline the story so anybody watching this in the future have some idea without having to go, you know, be misinformed by something else. Speaker 1: Sure. Speaker 2: But just give us a basic outline of the story. These are, are Africans who, well why don't you, I'll let you tell it. Speaker 1: I'd be happy to. The Amistad incident occurred in 1839. The fifty-three Mende, what is now modern day [Republic of] Sierra Leone, Mende Africans, predominantly rice farmers from the Western Coast of West Africa, were, were purchased in Lomboko Harbor which is on the coast of, of Sierra Leone, purchased by Spaniards, put on board a Portuguese slave vessel called the Tecora brought from West Africa to the New World, brought to Cuba, and at that time, Cuba was the largest entre port for slavery in the Caribbean. We have this misguided notion in this country that, you know, slavery was unique to the southern United States when, in fact, South America, being the largest and the Caribbean being the second number, for the number of Africans who were brought to the New World, and then the United States, which was dwarfed by the numbers in, in South America and in the Caribbean. So anyways, they come to Cuba, not onboard the Amistad [La Amistad] like the movie ['Amistad'] portrays, that the Amistad was the boat that brought them all the way from, half of my job in the last seven years has been explaining the real history of the Amistad incident that [Steven] Spielberg tried to do in two and a half, two and a half hours. So anyways, they come to Havana [Cuba], they're purchased by two gentlemen, Pedro Ruiz and Montes [sic. Jose Ruiz and Pedro Montes]. They bought forty-nine adults, men, and four children, three girls and a boy. They're on their way, they rent out and charter this vessel called La Amistad which means "friendship" in Spanish and it was a charter vessel. It was a cargo schooner. It brought things from point A to point B. In addition to the fifty-three captives, they had silk and rice and beans and, fortunately, you know, for the Africans, the sugarcane knots that were used in plying the trade. So they're on their way, twenty-six miles from Havana to Puerto Principe [Port au Prince, Haiti] and two and a half days out, amidst a storm, led by Sengbe Pieh [Joseph Cinque] who was the twenty-five year old Mende rice farmer decided that this was not going to be his fate, that he was going to take his life and the lives of his fellow captives in his own hands. He found a loose nail, unloosened his chain, unloosened the chain of his fellow, some of his fellow Africans, came up on deck and they were really trying to barter but, 'cause, but because of the language barrier they couldn't explain what they wanted to do. They wanted to barter. They just wanted food. They wanted to go home. That's their whole charge throughout this entire element. The captain sees this, [Ramon] Ferrer, he shoots one of the Africans, kills them with his musket, the Africans fall on the captain, they kill him and they kill Celestino who's the cook because Celestino had, had motioned to them that they would be beheaded and eaten and, you know, on boats back then, they used to cook on the deck of the ship, not like we have on the modern vessel now. And so, that was, for him, a joke, you know to them. So the Africans are fearing for their lives. Speaker 2: Now this is interesting because a lot of people in this country, I know from the time that I was small, growing up even, this probably goes way back are, have this image of Africans as cannibals. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: And afraid of Africans with this in the back of their mind, one of the horrors in the back of their mind. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: But here the Africans are being taunted-- Speaker 1: (simultaneous) Taunted. Speaker 2: --by the Spanish, you know, with cannibalism. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's right, that's right. And so the, the Africans fearing for their life, they kill the captain, they kill the cook, some of the crew members on the boat jump off, they took the little small row boat 'cause they are never more than twenty miles off the shore. They row back, that's the end of their participation in it. So now this unwitting cooperation between the Spaniard captors and the Africans ensues. The Africans knowing that they had come from the east, where the sun rises, and sets in the west, all they wanted to do was to go back home. So during the day, they would say to the Spaniards, pointing towards the rising sun, take us back home to Africa. At night, the Spaniards would sail the boat west and north trying to find another island, trying to find Puerto Rico, any of the Virgin Isle--what's now the Virgin Island[s], any of the islands so that they could regain control of the vessel. Story_ID: 261169 Speaker 1: Well, what happens is, they never are able to accomplish that. So for sixty-three days, they're zigzagging up and down the Eastern seaboard until finally they are spotted and they land off of Montauk Point in Long Island [New York]. There's actually a monument there today that signifies this is the landing spot for the Africans. They start, they row ashore because they've got, mind you in this cargo schooner [La Amistad], again, not a slave ship, in this cargo schooner, are all these goods and things, medicines and cloths and stuff. So they try and go and barter with the locals in Long Island. They're seen, spotted by a coast guard cutter that was led by Captain Gedney of the, what would have been, you know, the forebears of the U.S. Navy, they're doing surveying in Long Island Sound trying to see how far the depths are and so on and so forth. He fires upon the boat, he captures it, brings it and tows it back into Connecticut. They bring it alongside the custom house in New London [Connecticut], which still exists today. There's a wonderful Amistad exhibit there, and the Africans quest for freedom begins but the story of the boat ends because it was just a means of voyage for them, okay. The Africans get taken to New Haven [Connecticut], they're put in jail, they've got the first trial, and this is where, in the movie ['Amistad'], it's played by Matthew McConaughey but Roger Sherman Baldwin takes up their court case. Then they are-- Speaker 2: He's, now I've heard of them-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --one of them contradictions in the movie is that they make him like a young rookie lawyer, his first case. Speaker 1: He was young but it was, it certainly wasn't his first case and he certainly was no rookie but he took this case because it was a property case and the, the Spanish government was looking to see, seek ownership of the captives and the boat because it was, it flew under the Spanish flag. Captain Gedney, because of longstanding maritime rules, if a boat is found, you know, abandoned, you can seize possession, excuse me, of it. And then, of course, you've got the abolitionists who are trying to use this as a case to enliven their debate about the abolition of slavery. So they see this as a real rallying point. Speaker 2: Because it just, it's just another point of issue, the slave trade with Africa, the international slave trade going to Africa to bring slaves here had been outlawed in 1830, I think, in the United States so-- Speaker 1: Twenty [1820]. Speaker 2: --it was actually-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --twenty [1820], okay, so is it against the law to, to-- Speaker 1: By the British, by the Spanish in 1807 and so that's why this Amistad case [United States v. Libellants and Claimants of the Schooner Amistad, 1841] becomes so important because these Africans were called bozales, Africans who were brought from the New World to, from West Africa to the New World. It was illegal to transport bozales or free Africans from the West Coast of Africa to the New World. Now you could live, die your entire life as a slave in the Caribbean, South America, United States but it was illegal to transport them. The British, mind you, had suppressed this notion of, of slavery. They had squadrons that were, you know, and if they captured them, you know, what the Spanish would do, or the Portuguese would do, is they would rather kill the slaves than get caught and lose their boat. Anyways, the, the, that's what the case rested on. The international law that they actually were not slaves, they had been born free, they had been brought against their will and that what the United States Supreme Court finally decided was that they, it was within their rights as free born human beings to strike against any oppressor, in this case the Spanish landowners, the slave owners, and fight for their freedom and it's the first time in the United States court that they found, these Africans as I said earlier, to be more than just chattel or slavery. So it was very important at that point and it became a really wonderful rallying point for some, let's see, some twenty years later during the Civil War, to begin this buildup of this abolitionist fervor to call for the, the ending and cessation of slavery in this country. So, it was very, very significant at the time. This is in The New York Times, it's in the London [England] papers and France because this was international as well. You know, Queen Elizabeth, excuse me, the Queen of, don't know what they call it, but the Queen [Isabella II] of Spain was arguing to get back her property, basically, and that's what they were seen as, not as human beings in any way, shape or form, and so the significance of the case lives on today through those schools and colleges that I mentioned, through the work that we try to do now with the Amistad here [AMISTAD America Incorporated] in teaching the inherent lessons of the Amistad incident of cooperation, perseverance of, of the importance of freedom, which is a universal notion and that anyone who is oppressed should have the right and the ability to strike out and maintain or secure that freedom for themselves and for their family members. And I think this case ended positively in that many, not all, 'cause some of them died from the transit. Some of them died from, they say, from homesickness here in Farmington [Connecticut] and such, or of disease, petulance [sic. pestilence] and such, went back home, thirty-five of the original fifty-three went back to, to [Republic of] Sierra Leone with their dignity and their freedom intact. Story_ID: 261170 Speaker 1: When you took this job [at AMISTAD America Incorporated], had the movie ['Amistad'], the Steven Spielberg movie been, you know, was it released yet? Speaker 2: I was hired, I was hired in August and in December is when the movie came out. And I'll be frank with you, I, I really thought when I took this job, I was going to, you know, I was going to make a few phone calls, I was going to call Oprah [Winfrey], I was going to call Bill Cosby and I was going to call Spielberg, I was going to get them all to give a couple million dollars and I was going to wrap this up and be done with it but as you see, I'm sitting here seven and a half years later still struggling and working at it. I give Debbie Allen a great deal of credit. I give Tim Shriver, of the Shriver family who used to be on our board, a great deal of credit because it was those two individuals who went to Spielberg and asked him to do this movie. I think it had been shopped around in other circles but, either through funding or whatever reasons, it just never happened but Debbie, God bless her, made her case and Spielberg agreed to film the movie. Now, there was a lot of controversy within the black community. Why is this Jewish fellow, you know why is he doing this movie? And my opinion on that is, I don't care what he is, I care that the movie gets done and hopefully it gets done accuracy. If any problems I have with Spielberg's film is that it was not necessarily done accurately and it was done in a more commercial way. I understand that from a business perspective but from historical accuracy perspective, there's some major flaws in the film and the fact that they never connected the movie to our efforts to build the actual recreation of the ship. Of course, it's kind of a perennial problem that I have with him because I just think that why do the movie and not connect to an organization that is trying to keep the message alive that you and, and Debbie and others were on, you know, Oprah crying about how important this was and so you did it for your kids and, you know, we don't get any support from him or any of them, quite frankly. I think in their minds they did this, it was a project and they moved on, whereas for me and for others involved in this, this is, you know, a legacy and a life, a life love and passion. Story_ID: 256304 Speaker 1: We were talking about the John Quincy Adams reasons for taking the case being politically motivated and being emblematic of the political struggles that are going on in the country between the various parties and, I think, you were explaining some of that to me, off-camera, so-- Speaker 2: Sure, well you know, in the movie ['Amistad'], we were talking about the film and the inaccuracies. So one of the inaccuracy is that Quincy Adams is seen as some kind of liberal, bleeding heart, you know, abolitionist which in no way was he. He was upset at the, at the executive branch's decision to try and alter or undermine the decision of the judicial process and he felt that that was wrong and he stood up and argued that case to that point. He later threw the case in his dealings with the issues associated with, became more, I think, humanly attached to the notion of these Africans but clearly he didn't go into this as an abolitionist and if you read any of his writings, he says that very clearly that he was not, you know, of the mind of the abolitionist, of the times, but he felt very strongly that [President] Martin Van Buren who was up for re-election was concerned that the southern votes would not support him if these Africans were given their freedom. And so he had Holabrand [sic. William S. Holabird], the attorney general and others trying to ensconce these Africans back and give them back over to the Spanish slave owners or back to [Queen] Isabella [II] of Spain because he didn't want to rock that boat and lose that southern support. So Quincy Adams comes in at ninety-three, whatever he is, argues passionately for them on a property rights matter and also on the fact that the presidential, the executive office, should not, you know, curtail or try and supersede the decision of the lower courts. That's what brought them to the United States Supreme Court and he was, he effectively did that and some of the members of the court, at the time, oddly enough, majorally southern, had to agree because his argument was, was clear that they were free born because of the law that I mentioned earlier, the fact that these Africans after 1807 and 1820, could not be brought from West Africa to the New World. They, in fact, had been stolen or captives, not slaves, and the fact that the president was undermining the, the branch of power, you know, the differences in the branch of the balance in the branches of power. So it's fascinating in that way and unfortunately the movie, and I understand that in two hours you can't explain all of that but I think there could have been a better way to link to some of the real history that exists. [Steven] Spielberg went further and his people did a kind of a edit, an educational curriculum element to it but they used the characters in the movie before the curriculum. They didn't use the historical elements. You know, this [Theodore] Joadson character that Morgan Freeman plays was a fictitious individual. I think he was most likely meant to be James W.C. Pennington who we talked about earlier but if you're going to do that, do him, do Robert Purvis, you know, and the other myriad of black abolitionists who existed and that was the other element that, that there are, that there's this impression, historically, that is completely inaccurate that blacks were not part of this abolitionist movement and trying to fight for the freedom of their fellow, their fellow Africans, African Americans, at the time, which is completely and utterly false. These people risked their lives-- Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: --and such for this and fought very passionately to make sure that people became free. So, I just, I just hope that maybe in a small part through the work that we're trying to do at AMISTAD America [Incorporated] is to try and teach the country, young people in particular, but the country, about the real historical facts related to the Amistad [United States v. Libellants and Claimants of the Schooner Amistad, 1841] and I think it's a valuable story because it's one of heroism which we don't see often. Story_ID: 256305 Speaker 1: We always kind of sense, and even in many ways through 'Roots[: The Saga of an American Family,' Alex Haley], that, you know, we kind of lie down and allowed these things to happen to us and that we didn't, you know, fight as insurgents against slavery, that Africans didn't, of the millions who were lost as a part of this insidious transatlantic slave trade, there were in fact many examples of revolts on board, aboard slave ships but, in fact, the fact that this was not a slave ship, on a cargo schooner, is why they're able to succeed in many ways because on board those tight-packing, Middle Passage vestiges with all these vessels, with all these crew members and all of the devices for the slave trade, the chains and the, and the three-foot stalls and such, they couldn't succeed. The reason why they're able to succeed on this boat is because it was not one of those vessels. And so those are some of the nuances in the [Amistad] story that we try and delve into a little bit deeper and hopefully provide, I think, a more depth understanding and appreciation for, for how this, how this could have happened. Speaker 2: It's interesting that there's a, the emergence of this story's a movie ['Amistad'] opened up, people started to, to discuss one of Frederick Douglass' books called 'The Heroic Slave' about, Madison Washington actually was involved in a slave revolt on another ship called the Creole-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --in 1840s, I believe, and he actually, he succeeded and piloted the ship to the Bahamas-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --you know, and became, and was protected by the British. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: And there's some other examples, too-- Speaker 1: The Enterprise. Speaker 2: --that have never been--okay. Speaker 1: The Black Pearl [sic. Pearl], yes, plenty, plenty of examples, and, I mean, I guess that's part of this broader need for this learned, this learning and this appreciation for African American history and it's U.S. history, and I say that every time I give a speech about the story of the Amistad because people have this impression that it's just black history and it lives in this moment and that it's not tied to the broader elements of the development and the growth of this country but, in fact, this is American history and to call it otherwise, I think is, is inappropriate and while African Americans played a major factor in this, this is American history, it's U.S. history and it's something that ought to be shared and ought to be told. We worked really hard in the State of Connecticut to make sure the story is told and hopefully there will be others who, who learn this as well. And our biggest point, I think, as we've traveled to now some seventy ports around the country is to say, look, the Amistad is one story, we want to be the catalyst, if you will, for the exploration into other local history, other things that have happened in Baltimore [Maryland], in Charleston [South Carolina], and Charleston's so rich, New Orleans [Louisiana], Chicago [Illinois], wherever it may be, there are these stories of African Americans, not only their contributions, but their struggles against, against tyranny, against socially economic situations and the great contributions we've made to this country and some of the actors on the other side, our white counterparts, who helped in this struggle, in this Civil Rights Movement prior to that and the abolitionist movement and so on and so forth. So, I think it's very powerful. I think it's very important. Story_ID: 256306 Speaker 1: Here in New Haven [Connecticut], as we sit here, two blocks away from here-- Speaker 2: Yes sir. Speaker 1: --is the site where the Africans were held in eighteen, in the 1830s, right? Speaker 2: Correct. Speaker 1: --And '40s [1840s]? Speaker 2: Eighteen thirty-nine [1839], correct. Speaker 1: Yeah, when did they, how long did it take to free them? This occurred in 1839-- Speaker 2: And they went home in 1841. Speaker 1: Okay, so-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, so, a little over three years, basically. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The places of significance in Connecticut for this story are first and foremost New London [Connecticut], at the custom house where the boat [La Amistad] came. The boat was like a cargo, a tractor trailer is today, it brought things from point A to point B. Once the boat was laid at the dock, it was put up for salvage and a fellow named Captain George Howland [sic. Captain George Hawford] who was a mariner from, from Rhode Island, bought it, put it back into service, okay, went off and after a couple of years, I think, in '45 [1845], '46 [1846], it was scuttled somewhere, we lose track of it in '45 [1845], '46 [1846] in the, in the French West Indies. So, you got New London, you got New Haven, which is where they were jailed, and on the site of the jail now is a, a statue was erected, I believe in '87 [1987] or '88 [1988] that is an image of Sengbe [Pieh; Joseph Cinque] and it tells in a brief description the story of the Amistad. The third location is Hartford [Connecticut] where the court case, the main court case took place because Hartford, and you have to remember, had bicameral houses back in 1839. So they met sometimes in New Haven, sometimes in Hartford. The old state house is where the, the court case was held and that still exists today. As a matter of fact, the old state house does a wonderful job every, once or twice a week, they do a re-enactment of the actual trial in the old state house and the actual building where it occurred. The fourth and final place is Farmington, Connecticut because Farmington is where the Africans were taken in by the, the abolitionists in Farming--Farmington was a hotbed of abolitionist activity and for nine months they were kept there, fed, clothed, learned how to read. They actually went around here in New England and sang songs from the Bible and were paid to help them raise the money to go back on the Gentlemen in 1841 which is a ship that they chartered to go back to Sierra Leone. So, very important, Connecticut history, and therefore U.S. history. Story_ID: 256307 Speaker 1: Well tell us about the activities of AMISTAD [America Incorporated] organization here. Well, what, what, now you, the replica of the ship [La Amistad]-- Speaker 2: Re-creation, it's not a replica. Speaker 1: Re-creation, okay, it's a re-creation, so, so is there a, how is that, how true to the original is it and what does it, how much does it matter? Speaker 2: Sure, sure. Well, I would say first and for--people always ask me that question, you know, or they'll say, it's a replica and I'm very quick to, to correct them and suggest that it's not. It's not for a couple of reasons, couple of significant reasons. One, we could not have built a boat like the original vessel because we never would have been able to take it off of the dock because the boats back then were, would have been less safe in terms of its water line, the amount of water from the water to the deck of the ship. It would have been about ten feet shorter, made of materials that don't exist in this country because it was built in Cuba and so some of the native woods we would not have had. We built this boat to meet modern U.S. Coast Guard standards. It certainly would not have had the engine or GPS or navigation chart plotters and all the things that we do have on board and the heads and so on and so forth. So, as I always like to say as a sailor, if a sailor from 1839 were looking at this boat in Long Island Sound, from a distance, he would say, that looks like my boat but to get on board her and to stay on board her, or sail on board her, they would find some, some, the sailing principles have not changed but the accoutrements that we have to ensure safety and comfort for the crew and for our passengers is a little bit different. We've got water-tight bulkheads, you know, and so that none of the chambers, not all of the chambers can fill up with water at the same time to get back safely. We've got diesel engines and, you know, a galley and so on and so forth but in type, it is, and how we know this, the design element. These were the, these were the Cadillacs of the time. These were the fast boats, race boats. They used to bring things from point A to point B and they have the, what's called the tilt or the rake in the mast so that they can go faster because the sails capture more of the wind. They allow you to heel on that boat much faster. And so, this was a type, the Baltimore Clipper ship, the Baltimore schooner clipper ship that was copied, manufactured all throughout the world, you know. There are boats at Mystic Seaport [Mystic, Connecticut] from their archives in Norway and in England and Paris [France], I mean in France and such that look just like this boat all through the Caribbean. These were-- Speaker 1: Now this is a design that was-- Speaker 2: This is a design that was-- Speaker 1: --that came from Baltimore [Maryland]? I mean-- Speaker 2: --came out of the Baltimore, Chesapeake Bay [Maryland] region. They were used in the War of 1812 primarily as privateers because they were much quicker and they can get around the big British frigates and run, outrun them, and so on and so forth. Speaker 1: It's interesting you should say that because when you, when, I think the first, that's the first idea when I saw a photo, I mean a picture, an illustration of the Amistad, in a book, I said it looked fast. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: It looked fast. Speaker 2: Yes, sleek, low, sleek, fast schooners. These boats, you know, Howland [sic. Captain George Hawford] in one of his, some of his memoirs, he talks about that boat leaving Rhode Island and getting to Bermuda in the Mid-Atlantic within fourteen days' time. Now back then, with no engines, that's fast. That's really fast and, you know, you figure, eight, ten, maybe on a good wind, eleven knots. That's a very fast moving, moving vessel. So, that's what they were primarily used for and in this case it just happened that it had these fifty-three Africans in addition to the other elements on board, on board the cargo. So this boat is different in that regard. Story_ID: 256308 Speaker 1: We have a crew of thirteen that, that sail the vessel [Freedom Schooner Amistad] and also act as the docents, or educators, on board the boat but they maintain it, they live on it for their, their stint of time which is normally anywhere from three to four months. And we take the vessel for a dual mission, as a floating educational classroom and an ambassador of goodwill from the State of Connecticut. We're the official flagship and tall ship ambassador for the State of Connecticut and in the last four and a half years, under my watch, we have taken her to some seventy ports, including your hometown of Chicago [Illinois] in the summer of 2003 and we bring the story of the Amistad to young people, to the general public. We offer educational tours to the general public, private elements to those but all of it under the guise of teaching the story of the Amistad but also in a contemporary sense, teaching people about our commonalities versus our differences, which I think is very deeply rooted in the history of the Amistad incident and very deeply needed today in terms of the race relations that exist in this country, the need to seek pluralism and to try and find common ground between us. The boat has an interesting way of attracting people and then therefore we have a forum to be able to discuss with people the importance of our commonalities versus our differences. So, we try and mimic that in our staff here and our staff on the boat that's very diverse and such, and I think as a model, it has worked fairly well. It hasn't been done without difficulty, without challenge and without struggle, the primary one being funding, of course, but it's, I think, a mission that's really worth fighting for and worth contributing and being engaged in and that's why I spent the last seven and a half years of my life, from the very early days when I saw the first plans of it, to getting the wood and to fashioning the boat, having it constructed and creating the programs and traveling as we have and so on and so forth, it's taken, it's taken on a life of its own. I used to say in the early days that, number one, they hired a golfer to build a ship which I thought was crazy in the first place but secondly, I was like a shepherd of a flock of goodwill and interest around this notion. It's almost like people needed this Amistad. People wanted to see this Friendship boat, wanted to see it go and do and speak to this history and be a forum, to allow people a little bit of comfort in being, talk about this painful history in our past and then contemporarily, to use it for young people to bring them together. I mean the greatest thing I think we've ever done is to create this program to, here in Connecticut, and we've done it elsewhere, to bring racially and socially economically diverse people together, young people, on board the boat and take them out sailing and tell them, look, the boat has no brakes, all right, you all are in charge, we're going to go out this way and you all are going to work as teams. You may not have ever met each other, they don't know their backgrounds but they've got to work as a team in order to get that boat back safely. And I think in a very experiential learning manner, it allows young people to kind of throw away some of their misperceptions about people. You got the element of history but you've also got this contemporary mission that makes it a very, very powerful opportunity to teach young people and others about the importance of coming together. Story_ID: 256309 Speaker 1: Do you have any stories you can tell us about this dynamic? It sounds like a, you know-- Speaker 2: All sorts. Speaker 1: --it'd be a great reality TV show about following them around. Speaker 2: Yeah, some of my board members [for AMISTAD America Incorporated] would like to see us do that, you know, on MTV. I mean, the stories are endless of young people who I've seen and we've got video clips and I've got e-mails and letters that young kids have written me who've participated. Some of them have come on as actual crew and have been so moved by the experience. I'll tell you one story that didn't involve kids but was probably emotion--so emotional for me, the first being, I was at the dock one day in New Haven [Connecticut] and I just went down to say hello to the crew, have lunch with them and, and a taxicab pulls up to Long Wharf Pier, which is our home, our home port, and this elderly black woman gets out of the cab, I can see her from the distance, and I'm thinking, she's a local person who came down to visit the boat and so on and so forth, and she makes her way and she was a very, kind of quintessential black grandmother, you know, image and face, probably in her late seventies, early eighties, and she comes on board [the Freedom Schooner Amistad] the boat and she says, "May I have permission to come on board?" I said, "Certainly." Now we were at lunch but I let her come on board. She sits down. I said, "Oh, good to have you, would you like to join us for lunch?" "Oh, absolutely." It turns out this woman had, her church, Riverside Church in New York [New York] up on, on Riverside Drive, had paid for her to take a taxi from New York City all the way to New Haven just to see the boat and she said, "Sweetheart, I had to come because I didn't want to die without seeing this boat. I wanted to sit on it, I wanted to step here and I wanted to be able to say to my grandchildren that I was on board the Amistad." I mean, I almost lost it in tears. The Captain Bill [ph.] and I were there at the time and we're just fascinated that, it evoked that much emotion in this woman, that much emotion that she would find her way, all, she didn't, she'd never been to New Haven before, didn't know, all she knew was she needed to find the Amistad and go on it. And so she ended up spending the day with us and having lunch and so on and so forth and it's one of my fondest memories and I sat back and I said this is probably why we did what we did. If it can touch this woman the way in which it has, then I think that all the effort and all the frustration and all the money and the budgets and all this stuff, had been worth it because I think it did have a positive impact on her and I hope that it has done that for others as well. I may not have met all of them but I, I hope that it has changed people's perceptions about history, about the contributions of African Americans and about the potential and the hope for our future and our ability to come together. This, this notion as W.E.B. Du Bois said, that this will be, the issue of race will be the issue of the 20th century, continues in the 21st [century] and I worry that if we don't keep working at it that we're not going to make enough progress going forward. Story_ID: 256310 Speaker 1: Have you had any opposition, I mean, to this project? Any opposition based on the fact that this is a slave revolt and, and that-- Speaker 2: Not once. I had one guy, one crazy guy when we were going to Fort Pierce, Florida who wrote me an e-mail or left me a phone message or something, he was clearly a racist redneck fella who was upset that we were coming to his town but the people in the lo--host committee handled him pretty well 'cause I guess he got on radio down there and was spewing off all sorts of hated, hateful stuff and they took him to task. He wrote me a letter and I didn't even bother, he sent me, it was like Ku Klux Klan [KKK] material and so on and so forth but nothing ever came of it and certainly never have we had, ever had any threats, have we ever had any, you know, people who've asserted that they want to do harm or didn't care about it. I have had people who, you know, who have not fully embraced what we're trying to do and I think some of that is due in part to expectations. I think people expect to see a slave ship, often, and they come to the vessel and they say, the first impression is, my God it's small. Well it is because it wasn't the slave boat, it wasn't the boat that's described, excuse me, in 'Roots[: The Saga of an American Family,' Alex Haley] or any of the narrative-- Speaker 1: It's not the boat of those diagrams that you see of all the slaves-- Speaker 2: None of those, you know, 'The Black Book,' you remember that book, 'The Black Book'-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --that had all those images of slavery and such. I remember-- Speaker 1: The diagrams of all the, the layout of how slaves are arranged on a boat. Speaker 2: It didn't have any of that design to it. And so I think people are off-put because they really want to see that. I think they need to see that in, in some of, in some way, shape or form but that's not what this was. That's not what this story was about. It had the element of that on board the Tecora but we wouldn't build and didn't build the Tecora. We weren't building Middle Passage-type packing slave vessel, we were building a freedom schooner [Freedom Schooner Amistad]. We were building a boat to talk about, and not without, not running from the history and the cruelty that existed, explaining that in, in very broad detail but, but really using this as a point of hope and a point of inspiration to show the courage and the perseverance of our ancestors. You know, there were millions who lost their lives but there are also those who fought and survived. Speaker 1: There's an interesting point about that, you know, this story. When people first hear it I think, our people are presented with very few stories where we win. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: We actually win something-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --in that time period especially and, you know, we've got a lot of ambivalence about slavery now. Some people are, are quite frankly, glad that there was a slave trade so they could get out of Africa but there's a friend of mine, Anderson Thompson says in Chicago [Illinois], our troubles really began when we don't want to go back. I mean, our cultural identity and problems in terms of who we are start when we, when the generation comes to this country and doesn't want to go back to Africa anymore or doesn't even think of that as home anymore. It's a cutoff, a cultural isolation but, but the, I remember in the movie ['Amistad'], the scene that seemed to really work for the black audience whether they knew anything else about the Amistad or not, was the scene where Djimon Hounsou plunges a cutlass into the captain and there's a, I mean, the theatre, I saw it twice and the theatre both times, the theatre went silent, you could hear a pin drop and then some people clapped. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And it's one of the few scenes like that, I can't think of another scene like that in a movie. Speaker 2: Right. There are two poignant scenes, that one and then when the mother takes her own life and that of her children off of the boat. Those two remain with me, quite frankly-- Story_ID: 256311 Speaker 1: You know what I think, Larry [Crowe], I think that that is a culmination of, of the anger, of the fear, of the mistrust, of the pain, of the history and the legacy of slavery that, as black people, we can clearly identify with. That's almost like how, I remember when I heard the O.J. Simpson trial and whether he's guilty or not, but remembering and just, yes, and you know and, and being in a white bar when I did that and everybody looked around like what's wrong with this, this boy, you know? But that sense that we, just like to nod that as a black man I can give to you, I never met you before, I see you walking down the hallway in the airport and I do that and you have an immediate understanding of why I did that and why you nodded back and that scene, I think, speaks to that in many ways and is very empowering, it's very empowering, and there's not enough of that, unfortunately, for our young people. There's not enough of those heroes. There's not enough of that courage. There's not enough of that. Everything now is, I'm not going to go on the diatribe about all that, but it's, it's very different now. It's very, it's very less centered on history and contributions and progress and possibilities, it's more about here and now and it's sad in many ways. And so, you asked me about the kids and, and when I see the kids who come on board this boat [Freedom Schooner Amistad], who knew absolutely nothing about this or very little and leave very differently from it and feel inspired. A young girl on one of our video clips from Cleveland [Ohio] talks about this. She's like, I, I can't, she's fifteen-, sixteen-year-old, she says, I just don't understand how no one ever told me this when we took her sailing in Cleveland. She says, I just don't understand. I need to know this and she does and the fact that she's gone that far in her educational career and no one ever told her, like me, going all the way to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] and other than my parents [Diane Brown Cloud and HistoryMaker Sanford Cloud, Jr.], never hearing it, this is a travesty. It's a travesty that we never heard about these things and we don't share them, we don't respect them, we don't revere them and celebrate them. You know, they give us the shortest and coldest month of the year for Black History Month, you know, but it should be 365 days of the year. Speaker 2: It's interesting too, I mean, I went to a Jewish high school, it wasn't a Jewish religious high school but, public school, mostly Jewish people, and I was impressed as a high school student of the history and culture that they got at their temples that, and it wasn't, you know, religious-base necessarily, it was about, you know, the deeds and activities of historical activities of their ancestors and their current, you know, Jewish population around the world, they talked about a lot and I just wondered why we never did that in church, you know. I mean, some churches, black churches do, but, I don't think we, I know my church didn't do enough of it or hardly any of it and-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --it just raises a lot of cultural questions, you know. I don't know if one of [Steven] Spielberg's motivations for doing this was to, you know, show, I think he did sort of address, in terms of the movie ['Amistad'], you know, the demonstrating to black folks on some of that there, that they do have a history of activism and stuff that they could turn to, I don't know. Speaker 1: I, I think, I remember him being quoted, I watched him when he was on 'Oprah,' ['The Oprah Winfrey Show'] I watched him very keenly, and he said in many ways he was doing this for his kids. I think he has an adopted black child, if I am not mistaken and he wanted that child to understand who, who he comes from and so on and so forth and for his white kids to understand, his white children to understand that as well. I think that's very, very valid and I think that's very, very important and I'm grateful and I don't ever want, if he ever watched this or saw my comments which I've made many times, I would never want him to think that I am not, nor is the organization [AMISTAD America Incorporated] appreciative, it's just, I wish that it could have been done a little bit differently and I wish that there was a connection after the film that continued, that didn't let it die, you know, with a couple of months in the movie, in the movie theatres and that it continues to live on. That's my only regret, unfortunately. Story_ID: 256312 Speaker 1: Filmmakers seem to not to know who the black authorities are on these, these subjects or who's an authority on black history 'cause there're even some white people out here that are authorities and they can speak with authority about some things that-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: --seem to be missing from a lot of historical movies like 'Glory' and 'Amistad' where you have the names of black characters are, kind of omitted from the record, you know, the African American-- Speaker 2: It seems convenient doesn't it in many ways? I don't know, I don't know, I mean I don't want to paint a blanket notion but I, I don't know that the same level of detail and the concern about accuracy exists in the films about us. Maybe the argument is that it doesn't exist and I would argue that it does but you've got to look harder and you've got to look a little bit deeper. You know, you take 'Glory' and as you and I talked off-camera, the 54th Regiment of the Massachusetts Infantry, a lot of history, a lot of notation about that that is very accurate. I know that places like the Schomburg Center [for Research in Black Culture, New York, New York] have extensive libraries, the Spingarn Library [Moorland-Spingarn Research Center] at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], another one. The Amistad Research Center down at Tulane [University, New Orleans, Louisiana], where we have some of our archives are, or at least around the Amistad, are tremendous, tremendous archives. Personal notes from [John] Quincy Adams, you know. Examples of his legal briefs and so on and so forth, you know, kind of crossed off elements and ways he was changing his arguments and things, all that stuff exist, Library of Congress [Washington, D.C.], you know, so maybe they don't feel that it's necessary to do that. Maybe people won't pay as much attention to it but maybe it's just the commercialization of the film industry at this point where, you know, you pull together a movie, you do it for two and a half hours, pay ten bucks and have some bad popcorn and, you know, hope that you sell enough tickets to pay back, you know, what you put into it, which in fact did not happen with the 'Amistad.' You know, it was not a blockbuster and I think, unfortunately, 'Titanic' took a lot of the wind out of the sails of 'Amistad.' If you remember, they opened at the same time and not that 'Titanic' was a bad, a bad movie, but for me and for many historical buffs, it certainly didn't have the same level of, of importance as the story of the Titanic did. Story_ID: 256313 Speaker 1: So you're going on, the boat is continually on, it's on tour in the summer months? Spring and summer (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Normally, year-round. This winter we laid, we laid her away for the winter to do some repair work which is ongoing right now at Mystic Seaport [Mystic, Connecticut] where we actually built the boat. We are not a part of Mystic Seaport. We are an independent non-profit [AMISTAD America Incorporated] but they are the builders of the vessel, there's a great deal of relationship between the organizations and they are contractually obligated to help us, really, maintain her and keep her which is a great offer and a good relationship that we've maintained over the last seven and a half years. So, we're going to get back in the spring and have the vessel preparing to take a trip to Bermuda which will be her first full-fledged international voyage. A lot of great history on the island of Bermuda, particularly for blacks, black mariners, even more specifically and we believe, we're trying to verify it, but we believe that the Amistad [La Amistad] may have visited Bermuda in her second life as Ion, which is the name of the boat that she was, she was renamed as. So, the summer will have us mostly in Connecticut, a few trips to the Vineyard [Martha's Vineyard, Massachusetts] which is where we go once a summer, possibly Sag Harbor [New York], places like that in New York City [New York, New York]. No major tours this year. The possibility if our funding from the federal government comes through, we're going to take the boat down to the Caribbean to explore the roots of, of resistance and rebellion in the Caribbean islands of Puerto Rico, St. Croix and St. Thomas [U.S. Virgin Islands], which I'm very excited about and the future holds, I think for the [Freedom Schooner] Amistad, eventually to make some trips across the Atlantic [Ocean] to Europe, particularly to Hull, England which is where they built all of those slave vessels to Cadiz in Spain and to Nantes in France. I'd like to see the vessel, at some day, go back to Freetown, [Republic of] Sierra Leone, which is the home of the original Mende. I was with the president of Sierra Leone a couple of years ago and he was very gracious, a wonderful gentleman and one of the things I pledged him was that we would do everything within our power to make that possible for the people of Sierra Leone to be able to see their vessel again and there's a great deal of interest in that. Story_ID: 256314 Speaker 1: In terms of [Republic of] Sierra Leone-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --that's a country that's just had a tremendous turmoil, a lot of civil strife over diamond sales and so forth. It had nothing to do with anything political, but it disrupted the country and almost brought it to its, to the ground but, basically. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: But how, there's a, there's a, the book that most people associated with Amistad before was a book called 'Black Mutiny[: The Revolt on the Schooner Amistad,' William A. Owens] and in that book there's a falsification at the end about the fate of Sengbe Pieh [Joseph Cinque]. Can you address that? Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: And what you'd be able to find out, you may know more about what happened to him than most people. Speaker 2: Pieh is a, is not a common name in Sierra Leone. As a matter of fact, it's a name from a particular region which is probably about thirty to forty miles outside of the capital of Freetown [Republic of Sierra Leone]. We were in touch with the Pieh family that exists here in the [United] States. Samuel is the patriarch, really, of the family. His, his nephew worked for me at some time here which would have been the great, great, great grandson of Sengbe Pieh. Now-- Speaker 1: Now, there's a family here in the United States-- Speaker 2: Yes, in the United States. Speaker 1: --that's related to, is this a family he started here or a family that came over from Sierra Leone? Speaker 2: No, from Sierra Leone. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They're from, they're from a little village called Taiama [Sierra Leone] in, in Sierra Leone, and Mende and, they tell the story of see, their, Samuel's father was a minister in Sierra Leone and his contention is that Sengbe Pieh would have been his great-great grandfather. Now, there was a lot of ruckus about this when we brought them here for the launch and for the keel-laying of the vessel [Freedom Schooner Amistad] and there were a lot of historians and others, you know, even some of the people on my board at the time looked, said, you know, how do we know, you know? They could be, you know, pulling the wool over our eyes. And at the end of the day, what, what I decided was that I was going to take these people at their word. I was not going to scrutinize, you know, their contentions. Now, we have to remember too, that in, in West Africa, in Sierra Leone in particular, records, don't necessarily exist. When I was there a couple of years ago, the, the city building where they house the records had been torn up in the, in the civil war. So, and we have a tradition in West African culture of, of storytelling, of relating things, verbally, not written, and so if these people contend that they are who they are, we have no reason until proven otherwise that they are not. And so I have invited them and I have become friendly with them over the years and I respect them a great deal and they still work very hard, Samuel and his brothers in particular, to help their little village of Taiama and we have tried to help as well, financially and other support. We just gave an exhibit, our old exhibit, to the government of Sierra Leone so that they can post it in a high place in, in Freetown and make a traveling exhibit out of it so that the people can hear it and it's very visual. People, not everyone, reads. There's a decent literacy rate but not everybody reads. So we wanted to do an audio version of it as well so people can see it. So, there's a direct connection between Amistad, between the Amistad incident and the people of Sierra Leone and now a growing link and connection between the government of Sierra Leone and AMISTAD America [Incorporated] and I hope that that continues even after my tenure is over at AMISTAD. We've had two young people who are Sierra Leoneans from Freetown who've served as members of the crew on board the vessel. As a matter of fact, one of them is here with us now, [HistoryMaker] Donald George, and a young man John Kamara before him and I thought it was very important to bring actual Sierra Leoneans to sell their side of the story because the story didn't end here, in the United States, it continued on and the history and the sense of, of purpose and mission that Donald and Johnny have had in telling their side of the Amistad story is very powerful and I think that their voices should be heard and fortunately through the project they've been able to do some of that. Story_ID: 256315 Speaker 1: Is there any new information on the fate of Sengbe Pieh [Joseph Cinque]? Speaker 2: There, you know, there was an element about him becoming a slave owner which I think was-- Speaker 1: Yeah, it came out in 'Black Mutiny[: The Revolt on the Schooner Amistad,' William A. Owens] which was-- Speaker 2: Which I think is preposterous, quite frankly. I think it's utterly preposterous. You know, we have to remember that we were implicit, meaning our ancestors in selling each other to Europeans, I mean, that's very clear, very documented that there were Africans who, but not necessarily for profit. Sometimes because of tribal war, because of disputes, so on and so forth, bartering and such, but I don't think that any of them in the beginning at least, had any sense of what they were selling them into, what it would look like when they got to Cuba and Savannah [Georgia] and, you know, Bahia [Brazil] and such. I don't think any of them had any idea of what was to be expected. I think if they had, maybe they would have thought differently about it but I think then it became a very profitable element and some of these village heads, head men and, and kings and such of kingdoms in the early days, Dahomey [Benin] and so on and so forth, I think for them it became a place of, of privilege and it was probably hard to not do that but we have to understand and appreciate that, whether we like it or not, that we did, meaning Africans, did sell one another into this chattel slavery. Speaker 1: But at the same time, Europeans were acquiring Africans any way they could? Speaker 2: Oh, clearly. Speaker 1: It wasn't just through-- Speaker 2: Clearly. Speaker 1: --sales of-- Speaker 2: Oh, no, no, no, and I'm sorry I don't mean to say that. What I'm saying is that I've met many black people who say, black folks weren't involved in slavery, you know, that was all white folks who did that, all Europeans, and what I'm saying is that it was both, that it was both and that the heinousness that is associated with slavery that we're all far too familiar with, was predicated upon black people, Africans, by the Europeans that the African vision, or version of slavery was mostly out of bartering or for trade or whatever else and more of an indentured servitude that could end at some point, you know. If you lost the war, for example, or, you know, for whatever reasons, but it didn't have the level of, of de-humanization and of torture and of the horrid conditions that slaves were, were brought to in this country and elsewhere. Speaker 1: I guess it's certainly not the stigma of being black and, black and slavery being synonymous, you know. Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly. We've been slaves for a long time, we have to remember, you know, the Romans and Egyptians and others, you know, this us versus them has always existed, mostly around profit lines, political reasons and others but clearly they perfected it with us and, you know, its impacts still exist. It exists on every street corner, you know, in the United States, from Cleveland [Ohio] to Chicago [Illinois] to Hartford [Connecticut] and anywhere else and that's saddening. That's the legacy. That's one of the legacies, one of the sadder legacies. I think there are many positive legacies but, of our people, but that is one of the sadder ones that is, still impacts us today. Speaker 1: Is there, is there any reliable information on what actually happened to Sengbe when he went back? Speaker 2: I think the most reliable is in Howard Jones' book, 'Mutiny on the Amistad[: The Saga of a Slave Revolt and Its Impact on American Abolition, Law, and Diplomacy'] which he's a professor at the University of Mississippi-- [The University of] Alabama [Tuscaloosa, Alabama], excuse me, and I think he does the most, I'll give you a copy of it, he does the best job and the most accurate job of describing what happened. In fact, we really don't know because, you know, there were probably some letters back and forth between the missionaries that would have said that they were, they arrived and that Sengbe wanted to find his family and quite frankly they were probably sold into slavery. You know, he left a family at twenty-five. He left his rice farming and all of that was probably gone by the time he came back three years later and I think he was probably devastated and I think he probably went back to what he knew, which was rice farming, and he probably sought out his family members or he started a new family and, you know, he would only have been twenty-eight, twenty-nine years old when he went back home so he probably started a new family and those peoples are the peoples that Samuel and his family claim as their heirs and again, I have no reason to believe otherwise. Story_ID: 256316 Speaker 1: Tell us briefly about some of the other educational initiatives associated with AMISTAD [America Incorporated]? Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: I mean, when you look at the brochures, a lot of different ways to learn (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) A lot of different things. Speaker 1: --from this project. Speaker 2: A lot of different things. First and foremost I'd say we have a membership program which I encour--encourage people to support. We've got an educational curriculum that, we have an older version and we have a new version that's coming out shortly online as well as hard copy. We do this program to reduce racial isolation. We have a camp based here in New Haven [Connecticut], the Kali Camp, K-A-L-I, like the young boy in this story. We have an Amistad leadership institute which is a longer five-day program that takes young people, high school students, particularly out on board the vessel [Freedom Schooner Amistad] and trains them in leadership and history of the story and sailing and so on and so forth. All of those things have evolved over time as programs that try and fit the mission of the organization to teach about the inherent lessons but also to use the boat to spark these contemporary conversations about race and race relations in the country. I would be remiss though in, in closing if I did not say that I have been terribly disappointed, we're on this African American [The] HistoryMakers program and to say that I have been troubled, severely, by the lack of financial support and interest that we have received from black folks in general and those who can, who should, who don't, without naming names but those who you would think would jump all over this and be supportive, it's been very discouraging for me as an individual and maybe it's somewhat more that we need to do or whatever else, but we've been around a long time and been a lot of places and I have not seen the level of support that I would have hoped would have come from this project so that it was able to be shared for generations to come and not just us that exists and I don't understand the, the psychology of that. I think about it quite often, probably more than I should, but it's, it's troubling to me. Speaker 1: Well, black people, it's been said numerous times, I guess, I've observed it too, they seem to be very squeamish about dealing with the subject of historical slavery. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Even though this project was, grew out of the initiative of [HistoryMaker] Warren Marr [II]-- Speaker 2: Correct. Speaker 1: --right, an African American-- Speaker 2: Correct. Speaker 1: --it's still something that's a subject that we don't like to deal with. I think Spike Lee said at one time when he discussed the [Steven] Spielberg movie's ['Amistad'] emergence, he said, "I'll never do a slave movie," you know-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --or, or something to that effect. Speaker 2: Well that's one black man's opinion. You know, I, I remember you asking me earlier about memories. I remember when the film came out, the debut. We had a big thing here in Connecticut and I remember going to the film and I, and I walked out 'cause I had already seen it, you know, I don't know, I've seen the film out of, eight, ten times, right, and my second or third time, and I go outside to use the restroom and there was a group of about four or five older black women, all dressed up, you know, this big shindig right, and they were outside chatting with each other and saying, "I don't want to see this movie. I don't want--I'm leaving. I can't believe I paid--" and they didn't know who I was but I just sat at the water cooler and I listened to their conversation and they were adamant in their minds that this was a part of history that they did not want to touch, that they were not going there, they were not going there and that, damn it, why would they, anybody even do this? And I kept asking, I kept thinking to myself, well why did they come in the first place? Was it something that they expected that didn't meet their expectations in some way or was it just a visceral reaction to what they saw? And that's possible, you know, maybe it's too tough to deal with and in part, you know, I can understand that but we can't be ostriches and put our heads in the, in the sand and expect, or act as though it didn't happen, you know. I think it's what we do moving forward without forgetting that history that's very important. And I was just a little saddened that these, and I'll, you know, what they did, how they've been since that moment, I don't know, but I just remember very vividly remembering those four or five old black ladies and their reaction was that this was not something that they want to be a part of, at all. Speaker 1: You think that might be part of the obstacle-- Speaker 2: I think it's a part. Speaker 1: --that she has to overcome. Speaker 2: I think it's a part, it's challenging. You know, we don't want to talk about scars and, you know, what do we say in the black family? We don't put our business out in the street, you know. We don't want to talk about all that. We want to talk about, you know, positive things. We want to, you know, talk about Michael Jordan and how much money he makes and Michael Jordan--Michael Jackson and his trial and all that kind of stuff that is nonsensical to me and, and not recognized, you know, the shoulders that we stand on. And I'm saying this very broadly. Speaker 1: The Michael Jackson, I think you're talking about, the trial and stuff-- Speaker 2: Huh, yeah-- Speaker 1: --the Michael Jackson trial, yeah. Speaker 2: --the trial, you know. I mean, we had to talk about all that kind of stuff and, you know, this nonsense they're doing with Bill Cosby and such but I don't, I don't begrudge anybody their opinions and feelings about that. This is the path that I've chosen. I feel that it's an important path. I chose this because I wanted to be able to share this history to kids that started for me as a young person in learning the story when I was six, seven years old, by my mother [Diane Brown Cloud], and I want, when this is all said and done for however long I do this, I want to be able to look back when I have children one day and them see the boat somewhere and be able to say, "Yeah, you know, your father, your grandfather had a little something to do with that," that's it, that's it. I didn't do this for the glory. I didn't do it for the money, certainly, I did it because I felt like this was a story that had to be told. Story_ID: 256317 Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: I have my concerns for the African American community. I have some broad concerns about us forgetting our history, it's what's important, the work that you all are doing in, in archiving and documenting these things because I think that you don't know where you're going unless you know where you've been and who you come from and the accomplishments and the contributions of, of so many, so many countless numbers of blacks, whites and others who've helped us get to where we are in this country. I'm very concerned about, kind of this, and maybe every, every generation has it, but I'm very concerned about this, this kind of social, this lack of, of concern in engagement in young black people, young black men in particular. You know, the behavior that allows the underwear being shown and the kind of slackness that exists and that, I will say that I know many young black men and women who defy that model altogether who are doing fantastic things but in general, this kind of malaise like we throw our hands up like we can't do anything to stop it or to save them or to help them I think is really unfortunate. I think that this notion of race and racial animus continues to exist. I'm afraid that it's, it's going broader to include social and economic, social and economic divide, that divides us even amongst ourselves that is equally troubling. I believe that if we don't begin, as a people, to hone in on our educational and our financial wherewithal within our black communities, that we're going to find ourselves left behind. You know, my mother [Diane Brown Cloud] used to tell me as a child growing up in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] how it was so great to grow up in black communities. You know, there was a black doctor, a black dentist, black lawyers and you know and in some way segregation was a very good thing for black folks, it kept us together, you know, and we had this migration and black folks are fleeing the inner-city and such and now we've got this incredible and intense elements of poverty and poor education, poor healthcare and such within the urban centers and figuring out a way to stem that tide and to improve those situations for others because I believe that we're only as strong as our weakest link and we've got some pretty weak links, not only in the African American community but in the urban centers, overall, that are very troublesome. Education is key. You know, you can never stop learning and I think that it's important that, look, I, I remember this conversation about, you know, I don't want my forty acres and a mule. You know, I've done all right. I'd rather see that money pay poor black kids in Mississippi or in Bridgeport [Connecticut] or in Chicago [Illinois] to go to college and you have the same kind of opportunities that I have. I don't want forty thousand dollars, you know. I don't want reparations for myself, personally. I believe it's an obligation that this government and that many companies who profited from it owe people of color will go and do something in, in Africa where we raped and pillaged, you know, to stem that tide over there. I've been to [Republic of] Sierra Leone. I've been to South Africa. I've been to Gugulethu [South Africa] and, and Soweto [Johannesburg, South Africa] and these places and it is, it is utterly incredible to me that people live in the conditions that they do and we continue to allow it, you know, to exist. So, maybe, you know, the broadest concern is that we do something to engage, inspire and, and propel our young people to not forget who they are, where they come from, but to dream big and give them the tools and the opportunity to achieve those things. That's what I would hope. Story_ID: 256318 Speaker 1: Now, in 1839, you would be considered probably a middle-aged man. You're about thirty-five, now? Speaker 2: Thirty-five, yes sir. Speaker 1: Yeah, but in, in 2005, you're considered a youngster in a lot of ways. You, you went to school with Puff Daddy [Sean Combs]-- Speaker 2: Yeah I did. Speaker 1: Rosenberg [ph.], [Ras] Baraka-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --people like that at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.]. What do you plan to do next? Now I know, I know you're looking beyond this. You've got to be looking at like what are you going to do after this? Or what are your plans? Do you have any plans beyond this job? Speaker 2: That's a great question. I, I'm in the midst of that thinking now. I've, I've made it public that I'm leaving AMISTAD [America Incorporated] at some point, in the near future, probably in the next six months or so, and I really don't know what I want to do next. I know that I want to be passionate about I do, about what I do. I know that as my family grew up with this saying that "To whom much is given, much is required," and that for me means that I have contributions I need to make to my community, locally, nationally, globally if the Lord sees fit to allow me to do those things. I'm not one who is pursued by money. You know, that's not my, my, the biggest propeller. I really feel like if I can do something that benefits others, I'm probably most happy, you know. I'd like to play a little bit more golf if I could but I don't know, I really don't know and I've never looked for a job. Jobs have always kind of found me, or opportunities I should say, have found me, and I've been smart enough to take 'em when that opportunity knocked and that's probably what'll happen here. I think that I want to continue in the entrepreneurial spirit that I have been given the opportunity to operate in here at AMISTAD because this has been a very entrepreneurial element. I started with nothing. There were seventeen thousand dollars in the bank when I started this and we're a $2.5 million industry now, a corporation now and I want to see that kind of spirit continue. I like the autonomy. I like working with smart people, good people, committed people and I could see some of that as well. I won't be a lawyer like my brother [Adam Morgan Cloud] and my dad [HistoryMaker Sanford Cloud, Jr.] but I certainly hope that my, my next job offers me the opportunity to be as engaged and passionate about what I've done here and AMISTAD will always be in my heart. This is my baby. I built this ship [Freedom Schooner Amistad] myself with many others but I led this effort and if this organization never needed me for anything, all they would have to do is call because it's meant, it's meant a great deal to me. It's changed my life and I thank them, Chris Cox and the others who hired me for the opportunity and, you know, I feel like I've been blessed. I have a wonderful wife [Stacy Cloud] and I've got a great family and I love them all very dearly and, you know, I, I feel like the next, the next opportunity would be a fantastic voyage. The next opportunity would be a fantastic voyage and I'm up for it. Story_ID: 256319 Speaker 1: Now, is there anything, any major thing that you would do differently at this point in your life? Speaker 2: Career-wise? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I don't think so. I think it would have to be thematic to what I've done. I mean, I wouldn't go off and want to become a doctor. I think politics is probably in my future in some way, shape or form. I think that community affairs, government relations work is probably in my future in one shape or another. If I wanted to stay in the, in the nonprofit world, I could certainly do development for another organization but, you know, it's hard once you've been the boss to be anything other than the boss, so that's part of my challenge and my wife [Stacy Cloud] tells me that's my, my biggest achievement and my biggest deficit. I've been a CEO for too long and I don't know how to be anything else. So, I don't know what it will lead to next, Larry [Crowe], but I know that that time is coming and it's probably coming soon for me and I'll be ready for the challenge or whatever it is, whatever it is that comes next. Story_ID: 261171 Speaker 1: Sir, at this point, what would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: My legacy. Well, I guess my legacy would be that I'm the guy who fulfilled Warren Marr's [HistoryMaker Warren Marr II] dream which was to build a re-created Freedom Schooner Amistad and use it as an educational tool around this country to teach about the historic Amistad incident but also use it as a platform to teach young people about the importance of our commonalities versus our differences. I'm a pretty soft-spoken guy. I have never looked for kudos and applause and such and certainly not legacies. I have tackled this as kind of a personal mission to do what needed to be done and my legacy would be that Chris [HistoryMaker Christopher R. Cloud] cared a great deal about this, that this was in his blood, in his soul and in his spirit and he gave all that he could around it and I hope that when history looks back at the story of the Freedom Schooner Amistad and the organization [AMISTAD America Incorporated] that it will look favorably and said that he accomplished those things and that he did this for the youth of America and elsewhere to understand this important part of American history. Story_ID: 261172 Speaker 1: How would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Hm. I would like to be remembered as, as someone who cared a great deal about his family, who loved his wife [Stacy Cloud], who strove for excellence in everything that he did, that worked hard, that gave back to his community, that loved his children and his family and that he lived by the words that, "To whom much is given, much is required." I think that's probably what I would want to be, how I'd want to be remembered. Someone who was given a lot and did something with it and didn't sit back and rest on the laurels or, I probably could have taken a different path in life. I could have done things and been more comfortable or, financially and so on and so forth, but that never meant, that never meant a lot to me. I would hope that I would be remembered as somebody who knew who he was as a black man, in this country, who was proud of that, who tried to instill that into others and to his family, who shared, who educated to the best of his ability and left people feeling good about their interactions with me, never burn bridges, you know, and loved the game of golf, certainly. I love the game of golf. Those sorts of things, Larry [Crowe], those sorts of things. My wife is the most important person in my life and sometimes this job and my work has not, you know, allowed me to be all that I could be in that regard but she knows how much I love her and she's meant, she's changed me and so--women have a way of doing that if you find the right one and she certainly has and she's made me a better man and someone who's more grounded and more respectful and appreciative of all the blessings that I've been given. So, I thank her. I thank my parents [Diane Brown Cloud and HistoryMaker Sanford Cloud, Jr.]. I thank my grandparents. I've got a wonderful legacy and lineage of, of strong black people in my life, women and men, and I'm grateful to all of them who've made me who I am and I have a niece now. I don't have children yet but I have a niece and I see that love that she's receiving now and I think back to my childhood and if the Lord blesses my wife and I to have children, I hope that they'll receive that same element and when they sit down with their kids and they talk about their father that they'll do it with love the way that I talk to my niece now about her grandfather, about her grandfather. So, those are the things that are important. When it's all said and done, you know, and you've got family, you've got love, your health the most part, we didn't touch on any of this but I've had significant health issues throughout my life that have always been challenges that have been right there in front, you know, as a diabetic for twenty-five years, a kidney transplant recipient but none of that stuff has ever stopped me and most people when they meet me they have no idea, you know, that that's my, that's my life, you know, the medicalness of my life but I never let it stop. My mother told me that when I was a kid and I listened to her, oddly enough, I listened to her, and I believed her. I believed her that I could do anything that I set my mind to. I believed when my father told me that you got to be the best that what you are. He used to say, I don't care if you're a street sweeper, a lawyer, a doctor, just be the best that you are and I believed him. I was dumb enough to believe him and I've tried to pursue that. I try to pursue those goals and I'm trying to share that with other people who haven't had the same opportunity. All my friends, my childhood friends and my college [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] friends, these guys, they've all kind of come into my life and my fold and have experienced the love and the support in my family and I've tried to share some of that with them even if they had it or certainly for those who hadn't had it. You know, so my friends who are divorced who saw my parents and saw our family life and, you know, have come to respect and appreciate that and I just feel blessed overall in my life and for however long it goes, whatever I do next. If I were to die tomorrow, I would die happy knowing that I've been really blessed and that I, I tried to do my part and make this world a better place. Story_ID: 261173 Speaker 1: That's a picture of me with [HistoryMaker] Ossie Davis and [HistoryMaker] Ruby Dee. That was during the launch ceremony which was in March of 2000. Ossie and Ruby served as the emcees for the launch event and for the dinner and sadly, as you know last week, he passed. So, there was a lot of, of heart and emotion associated with that. He was a very good friend of the AMISTAD [America Incorporated]. He was actually the chair of our national advisory committee. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Next. Speaker 1: This is at our second annual Amistad Freedom Awards which was held at, in New York City [New York, New York], down at Pier 61, I believe, and that is my wife [Stacy Cloud], on my arm, my mother [Diane Brown Cloud] in the middle who looks like my other girlfriend, my sister-in-law and my twin brother, Adam [Morgan Cloud]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Great, next. Your upper. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Speaker 1: That's one of my, that's a good picture, favorite picture of mine. That's myself, with our chairman, William Minter, and Ambassador Andy Young [HistoryMaker Andrew Young] who was one of my personal heroes. He's a great fellow. We gave him the Sengbe Pieh Award, which is one of the awards that we give to distinguished individuals for their service to humanity. So, Andy and myself and Bill Minter, and that was in 2003 in Chicago [Illinois] at Navy Pier for our third annual Amistad Freedom Awards banquet. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Go ahead. Speaker 1: Yeah, if you pan in closely, that's the Amistad, Sierra Leone, Friendship Grove [Amistad Friendship Grove]. I visited Freetown, [Republic of] Sierra Leone in December of '03 [2003] and that site there is the site where the trees were donated from the Republic of Sierra Leone to be used in the construction of Freedom Schooner Amistad. So we went back to dedicate the site and to plant seedlings for those that were taken. For every tree, we planted a hundred seedlings to rejuvenate that, that tree forest. So that's a very emotional picture, very Amistad connected photograph. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, that was great. Speaker 1: Let's get this one. I always liked this one. Speaker 2: Sure, that's in Chicago. That's a photograph coming up, coming up, that's a photograph of the Amistad in the backdrop at Navy Pier the afternoon of our luncheon and all those flags represent a United Nation Peace Pole ceremony that we did. And so we had a series of flags from around the country representing the unity of the Amistad and the spirit of friendship. A great event that day and, as you can see, the vessel's right in the backdrop. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Speaker 2: Let's see, let's see if it's spread out right, okay. Speaker 1: One of my favorite pictures of the Amistad under full sail. That was probably taken in Long Island Sound and it shows the rake mast that I mentioned earlier and the design of the vessel. So, to a sailor of 1839, if he saw this photograph, he would feel very comfortable and at home knowing that that boat looks very much like and operates much like the boat of the Amistad incident of 1839. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Next. Speaker 1: Oh, goodness. That is one of my favorite photographs of my wife and I at our annual Kappa Alpha Psi [Fraternity] Crimson and Cream [Scholarship] Ball. It looks like I was having quite a bit of fun that evening with my cigar in tow and my beautiful wife on my arm. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Next. Speaker 1: Oh, goodness. This is a favorite photograph of mine. I keep it in my office to remind me of my days at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.]. This was the day that my brother [Adam Morgan Cloud] graduated from Howard University School of Law [Washington, D.C.] and in it you'll see about ten, eleven African American men all who came into Howard together in, in 1987 and all who graduated on time in 1991 and all of them have gone on to have distinguished careers themselves. There are probably three or four doctors in that group, an architect, real estate mogul, businessman and politicians. So, I'm very proud of that photograph. These were all guys that over the last fifteen almost twenty years that I have remained friendly with and it just brings back great memories. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Next. Speaker 1: Ah, a picture of myself with Christopher Cox in the middle. Christopher was my neighbor but also the fellow who introduced me to the idea of the Amistad and made sure that I got hired to do the job. And then, secondly, [HistoryMaker Captain William] Bill Pinkney, who was the first master of Amistad, the first black man that ever sailed around the world by himself and he's still a dear friend. Both of them are great mentors of mine and people who I've come to love, respect and appreciate a great deal. We were getting that day the award from the State of Connecticut tourism Office for the tourism project of the year. Speaker 2: What year is this? Speaker 1: That would have been in 2000. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Other way. Speaker 2: Well we do it the long ways because they scan better. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): It fits our frame and then we rotate it over. Speaker 2: I see. That's a picture of yours truly at the helm for Amistad. That is J.R. [ph.] in the background, one of our more colorful crew members and I was manning the wheel that day it looks like and making sure that we had a steady course and it's always a great experience to be out on the water on that, on that beautiful vessel and that's one of, actually one of my, my most favorite photographs of my time here at AMISTAD. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): All right, next. Speaker 2: Watch that. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): You need to tilt that forward a little. Speaker 2: It's going to fall a little bit. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): It's not resting on the bottom-- Speaker 2: It's on the ledge. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): --it's resting up on the edge. You need to lift it up and set it down on the ledge. Speaker 2: Yes, out on the ledge. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Sitting on the edge and then tilt the top edge forward. Hold, you have to hold it but, that's good, that's fine, okay, go ahead. Speaker 2: This is a great photograph. This speaks to what I talked about, the diversity of the organization and of the crew. This was taken probably in 2002 in New London [Connecticut] harbor, not far from the Amistad, rather from the custom house where the Amistad first came into port. The City of New London renamed that pier Amistad Pier in honor of the incident and in honor of the Freedom Schooner Amistad. So this is me with my entire staff and the entire crew of the vessel. It looks like a cold, a fall day, probably September in Connecticut. I'm very proud of that photograph and all the wonderful people I've worked with over the years. That's just a glimpse of some of the people I've, I've worked with over the last seven and a half years. Story_ID: 261174 Speaker 1: That is a picture of my brother [Adam Morgan Cloud] and I in Boston [Massachusetts]. It looks like we're about six, five or six years old. We were probably on the USS Constitution. It's odd that my life has come full circle. I went from the Constitution to the Amistad. That's a good picture though. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Next. Speaker 1: Gazella [ph.], Gazella--that's my brother and I's ninth birthday, once again dressed like twins. It looks like my sister [Robin Cloud] wasn't too happy 'cause it wasn't her birthday cake but that was at our first house on Plainfield Street in Hartford [Connecticut]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Next. Speaker 1: I remember this photograph. This was in St. Thomas, U.S. Virgin Islands. I think this was right before we went away to college or it was our first year after college and my brother and my sister and I and my parents [Diane Brown Cloud and HistoryMaker Sanford Cloud, Jr.], all five of us as a family went down to St. Thomas that year. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Next. Speaker 1: Henry Oscar Brown, this is my great-grandfather. He was a real tough cookie. He lived to be 102 years old and that was he and my brother and I, him teaching us how to play checkers in his house in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and just such fond memories of him, stout, stout man. Speaker 2: This is a picture that ended up being a poster and a little video clip, television commercials that my brother and I did for juvenile diabetes. This was our freshman year at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] and we came home and they asked us to be the spokespersons for the Juvenile Diabetes [Research] Foundation [JDRF]. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Next. Speaker 2: Very early photograph. My sister looks to be an infant. I think we were in Jamaica at that point on a family vacation and it was somewhere certainly in the Caribbean, I think it was Jamaica. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: Early childhood photos. This is probably just a couple weeks or couple months old in the backyard. That's my mother with her Afro back in the early, early '70s [1970s], late '69 [1969], early '70s [1970s] and don't ask me which one is which. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Next. Speaker 2: That's probably as early as it gets. That looks like the day that my brother and I came home from the hospital [Providence Hospital, Washington, D.C.]. We were born premature and weighed three and a half pounds apiece and, again, I couldn't tell you if my life depended on it, which one of us is which. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): All right, next. Head it toward the light. Speaker 2: Other way. Yeah, there you go. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Good. Speaker 2: That is a junior high school picture [Kingswood Oxford School, West Hartford, Connecticut]. Once again, still looking like twins. I think that it wasn't until we got to [Northwest Catholic] High School [West Hartford, Connecticut] that my brother and I decided that we could not continue that, that twin appearance, so we must have been probably 13, 14 years old...