 Story_ID: 660006 Speaker 1: We'll slate by me saying I'm [HistoryMaker] Harriette Cole, your interviewer. Isaac, what's your last name? Speaker 2: (ISSAC FELDMAN): Feldman. Speaker 1: Isaac Feldman is our videographer and Julieanna Richardson is observing. I would like-- Speaker 2: Is our grand diva, yes (laughter). Speaker 1: Yes. I would like for you to say and spell your name, today's date and location and where we are, yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. I'm [HistoryMaker] Caroline Clarke, C-A-R-O-L-I-N-E, C-L-A-R-K-E. Today's date is September 9th, 2014, and we are in New York City [New York, New York] at Skadden, Arps [Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher and Flom LLP] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) At 4 Times Square, yeah. Speaker 2: Four Times Square. Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and location of birth? Speaker 2: December 25th, 1964, New York City. Speaker 1: Great. Story_ID: 660007 Speaker 1: So, I want to start with some People magazine type questions. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: They can be short. What is your favorite food? Speaker 2: Oh gosh. Bread, hot with cheese and or butter. Yes, I could survive on bread alone, yes I could but better with cheese or butter or both. Speaker 1: And what is your favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Oh, my favorite time of year. That's hard. I love all the seasons but spring probably. Everything's new again. Speaker 1: Your favorite color? Speaker 2: You know you think these are easy questions, they're not easy questions. Purple at the moment. Speaker 1: And your favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: "To thine own self be true" ['Hamlet,' William Shakespeare]. Story_ID: 660008 Speaker 1: So, now I want to go look at our family history and let's start with your mother. Can you tell me your mother's name or where she's from? Tell me about your mom. Speaker 2: Okay now, I have two. So, if we're talking about my mother who gave birth to me, her name was Carole Cole. If we're talking about my mother who raised me because I was adopted at one month old, then it's Vera Clarke. Carole Cole was originally from Massachusetts, but she too was adopted. She was an orphan who was adopted at the age of four by her biological aunt and her aunt's husband. They happened to be Maria [Maria Hawkins Cole] and Nat King Cole. And so, she then moved from Medford, Massachusetts to Los Angeles, California to become Carole Cole. She had been born Carole Lane. My mother who raised me, Vera Grinnich Clarke, was born and raised in New York City [New York, New York], in Harlem, by Grenadian immigrants and she was the second of five children, the oldest girl and spent the rest of her life here in New York City. Speaker 1: So, let's talk about Vera first. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Did--was she born in Grenada? Speaker 2: She was born here. Speaker 1: She was born here. Speaker 2: Her parents emigrated here. Speaker 1: Okay. And, and how far back can you trace Vera's family? Speaker 2: You know I've never tried but just growing up I'm aware of two generations back. Actually, this locket belonged to my mother's grandmother, Vera's grandmother who also came to this country when her daughters came and lived with my grandparents, so was a member of their household in Harlem growing up. And my understanding is you know, like all of us, there, there was some mixed race heritage there. My maternal great-grandmother was half Scottish and you know very typically color conscious. She could have passed. She looked very white and was very disturbed that all of her daughters who married, married very brown men, including my maternal grandfather. And, and interestingly in that family, my mother and her siblings who married--she had three sisters and a brother. The brother never married but all three sisters did and she and all three sisters are all lighter skinned and they all married very brown skinned men, so you know. I'm sure the grandmother probably had an impact there. And they're raised in Harlem. My mother went to college. She was the first in her family to go to college. She went to City College [City College of New York, New York, New York]. She then got a master's degree as well in education and three of her siblings also went to college and got advanced degrees. Parents you know I don't even know that they had a high school education. Speaker 1: Do you know what they did in Grenada, her parents? Speaker 2: I don't. I don't know. My grandmother didn't work. She raised her five girls--her five children, one son and four girls. And my grandfather worked several jobs. He was a cook. He was as taxicab driver. He, he did all manner of things but their goals which were very traditional West Indian goals were to educate their children so that their children would have opportunities that they would only have been able to imagine. And as I said three of the children did go to college, got master's degrees. And my grandfather, even with his limited education and working multiple jobs, he purchased two brownstones in Harlem, both of which are still in the family and you know most of his years those floors, most of the floors were rented out but now they're you know just wholly owned by family members who live there. Speaker 1: And what was your, what were your grandparents' names? Speaker 2: My, my grandparents' names were Charles [Charles Grinnich (ph.)] and Eliza Grinnich [ph.]. Speaker 1: Do you know why they chose to come to America? Speaker 2: Opportunity, plain and simple. Same reason people come to America today, opportunity, wanting more for their children than they had. Story_ID: 660009 Speaker 1: And your father-- Speaker 2: Who raised me. Speaker 1: --who raised you. Speaker 2: Yes, the only one I know. My father's name is Robert Clarke. He was also born in this country to West Indian immigrants. His parents were from Barbados. He was the youngest of five children, very similar situation, different islands but same goals and values. My grandparents came to this country, my grandmother Drucilla Caroline Clarke [Drucilla Clarke], she didn't work, she raised her five children. My grandfather worked you know various jobs. They never owned a home which was a goal that they didn't achieve. My grandfather helped build the Panama Canal on the way to this country and you know so interesting so many immigrants came to this country, such a huge, jarring move and then never left again. I'm sure they never took a plane right. My grandfather was a big Marcus Garvey devotee and he sort of planted that seed in my father of a real desire to go back to Africa, particularly Liberia. And my father got his college degree at City College [City College of New York, New York, New York], that's where he met my mother [Clarke's adoptive mother, Vera Clarke], and served in the [U.S.] Army during that time so his education was interrupted but came back and went on and got a master's [degree]. Did all the coursework for his Ph.D. but never wrote the thesis 'cause he didn't want to interrupt his work to do it. He really loved what he did. He was a college professor, chemistry professor and he taught chemistry at the University of Liberia [Monrovia, Liberia] for four years after I was born. When I was a young child, preschooler, my parents and I lived in Liberia. My father was really fulfilling his own father's dream which had become his. And my parents always said those were some of the best years of their lives. This was obviously before you know the first coup in Liberia and when the government was very stable and they had a good life there. Story_ID: 660010 Speaker 1: Do you remember those years? You were very young. Speaker 2: I was very young. I remember certain things. My mother [Clarke's adoptive mother, Vera Clarke] was a teacher and I remember our house. We lived next door to interestingly, white people. They were missionaries from Europe and I remember the little girl, Lisa [ph.], 'cause she was my best friend. We were similar in age and we lived right there next door to each other. I remember my babysitters, several of them 'cause they were usually my father's students and they were from all over. I had a Chinese babysitter, I had a Korean babysitter, I had an Indian babysitter and I remember her wrapping me in towels to make a sari. My mother still cooks a dish called bulgogi that the Korean babysitter taught her how to make that she then taught me how to make. So, it was, you know I, I remember sort of those kinds of images. My first, my earliest memory is from Liberia. There was a woman who worked with my father [Clarke's adoptive father, Robert Clarke] who used to come to the house all the time and she would say, "Oh, you're so cute, you're so cute, I'm going to eat you." Well, I totally believed this woman. She scared the life out of me and I guess that fear, I remember that and I remember her. And I remember certain things pretty vividly and I have--you know my friends from Liberia, they ended up for the most part moving here after the coup and many of them moved to Washington, D.C. And so, I ended up actually knowing them better than I would have had their, their families been able to stay there. So, through reminiscing with them over the years you know I guess also certain memories are magnified. Story_ID: 660011 Speaker 1: When you think back on that time and in that neighborhood can, can you see it? Do, do you remember sights, sounds and smells of your Liberian neighborhood (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I do. I do. I do. There were parades. It must have been a festival but I can very vividly remember elaborate costumes, people in masks you know real masks, not like paper masks, wood masks. And I remember I must have been napping one day. My mother [Clarke's adoptive mother, Vera Clarke] was very big on nap time and I had children, I understand why. And I, and I remember being scared one day waking up in my room and it was a, a man in a mask in my window, waking up to that, pretty scary. I remember vegetation, certain smells, yeah I do. Story_ID: 660012 Speaker 1: And even though you were young, your, your father's influence from his father about Marcus Garvey, do you remember your, your father [Clarke's adoptive father, Robert Clarke], your parents talking about that philosophy? Speaker 2: You know, I don't remember so much them talking about the philosophy, but my father, although he was a chemist, he was a bit of a renaissance man. He was really passionate about history and music in particular and language. He had taken Latin in high school. He went to James Monroe High School here in New York City [Bronx, New York], and he had taken Latin. So, he didn't speak another language but Latin is such a base for so many languages. And, and he really loved language, he loved the words. He was the kind of guy who would pull words out of the dictionary and make me learn the meanings just because. He was the keeper of the family tree so we would go back to Barbados almost every summer when I was growing up. Went to Grenada too, but we went to Barbados more where my father would look for new members of his family tree, something that he was far more enthusiastic about frankly than his siblings. He was so into this. And so, I, I remember going there and meeting members of my father's family which would create much more of a connection you know to this little island and what it meant in our family for me. So, you know I inherited my father's love of music. I inherited my father's love of family. I mean I think for him family really was everything and he was, he was very enamored of--and, and he was very determined to impress upon me how critical family was, particularly in the black community. I think both of my parents, they were teachers both of them. My mother [Clarke's adoptive mother, Vera Clarke] was a reading teacher, public school teacher in New York City [New York, New York]. So, you know when--any child of teachers, school is everything all the time, 24/7, your whole life. So--and I was an only child so you know that, that beacon of light was just on me all day, all night. And you know when my father retired I told the story that he thinks I exaggerated but you know the truth is, is always in the mind that the person has experienced. And I was a Christmas baby and I--you know people think that's a horrible birthday. It's the best birthday in the world. You never go to school. You never go to work. Nobody does for like a week. It's not even just that day. It's a whole celebration which as a kid, I always thought it was all about me, right. So, it's a great birthday. And my parents always made sure, my whole family, my extended family always made sure that it was always not just Christmas, it was my birthday. And my whole family got together on Christmas so I got two gifts from everybody which was great 'cause we were not necessarily together on my cousins' birthdays. And if you didn't see 'em, maybe they didn't get the birthday gifts. So, I knew this was like the great cat bird seat, right. One year for Christmas, my parents gave me a blackboard. Now, it was blue. It was a standing blue blackboard that could flip. It was taller than I was and they thought this was a great present. This was not a great present. And I would wake up forever after that Christmas and there would be equations, algebraic equations on my blackboard. There would be word problems. There would be black history facts. There would be vocabulary words. They were basically assignments okay. Homework in my house meant work you got from home that was school work and it was on top of school homework and it was even on weekends, which in elementary school, teachers don't give you homework on weekends unless they're your parents. So, I tried every way I knew to ditch this blackboard once I was strong enough and large enough to carry it out of our house. I took it down the street and left it behind other people's homes. I tried to take it around the corner and put it behind my uncle's house. I tried to get rid of this blackboard. I couldn't put it out with the garbage. That was a little obvious. It always found its way, always found its way back. So, you know my parents were very, very deliberate about my education and, and not just my education but my learning. And they were very deliberate about what I would learn and they were very insistent that among the things I would be taught was black history. So, I had flash cards, I had Golden Legacy comic books. I had information that they sifted out themselves decades before the Internet. And I had Sunday school in an all-black church which third grade Sunday school, Ms. Campbell's [ph.] class, we learned nothing about the bible, it was all black history. So, you know it was another time and, and I was very much steeped in those things. Speaker 1: And where was this church? Speaker 2: In the Bronx [New York], St. Luke's Episcopal Church. Story_ID: 660013 Speaker 1: So, I want to go back to your parents. You said--well, excuse me, your father [Clarke's adoptive father, Robert Clarke], you said that he was the keeper of the family tree. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Do you know how far back his family goes? Can you trace back to slavery? Speaker 2: I don't think he traced back to slavery but he traced back at least four generations in Barbados. It was all in Barbados. And you know I've, I've not looked at--there is a physical family tree in his den. He's been deceased now for seven years but I've, I haven't looked at it in years. I should. Story_ID: 660014 Speaker 1: You said your parents met at City College [City College of New York, New York, New York]? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Do you--tell, tell the story of their meeting. Speaker 2: They met in the lunchroom as they tell it. My father [Clarke's adoptive father, Robert Clarke] was seven years older than my mother [Clarke's adoptive mother, Vera Clarke] so his education at City had been interrupted by the [U.S.] Army. He was in the Korean War. And, my dad is funny. He's not one of these army guys who's like, "Yeah" (gesture), you know. He was terrified. He had never left home. He did not want to leave home. And he, he always told the story of being sent home because he, he developed a stomach ailment from New Guinea. And being on this huge [U.S.] Navy ship in the middle of the Pacific and the engine died and they were sitting ducks literally. And all the men were told to come up on the bridge and put their life jackets on because anything could happen and my father never was able to swim. 'Til his dying day he couldn't swim. And he said the entire time he sat there just praying that he would get to see his mother [Drucilla Clarke] again. And, and they sang this Navy hymn and it's the only hymn that my father to his dying day knew all the words to. We sang it at his funeral. But they met when my father returned and City, when my father left, was all-male. And City when my father returned had gone coed and my mother was one of the coeds. And my father always said, "City's going coed was the launch of its long decline." You know and my mother would laugh as she laughed at everything he said. But they, they met and he asked her out in the lunchroom and they went on a date that lasted you know all night or something. They ended up talking in a diner until the sun came up. And my mother put off marrying my father for a long time. She was twenty-six when they got married. In 1957, twenty-six is, is a pretty old bride. They were engaged for years and her own mother [Eliza Grinnich (ph.)] had not worked and I think the way my mother told it, she loved her mother and admired her mother but she saw her life as being very small and my mother wanted a big life. So, when she graduated from college, her father [Charles Grinnich (ph.)] offered--she was the first in the family to have graduated. Her father offered to either buy her a car or send her on a trip. She'd never been on a plane and she chose the trip. And she went to Europe for the entire summer by herself on a student visa and she traveled all over Europe. And my father was home waiting, seven years older and none too happy. And I have letters--my dad saved all the letters from his whole life really, so I have those air mailers you know of her letters to him, his to her that summer. And even when she came back she kept coming up with excuses, and finally when she was twenty-six you know her parents had long given their consent. My father had asked, my grandfather consented, her family was very pleased with her choice. But he was frustrated and he hit the wall, picked her up on a date one night that was supposedly in New Jersey, drove across the George Washington Bridge, pulled over onto the shoulder, looked at her and said, "Either you are going to marry me tonight, we are going to drive to Virginia right now, or I will make a U turn and drop you back in Harlem [New York, New York] and never see you again." And the rest is history. So, they drove to Virginia that night and, and they got married. And a month later my grandmother made them get married in a church lest none of the neighbors think that my mother got married because she had to, you know god forbid she was pregnant and had to get married. So, so they had two anniversaries, always, April and May. Story_ID: 660015 Speaker 1: And how long were they married before you came along? Speaker 2: They got married in 1957, and I came along at the tail end of 1964. I was adopted actually in January of 1965, so, they had been trying for a while. My mother [Clarke's adoptive mother, Vera Clarke], my mother had, had a maligned--a benign brain tumor as a--in her twenties before they got married and she had radiation treatment. And so, it's suspected that she lost her ability to conceive through that although they didn't have any idea of that at the time. So, they had tried for some time not being able to conceive and, and decided to adopt. Speaker 1: Did they ever talk about what that experience was like of coming to the decision to adopt? Speaker 2: No, never. No talk about infertility, no talk about you know it was hard, it was this, it was that. You know that generation didn't really. I mean if they did they certainly wouldn't have discussed it with me. I think that's just a generational thing. And I think that generation too, they, they just didn't dwell on things in the way that we tend to. There were no such thing as fertility treatments then so if you were infertile you either didn't have children or you adopted and they just did. Story_ID: 660016 Speaker 1: So your birth mother-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and can you talk about her and what led up to your being adopted? Speaker 2: So, as I said my, my birth mother was Carole Cole, nicknamed Cookie. And she was the oldest child of Nat King Cole and Maria Cole [Maria Hawkins Cole] and she was raised in the rarest of circumstances, particularly for a black child in the '60s [1960s] and the '50s [1950s] and the '40s [1940s] when she was born and you know all of this privilege, all of this exposure. She had traveled with her parents to Europe and so forth. She had been raised in the lap of luxury. Their family integrated Hancock Park in Los Angeles [California] very famously. And she, and she went to Cazenovia College, which is in New York [Cazenovia, New York], so very far from home. It was a junior college at the time, two-year college, all women's college. And she had just completed or was about to complete her senior year, second year of college and get her degree when she realized she was pregnant, so she was pregnant when she graduated. She didn't tell her parents until that fall. She was an aspiring actress and she spent that summer in Warren, Ohio doing summer stock theater. But then come fall, she told her parents and very much in keeping with the tenor of the times, she was told she could not come back home. She had to go off somewhere secretly, have this baby, me, and give it up for adoption and not come home until she has lost the weight. And her parents through their lawyer, Leo Branton [HistoryMaker Leo Branton, Jr.], who was sort of the black Perry Mason at the time of California, found Spence-Chapin [Spence-Chapin Services to Families and Children], an agency here in New York [New York], which was a private agency that was very much a trailblazer in the area of African American adoption. And so Cookie was sent to New York from Ohio by herself, her parents didn't come and she was sent to live in a home that Spence-Chapin didn't operate but it was a, a feeder for Spence-Chapin mothers. So, unwed mothers who were giving up their babies for adoption through Spence-Chapin or other agencies would go to this home. It was on the Upper East Side [New York, New York] in the 80s and it was called Washington Square Home for Friendless Girls. Just such a cruel and terrible name. But the short hand was Washington Square, not so bad. It was a brownstone. Cookie always remembered that the actress Lillian Hellman lived next door which I guess is meaningful to her since she wanted to be an actress. And, and she lived there under an assumed name which was Carole Gale [ph.]. Gale was her godmother's name. And I think she was there I guess about three months until she gave birth to me and then she did what she was supposed to do, she, she gave me up. When we met, which was when I was thirty-seven years old, she told the story of how she very much wanted to keep me and was trying to figure out how. She had refused to sign the papers so she had been released from Lenox Hill Hospital [New York, New York] having not signed them which was not the agency's goal at all. She'd gone back to Washington Square Home, I'd been placed in interim care, and she was sort of conspiring with her godmother who lived here in New York to figure out how to keep me and not go back home. But she was in her room one day at Washington Square and she heard on the radio that her father was very ill and in fact perhaps devastatingly ill. No one had told her. And she panicked, she went downstairs to the office of the woman who ran the home and no one had said anything to that woman either. Her name was Catherine Marvin [ph.]. And this woman said, "Use my phone, call, call California, call your house." And she did. And her aunt, her mother's sister, Aunt Baba we call her, Charlotte Hawkins [Charlotte Hawkins Brown] answered the phone and, and confirmed that her father was very, very ill. He was in the hospital and that she needed to come home right away and she was basically told sign those papers and come home. It's urgent. And she did. Story_ID: 660017 Speaker 1: So, Cookie [Clarke's biological mother, Carole Cole] signed the papers. Speaker 2: She signed the papers that day and took the first flight she could get and arrived home to find her father [Nat King Cole] virtually unrecognizable physically. This was January by now. It was more than a week after I had been born. I think it was about twelve days. She really was holding out on this signing piece and, and he died in February. So, he died six weeks after I was born, so probably about four weeks after she got home. Speaker 1: So, she lost you and her dad in--? Speaker 2: She lost me and her dad in, in less than two months. And, and what's particularly devastating for her was that you know her dad's career--I mean it was very typical of the time that unwed motherhood was shameful and there's a generation of women who had very similar experience to Cookie. I wrote a book about my journey with Cookie ['Postcards from Cookie: A Memoir of Motherhood, Miracles and a Whole Lot of Mail,' Caroline Clarke] and, and many women have reached out to me who, who understood what she felt and what she went through because they went through a very similar thing, not having anything to do with celebrity. In Cookie's case, it was exacerbated by her father's celebrity because the feeling was and what she was told by her mother [Maria Hawkins Cole] was that you know she could destroy her father. Here he was this iconic musician, this unbelievably successful person you know for his time. He really, he transcended race, he was just extraordinarily gifted and, and successful. He had a movie career, he had a musical career, he was a genius jazz pianist and the family reaped these incredible rewards and Cookie was told by her mom, you alone could single handedly, completely destroy all of this, everything that your father has worked for, everything that he's been--and so she tried to do her duty and give me up largely to protect her father's career and then there was not even--no career to protect. Her father himself who she adored was gone. So, you know it was really particularly tragic and devastating and there was no going back. She had signed the papers. It was done. It was over. I was with my family, and, and she was never the same. Speaker 1: Did she talk about trying to find you after her father died? Speaker 2: No, and she didn't. I think you know her father's death was deeply traumatic for the whole family and Cookie was the oldest sibling. She had not just Natalie [Natalie Cole] who was a couple of years younger than she was and her brother, Kelly [Nat Kelly Cole], but there were twins in the family who at the time were just three years old, they were toddlers. And her mother was devastated by her husband's death and so, Cookie was really sort of called in to duty to you know to help take care, particularly of, of the twins, the Timolin [Timolin Cole] and Casey [Casey Cole Hooker]. They were so young. They were so little. And her mother was really struggling you know to hold it together emotionally and, and Cookie I think from what other family members have told me and, and what she said, although it was a really difficult time for her to talk about she sort of you know pushed forward in that role of trying to be an anchor in the household and, and not look back. You know the, the dictate was always don't look back, don't look back, don't look back. Story_ID: 660018 Speaker 1: Did she ever become an actress? Speaker 2: She did become an actress. She became quite a good actress. I actually--[HistoryMaker] Ruby Dee was a good friend of my in-laws and Ruby pulled me aside after learning about my history and she, and she was one person who made a point of telling me that Cookie [Clarke's biological mother, Carole Cole] was really quite a gifted actress. She did theater here in New York [New York]. She starred in a sort of groundbreaking play in the Public Theater [sic. Vivian Beaumont Theater] called the 'Black Picture Show' [Bill Gunn]. She did movies, including the original 'Taking of Pelham One Two Three,' and she did television. She starred in a spinoff of 'Sanford and Son' that focused on Grady [Grady Wilson]. Sanford had, you know his best friend was Grady and Grady--when 'Sanford and Son' ended, there was a sitcom created where Grady had a family and he went to live with his daughter Ellie [Ellie Wilson Marshall] and her husband [Hal Marshall]. Her husband was Joe Morton who now stars on 'Scandal.' And Cookie loved the show and it really was a precursor to 'The Cosby Show.' Joe Morton played a college professor. Ellie worked, I think she was a social worker. They had three children. They were very middle class black family and Grady, Ellie's dad, came to live with them. And the show died a very quick and unceremonious death and Cookie always said you know America wasn't ready for the Cosbys. America wasn't ready for a successful black family that looked like everybody else and spoke well and acted like everybody else. 'Sanford and Son' was you know a hit. They could take the junk man but they couldn't take the college professor with the middle class wife and life. So, I was really interested to learn that because I loved 'Sanford and Son' and I had seen the 'Grady' show. I'd never seen you know 'The Taking of Pelham One Two Three,' but I had seen that show and I sort of remembered it when I met her. So, she was an actress but you know ultimately she, she left acting. She was a black woman in, acting in the '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s] and there weren't a lot of jobs and she was very particular about what she would and wouldn't do you know. She had grown up in this very privileged life and she was not going to act like some black woman she'd never known you know in terms of being uneducated and, and whatever, whatever roles were available that just she didn't feel portrayed woman the way they should be. Speaker 1: So, did she have money because of her family wealth? Speaker 2: Cookie didn't have money. Cookie, as it happens, I was raised far better from a financial standpoint than my brothers [Sage Cole and Harleigh Cole]. Cookie had two sons after I was born by a different father from mine, and they really struggled. She was very much the struggling actress. It was not until many years later when the boys were practically grown that she gained access to some inheritance money that had been withheld by her mother [Maria Hawkins Cole]. So, the Cole children essentially sued their mother for inheritance that they hadn't gotten access to. And so, she came into this inheritance money later in life but, but she struggled for many years financially because her mother was not particularly pleased with her choices and so she didn't do very much to support them. Story_ID: 660019 Speaker 1: You write in your book ['Postcards from Cookie: A Memoir of Motherhood, Miracles and a Whole Lot of Mail,' Caroline Clarke] about her mother-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and she was very strict and, and as you just described, judgmental. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Can you speak more about her and say--what, what was her name? Speaker 2: Maria Cole. Maria Hawkins Cole. I, I knew Maria. I didn't know her well but I met her when I was sixteen years old. I was friends with one of the twins, Timolin [Timolin Cole], we met in college [Smith College, Northampton, Massachusetts]. We met when I was a senior in high school looking at colleges. And Tim and I stayed friends so that's how I came to understand that Cookie [Clarke's biological mother, Carole Cole] was my mother. I, I recognized the family years later when I heard about them. But I knew Maria first through Timolin and through things that Tim would share, the way we share with friends, just you know just kvetching about our mothers and parents, and, and I had met her. She was lovely. She was charming and graceful and gracious and quite a hostess. And her youngest daughters, Tim and Casey [Casey Cole Hooker] in particular, you know she was very generous with them. And, and Tim had the most laid college dorm room I've ever seen in my life and she was the first person I knew who had you know clothes from Paris [France] and you know bedding that was custom made and you know really, just she had a beautifully appointed life. And, and her mother had impeccable taste. But Maria was, was tough too and, and she had had a tough life in many respects. Maria's own birth mother died in childbirth. Maria was the middle of three girls and Cookie's mother was Maria's younger sister, the youngest. So, Maria's mother was a Bermudian immigrant and her name was Caro Saunders [Caro Saunders Hawkins]. And she died in childbirth with Cookie's mother who was named for her and was nicknamed Babe [ph.]. Maria was just two at the time. So, her own birth mother died. Her father, Mingo Hawkins, who was a postal worker, he remarried and I don't know the woman's name but Maria never had a kind word to say about her. So, my sense is that her stepmother was not particularly kind to her and there was no love lost there. Mingo ultimately sent his three daughters to be schooled and raised by his sister, Charlotte Hawkins Brown, who was the founder of Palmer Memorial Institute [Alice Freeman Palmer Memorial Institute] in North Carolina [Sedalia, North Carolina]. Charlotte was a childless woman and she took her three nieces in to live with her in Canary Cottage on Palmer's campus and she took to finishing raising them and, and they attended Palmer. And Charlotte was a pretty imperious woman, you know extremely well accomplished, very much a speaker, revered in the community, well known. And Maria, I think you know she, she, she got everything she was supposed to from that education but you know it was hard core. There were very stringent values and mores and ways to dress and ways to comport one's self and ways to speak and ways to serve tea and ways to be. Charlotte Hawkins Brown actually wrote a book called The Correct, I think it's 'The Correct Things to Think, Wear and Say' [sic. 'The Correct Thing to Do, to Say, to Wear'] or something like that Skip Gates [HistoryMaker Henry Louis "Skip" Gates, Jr.] republished not, not too many years ago. But you know she was very exacting in her standards. And you know my sense about all this is that Maria was a bit of a rebel. She was a classically trained musician but she loved pop music and she wanted to be a singer, a popular singer which Charlotte Hawkins Brown had no interest in and just thought was way beneath anyone in her family. But Maria ultimately got from under her aunt's clutches and moved back to Boston [Massachusetts] and was singing in nightclubs under an assumed name. And she ultimately did forge a career as a singer and that's how she met Nat King Cole. She was performing, opening for The Mills Brothers and Nat King Cole came in and the story goes, said you know, "Who's that?" And the rest is history. So, you know on the one hand Maria rebelled from that whole Palmer reality. On the other hand, you know we are what we're raised to be to a large degree and so my sense is that she became very much like her aunt and was very exacting in her standards for her children and for Nat. And there was a way to be and if you were to be respected particularly as an African American, particularly in that time, you better nail it and you better nail it every day from every angle. She did that and she raised her children to do that. Story_ID: 660020 Speaker 1: Palmer [Alice Freeman Palmer Memorial Institute, Sedalia, North Carolina], can you put Palmer into context because it was a major institution at that time. Speaker 2: Yeah. You know it's funny, as much as my parents [Clarke's adoptive parents, Vera Clarke and Robert Clarke] raised me, my parents who raised me, raised me steeped in black history. I didn't know a lot about Palmer when I met Cookie [Clarke's biological mother, Carole Cole]. I mean I knew of it but maybe because we were West Indian I wasn't raised with as much of a southern sensibility and Palmer was very much a southern institution. But from what I've learned you know it, it was at one time the prep school for African Americans and Charlotte Hawkins Brown felt very strongly that the road to success for us in this country was very much not just about scholarly excellence but about social excellence and, and really being able to carry one's self in the world with social graces in the extreme. And so, also from, from my book that I've wrote ['Postcards from Cookie: A Memoir of Motherhood, Miracles and a Whole Lot of Mail,' Caroline Clarke], I've had people reach out to me who went to Palmer and talk about how you know it was, there was a way to be and you did not veer and it became very deeply engrained in them in ways that they all still you know very much exemplify to this day. Story_ID: 660021 Speaker 1: So, in your growing up in the Clarke household-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --they had their way of being very exacting as well. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Can you describe the, the household in which you grew up? Speaker 2: It's funny, I was raised--you know Cookie [Clarke's biological mother, Carole Cole] was a bit of a rebel at some point. And, and I suspect it had to do with the trauma she did experience with my birth and her mother's disapproval of her life. At some point, she kind of just bucked it all you know and she developed much more of a bohemian life, the artist in her really came forth. And she didn't live in a way that was so much seeking of approval the way Charlotte Hawkins Brown would have hoped and the way maybe Maria [Maria Hawkins Cole] would have hoped. My parents [Clarke's adoptive parents, Vera Clarke and Robert Clarke] were you know raised in a different place, in a different reality with a sort of different culture but the value system was very much in line with that. I was raised with very old school values. You know you, you did not wear white after Labor Day, you, you know there were certain places where the silverware had to be on the table and you'd better know how to use it from a very young age. You ate your chicken with a knife and fork. You did not pick it up in your fingers. Hair was to be braided for school, not flying free like some wild child. You know there were just a lot of those rules and restrictions. There was a lot of emphasis placed on the need to be exceptional. My parents didn't dwell on racism per se, but they dwelled on excellence. And there was sort of an intrinsic message that to be black in America, you had to be excellent. People might not expect it of you, which made it all the more important to bring that to bear. There was an emphasis on formal religion and formal religious education, how I dressed was very important. Slips, the proper underwear were very important. Stockings, you know this whole new thing, you never wear pantyhose. I hate pantyhose. I never wear pantyhose. My mother, you know my mother still wears camisoles you know. It was just, it was very old school. It was very much based on presentation really mattered, the way you spoke really mattered, impeccable manners above all else really mattered. My parents had a, a song to teach me manners. They taught a lot of things when I was very young through, through songs. They taught my--I taught my children our phone number through you know we'd make up a song, they would make up songs for things to make them memorable and make them stick from a very young age. And you know the lines were not blurry ever, they were very black and white. And I think you know for, for children, I still think that's comforting. I mean I'm, I, I tend to be more old school than not. I think children need that. They need definition, they need routine, they need to have a sense of tradition, they need to know that there's a way to be you know, everything doesn't go. It's not a world where anything goes. It doesn't, particularly if you're black, it doesn't. But it really doesn't for anyone, it shouldn't. Story_ID: 660022 Speaker 1: Can you show me the house you grew up in, what--and do you remember the sights, sounds and smells of that? Speaker 2: Well, I don't have to remember because my mother [Clarke's adoptive mother, Vera Clarke] still lives there. I grew up in a single family semi-attached brick Tudor-esque house in the Bronx [New York]. The neighborhood is called Wakefield. It's the northeast Bronx, not too far from Co-op City [Cooperative City, Bronx, New York]. And it was a very mixed neighborhood. There are projects about five blocks from my house. There's a Catholic school around the corner, a number of public schools. And when I was a child there were mostly just mom and pop businesses and, and a lot of diversity. There was a Chinese laundry where the launderer was Chinese and didn't speak very good English and that's where my father's shirt went and they came back to the house wrapped in butcher paper with butcher string that was very crunchy. There was an Italian restaurant called Nina's [ph.] where everyone spoke Italian, was clearly their first language. There was a Jewish bakery where Rosie [ph.] would always put these gigantic rainbow sprinkled cookies. She would toss an extra one into the white bag when my dad [Clarke's adoptive father, Robert Clarke] and I would go by on the weekends you know. So, so it was, it was very much a diverse neighborhood of working and middle class people, strivers, a lot of immigrants. Our neighbors were from everywhere, Puerto Rico, Ireland, Italy, the West Indies and everyone had an accent and everyone who was from another country spoke another language. And the homes on my block were often filled with multiple generations, particularly the Italian homes, there was usually a grandmother in the house with the kids. There was a strong Catholic contingent. There was a Catholic Church and school around the corner, but there was you know a strong Jewish contingent too. So, so it was really, really a dynamic neighborhood. As I grew, by the time I went to college [Smith College, Northampton, Massachusetts], that neighborhood was mostly black, mostly West Indian. People had taken off for the suburbs, anyone who was not black pretty much had taken off, or Latino, had taken off for the suburbs. But my parents never wanted to move and my mother is still there. My father, what was most important to my father was very clear and simple. He never wanted more than a fifteen minute commute to work. He thought it was just an utter waste of time and a stress bomb and he loved the Bronx. He was born in the Bronx, he grew up in the South Bronx [Bronx, New York], he was happy to live and die in the Bronx. My parents were content people. I think the, the prevailing lesson of their life for me is they were content. They didn't want more than they had. They lived beneath their means. We could have moved to the suburbs. We could have had a second home. They didn't want it. You know my dad's parents never owned a home. He owned one, he had a twenty year mortgage. The day he wrote the last check on that mortgage is the day I'll never forget. He whooped and hollered like you know the world was starting anew. And he thought why would I ever take on a mortgage again, you know? They were, they were financially conservative people which has made their retirement very comfortable. They, they put away a lot of money and they lived beneath their means and they had more than they needed and they were content, they were happy. They did the things they wanted to do in life. They were able to travel where they wanted to go. They were able to raise a child and send me to college. I never had debt. They paid my way through graduate school at Columbia [Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism, New York, New York]. I did not have one loan to repay. I did not have one penny of, of debt and that was success for them you know to be able to have what they wanted and need and set me on the course to have what I wanted and needed. Story_ID: 660023 Speaker 1: Where did you go to school when you first started elementary school? Speaker 2: I went to P.S. 121 [P.S. 121, Throop School, Bronx, New York], which was not the school I was districted for. I used my uncle's address, my dad's brother, Uncle Buster [ph.] lived around the corner, one block, what would that be, one block southeast of us or one block east of us I guess. And that difference was the difference in the school you were districted for. So, the school I was districted for was closer to our block. I could walk to it. The school my cousins were districted for just a block east was deemed by my parents to be the better school. It probably did not hurt that my father's cousin was the assistant principal there so that was where I went to elementary school. Speaker 1: What kind of a student was young Caroline [HistoryMaker Caroline Clarke]? Speaker 2: Young Caroline had no choice but to be a really good student. My, my parents always said you know, "We each have a job, we're--our job is teaching, your job is to be a student. We don't get to fail at our job, you don't get to fail at your job." And then I had that blackboard, right? So, like I had no choice. I, I honest to god, I don't think I was taught anything in school that I had not already been taught at home until I was in high school. I--my father had me doing algebraic equations when I was in elementary school. By the time I took algebra in ninth grade, you know. So, I mean I was, I was skipped from--I, well I started school because my birthday was so late. I seemed younger to begin with so I was five when I started first grade. And then I skipped third grade and, and I went from 1--P.S. 121 to I.S. 144 [J.H.S. 144, Michelangelo School, Bronx, New York]. My parents almost pulled me out and sent me to St. Hilda's and St. Hugh's [St. Hilda's and St. Hugh's School, New York, New York] for junior high school and they would have except that St. Hilda's and St. Hugh's was not going to honor my having been accelerated so they were going to make me repeat a year of school which, you know that was never going to happen. Vera [Clarke's adoptive mother, Vera Clarke] and Robert Clarke were not going to have their child repeat a year of school and my father just deemed it you know a money hungry move. They just wanted the tuition so, that was, was rejected. So, I, I got to go, thank god, 'cause I didn't want to go to St. Hilda's and St. Hugh's, go to the local junior high school with my friends and then I went to Bronx High School of Science [The Bronx High School of Science, Bronx, New York] which again was not my first choice. I wanted to go to Music and Art [High School of Music and Art; Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music and Art and Performing Arts, New York, New York], but again Vera and Bob were not having it, I was going to go to the best high school in the city which in their view was Bronx Science. Story_ID: 660024 Speaker 1: So, Caroline [HistoryMaker Caroline Clarke] I, I want to look back at your family history a bit. We didn't speak about your, your birth father. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Can you tell me about him? Speaker 2: I don't know him but what I know of him is that he was in college at the same time as Cookie [Clarke's biological mother, Carole Cole]. His name was Stanley Goldberg and as far as I know, he was raised in Long Island [New York]. He was a student at I believe it was Syracuse [Syracuse University, Syracuse, New York] and Cook- Cazenovia [Cazenovia College, Cazenovia, New York] where Cookie went to college is, is in that same area. And he was not her boyfriend so I, you know I don't know the precise nature of the relationship except that I know she was very, very fond of him, very smitten with him and obviously, they were intimate because I resulted from it. But Cookie never told him that she was pregnant and their relationship I know did continue, their friendship after my birth because she told the story of his coming to see her in a play some years after. But she never told him so I never met him. I don't know where he is. I only know that he is my biological father and he is Jewish and from Long Island. It was a jarring thing I have to say. I, I found out when I was in my mid-twenties that my birth father was not African American. I had been told--well my parents [Clarke's adoptive parents, Vera Clarke and Robert Clarke] told me I was adopted as a child. I found out-- Speaker 1: How old were you when they told you? Speaker 2: I was almost eight so I was just shy of eight and my mother told me one day. And she had very limited information but she told me everything she knew at the time. So, I was told that both my parents were African American, that all of my grandparents were African American. She made a point of telling me that my maternal grandmother [Carol Hawkins Lane] had some Native American blood which you know I, it's, it's fascinating but black people we always love to claim we have some Native American blood. I don't know what exactly that's about. I don't know if it's a hair thing, I'm just not sure. But it's a slavery versus native thing. Whatever it is you know it's always a point of pride. And she did, she presented it as something you know wonderful, like, "Oh your, your birth grandmother has some Native American." But you know maybe it was always supposed to explain my hair because I have you know long, long wavy hair. Story_ID: 660025 Speaker 1: But I, I found out in my mid-twenties that what happened, one of my mother's sisters, one of my favorite aunts, Yvonne Jean Jacques, was dying and I went to visit her one day and she was very agitated. And, and she just looked at me and she said you know, "Did your mother [Clarke's adoptive mother, Vera Clarke], did your mother ever tell you that your mother's white?" Speaker 2: Your father. Speaker 1: No, my mother--this is what my aunt said. And here I am all these years thinking first of all that I was black by birth which was, which was an important thing. I have to say when my mother told me I was adopted, because I look the way I do from a very young age and because--and I guess because I didn't exactly look like my parents. My father [Clarke's adoptive father, Robert Clarke] is very, very brown skinned, very lean. My mother was rounder than me and paler than me. And so, you know you rationalize things and as a child I just thought okay, you put the two together, you know skinny and dark, round and light and you get me, you know. I was kind of the skinny kid, I was darker than my mother, lighter than my dad, you know sort of in the middle. But there was a huge spectrum in the middle, right? So, when I was told I was adopted, I do very clearly remember a sort of semi panic, what am I really, because people would always ask even when I was little, "What are you? What are you?" Or they'd ask my--, "What is she?" It's an annoying question. And when my mother told me I was adopted, her telling me very specifically that my biological family was universally black was key to me and it was something that I gripped on to very quickly when everything was sort of floating out there because I felt, a okay, I know what I am. So, when people ask me this question and I've been answering it all these years, that's still the answer. That answer doesn't change and, also it made me the same thing my parents were. So, okay maybe these people are not blood related to me but this is my family and I am what they are. And that was important. That mattered to me even in that moment I remember that. So, sitting with my aunt you know almost twenty years later, on her death bed literally, and she says to me, you know, "You, you do know your mother's white?" She was very ill. And she had a respiratory ailment. Her breathing was very labored. And so, in the moment I went with it and I just said, "Oh yeah, sure. She told me, I'm good." And she immediately relaxed. And I thought well you know it could be medication. It could be oxygen deprivation. It could be a lot of things but it surely couldn't be that my birth mother is white. And my aunt and I had never talked about my being adopted ever and we were very, very close. So, I go home, I let a couple of days go by and I don't say anything because I'm thinking and I'm, I'm trying to convince myself she's just talking out of her head. And then a couple of days later I was again at my aunt's house and my parents were visiting her also and I confronted them about it and my father became very agitated as he was want to do. And he's like, "Oh you know you have to talk to your mother. Talk to your mother." And I said to my mother you know Aunt Vonnie told me that my birth mother is white," and my mother you know she practically burst out laughing. She's like, "That's ridiculous, of course your birth mother is not white." And you know just as I'm about to exhale, she looks at me and says, "It was your father [Stanley Goldberg]. Your father was white." This is like a bolt from the blue. This is not what she told me. This is not what I grew up believing. So, I had found out from my parents in that moment about ten years before I even met Cookie [Clarke's biological mother, Carole Cole] that I was biologically biracial and I told no one. I was not happy. I wanted to be what I had always thought I was for starters. And I had been raised with all this black pride, you know just steeped in black history and black culture and, and my West Indian heritage and all these things that you know okay biologically maybe I knew I wasn't West Indian but I loved my family and I loved everything I had been taught and I was so truly proud of our history as black people, African American, West Indian American, all of it. I did not want to be half white, I really did not. Story_ID: 660026 Speaker 1: And it changed also in my mind whatever fantasies I'd had about what the story might have been between my birth parents, which I think best case scenario, you know I envisioned this wonderful love story, these college students who were just you know so in love it was some kind of, you know black Romeo and Juliet thing. They just couldn't be together. That twisted into something else when I found out that my birth father was white and a whole realm of possibilities that I hadn't considered came into view for me. And, and you know I, I know that speaks to my own stuff you know. I, I had never thought my birth mother could possibly have been raped or taken advantage of even when I thought my father was black. When I found out he was white I thought about those things. What I didn't think was that they could have just been in love so that speaks to my own upbringing I guess. But as it turns out you know when I met Cookie [Clarke's biological mother, Carole Cole], I think she, she, she was in love. She had a huge crush on Stanley Goldberg. The feelings obviously were not balanced in return and for whatever reason she didn't feel ever at liberty to tell him that I even existed as a possibility. So, I've never gone looking for him for that reason. You know it's one thing to call your birth mother. She knows she gave birth to you but to call some poor guy who never knew you existed, who's gone on and had a whole life you know that's a, a very different thing and I just haven't wanted to do it. Story_ID: 660027 Speaker 1: But as far as your identity goes, you, you were steeped in black culture, lived in Liberia for your first, first-- Speaker 2: Right (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) four years of your life. What did it mean to you to be half white? Speaker 2: You know I, I, I rejected it. I, I don't know that it meant anything to me 'cause I just rejected it out of hand. I think given my age you know I also grew up in a time where you know it was the kind of like old, what is it the 1 percent rule, the 5 percent rule? You know if you got a little bit of black you're black. If you're walking around, nobody's looking at you and seeing white, you're black. So, you know I kind of didn't have any illusions about oh, I'm half white you know. Nobody, nobody ever talked about being half white. When I met Cookie [Clarke's biological mother, Carole Cole] I already had children. My children were young. They were five and eight or four and seven, something like that. And so, my daughter was, was in school, my son was just about to start and you know their, their reality is very different. This generation's racial reality is very different. Biracial wasn't even a word, it wasn't even a term when I found out my father was white. You know you were mulatto, you were mixed, you were a zebra, you were whatever, you weren't that--biracial just wasn't a, a term of choice. By the time I met Cookie though it was. And, and my children have biracial friends and it was really not that uncommon, at least here in New York [New York] to be biracial, to know people who are biracial, to look at people and automatically see biracial as opposed to black or half black or you know whatever. And my children challenged me on it, you know and they would say you know, "You're half, you're half white or we're a quarter white." And I would say no you know I'm black, you're black, get over it you know. What is that about? And they would say, "Oh you're such a racist. You know why, why wouldn't you just say what you are, you know this is what you are?" And they laugh at me now. They're much older and what--but what I would say is you know, "I'm not half white." I said, "My birth mother is black and I was raised by two black people [Clarke's adoptive parents, Vera Clarke and Robert Clarke] so if I'm any part of white you know I'm three quarters black you know." It was just, just absurd. I mean I would come up with all these things. But I do think you know race in America is still largely a matter of choice you know. If you look a certain way yeah the world might look at me now and see biracial although I will say Egyptians see an Egyptian person, Latino people expect me to be fluent in Spanish and claim some Latino heritage. Indians and Pakistanis, you know I have one of those chameleon like looks. I can blend, I can roll through the different neighborhoods of the world and I can, and I can blend. And so, lots of different people still ask me what I am and I always very proudly and definitively say black because that's what I was raised as and that's what I want to be. I don't apologize for it. It's no disrespect to white people, to Stanley Goldberg, to anyone of any race. This is what I was raised to be and I like it. It suits me and it's comfortable for me and I'm too old to change it up now. Story_ID: 660028 Speaker 1: You mentioned your children who are probably also asked, "What are you?" Speaker 2: (Nods head). Speaker 1: I mean your son has light skin and blue eyes, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, hazel eyes. Speaker 1: So, just based on this, pushing a little bit more-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --regarding identity-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --is that not a through line for them? Speaker 2: It is, and my daughter who looks you know just like me-- Speaker 1: Exactly. Speaker 2: --she grew up always being challenged on what she was and it really bothered her. She wrote about it in elementary school. She even wrote about it in college essays. You know I, it's interesting. I don't look back as a child and remember being really bothered. I think I was bothered by knowing that I didn't look like my parents [Clarke's adoptive parents, Vera Clarke and Robert Clarke] and the questions that that would raise. And they were very polite times when I was raised so people would rarely just come out with it. But I know when my husband [John C. Graves] and I talked about it, about our meeting, we met as children and I met his whole family and, and he met mine. And, and he would tell me years later that the moment his parents [Barbara Kydd Graves and HistoryMaker Earl G. Graves, Sr.] met me, his mother remarked that I must be adopted. And you know I was really taken aback by that because I didn't--it had not occurred to me that people would look at my family and instantly think she must not biologically be theirs. And yet you know I, I prayed for a child that would look like me because I, I didn't particularly like growing up not looking like anybody you know. It seems like the superficial thing but you hear adopted children talk about this of how you know you just long to look into a face that resembles yours at some point. And I did and I got that with my daughter. Lord knows I mean, I don't know, it's like the be careful what you wish for thing because she does look so much like me. And she hated being questioned about what she was and I think it's very disconcerting for a child to be questioned about something so basic. And my son you know it's interesting too because he's, of, of all of us he's the lightest complexion and he does have these hazel eyes. And when he was small, when he was born they were gray and then they were sort of blue, you know light eyes do this thing like you grow, they grow into you or something. And African Americans, we make such a fuss over light eyes. I mean I never had them so I never knew. But having a child, we make an enormously big deal out of light eyes. And so everywhere I took this child from the moment he was born, everyone--and, and white people do it too 'cause they're not used to seeing black people with light eyes. You know it's just a huge deal and he hated it. And I think one of the reasons he hated it was that my husband and my daughter and I didn't have them and it made him feel different and he didn't want to be different. Well, now he loves it of course but yeah, I think all those, all those issues of, of what you look like physically versus who you come from and who you bear and how that fits together, it, it raises more questions than I think you think it does, even today. Even in our mixed and melting pot of a society where being biracial is very common you know people still really question, and in a very direct way often times, and they want answers and they want the answer they expect to get. They're not satisfied--you know when I tell people I'm black they're almost never satisfied. It's always like, "No, no, no, but what are you really? You know where do you come from? Where are your parents from?" Where are your peop- you know they keep going, going, going like I'm going to have some other answer and of course I never give it to them you know. I don't give them the whole story because it's not that complicated for me. I'm black. Story_ID: 660029 Speaker 1: I want to go to high school. You mentioned that your parents [Clarke's adoptive parents, Vera Clarke and Robert Clarke] made the high school choice for you. So, in New York City [New York, New York], high school is that point where, where many people do get to choose. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And a lot of great vocational schools as well as other schools in the public school system [New York City Department of Education]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And your parents chose what school for you? Speaker 2: Bronx High School of Science [The Bronx High School of Science, Bronx, New York]. Speaker 1: Can you talk about that school and why? Speaker 2: Bronx High School of Science, so there, there, there are three schools that, in New York City are public schools and all you have to do is take a test to get in. And they had, I believe at that time they had three different passing scores to get in and, and I do think there was a pecking order. I think Stuyvesant [Stuyvesant High School, New York, New York] was the highest, Science was the next and at the time Brooklyn Tech [Brooklyn Technical High School, Brooklyn, New York] was the next. Those schools were really the great equalizer because they were phenomenal schools academically, top drawer. We didn't have class rankings. If you applied to college anywhere in the nation and you put those schools down they automatically assumed you were at the top of you know the academic boards in your city so, that was a huge advantage. The science piece you know my father bless his heart, chemistry professor, he hoped and prayed that I would go that route. How he would have loved a STEM [science, technology, engineering and mathematics] kid. I was, you know I was a good student and I was fine in science and math. I took organic chemistry as an elective as a senior in high school. Really? Who does that? And I did well and I thought that I would be a doctor. I planned to be a doctor when I was in high school but I had a cousin who was in medical school at the time I was in high school and she just went through it. And as a woman and as an African American woman in medical school at that time, they really gave her a hard time. And we both wanted to go into obstetrics. I thought there would be no more rewarding career than to help bring new life into the world. Ah, such a romantic I was. But when I stared to understand the reality of being a woman obstetrician, that you would be on call at all hours, that babies are born at all hours, mine certainly were, I wanted to be a, a wife and mother too and I couldn't figure out how I was going to make that work. And there really wasn't another area of medicine that I was drawn to. Story_ID: 660030 Speaker 1: So, I got to college, Smith College [Northampton, Massachusetts], and majored in English, much to my father's chagrin. And he was not unsupportive. He just kept saying to me, "You're going to have to earn a living so I don't know what you're going to do with English as a degree." Teaching maybe, which I knew I was never going to be a teacher. Two teachers as parents, that was not the road I was going to take. But he just kept hammering that you know you're going to have to get a paycheck every two weeks so figure it out. So, I came out of college and still didn't know what I was going to do. I went to a you know liberal arts college and I took a job at Teachers College [Teachers College, Columbia University, New York, New York] as assistant to the first woman dean there. And the journalism school at Columbia [Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism, New York, New York] was right, a block away and I didn't know any journalists. My parents [Clarke's adoptive parents, Vera Clarke and Robert Clarke] had a lot of friends who had a lot of different careers but none were journalists. But the proximity of the J school, you know it occurred to me, oh, okay I like to write and writers get paid. If, they're not like authors but if they actually work in journalism. I had never been on a school paper. I was a creative writing type so I did the literary magazines, but I'd never you know done anything in journalism and I applied and I got in. I got a master's in journalism and started in newspapers and, and I was really lucky because I just, I had an affinity for it and I loved it from the moment I started. Story_ID: 660031 Speaker 1: What made you choose to go to Smith [Smith College, Northampton, Massachusetts] and what was that experience like? Speaker 2: Okay, so my options on college were, were limited in the same way my options in high school were by my parents [Clarke's adoptive parents, Vera Clarke and Robert Clarke]. I was going to be sixteen starting college and my parents wanted me to go to school in Manhattan [New York] and commute, live at home in the Bronx [New York]. That was no ways going to happen. And even as a relatively sheltered and shy sixteen year old, I stood up to my parents on that. I was not going to live at home for college. So, then they were like, "Well okay, well how about you know Barnard [Barnard College, New York, New York]," blah, blah, blah. No thank you. So, my cousin was at Smith, she was a year ahead of me, Terry [ph.] and my parents liked the idea if I was going to go away, of an all-women's college. And so, what they told me was, "Okay we're willing to let you go away but you can't be more than four hour drive from home because we need to see you, be with you in your presence at least once a month." So, I applied to a range of schools within those geographic parameters and, and Smith was one of them. And in the end my father really loved Williams College [Williamstown, Massachusetts] and wanted me to go there and I got in. But Smith, my cousin was there, my best friend was going to Amherst [Amherst College, Amherst, Massachusetts] and my boyfriend was at Amherst and that was how I met Timolin [Timolin Cole] through that boyfriend. And so, you know I stayed with sort of my circle and, and chose Smith because of that really. Speaker 1: And your parents were okay with you moving near the boyfriend? Speaker 2: My parents were not naive and they didn't realize it until you know like two months into school. They thought well, it's an all-girls school and you know it will be pretty cloistered. I think in their minds they thought it was convent like until they did come to visit me on one of those we've got to see you once a month things. And my father came to my room and he went to the bathroom and there was a sign on the door and it said, "Man in shower," because when men visited us, that's what we'd do. We'd stick a little warning just so you'd know, you know so you didn't--I mean all-girls school, you could walk in you know anyway. It was like okay just so you know there's a guy in the shower. My father was horrified. I mean he was like fit to be tied. He comes running back down the hallway. "What do you mean there's a man in the shower?" And I'm like, "Oh, So and So's boyfriend you know is visiting from wherever." And it was, it was a wake up call for them but it was way too late. And I don't know why it didn't occur to them. Like my boyfriend was at Amherst. It was eight miles away and he had a car. What were they thinking? You know what they were thinking is that colleges were much more protective of their students than they were. What they had no idea of was that it was like you know everything goes. Had they known, I probably would have been at Barnard commuting to the Bronx but luckily (laughter) they didn't know 'til it was too late. Story_ID: 660032 Speaker 1: Who were some of your contemporaries at Smith [Smith College, Northampton, Massachusetts]? Speaker 2: Oh gosh, known people you mean? Who was known? Well, [HistoryMaker] Thelma Golden. Thelma is one of our, our stars from my era. Thelma was a year or two behind me at Smith and you know she's now head of the Studio Museum in Harlem [New York, New York]. And I'm trying to think of, of who else. I mean Smith women by and large have gone on to do very well and Thelma is certainly an example of that. One of the things I, I loved it didn't happen in my era, but I went back for my tenth reunion mainly because Ruth Simmons was becoming a president. And she was you know in becoming president of Smith she was lauded as the first black woman to you know, to head a school of that caliber near Ivy [Ivy League] caliber. And, and I was just incredibly proud of Smith in bringing her in because to be quite honest, I was not a huge fan of the Smith College experience at the time I was there. It was positioned as a very liberal school and in many ways, it was. But African American students or black students, including international students, we probably represented hovering around 10 percent, maybe it was like eight, which wasn't a bad number as paltry as it is for the time. But the year before I got to Smith there had been the Mwangi Cultural Center which was our black house had been defaced and they'd never caught the people but they'd written you know profane words on the cultural center and the school had responded with outrage. And I walked into a situation where the college had mandated that in every house on campus there be racial awareness workshops. Smith College [Northampton, Massachusetts], one of the things I loved about it and, and that drew me was that we didn't have these cold dorms. We had these beautiful, old Victorian homes, large, large homes that were our dorms and each home had a dining room. So, you ate in your house that you slept in and it was a really lovely system. I was the only black girl in a, in my house, Albright House of sixty-seven women. I had never been in a situation like that before. Story_ID: 660033 Speaker 1: When were you at Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia]? Speaker 2: My junior year abroad was in Atlanta [Georgia]. I, I wanted to be away. I wanted to take a plane to school but I really wanted--you know the thing about Bronx High School of Science [The Bronx High School of Science, Bronx, New York], it was a great school but it was an academic school. So, it wasn't your typical high school. We didn't have a football team. We didn't have a homecoming. You know you, you didn't have those social high school aspects. And then you go to an all-women's college and you also don't have that. So, I'd never been to a prom. I'd never--you know it just, it just was a very specific type of education in either case. And, I had a god-sister who was at Spelman and being at Smith [Smith College, Northampton, Massachusetts], I, I had my first racist, overtly racist experience at Smith. I resented the fact that at Smith I felt the administration and so forth you know while they claimed to be interested and engaged and compassionate, they really didn't seem to have a clue in my view as to what it was like to be a black person on that campus and probably a Latino person or an Asian person, a woman of other background. And they really didn't do a lot to integrate us. So, at Smith, here I went, I was the only black woman in my dorm. I was often the only black woman in a class. There were black professors but not a lot and I wasn't an Afro Am [African American studies] major and that's where most of them were. And I just was sick of it, you know. I was really genuinely sick of it. I was in an African, I was in a black dance group on campus, a third world dance group. I was in the, in the black students organization [Black Students' Alliance] but it was the first time in my life I was gravitating toward black things you know the whole black lunch table phenomenon. Even though there were, there were not a lot of black students at Bronx High School of Science, there were, there--it was such a melting pot because all you did was take a test to get in. So, Bronx High School of Science I met the first person I'd ever met who lived on Park Avenue. I didn't know people did live on Park Avenue. But it was the great equalizer economically, racially, from a gender standpoint so there were a tremendous number of Asian Americans at Science but they broke down by their specific place. There were Chinese students, Korean students, Japanese students. There was a Greek student contingent so you know even among the white students they broke down often by culture or ethnicity. At Smith, it just seemed really white and then there were the few of us who were something else. But that whole only one thing I didn't like it. So, I decided I wanted to go to Spelman and I remember the dean at Smith was not impressed or pleased and she said why--you know blacks that--it was called the black student--the black college exchange. And I don't think anyone at, at Smith had utilized it in a while although it was there. You could go to Spelman I think or Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]. And she said, "Why would you do that? You know you're, you're a good student. Why don't you go to a--go abroad, go to Europe, go you know go to Spain, go to Italy?" And I couldn't say it to her but you know what I wanted to say was you know they'll speak a different language but it's still just white. I'm trying to get away from you all you know I need a break. And so, I decided to go to Spelman for just a semester and I loved it. I absolutely loved it and I ended up staying for my whole junior year. I think I would have loved it in any case but it was 1983, '84 [1984], so it was a particularly great year to be on a black campus [HBCU]. Vanessa Williams became Miss America like weeks after I got there which on an all-black women's campus you could imagine how excited we were. And Suzette Charles was the runner up. So even if she blew it which unfortunately happened, you know it was still going to be a black Miss America. Maynard Jackson was the mayor and Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] was running for president. I mean it was like an unbelievable year especially to be on a black campus. So, I, I loved that year I mean I absolutely loved that year. I had never been south of Washington, D.C., so it was my first exposure to you know southern culture which I loved. And I went to an A.M.E. Church that year, Cascade [ph.]. That was my first exposure to that. I was raised Episcopalian so--although my church here was black and Episcopalian, it was much more Anglican. It was West Indian so it was much more you know refined and upright (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Conservative. Speaker 2: --and this was A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal], this was a whole other thing. I was a really happy camper. It was, it was just a, it was just a great year. Story_ID: 660034 Speaker 1: So, you graduate from Smith [Smith College, Northampton, Massachusetts], you go to Columbia [Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism, New York, New York] and-- Speaker 2: (Nods head). Speaker 1: --and when do you start working? Speaker 2: Right away. I got a job, a recruiter from a New Jersey paper came to Columbia, The North Jersey Herald and News, it was a competitor of The Bergen Record [The Record], although not much of a competitor. I have to say The Bergen Record was by and large the bigger paper. But they came and recruited and so I was recruited out of Columbia. I was not extremely ambitious in my, in my job search coming out of Columbia. I think I was very fearful that I was still very green. I did really well at Columbia. I graduated with honors but I felt because I had not had any experience going into Columbia which a lot of students had really even worked in journalism, I was hyper aware of how much I didn't know and I was not a big risk taker. So, I went to this little paper in North Jersey. I also wasn't really excited about going to you know another market, a small market. I wanted to stay close to New York [New York] and it was a great experience. I learned a lot. It was a daily newspaper. I definitely cut my teeth there and, and again I did well. I, I was lucky I found my calling in journalism. That was clearly what I was meant to do. And, and then after a little over a year there I went to a small trade paper in Stamford, Connecticut called the Connecticut Law Tribune. And my goal in going there was really to get to The American Lawyer, which was the flagship publication of that organization which was--although it was a trade, it was a very, very highly respected trade magazine in New York and it was a feeder for The Wall Street Journal and, and you know a lot of prestigious news organizations. And so, I figured you know I could get there through one of their subsidiary papers and that's what I did. So, I went from the Law Tribune to The American Lawyer magazine in New York. Story_ID: 660035 Speaker 1: Now, at what point along the way have you met the man who would become your husband? Speaker 2: I met the man who would become my husband when I was about nine. My uncle, Vernal Cave, was a very prominent physician in Brooklyn [New York] and he happened to be Earl Graves' [HistoryMaker Earl G. Graves, Sr.] dermatologist. And so, and the two men became friends, both of them became friends with everybody. Not surprising they became friends with each other. And the Cave family was a very medical family, very influential in Brooklyn and in civil rights. And they had, there were siblings, five siblings, very common this number five for that generation. The Cave family, the siblings owned a house together in Sag Harbor, big old house and they had (background noise)--. The Cave family had a big house in Sag Harbor, New York and every summer they invited tons of people out. So, my whole family came, these were my father's cousins so my father [Clarke's adoptive father, Robert Clarke] and all his siblings and their kids would go and they would invite friends. They would have like fresh air fun kids you know they were just a, y'all come, kind of people. So, they would have people out there all summer and my family would always have this kind of big family reunion Labor Day weekend. So, one year Johnny's [John C. Graves] family was invited to attend as well and we met out in Sag Harbor at the Cave house and we became friends you know. We were kids the same age, my cousins and me, he and his brothers. And we would hang out playing cards, the grown ups would be doing their thing. And I'd see him you know every Labor Day usually in Sag Harbor. And then as we got older we'd see each other at parties you know in New York, we had a lot of mutual friends. And so, we kind of grew up together not close but seeing each other regularly. And then it was Labor Day weekend before my senior year in college, and we hadn't seen each other in a, in a couple of years. You know once you start college you're not always around Labor Day weekend, but we saw each other this year on the beach and it was like kind of one of those instant things you know. He looked different to me all of a sudden. I looked different to him all of a sudden and we started dating that weekend and that was it. Speaker 1: And from, from how long did you get married? Speaker 2: We, we started dating the summer after my junior year at Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] so that was September 1994--1984, and then we got married in November 1990 and, and we were married twenty years. And we're separated now but we had a long marriage. Story_ID: 660036 Speaker 1: So, now in your, your professional career and your family life kind of merged at a certain point. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: When was that? Speaker 2: When Johnny [John C. Graves] and I married, I was working at The American Lawyer and I guess it was about a year, 1990, '90 [1900], must have been a year, little over a year I, I left The American Lawyer. I was, I couldn't write about one more lawyer. I learned a tremendous amount there but I just couldn't do it anymore. And again, I think I really lacked the confidence to go for you know a magazine job at a general interest magazine. So, I had had a friend at American Express [American Express Company] who had asked me while I was still at The American Lawyer if I would do some writing for Amex freelance, technical writing. And you know it was easy to do and it paid incredibly well, far better than my day job frankly. So, I left Am Law basically to freelance and, and that was my anchor because I knew I'd have income from, from this technical writing. And I did that for about a year and, and I was, I had freelanced for Black Enterprise. I wrote my first big feature cover story for Black Enterprise when I was still actually at the Connecticut Law Tribune, and it was a profile on Clift Wharton [HistoryMaker Clifton R. Wharton, Jr.] who at the time was CEO of TIAA-CREF [Teachers Insurance and Annuity Association of America - College Retirement Equities Fund, New York, New York]. And although people often think Ken Chenault [Kenneth Chenault] or Frank Raines [Franklin D. Raines] were the first black CEO of a Fortune 500 company. It was Clifton Wharton. He was the first black CEO of a Fortune 500 company and I'll never forget that interview because I was so green and I was so intimidated and so impressed by this man who was extraordinary. He had been chancellor of the SUNY college system [State University of New York System]. I mean he was just extraordinary, the Michigan college system [sic. Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan]. And he could not have been kinder and more generous to me. And he told me years later he had no idea you know how green I was. But, but it, but he wouldn't have treated me any differently had he known. I mean he was just really wonderful and, and gave me incredible access. I interviewed him in his office. I went back to his apartment. He and his wife lived in the UN building [United Nations Plaza, New York, New York], Dolores Wharton [HistoryMaker Dolores D. Wharton]. I interviewed both of them there. They gave me an extraordinary amount of time and, and were very kind. And you know I, when I look back at that piece today I'm still not embarrassed so that's a measure of how good they were to me and how I was probably a little better than I gave myself credit for being. But they--Black Enterprise at the time, Sheryl Hilliard [HistoryMaker Sheryl Hilliard Tucker] was the editor in chief. She was a Columbia J school [Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism, New York, New York] grad as well and we knew each other. And Sheryl you know reached out and said you know, "Why don't you work for Black Enterprise?" And she had talked to my father-in-law [HistoryMaker Earl G. Graves, Sr.] about it and it made sense to me although I had never planned on being a business journalist and having done the legal journalism, I wasn't completely enthralled by the idea of shifting to business. But it was a lot broader than law and you know and I said okay. I hesitated for the business thing and also because I thought you know it's easy to join a family company, probably not so easy to leave a family company. And I wasn't thirty yet and I thought you know do I want to make a career decision that could potentially be my whole career? But the flip side was sort of like if this is what I do and this is what the family business is, why would I do it for someone else? So, you know I, I took a, I took a chance. I figured people would, you know the nepotism thing would dog me a little bit but you know it wasn't--once people worked with me you know they didn't think I only got there because I was the daughter-in-law. So, you know it was, it was--been a great ride. I'm still there so you know it's been a great, great ride (simultaneous). Story_ID: 660037 Speaker 1: What year did you start? Speaker 2: This is ninety--this is 2000, I've been there twenty-one years so I think it was '93 [1993]. Speaker 1: Now working (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Eighty-three [1983]--no, '93 [1993], yeah. Speaker 1: Working for Earl Graves [HistoryMaker Earl G. Graves, Sr.]-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --family or not-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: --he's strict. Speaker 2: Uh-huh (nods head). Speaker 1: What was the experience like in those early days with, with him because he was very present? Speaker 2: You know he was very present but he was more immersed in the sales side of the business than the editorial. Dad never--you know one of the things I most admire about dad is that he knows what he knows and he knows a lot but he knows what he doesn't know. And he was always really good about hiring people who filled in his own gaps and respecting their knowledge and their skillset. And so, he really respected Sheryl [HistoryMaker Sheryl Hilliard Tucker] who was young. Sheryl never really got her due you know. Sheryl was the only, I think at the time she was the only woman of any race to be editor in chief of a national magazine and certainly of a business magazine. It was a big deal and she was young you know. She was a wunderkind. And he really respected Sheryl and they got along great. So, he didn't get, he didn't play too much in Sheryl's sandbox, you know he trusted her. We did have a system at Black Enterprise then which we still have, it's not quite as, it's not quite as rigid. But the whole magazine would be written and then almost everyone in the company, certainly every manager level and up would have to come to what we call preview where the editorial team would preview the magazine. And you would have to present your article no matter how large or small it was to everyone from dad on down. And if dad couldn't make the preview date, the preview date was changed to accommodate his schedule. And this was late in the production cycle so the magazine was very close to closing and if he had any issue with anything, it had to be fixed before the magazine closed. So, you know it was, it was a, it was a unique tool and there was no give on it. But it was good you know. It, it, it, it honed people's presentation skills, it forced you to know that when you were writing something you were going to have to stand there with it and defend it possibly either the way it was written or why it was written or that it was written at all. And you know we had some very lively and very long previews but I, I enjoyed it. And he was fully invested in any word and bit of punctuation and bit of artwork and ad in that book every single month year in and year out for his entire tenure as publisher of that magazine. Story_ID: 660038 Speaker 1: Now Black Enterprise also had the reputation of there is a dress code. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: There's stories of women coming without pantyhose on and being sent home. Speaker 2: Um-hm (nods head). Speaker 1: Can you describe the, the rules? Speaker 2: Uh-huh, yeah and I came in late in the game. This was the '90s [1990s] so you know BE had been around for twenty years before I got there. You know it was a conservative place. Dad [Clarke's father-in-law, HistoryMaker Earl G. Graves, Sr.] created BE in his own image to some degree and he was very old school, West Indian man, raised with the same values I was and then cut his teeth working for the Kennedy family, for Robert Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy], and I think really, really admired the Kennedys both for their family orientation and their success, their service to this country. And so Black Enterprise was a real outgrowth of that and he sort of founded it also with IBM [International Business Machines Corporation] in mind. IBM was an early advertiser and you know IBM had that blue suit you know briefcase, very stringent codes as well. And dad's feeling was we were writing about business and black people in business. Most of the people we were writing about were pioneers in their field and were still very much fighting for acceptance just to get in the door and then to move up the ladder. His feeling was if we didn't show up correct in every instance whether we were working in the art department as a photographer where you know art typically would have the most leeway, you don't come in a suit and tie if you're a photographer or if you're you know the, the designer, right? But it was a one rule fits all scenario and whether you were in ad sales or whether you were a reporter who was never leaving the office and wasn't going to even have contact with anyone except on the phone or whether you were the art director, you had to maintain the dress code and it was a very traditional business dress code. And so that meant ties and jackets for the men, that meant dresses--we did move to pants for the women but pantyhose, pumps, not open toe shoes. As our culture you know grew in its self-expression, he wasn't too happy about dreads, braids, twists, curls, earrings on men, absolutely no. You know it, it was all of that and he took a lot of heat for that from us 'cause nobody else cared. You know we're good at beating up on each other. He took a lot of heat for that but he also--there are so many people who came through BE who maybe at the time didn't appreciate it so much but in hindsight people will still come to me and they have such affection and such admiration for him and they'll talk about how much they learned and they'll talk about how you know they made out, may not have loved it at the time but they get it now and it was the right thing and it helped them and it fed them in a way that they needed whether they realized it or not. Story_ID: 660039 Speaker 1: Your being at Black Enterprise for now twenty-one years, but o- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --over the course of this time you've had quite a bit of influence, including as it relates to women. Speaker 2: (Nods head). Speaker 1: Can you speak to the initiatives that you've been a leader on? Speaker 2: Um-hm. We, we do events at Black Enterprise. We are a magazine but we're a multimedia company so we do events and we've always done them. And from the time I was there we had career conferences, we had entrepreneurs conferences, small business conferences. So, as these things emerged and evolved my, my husband, Johnny Graves [John C. Graves], built out this events part of the business and very successfully. And the small business, the entrepreneurs conferences that we had as women emerged as leaders in their companies, particularly in the small business sector, we began having one session at the end of every entrepreneurs conference that was for women only. And initially we called it Sisters, Inc., and it was packed. It was the very last session at the end of the conference so people could have walked away basically. The conferences for years were at Disney [Walt Disney World Resort, Orlando, Florida] and people would bring their kids and they could have just gone to you know the park that day. The men typically went off to a golf outing at that hour but the women would pack whatever room we put it in; we'd always have to bring in extra chairs. And we would have a panel of three women CEOs and I would moderate. And from the very first year, it was a really magical thing. Something happened in that room that we couldn't have orchestrated if we wanted to and it had to do with the hunger of those women for the information we were offering, for the role models we were providing, for the inspiration that those role models were candidly giving them and for the ability to connect with each other because they were from all over the country and they just didn't have that. They didn't have a network. They didn't have a way to do it. And from that very first year they started saying to us, "We want our own conference." Well this was a real dilemma because we didn't want to cannibalize our own entrepreneurs conference and peel off all the women. And to be honest we didn't think it was our space you know. Essence and Black Enterprise were started around the same exact time and there was sort of a very like unspoken non-compete clause you know. It was like Essence had its space, we had our space, Ebony had its space and we tried I think as much as possible not to get in each other's way. There was room for everybody and we wanted to make sure everybody succeeded. So, we were really, really hesitant to, to directly engage the women in our audience. Story_ID: 660040 Speaker 1: But they kept asking and they kept asking. And so, ultimately we decided in 2005 to have a women's conference but we said we wouldn't make it about the entrepreneurs in our audience, we would make it about the corporate women. This way you know the entrepreneurs conference would be intact. And women came out in droves. State Farm was a title sponsor, it was in Phoenix [Arizona] and women just really came and it was that same, it was that same you know fire in them and hunger in them and you know there was something emotional that happened there. Women would come up to me and say, "You just don't know you know, I'm in Minnesota so this is like, you know, I feel like I've been dropped into heaven. I don't have this. I don't get this. I need this." And that was repeated you know all over. And we would do this conference and we would all leave there feeling like everything was possible you know. You just like, you be in your little silo throughout the year, you're doing your work, you're trying to raise kids, you've got parents, you've got this, you've got that. You're struggling, you're doing it but you get here and really truly decompress with women who are living the same kind of life, had the same sorts of dreams, wanted the same sorts of things and making it happen. And being together made you feel more strongly that it was doable and that it was worth it and that whatever you were going through or sacrificing to make it happen, it was worthwhile. So, the Women of Power Summit you know came into being and it's evolved and it's now going to be in its tenth year next which is phenomenal and amazing to me. But you know the women of Black Enterprise, the businesswoman, whether she is a small business person who has started her own company or inherited it from parents or started it with her significant other or whether she is you know clawing her way through corporate environments is so vital to this country and this culture and, and she's been really vital part of our audience. Story_ID: 660041 Speaker 1: You had a question as to whether you wanted to do business journalism. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And now all these years in, what is important to you about having plotted this course? Speaker 2: What do you mean? Speaker 1: Well, now you're entrenched in business journalism. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: African American business journalism. What, what has it meant for you? Speaker 2: You know I, I had no interest in business. Like I said my parents [Clarke's adoptive parents, Vera Clarke and Robert Clarke] were educators and we got Essence and Ebony, we didn't get Black Enterprise in my house growing up. Had I not known Johnny's [John C. Graves] family you know I, I really wouldn't have known what it was. And business was sort of a murky thing for me. I didn't really know what it was all about. Come to find out, you know it's everything. Business is everything. Everything is a business now even more so than when I first started. You know we talk about the business of education, the business of healthcare, areas that you didn't attach the concept of business to even though technically they were that. Now, are absolutely that. So, it's grown I think in importance and in our understanding and it's got its tentacles in everything. So, I think from that standpoint you know it's turned out to be great because it's had a lot more breadth than I ever thought when I started. When I started, my concept was very narrow and the reality is you know boundless. So, no matter what you're interested in you know fashion, history, music, art, it's all business in some sense of the word and black people are in every sector of it so there's no shortage of stories. Story_ID: 660042 Speaker 1: I went into journalism because I wanted to tell stories. I loved listening to my parents [Clarke's adoptive parents, Vera Clarke and Robert Clarke] and their siblings tell stories growing up. As an only child, I had a particular hunger and affinity for just listening to that oral tradition play itself out. And what always fascinated me was that if there were five people in the room and they all were relaying the exact same event, date, time, experience, you got five completely different versions and everybody was absolutely adamant that theirs was the one that was true. So, that fascinated me you know gave me that sense that truth is not absolute, it's subjective, it's personal and, and everybody has a story to tell. And when you have the time and opportunity to listen, everybody's is fascinating on some level. So, I really love having the ability to be a conduit for those stories and being able to continue an oral tradition that we brought with us from Africa to this country. My father was very enamored of that tradition and the first person to talk to me about griots and, and all of that you know. I was from the 'Roots' generation when 'Roots' came on TV and we all sat around you know watching for a week and Alex Haley you know sort of brought all of that into the light. But I mean I knew all that before Alex Haley because my dad talked about that. And we had a family tree and so I think of my job, my profession as really an unintentional extension of all of that, of all that you know my father didn't imagine journalism for me. He hoped for a STEM [science, technology, engineering and mathematics] kid. He would have still liked me to be Dr. Clarke, but you know he kept a scrapbook with every single piece I ever wrote, even the ones that were this many lines. And he was really proud of that and I think came to recognize that he had had a big influence on, on how I you know, how I proceeded on my professional journey. Story_ID: 660043 Speaker 1: So, you know and, and I'm really, really proud to be, to have been and continue to be a part of Black Enterprise and that whole tradition. I think that journalism you know our whole industry has just changed exponentially. It bears little resemblance to what it was and it's still very unclear what it's going to become. But the mission of what we do at Black Enterprise is absolutely intact and there's still such a large need for it, for us to share the stories of successful black people in this country and the world and how did they get to be there and where did they come from, what shaped them, who shaped them, who mentored them, what do they dream of still, what did they earn, what did they make, what are they giving back to the community? These are things that we don't have enough of in our communities. You would think forty years after Black Enterprise and Essence were founded, fifty, sixty years after Ebony was founded, given all the technology we have and our greater capacity to be connected to one another, that we would be so much more aware of these success stories and all the good that goes on in our community, but we're not because the emphasis is still not on the good. Bad news still travels faster in some respects. So, I'm, I'm really proud to still be part of that machine that stays committed to cranking out the good stories, the educational stories, the inspirational stories, the motivational stories for men, women and children, the things that are going to uplift us hopefully as individuals and as a community and as a country. Story_ID: 660044 Speaker 1: You have worked to that end in the digital space for Black Enterprise as well as you now host 'Black Enterprise Business Report.' Speaker 2: (Nods head). Speaker 1: How do you see both the broadcast and the internet playing out in this contemporary space? Speaker 2: Yeah. I'm still a writer at heart. I'm a throwback, I'm trying, I'm really trying to wholeheartedly embrace the digital age. It's not like we have a choice. You know I think, I think it's all still so much in its infancy as, as much as it's everywhere. It's still a kind of a crawling, stumbling tiny thing trying to figure out how to mature and what it's really going to be and wants to be. I have a lot of concerns about journalism in the digital age because the checks and balances are not there. The expectations have shifted. The systems that ensured or at least attempted to ensure accuracy and fairness you know all of these things that were once the, the fundamental tenets of journalism you know, they're, they're all sort of murky now. There's lots of gray area and not so much black and white and I think we all struggle with that as consumers and content producers. But you know we're, we're finding our way and there's a lot of extraordinary work being done. The profit models are harder to get a grip on and everyone's struggling with that and it's, and it's reached out into publishing in all of its forms. So, you know from an economic standpoint and a career standpoint, that's, that's a little bit tougher to get my hands around. But I think in terms of mission and possibility from an idea standpoint and production standpoint, there is so much that's possible that you can do now with you know video and, and digital that the possibilities are endless. I think, I just, I just worry that we need to ensure that the quality stays really high and that we don't just you know give in to our base or instincts and interests. Story_ID: 660045 Speaker 1: Now the, the business landscape for black media right now is tenuous at best. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: You know all-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --black publications have fewer ad pages, fewer edit [editorial] pages when it--there, there is that sense of black media in general and Black Enterprise-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --kind of hanging on a thread. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Can you, can you give some context for what that means and what are those internal conversations like when you're looking at this dramatic shift-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --in just advertisers buying and, and consumers buying? Speaker 2: Yeah, you know it's a revolving conversation and I think at Black Enterprise we have remained a family owned business where you know others have shifted for very good reason, to try to fill in those economic gaps and that's really hard to do. It's, it's hard for all of us as you said whether you're Essence you know owned by Time [Time Inc.] or, or Ebony which, which has gotten investors from Wall Street or us which is you know sort of trying to real hard to hold the line. The magical answer has not become clear for any of us. What is clear is that it is not a black issue. As Butch Graves [HistoryMaker Earl "Butch" Graves, Jr.], my brother-in-law has said often, a lot of general interest magazines have disappeared from the landscape that had a lot deeper pockets than we did at one time. But we are committed because the need is still so acute and you could argue that it's more acute than ever. You know I remember when Barak Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] was first elected president, in a sense you know he burst through the ultimate glass ceiling, right, he's president of the free world. But I knew even at that time, at the beginning of the first election as thrilled as I was and as much as I campaigned for him and as emotional as it was, I knew it was not going to make things easier for black media or black business in general, it was going to make it harder because where do we go, immediately to you know this notion of post-racial, post-racist society entered the lexicon. And anybody you know of any other color knew that that was just ridiculous. But, but you know when the world goes to, well the president is black, then it must mean the fight is over and we all knew the fight wasn't over. And so in some ways his presence made it more difficult because there was this moment of it's all good. We don't need to do this anymore. But for advertisers for you know--even for consumers. You know there was a time when we were so loyal to everything black and we are a more blended race now. We are much more diverse within our own ranks now. And so the one size fits all model, it just doesn't exist anymore and our mindset is different than our parents' and grandparents' was. So, all of those things you know are, are in full effect all the time and you know I wish that I or we at Black Enterprise had the answer. We don't. What I think is important though is that we, we know what the landscape is, what it really is. We know how many of us are struggling and how deeply we're struggling. We know that there's still this deep well of need for an influx of positive information that's going to help raise everything and we're still trying to answer that need and we're going to continue to do that for as long as we possibly can. Story_ID: 660046 Speaker 1: What would you like [HistoryMaker] Caroline Clarke's legacy to be? Speaker 2: Oh, my god I have asked people this question so many times and I did not expect it to be asked of me, certainly not at this moment in my life. I will be fifty at the end of this year. You know I think it's interesting. I think as black people we have a heightened sense of our imperative to have a legacy. I think partly because of our churches, partly because of our heroes and sheroes, we, we have this thing, a lot of us, legacy, legacy, we have to leave a legacy. I don't know that that's quite the same for people of other cultures. It would be interesting to explore. I was at the Black Corporate Directors Conference last week in Laguna Beach [California] and this is a, a very exclusive group of those African Americans who are on the nation's corporate boards, not a lot of them even in this day and age. And they're--and you know all of them are very successful, very high powered. And John Thompson [John W. Thompson] who is the chairmen of the board of Microsoft [Microsoft Corporation] was asked by [HistoryMaker] Mellody Hobson in live interview, "What do you want your legacy to be?" And he said, "I don't think much about my legacy." And there was like this collective gasp in the room. People were horrified like (gasps), "What do you mean you don't think--how can you be a black man in American, especially a successful one and not think about your legacy?" So, when you asked me that question that's the first thing I think of. In my head I think I haven't thought a lot about my legacy and then I hear that gasp of like all of the angels and you know like you have to think of your legacy. I really haven't. I, I think, I think I still, I still see myself as very much in the servant part of my life and career and I'm still somebody's daughter, still trying to be you know that child who my parents [Clarke's adoptive parents, Vera Clarke and Robert Clarke] are proud of even though I only have one parent left who's ailing. I still find myself feeling like although I will be fifty, you know not quite like a grown up like you're kind of faking the funk you know. Like you, you look like a grown up you know and your kids ask you questions and you answer like a grown up. But you know in my heart of hearts I still don't fully feel like I'm there. But I can say this I guess, I, I have written two books and if I have my druthers I would just write books. I wouldn't--you know I, I didn't ever set out to be on television. I was often asked even in journalism school [Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism, New York, New York], even in junior high school [J.H.S. 144, Michelangelo School, Bronx, New York] we had an AV [audiovisual] club and we all had to do this thing on camera. And I remember the teacher, Mr. Doyle [ph.] saying, "You know you should think about doing that." And at the time it was maybe Melva--Melba Tolliver and I don't even think Sue Simmons anchored yet and I thought, you're a black girl. I'm not going to be an anchor. So, I never wanted to do TV. I write, that's what I love and that's what I love and that's what I am most comfortable at and that's what I would do if I could do one thing, I would just write. And I would write books because I wouldn't have to go into an office every day. Story_ID: 660047 Speaker 1: And I've written two and they're very, very different. One of them is called 'Take a Lesson' ['Take a Lesson: Today's Black Achievers on How They Made It and What They Learned Along the Way,' Caroline Clarke] and it is basically an oral history form book. It is kind of HistoryMakers [The HistoryMakers] in book form and I interviewed over twenty successful African Americans and asked them how they made it, how they came to be what they'd become and all I did was edit their responses. I'm very, very proud of that book still. I look at that book now even though it's fourteen or something years old and I don't whence and I don't duck and I don't hide. I'm really proud of it. Was not a bestseller. You can still get it on Amazon. Some of the people in the book like Johnnie Cochran are no longer even with us. But I'm really proud of it. It's out there in the world. It has some degree of permanency and it did what I wanted it to do which was share people's stories, positive stories, meaningful stories. My second book ['Postcards from Cookie: A Memoir of Motherhood, Miracles and a Whole Lot of Mail,' Caroline Clarke] is basically my story and if you'd ever asked me if I'd write a memoir, up until probably just before I wrote it, I would have laughed and said that's absurd. I still have difficulty when people say, "What's your book about?" Saying it's a memoir because you know it's like, why, you know? Earl Graves [HistoryMaker Earl G. Graves, Sr.] writes a memoir. I can name scores, hundreds of people I've interviewed throughout the years who absolutely should write a memoir. Who cares about my life? But I wrote it because this whole journey with my family, both my parents [Clarke's adoptive parents, Vera Clarke and Robert Clarke] who raised me and the discovery of the family I was born into was just extraordinary. And it wasn't something I engineered and it wasn't something I anticipated but it changed my life and it changed my sense of who I was and how I came to be and what I was meant to be. And, and it resonates for all of us. It has to do with all of our stories. It's unique in its details but it's not unique in its specialness. And I wanted to put it out there because I thought it would affirm for people that when you really trust life and lean into it, it's going to take you there. It's going to take you where you're supposed to be and it's going to be someplace good. It's not necessarily going to be someplace easy or comfortable or you know magical and lovely, but it's going to be good. It's going to be good for you and it's going to be good for the world. And, and so the writer in me which is the really the core of me I guess would say about my legacy that I hope the words I've written down in my life--this is crazy--have mattered to someone, to multiple someones and that they've made their lives better in some way or they've given them courage or inspiration or hope in some way that's been meaningful. Story_ID: 660048 Speaker 1: What wisdom would you offer to your children and to other children who might want to follow in your footsteps? Speaker 2: Dreaming is a very big, big, important thing. I don't think we encourage our children or ourselves or each other to dream enough because it seems like such a soft thing. It doesn't have the grip of goals or mission or material things, but I was a really dreamy kid. And I was encouraged even from a scientist father [Clarke's adoptive father, Robert Clarke] and reading teacher mother [Clarke's adoptive mother, Vera Clarke] to dream big and really follow those dreams and to believe that my ancestors had planted those dreams and anointed those dreams and that they would help me reach those dreams. And I believed that all of that has come to pass for me and that's not because I'm me and I'm special. That's because that exists for all of us if we believe it and do the work of dreaming and then really, really pursuing those dreams. And it sometimes takes courage and it sometimes takes faith and it sometimes takes more hours and brainpower and skill than you think you have but anything is possible. Anything is possible and again and again in my life, that has been validated that notion that anything is possible and so why not make sure as much as you can that those possibilities are as good and as great and as grand and as amazing as they can be, and not just reach for the obvious thing or the thing that somebody tells you is what you really are when you think deep down it's not. Just go for all of it. I don't think I did that enough when I was younger. I think I'm only now, at almost fifty, really beginning to understand what I'm capable of and what I've been given and what I could do with it if I have the courage and the faith to try...