 Story_ID: 306248 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: David Surmier Cunningham, Jr. [HistoryMaker David S. Cunningham, Jr.]. D-A-V-I-D, Surmier, capital S-U-R-M-I-E-R, Cunningham, C-U-N-N-I-N-G-H-A-M, Jr. Speaker 1: Okay, now is there a story behind your middle name, especially Surmier? Speaker 2: Yeah. As my father [David Cunningham, Sr.] tells me, as my father told me, he said he was born in Tennessee--Mississippi. His family came from Holly Springs, Mississippi and he was named--they named him Surmier and everybody would call him Samire, Samire. And he said he just didn't like the tone, the sound of it. So when he got--when he went to school, he told them his name was David Surmier Cunningham. And so that's--it's the story I know he did. Speaker 1: Now is there any story about where Surmier comes from? That's an unusual name. Speaker 2: I've been trying to figure it out. I, I don't know of anyone else who has that name, other than my father, my son [David S. Cunningham, III] and myself. And I have a grandson, who my daughter named Surmier [Surmier Cunningham]. I don't know. I have seen some Arabic names that have Sarmar, but they spell it S-A-R-M-A-R. I don't know whether it's, has a French connection, I don't know. I really don't know the origin of the name. I have tried to look it up but it's an unusual name and I haven't been able to find it anywhere else. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is your date birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: My date of birth is June 24, 1935, and I was born in Chicago, Illinois. Speaker 1: Okay. And sir, what is your occupation? Speaker 2: Well presently I run my own business. I run a consulting firm that is a government advocacy firm or better known as being a lobbyist. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today is October the 5th, 2005. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: Well right now we're at my house [in Los Angeles, California]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My home. Story_ID: 306249 Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five People magazine-ish type questions we always ask as a warm up and they only require a short answer. Speaker 2: Oh, okay. Speaker 1: The first one is, do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Yes, I would say so. You want to know what it is? Speaker 1: Yes. Yes I do. Speaker 2: Peanut butter. Speaker 1: Okay. What about, do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Uh, hard to say, hard to say. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Okay. If any, it would probably since I'm an Omega [Omega Psi Phi Fraternity], it'd be purple. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Living in California, you know, it's summertime always. I prefer you know the more tepid part of summer when it's not quite so hot. Speaker 1: Okay. And do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Well, my ideal vacation would be to take a cruise somewhere in the Caribbean. But my favorite vacation spot--let me see. I have been to so many parts of the world, I can't say. You know I've enjoyed Rome [Italy]. I've enjoyed, I've enjoyed a number of places. But what would be my fav- that's a good question. What is my favorite vacation place? I've been to Hawaii. I really don't know. Speaker 1: Okay. And the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: My wife [Sylvia Cunningham] would say yeah, but it wouldn't be--they wouldn't allow you to repeat it (laughter), for public. You know, most occasions when things happen I have an automatic response and it's one word. Speaker 1: Okay, well-- Speaker 2: Starts with S and ends in T, so I mean, shoot I don't know (laughter). Story_ID: 306250 Speaker 1: Well I'm going to ask you about your family history. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: I'm going to ask you about your mother's side of the family-- Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: --and your father's [David Cunningham, Sr.] side. And we're going to start with your mother's side of the family. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: My mother's full name was Eula Mae Lawson [Eula Lawson Cunningham], E-U-L-A, Eula, Mae, M-A-E, Lawson, L-A-W-S-O-N. Speaker 1: All right. And what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Her date of birth is August the 24th, 1909, and she was born in Greenville, Texas. Speaker 1: Okay. Now what do you know about your mother's side of the family? What do you know about the ancestors on that side? How far back can you trace them? Speaker 2: Well it's been difficult and I've been trying to do some, some tracing. I did know my grandmother and my grandfather, my mother's, mother and father. I know that my mother had six or seven brothers and sisters. Several of their children are still alive and we do stay in touch to some degree. My grandmother, Nancy Jane Donaldson [Nancy Donaldson Lawson] was her maiden name, she was born on the 4th of July. I don't know in what year. I can't answer that question right now. But she was almost 80 percent Apache, Indian [Native American] out of Texas. My grandfather, I don't know what his birthday was. His name was William Benjamin Lawson, pretty rigid old guy, and he was part Blackfoot, but very dark complected gentleman. But--and he lived in Dallas, Texas, and that's about what I remember about him. He was a--he served as chairman of the deacon board at Good Street Baptist Church [Dallas, Texas] for a number of years under oh man, Bless My Bones T.M. Chambers. Speaker 1: You say, Bless My Bones, is that the--? Speaker 2: That's what they used to call him, Bless My-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That was his favorite expression, bless my bones and when he'd preach, you know. Speaker 1: Okay. So are there any stories about life in Texas, you know back in the 19th century? Any stories about--were your ancestors slaves in Texas or were they free or what was the condition? Speaker 2: Well, I--my grandfather was, I'm sure was born in slavery. I mean you know, that age he had--my guess in '51 [1951], he had to be somewhere around seventy-eight, eighty, somewhere along in there when he passed away. So-- Speaker 1: So he probably just was born right after-- Speaker 2: Right, somewhere-- Speaker 1: --slavery was over? Speaker 2: --somewhere along in there. But, I don't--you know, Greenville, Texas used to have a sign across the top of it, says the blackest land with the whitest people. And I do know my grandfather worked at the cotton compress. I know my mother used to have to pick cotton, she and all the other children used to have to pick cotton you know, so that cre- Speaker 1: The blackest land with the whitest people. Speaker 2: Blackest land with the whitest people. Speaker 1: Now, what did they mean by that? Speaker 2: Well, I guess it, I guess it was understood by us that we, that we were supposed to know what it meant. That the land was rich and fertile and they could grow cotton but they had the white folks' attitude. You know the whitest people--blackest land with the whitest people, which means that-- Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: I mean what do white people, what are the traits that white people usually carry that are most important, particularly in that part of the country is that we're gonna probably continue to dominate you as long as we can. But I don't think it carries much of a meaning 'til this day. Speaker 1: Okay, so that's what black people called it then, the blackest land with the whitest people? Speaker 2: No, that was a sign, used to hang over the--hung over the highway when you came into the town. I have seen, literally seen the sign for myself, blackest land with the whitest people. And anybody who's ever been through Greenville, it's made an--it will make an impression on them or it has made an impression on them. Story_ID: 306251 Speaker 1: Anything else about that part of the--was your mother [Eula Lawson Cunningham] raised there too? Speaker 2: She was raised there, principally raised there. Then my grandfather [William Lawson] at some point moved to Dallas, Texas and I had--his oldest daughter [Idella Lawson] taught school. She lived to be a hundred. Matter of fact, she just died a few years ago. She lived to be a hundred. She taught school, retired from teaching school and then went and taught Head Start and retired from Head Start after about twenty, twenty-five years of teaching Head Start. And her son worked for the post office and rose in the postal ranks, in the union ranks. He ran as--became head of his local in Dallas, Texas later in life. But we had a couple of other aunts who taught school at Lincoln, George Washington High School [Greenville, Texas], had a couple of aunts who did teach school there, you know. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But Dallas was always a dusty, hot town so, when we'd visit, I mean, we use to go visit, we, we--I remember one year we drove from--well my mother decided she wanted to go back and see her mother [Nancy Donaldson Lawson] and father and at that time we were living in Freeport, Illinois. And there were--my mother had three children, the three of us, my brother Ronald [Ronald Cunningham], who's now a bishop in the C.M.E [Christian Methodist Episcopal] church and my sister Nancy [Nancy Cunningham] who is--she's, she's deceased. But anyway this was in, I think it was '39 [1939] or '40 [1940], somewhere along in there and my mother grabbed us all and put us on the Greyhound bus. And I don't know whether you remember what the Greyhound buses looked like in the '30s [1930s], late '30s [1930s], early '40s [1940s]. But some part--if you left Freeport, Illinois you had to leave in one of the Greyhound bus like cars 'til you got to a more major city along the way, and then you get into the bus and you ride the bus. Speaker 1: Okay, so they had like a car you had to get in (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was like a car up to a point and then we got into the major bus, but most of the ride was done in the bus. The bus traveled from Illinois 'til we got to the Mason Dixon Line. Are you familiar with the Mason Dixon Line, 36 30' parallel? The bus stopped. Now before then we would you know, go in the restaurant, sit down, we eat you know everything went, was cozy you know. The bus driver was courteous and nice sort of fellow. Got to the Mason Dixon Line, the bus stops, everybody off, everybody off. They said every--now, I want people to--all white people get on from the front. Fill up from the front to the back and after they get on and fill up then all you colored people, you get on the back and fill it up but don't take anybody's seat up front. And so they made it clear what our place was and that's the way we traveled the rest of the--from 36 30' from the Mason-Dixon Line into Dallas, Texas. And my mother seemed somewhat embarrassed by it all, but that happened, you know. Story_ID: 306252 Speaker 1: Did your mother [Eula Lawson Cunningham] talk about growing up down there and what life was like for her growing up in Greenville [Texas]? Speaker 2: Yeah. She didn't have a lot of love for Texas because of the circumstance. I mean she had a big family and you know. She had her sisters and brothers were always very close but she headed to Chicago [Illinois] when she was young. Speaker 1: About how old was she when she moved? Speaker 2: When she got to Chicago? Speaker 1: When she moved to Chicago, yeah? Speaker 2: I guess my mother must have been in her twenties when she got to Chicago. Speaker 1: Okay. Did she get a chance to go to school in Greenville? Speaker 2: Well, she went to school. Matter of fact, she even went to Jarvis Christian College [Hawkins, Texas] for a while. She didn't get her degree but she was always proud of the fact that she did go to Jarvis Christian College in Hawkins, Texas, I believe it is. Speaker 1: Okay, now did--so what did she wind up doing in Chicago? Speaker 2: Well, she went there to live with her sister, my Aunt Felicia [Felicia Lawson], who was beautician and was one of those who worked with Madam C.J. Walker in Chicago. And my Aunt Felicia had opened her own beauty salon there on Calumet [Avenue]. You know in those days you know, you would operate your business out of your home. And she had a--I--was a three story flat there on Calumet. The L used to run behind it and so my mother went up there to live with her. And apparently I guess she was going to train her in being a beautician and that's where she met my dad [David Cunningham, Sr.]. Speaker 1: Okay. And that's 54th [Street] and Calumet? Speaker 2: 5406 Calumet. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Caddy-cornered from Sadie Bruce's studio [Sadie Bruce Dancing School, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Yeah, the dance teacher? Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Yeah, Sadie Bruce [Sadie Bruce Glover], right? Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My sister [Nancy Cunningham] went to her, took some of her dance courses. Story_ID: 306253 Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous) Now I'm going to leave your mother's [Eula Lawson Cunningham] story for a second and we'll go to your father's side. Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah. Speaker 1: Now can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Well, my father's full name is the same as mine-- Speaker 1: Same. Speaker 2: --except he was David Surmier Cunningham, Sr. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So you know how to spell that. Speaker 1: Now what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: His date of birth is December the 16th, 1898, and I believe he was born in Memphis, Tennessee. If not Memphis, then it was Holly Springs, Mississippi. His family came from Holly Springs, Mississippi. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But I know it was 1898, because we use to always kid him and say he was a hold-over from the 19th century. Speaker 1: I see. Okay. Now what do you know about the ancestors on his side? Holly Springs is a historic place in Mississippi. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: The home of Rust College [Holly Springs, Mississippi] and-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --the home of Hiram Revels [Hiram Rhodes Revels], I think is--one of the first black senators and--or the second black senator in U.S. history, yeah. Speaker 2: Well, if you--I don't you ever been to Holly Springs or not but there's a main road you go down to--there's a road you go down and it splits. I mean on one side is part of the cemetery and on the other side is another part of the cemetery. And you could see names, you could see Cunninghams buried there, you can see Ruckers buried there which was my grandmother's maiden name and Morris [ph.] and Piggies [ph.], which we were all part of that family. But my father principally grew up in Memphis, Tennessee and Kansas City, Missouri. Speaker 1: Okay, so he left Holly Springs when he was young? Speaker 2: Yeah, he did. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Apparently his, his father, his father was John Spicer, S-P-I-C-E-R, John Spicer Cunningham and apparently his father was an Irishman named Alexander [ph.], so that's what happened to us. But my dad's, my dad's mother and father broke up and I guess when my dad was about sixteen, seventeen, I guess. He didn't get a chance to finish, exactly finish high school. And by then they had moved to Kansas City. He moved to Kansas City. Apparently he used to say that his father had one of the major dairy farms in--outside of Memphis, Tennessee, said his dad used to have about a thousand head of cattle with cows for milking, but his wayward ways cost him everything, you know. He had that bad seed in him where he was chasing women, you know, which got him in trouble, you know. But, my dad went on to--later on in life and do his thing and was able to have a full fruitful life. Story_ID: 306254 Speaker 1: Well you know, what brought him to Chicago [Illinois]? Speaker 2: Well, he had--my father [David Cunningham, Sr.] had--let's see, Uncle Mack [ph.] and Uncle Bill [ph.]. He had two brothers and four or five sisters, Eva [ph.], Mable [ph.], Ophelia [ph.]--he had, he had four or five sisters but he and his brother Mack and Bill, he--they went to Chicago to find work. And apparently my dad found work in the stockyards. If you know anything about Chicago, Chicago was known at that period in time for stockyards. And my dad used to lug beef, you know and lugging beef, you ever heard that term? Lugging beef. He used to lug beef. He'd help in the slaughterhouses and that was a good job. And his brother--brothers came with him. And he used to tell the story of how they put their money together and bought a Model T Ford [Ford Model T] for seven hundred dollars and they thought they were really rakish. They were, they were pretty cool dudes, and they were out on the town. That's how he met my mother [Eula Lawson Cunningham]. It was never clear how they met but apparently they had a good relationship and through that relationship they got married and they had three children. Speaker 1: Now when did they get married? Speaker 2: They got married--because I helped the--matter fact I--they did their fiftieth wedding anniversary. They got married on the 26th of January, nineteen, nineteen, 1931, I think it was, '31 [1931] or '32 [1932]. My daughter--my, my sister [Nancy Cunningham] was born in '33 [1933], and I was born in '35 [1935]. But I know they did, they lived long enough to celebrate their fiftieth wedding anniversary here. I treated them to a celebration and they were very happy about it. Story_ID: 306255 Speaker 1: Now when you look at your parents' [Eula Lawson Cunningham and David Cunningham, Sr.] personalities who do you think you take certain traits after, you know and who do you think you really take after the most? Speaker 2: Well, honestly I think I take more after my mother. My mother was pretty volatile to a degree. She didn't accept--she didn't brook with a lot of junk, you know. She could be nice when she wanted to be but she's very protective of her family. But--and she used to have, liked to have fun. She used to like to play, she used to like to play games, liked to play a lot of games. Speaker 1: Like board games or--? Speaker 2: Board games, Chinese checkers. She loved Chinese checkers and--checkers. But see--and my mother also when she was in Chicago [Illinois], my mother was a--they used to go to Savoy--she used to go to Savoy Ballroom [Chicago, Illinois]. Remember the old Savoy Ballroom? And she used to, boy they would party on New Year's Eve. But my dad decided he was going into the ministry, but my mother was still committed to skating. She loved to skate because in Chicago, I guess in the late '20s [1920s], early '30s [1930s], skating, rink skating was a big popular thing and she loved to skate. And she also, a couple of times I think she got into some, a swimsuit contest. Matter of fact, I think she came in second or third a couple times. That's how I think she and my dad really got involved with one another. But after my dad made a decision whether he wanted to do professionally in terms of the ministry, she still wanted to skate. So she would leave him and she'd skate on, you know anytime she felt like it, you know. So one Sunday she didn't go to church with him and that evening she went to skate and she broke her hip. And my dad said see, that's what--you're being punished for not--but later on in life she joined my father very closely and they were a strong team throughout his career, his ministerial career. Story_ID: 306256 Speaker 1: Now your father [David Cunningham, Sr.] is a--became a C.M.E. [Christian Methodist Episcopal] minister right? Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: Okay. And I was wondering since he was from Holly Springs [Mississippi], did he have any relatives associated with Lane College [Jackson, Tennessee] near Memphis [Tennessee] or--? Speaker 2: Well, yeah of course, yeah. He served on Lane College's board of trustees, was very familiar with Lane College. We have a very rich history with Lane College. My brother [Ronald Cunningham] served as vice president of Lane College for a short time, taught there, served as vice president. We've had nephews who are--who went to school there, got their degrees from there. So, Lane College has been a very important part of our life and I--my brother serves on the board of trustees right now at Lane College. Speaker 1: Okay. Now when your father went to Chicago [Illinois], what church did he pastor there, do you know? Speaker 2: Well he didn't pastor a church in Chicago. He had joined Jamison Memorial [Jamison Memorial C.M.E. Church, Kansas City, Missouri] and from the stockyards he got into writing insurance, being an insurance writer for was it, Liberty Life [Liberty Life Insurance Company; Supreme Life Insurance Company, Chicago, Illinois]? That was the black insurance company, wasn't it, Liberty Life? Or-- Speaker 1: So, there was Supreme Life-- Speaker 2: Supreme. Supreme Liberty [Liberty Life Insurance Company; Supreme Life Insurance Company, Chicago, Illinois], Supreme. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: That's who he wrote insurance for just before he went into the ministry. But he was at Jamison Memorial and that's where he got the call to preach under Bishop Murchison [E.P. Murchison]. Well, Reverend Murchison who eventually became the C.M.E. bishop. And from Jamison Memorial, he got appointed to St. James C.M.E. Church in Freeport, Illinois, a little church with about thirty members. He moved his whole family out there in 1939. We had to go in and clean up the parsonage. The parsonage had no hot and cold running water. It had outdoor toilets (laughter). Speaker 1: Was that--that's in 1939? Speaker 2: Nineteen thirty-nine [1939]. Speaker 1: Okay. So you were just-- Speaker 2: About four, four years old. Speaker 1: --four, four years old, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, just--we were just little kids. But he pastored, he pastored the church for four years and did very well. But it was a, you know it was--the living conditions were I guess pretty good for that time, I mean although you didn't--we had to use the outhouse at night. We didn't have any hot, cold running water, we only had one stove in the house and had two bedrooms, you know. But I guess that was the--I mean we didn't know any difference. I mean, it was 1939. Story_ID: 308022 Speaker 1: So you were in Freeport, Illinois from age four 'til age eight, right? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Do you remember much about Freeport? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I remember. I remember it very well, very clear because I started school there. My sister [Nancy Cunningham] was born like--she and I are almost exactly two years apart. And she started--she went to school and see I'm born in June which means you know you can almost wait 'til that next June, closest to your sixth birthday before you can enroll in school, what they would do to you today. Well I turned five years old and I went to school with my sister and enrolled in school, not in kindergarten, first grade. I enrolled in first grade so I never did any time in kindergarten. And I had been there about two weeks and I guess they reviewed the records and then take a look and see, oh wow, you know this kid shouldn't be in school. He's only five years old, you know. So they called me up to the principal's office, I'll never forget it. Ms. Cruise was the principal. She said, "We're going to have to send you home." Cruise was spelled C-R-U-I-S-E, I think it was, like ship cruise. She said, "Well we're going to have to send you home." And I cried profusely. And she said, "Whoa, why are you crying?" I said, "Well I want to stay in school. My sister's in school and I want to stay in school." So she said to me, now here is the irony of the situation. She said, "Well if you can read this book you could stay." So I--she gave me the book but it was 'Run Dick Run,' 'See Jane--' you know--because of the family situation I had been, I had learned to, to read bible stories. I had learned to read Sunday school books. So I mean I was reading probably second grade level by the time I went to school at five years old. So she said all right, go back to class. Don't--if you create any disturbance we're going to put you out. So that's how I cried to get into school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's what--I stayed and went on and passed. Speaker 1: Okay. You were eight years old when you moved to, where was it--? Speaker 2: Oh when we moved to Decatur, Illinois. Speaker 1: Decatur, okay. Speaker 2: Decatur, Illinois. Speaker 1: Decatur, that's the-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --the corn syrup capital of America. Speaker 2: That's right, Staley's [A.E. Staley Company, Decatur, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Staley's mill--you know actually it's, soybean capital of the world. We, we use to live right across from the Decatur High School [Stephen Decatur High School, Decatur, Illinois]. We use to see--they use to have the Sweet Sixteen. Well they use to play some of the state championships at the gym there which we could walk right across the street to the gym and once or twice we saw Chick Hunter [ph.] play basketball there-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --cause he was, he was in high school at Aurora High School [Aurora, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Okay. Now you remember the name of your school there? Speaker 2: We went to--well I don't, I guess it was Gastman Grade School [E.A. Gastman Elementary School, Decatur, Illinois] but Decatur High School was the high school right across from me but the grade school I went to I think was Gastman, G-A-S-T-M-A-N. It was Gastman or East Side [East Side School, Freeport, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: One--because I think in Freeport it was either East Side or Gastman. I can't remember the two. Story_ID: 308023 Speaker 1: Tell me this, what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Well you know growing up in northern Illinois, Freeport, Illinois, Decatur, Illinois, you'd always--that first, that--and in St. Louis, Missouri too. That first snow of the winter you know it covered everything. It was white, pure, you know. I mean jeez, this--and if the, you know after a good snow then the moon comes out and glistens on the snow, I mean it just, I mean it's just an experience that you really can appreciate. And it really gives you a sense of Christmas and it really gives you a sense of Santa Claus and it really gives you a sense of Christmas caroling and it being cold and putting on an overcoat and wrapping up. I mean things we don't even think of now. The--there are sights and sounds that are gone that I haven't had that I've been involved with. But I remember in Decatur we would always wait for the first snow because what we'd do is go to school early and tramp through the snow, go to school real early, try to get to school about 6:30, 7:00. And we'd build these blocks, snow you know how you cut the snow out and build you, build you a fortress and then we'd get in snowball fights and get behind the fortress and throw snowballs at each other and get in a world of trouble and have that kind of fun you know. And we, you know one of the other things I remember was always having a sled. You know, in the winter time we always had a sled, slide around, pulling my brother [Ronald Cunningham] to school or slide, take your sled to school. You know those are some of the sights and sounds of those times. Story_ID: 308024 Speaker 1: Now what was your personality like as a little kid? What did you like to do and what were you interested in? Speaker 2: Well I was quite interested in basketball as a kid. And--but I also liked to work. I liked to read. I always liked to read, did a lot of reading. And I used--and I worked. You know I started--matter of fact you know there's a, there's a lady that lives here in Los Angeles [California], her name is Wolatta Bradley [ph.]. She's in Decatur, Illinois. She used to be my mother's [Eula Lawson Cunningham] beautician. She's now ninety-one, ninety-two years old. And we went to her ninetieth birthday party and she stood up and she told everybody, "I see my paper boy is here." You know because I used to throw her paper. So I mean I was a paper boy, used to do all kinds of you know yard work you know all those kinds of things that keep you busy cause in those days there was no such thing as television. Then I--then of course growing up in the house I grew up, all the kids had to take music lessons. So I spent a couple of semesters learning, taking music lessons at Millikin University [Decatur, Illinois]. I don't know whether you ever heard of Millikin University or not. It's in Decatur, Illinois. But it's a big, it has a big conservatory and I actually learned to play the piano, would give some small piano concert much of which I have forgotten 'til this day. But that was one, some of the other things I was quite interested in music, learned to read music, sing. Speaker 1: Okay. So I know church had to be a big deal? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, church was a big deal. We were always involved in church activities, Sunday school conferences, youth conferences, all of those sorts of things. Yeah. Story_ID: 308025 Speaker 1: So you started school [East Side School, Freeport, Illinois] at age five and-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --did you have a favorite subject in school? Speaker 2: History. I say history was probably my favorite subject and second was chemistry. Speaker 1: Okay. Did you have a lot of friends in school? Speaker 2: Oh yeah I had a lot. I had quite a number of friends but the thing is that you know you don't stay in one place long enough except for St. Louis [Missouri] which we eventually finished my junior high school, high school [Charles H. Sumner High School, St. Louis, Missouri] and some college [Stowe Teachers College; Harris-Stowe State University, St. Louis, Missouri], was able to stay there for about eight years or so. But you know making those moves you lose connections with people that you were growing up with. Speaker 1: Okay. Did you have any favorite teachers in grade school? Speaker 2: Yeah I had several favorite teachers. I was in--when I was in school you know having come from Freeport, Illinois, integrated school so you know, you're probably, there are only probably maybe five or six black kids in the whole school you know. Decatur [Illinois], there was a few more black kids [at E.A. Gastman Elementary School] you know and you really didn't--you really weren't conscious of race. You weren't really--yeah I can really say I wasn't conscious of race--I was conscious because of my dad's [David Cunningham, Sr.] involvement of people being treated differently but I wasn't--but the skin tone, et cetera, wasn't really a conscious thing. So you know I mean wherever anybody else went, we went too, you know. Or people came to our house, we went to their house. I mean we just--at that point in time I don't think we were that conscious, as conscious as we became later on. Story_ID: 308026 Speaker 1: I had to--when my dad [David Cunningham, Sr.] got moved to St. Louis, Missouri I was just getting, going from the sixth grade [at E.A. Gastman Elementary School, Decatur, Illinois] to--I was getting ready to go to junior high school. I was just going to sixth, seventh and eighth or seventh and eighth grade. Speaker 2: Yeah, sixth, seventh and eighth. Speaker 1: Seventh--no, I think in those days it was sixth seventh and eighth. We had ninth, tenth, eleventh and twelfth or seven--whatever, it was in junior high school. And the teacher in Decatur, Illinois was a favorite teacher of mine. I don't remember her name now. She asked me stay after school one day. She said, "Is it possible we could talk to your parents and see if you could just stay in Decatur? You know we have some friends who would be willing to keep you." I said, "No. I can go with my--I'm going with my mother [Eula Lawson Cunningham] and father." I mean, why? Well, I understood later on why she, why she wanted to try to save me from that St. Louis experience because as you know at that time, St. Louis' schools were segregated and I had never been involved in segregated schools which was a really, a cultural shock when we went from Decatur, Illinois to St. Louis, Missouri. It was a culture shock. It was literally a culture shock. Speaker 2: What shocked you the most? Speaker 1: Well it was the fact that we the schools that the performance of the students wasn't the same as the performance and commitment and--that we had been--had taken for granted, you know. I mean you always studied ahead. You always studied, always did homework. You always got ahead of the curve, you know. And much of the material that we had by the time we--it--I was going over material again that I had already had when I got to St. Louis, to the point I was in St. Louis. And it was so bad that I think all three of--I got skipped. I know I got skipped once or twice. So I was in high school [Charles H. Sumner High School, St. Louis, Missouri] by the time I was twelve years old. I was in the ninth grade. I had been skipped into the graduating class from grade school cause they went from--in St. Louis, they went from first grade to eighth grade and then you went to high school, nine, ten, eleven and twelve. There's no junior high or middle school as we know it today. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So I mean we had--and then they, then too in St. Louis they met--meted out corporal punishment you know if you didn't behave. Speaker 2: And that wasn't like, it wasn't like that in Decatur? Speaker 1: No, they didn't do that in Illinois. You know--whip no kid in school. Well this teach, teacher got me about something, came to me with that--you ever seen a (unclear), whack that thing one, whacked me a couple of times across the behind, I left school. I nearly walked out of school, you know. My parents had to take me back to school. But it was a culture shock and then you know talked differently than the kids. So we used to get beat up a lot, used to have to fight. Not get beat up but we used to have to fight. It was a culture shock. I have, you know I have to admit it was a culture shock. Speaker 2: Okay. Now had you ever had any black teachers before or did you have any in St. Louis? Speaker 1: Oh I had--oh yeah. We had nothing but black teachers in St. Louis. I don't recall having a black teacher before I got to St. Louis. No, I never thought about that until you just mentioned it. I mean teachers were teachers, didn't give much thought to it. But I don't recall ever having a black teacher before going to St. Louis. And of course that's all we had was black teachers in St. Louis (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Story_ID: 308027 Speaker 1: As you were growing up I suppose you were probably in high school [Charles H. Sumner High School, St. Louis, Missouri] before civil rights activities started really heating up, right? Speaker 2: I went to high school in 1948. Speaker 1: That's the year Jackie Robinson was the first black player in the major-- Speaker 2: Well, '47 [1947]-- Speaker 1: --wasn't it or close? Speaker 2: --was the year- Speaker 1: Forty-seven [1947], okay. Speaker 2: --Jackie Robinson came to the post. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Now that's interesting. St. Louis, Missouri, as you know we could ride anywhere on the bus in St. Louis. There were certain places we couldn't go in. If you went to Sportsman Park which it was at that time on St. Louis Avenue [sic. Grand Avenue], you had to sit in the--how do they mark off the field, is it left, left, center and right or is it right--? As you face out to the park, which one is left field? Speaker 1: Left field is to your left hand. Speaker 2: To your left hand, okay. We had to sit in the left field pavilion. That's the only place black folks could sit. Jackie Robinson came up, they said we could sit anywhere we wanted to. So my dad [David Cunningham, Sr.] wanted to make certain I got a chance to see it so my dad bought us tickets to go see Jackie Robinson--he--and of course Jackie Robinson came up as a first baseman. So we were sitting on the first base side and we were at the game where Enos Slaughter ran out of the base path and spike Jackie Robinson. Speaker 1: Now it's interesting you should say that because this week-- Speaker 2: We're sitting on that, we were sitting on that first base side. Speaker 1: --just this week I've seen that play like three times on-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --ESPN classic. They, they're re-rerunning the Jackie Robinson-- Speaker 2: Oh, I haven't--okay. Speaker 1: They've shown it three times. They've even interviewed Enos Slaughter about it. Speaker 2: Well, and Slaughter--now, but did Enos Slaughter tell you what happened to his life after that-- Speaker 1: Yes, he-- Speaker 2: --when he returned to the left field pavilion? You know why they traded him to the Yankees [New York Yankees], because there was no peace in the left field. We all decided I mean again, [HistoryMaker] Dick Gregory and a bunch of us we all got together and we poured everything we could think of on Enos Slaughter. He'd go back to trying to catch the ball and you know, he'd have beer coming at him or he'd have Coca-Cola laced with urination coming at him. I mean it was really hell on wheels for Enos Slaughter and a lot of us kids were guilty of doing that because of what he did to Jackie Robinson. Speaker 1: No he didn't mention that at all. Speaker 2: Oh yeah. And the next year he got traded to the Yankees 'cause he couldn't play. He could no longer play left field in St. Louis. So they traded him to the Yankees. Speaker 1: And to an American League team. Speaker 2: That's right, to an American League team. Didn't have to worry about him coming back into Sportsman Park unless he came to see the Browns [St. Louis Browns; Baltimore Orioles] and of course nobody went to see, you know who was going to see the Browns 'til they brought in Satchel Paige. Now I was there when, when Bill Veeck who had, who owned the Browns, piece of the Browns or was general managing the Browns, I can't remember which, he brought up Satchel Paige. But Satchel Paige as you know was in his mid-forties when he came up and Satchel Paige had one heck of a rookie season. And they used to sit him out there, I remember he was sitting in the, in the bullpen in a big, yellow chaise lounge, you know. But that was in St. Louis. Speaker 1: Yeah, cause Satchel Paige went on to play with the Indians [Cleveland Indians] I think (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh he finally went on to play for the Indians but-- Speaker 1: And played in the World Series I believe in '48 [1948]. Speaker 2: When he first came up, when he first came he first played for the St. Louis Browns [sic.] which are now the Baltimore Orioles. Story_ID: 308028 Speaker 1: So did you go to a lot of baseball games in those days or did you just (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We used to go to the baseball games quite frequently. I was, I was sitting in Sportsman Park at the time, the only time Roy Campanella was, Roy Campanella ever stole first--ever stole home. Speaker 1: Roy Campanella? Speaker 2: Roy Campanella stole home. Only time he ever stole it. Speaker 1: Now he's a catcher now they're-- Speaker 2: Stole home. Right, stole home. Del Rice tried to block the plate and he hit Del Rice so hard he broke his leg, yeah. Speaker 1: You were playing in the--you were watching at the time that baseball was pretty rough? It sound like--? Speaker 2: Well yeah. Well, when the days of Stan Musial and Marty Marion and Red Schoendienst and Harry Brecheen, Cat Brecheen [Harry "The Cat" Brecheen] and all those guys were Cardinals [St. Louis Cardinals]. And Dixie Walker and you know--but the Dodgers [Brooklyn Dodgers; Los Angeles Dodgers] came up and everybody loved the Dodgers. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And that's why till this day, the Dodgers don't realize what a legacy they have. Speaker 1: Right. There are a lot of black, older black men--I know my, my (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: --great uncle and all his generation. Speaker 2: We just can't give it up. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: We can't let go because Jackie Robinson and you know he went through, he went through holy hell. I don't know how he did it. But-- Speaker 1: But when you were at the game did you, did people call him names and that sort of thing? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, they called him all kinds of names. They called him all kinds of names. Speaker 1: And how did you feel as a kid in the stands listening to--here is a hero of yours back in the-- Speaker 2: Well we were, we were told you know to be polite and you know these people were ignorant and overlook it because we did not--we wanted to be on good behavior cause we didn't want to spoil it for Jackie. You know it was a two-way street. We didn't want to spoil it for Jackie. We wanted Jackie to have a successful career because it was very important for other kids who came along. Speaker 1: Okay. You also grew up during the age where Joe Louis was a big deal (unclear) too. Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Oh, what are you talking about? I wanted the (unclear) and we'd sit there by the radio and you listen. I mean and you know Joe Louis got knocked down once I think by Billy Conn in the first fight, you know. And it was, it was a lot of--there was a lot of concern. I mean you, if you went to the black community when, when Joe Louis was fighting, all you could hear was radios and--because people were sitting by their radios listening to Joe Louis' fight. Joe Louis was some hero, yeah. Story_ID: 308029 Speaker 1: You were interested in basketball you said coming-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Basketball was my sport. I--well I didn't get a chance to play it in high school [Charles H. Sumner High School, St. Louis, Missouri]. I played it intramurally because at age twelve, I started shining shoes in Union Station, St. Louis, Missouri cause I wanted to work you know. And I went and got a social security card so I'd been--I've had a social security card ever since I was twelve years old. Speaker 1: Okay. So you're starting your freshman year at twelve years old? Speaker 2: In high school. Speaker 1: Got a social security card (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Social security card. Speaker 1: Shining shoes? Speaker 2: Shining shoes. Speaker 1: Okay, you go into-- Speaker 2: See, I had an after school shift. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: We worked from four--actually we were supposed to work from four to eight but we would study because there was a slow time. There would be slow times and when it was slow a couple of us would study so we tried to work 'til eleven o'clock because you know you could make--I mean on a good day--on a Saturday--Friday night, Friday, Friday night I could make thirty-five dollars. Saturday I could make another, I, cause I work, I could go to work about, I could go to work about one o'clock on a Saturday and work and could make another thirty-five, forty dollars on a Saturday. And then the rest of the week you know you could average ten or twelve dollars in tips a day 'cause we, all we got were tips. Speaker 1: Okay. So you worked in a parlor in a--? Speaker 2: We worked a shoe stand, shoe shine stand right in the middle of the news station right there off the Katy--the Kansas City--what they use to call the Katy--Katy Line [Missouri-Kansas-Texas Railroad], we used to watch--and I use to see the train-- Speaker 1: That's the famous Katy from the old blues song, 'She Got the Katy and Left Me a Mule to Ride.' Speaker 2: It was the Kansas City, Texas--Topeka, Kan--Kansas Topeka and Missouri Line [sic.], Old Katy. But also the next date down was the Union Pacific and we use to watch the City of Los Angeles [California] as they would leave for Los Angeles and use to dream about getting on that train to Los Angeles. But yeah we could make a pretty good piece of change you know because you had to realize that right at the end, the changeover from World War II [WWII], soldiers were going back and forth. They were headed to Germany. So you shined the soldier's shoe yeah he'd give you a dollar you know. So the shine was only fifteen cents, you get to keep the rest for yourself. I shined Ezzard Charles' shoes. He was a pretty good tipper. Shined Joe Louis' shoes a number of times you know. They were pretty good tippers too, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, that must have been really something for kids to-- Speaker 2: Right. Right. Speaker 1: --to do that, yeah. Speaker 2: And then from there, just the way it was. I learned how to press clothes because the gentleman who owned the shoe shine stand also owned a cleaners down in the basement. And so if I had my homework done and it was a slow time I would go down, I worried Mr. Epps [ph.] about how to press clothes and he taught me how to press clothes. So my, the latter part of my sophomore year, I was, I was shining shoes and pressing clothes you know. You'd get like a quarter a piece for pressing pants and a uniform because he had a contract with the, with most of the Union Station porters that kept the place clean. So he did their uniforms and then a lot of railroad porters would drop their uniforms off and policemen and they would--so I, I would press their clothes. Then later on my senior year in high school, a Fred Harvey's [Fred Harvey Company] was right up the road so some nights I'd go up there and I'd bus dishes at a Fred Harvey's, and I learned how to wait tables there. And one time I--the Yankees [New York Yankees] were in town and of course in those days nobody--ball players did not want to see, anyone to see them drinking beer. And we had a back area where we, where the busboys and others use to--it was kind of an overflow area but we kept it, kept it separate from the regular dining room. And the hostess who used to seat everybody asked me one day whether I served these three fellows. One was Lefty Joe Page, the other one was Joe DiMaggio and--it was three ballplayers and I got their autographs on a baseball which is somewhere around the house now. So there were so many experiences I--I mean that was a real treat. Story_ID: 308030 Speaker 1: Now were you a good student in high school? Did you--? Speaker 2: Yeah, I--yeah. I got out of high school in four years. I was out at sixteen. Speaker 1: Now you were at Sumner right? Speaker 2: Sumner High School [Charles H. Sumner High School, St. Louis, Missouri]. Speaker 1: Charles Sumner. Speaker 2: Charles Sumner, graduated January 1952. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And went to Stowe Teachers College [Harris-Stowe State University, St. Louis, Missouri]. Of course you know in those days they didn't have SAT tests. You just had to take a proficiency test to see what you would need when you got to college. And I did so well in the English exam I didn't have to take any English when I got to Stowe Teachers College. Speaker 1: Now Stowe Teachers College, is that--who is that named for, you know? Speaker 2: Harriet Beecher Stowe. Speaker 1: Okay. And that's in St. Louis [Missouri]? Speaker 2: It's in St. Louis. Today it is Harris-Stowe State University. They used to have Harris Teachers College [Harris-Stowe State University, St. Louis, Missouri] was, which was for the white kids. And they use to have Stowe Teachers College which was for the black kids. Then in 1954, they just combined two schools. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that's when I decided well you know, I'm sixteen years old. I had saved some money and I wasn't going to work while I was going to college. I was going to play basketball and so I did. Speaker 1: So you played basketball then? Speaker 2: Yeah, played basketball there. Speaker 1: Okay. So were you pretty good? Speaker 2: I was pretty good. I have quite a--I have few of their records, scoring records. Things like that (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, so you were a scorer, huh? Speaker 2: Yeah. I, I use to play pivot. Speaker 1: Okay. Now you're-- Speaker 2: (Unclear). Speaker 1: --you're what, six feet or six--? Speaker 2: Well in those days I was probably somewhere around 6'2". Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I'm probably only 6, 6'1" now. You know you shrink after you--as you get older. And--but in those days you know a center was pretty much a hand off man. You know they run the wheel around me, cross off, break off, you know passing and back pass behind. But then I moved out and started shooting a jump shot at the--and that was the time when the jump shot was just, was a relatively new phenomenon, 1953 to '54 [1954], I mean that was a relatively phenomenon. Speaker 1: Yeah, before that it was a set shot, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, before that it was set shot, two-hand set shot. But you know you could take a guy like me, 6'2" that hops? You know you could, you'd shoot a guy out of the gym, you know. So, but I had developed a jump shot that was pretty accurate, pretty deadly and did very well with it. Speaker 1: Okay. Now were you involved in any other activities in high school? And did you run for class office or any of that kind of thing? Speaker 2: No, not really. Not really. I usually wound up--well, I was a robe chairman for the choir. I sang in the high school choir for four years, the--Kenneth Brown Billups. Story_ID: 307306 Speaker 1: How did you choose Stowe's Teacher's College [Stowe Teachers College; Harris-Stowe State University, St. Louis, Missouri]? Speaker 2: Ha, it was right across the street from Sumner High School [Charles H. Sumner High School, St. Louis, Missouri]. So my dad [David Cunningham, Sr.] said if you want to go to college, that's where you better go. We didn't have the resources to go out of school or go out of town, go to school. The only campus, do all that, so I did what was most feasible at that time. Speaker 1: Okay, so this is 1952? Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty-two [1952]. Speaker 1: Okay. So you played basketball and-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --so, now how long did you go to Stowe? Speaker 2: I went to Stowe from 1952 to 1954. I got my A.A. degree from Stowe Teachers College. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: If you want to call it that, A.A. certificate, associate of arts. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Then I went into the [U.S. military] service, United States Air Force. Speaker 1: Okay. Now had you been in the ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] before or--? Speaker 2: Yes, I had been in--no, I had been in the reserves. I'd been in the Naval Air Reserves. Went in the Naval Air Reserves in 1952, I think it was, '53 [1953]. Speaker 1: Okay. So now you're eighteen years old by now, right? You're--? Speaker 2: Nine--let's see, nineteen. Speaker 1: Because you came out of high school at sixteen right, I guess? Speaker 2: Yeah 1950--I came out at sixteen. Yeah I was eighteen. Speaker 1: Okay. So you joined the United States Air Force? Speaker 2: United States Air Force. Speaker 1: Okay. Now why did you join the Air Force instead of the Marines [U.S. Marine Corps] or the [U.S.] Army or the [U.S.] Navy or? Speaker 2: Well, I had always had a great desire to be a pilot. I wanted to fly. I had been in--I was in the Naval Air Reserve and they were gonna--they had talked to me about becoming a pilot. And I used to--during our two weeks training, I used to fly with one of the last of the Navy flying what do you call, noncoms [non-commissioned officers]. He was not an officer. And we were at Willow Grove Springs, Pennsylvania [Naval Air Station Joint Reserve Base Willow Grove, Montgomery County, Pennsylvania] in, I think it was summer of '53 [1953], and we went out--he was going to show me what it's like to land on aircraft carrier. And we went out over the Atlantic Ocean and you know, you look down there and you see that aircraft carrier. You ever seen it? It looks like a postage stamp. And you get down there and you land on it and the hook jolts you, and I had second thoughts. And then finally going off the aircraft carrier, you roll off that thing. You drop down below the fantail then go up you know. I said hm, I don't think this is for me. So what I decided, that I needed to begin to pursue some kind of career cause I was married by then and had a--and my wife was expecting a baby. I went to the United States Air Force and-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --went on from there. Story_ID: 307307 Speaker 1: Where did you meet your wife? Speaker 2: In college [Stowe Teachers College; Harris-Stowe State University, St. Louis, Missouri], I met her. I was a, well yeah, I was big man on the campus, I mean you know. I had made Honorable Mention All American for NAIA [National Association of Intercollegiate Athletics], that--in 1953 so yeah. Speaker 1: How many points per game were you scoring in those days? Speaker 2: I was scoring about twenty-four or twenty-five points a game. That's a pretty good, pretty good number you know. Was having fun, you know and studying. I pledged Omega [Omega Psi Phi Fraternity], went through the fraternity you know. So for that campus I was you know, pretty big man on campus. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: All right. So well what happened when you joined the [U.S.] Air Force? Where were you stationed? Speaker 2: Well I did my basic training at Lackland Air Force Base in San Antonio, Texas and wound up being sent to March Air Force Base [March Air Reserve Base] in Riverside, California to become a cartographer, whatever that was. I didn't know where March Air Force Base was and I didn't know what a cartographer was but I found out what he was. I found out where March was and I found out what a cartographer did. Speaker 1: Now a cartographer makes maps, right? Speaker 2: Maps and charts, yes sir. Speaker 1: This is in--it's here in California at--? Speaker 2: March Air Force Base. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Right out sixty miles east of here [Los Angeles, California]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, they've closed the base down. It was--since then. Speaker 1: Now, when you were involved they were like starting the Strategic Air Command [SAC] and all of that (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, I was part SAC. I was part of SAC, 15th Air Force part of SAC, yeah. I was in the 15th Recon Tech Squadron [15th Reconnaissance Technical Squadron]. We were using Gary--Francis Powers' [Francis Gary Powers] photography, back in the '50s [1950s]. Speaker 1: Okay. This is significant because this is what led to a big mess later on (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah. Speaker 1: --you know. Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: Spy planes, it was a cold war. Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: The Cold War. Speaker 2: Oh yeah, it was very much a cold war. Speaker 1: People were-- Speaker 2: I got--1955, I was sent overseas to England where we were--made maps and charts and I know every--a lot of times we would get awakened and they'd tell us to go to the lab and--because they had sensitive material that come in. And we'd get these latest photographs and we would update our charts and our material. Speaker 1: Okay. That was the U2 spy plane, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, U2 spy plane. We owned, we used a lot of Gary Powers stuff. Story_ID: 307308 Speaker 1: Then in '57 [1957], I came back to March Air Force Base [March Air Reserve Base, Riverside, California]. I was brought back here and you--I don't know whether you recall on one occasion, remember the F, F-86 Sabre or the F-100 Sabre [F-100 Super Sabre]? Remember one year they went into, they went over, flew over China? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Had a dog fight, about twenty-six planes flew into China, dog fight. You know what the mission was? Speaker 2: What? Speaker 1: They were doing photogrammetry. They were doing a photograph, a photograph run and all these planes, these planes took photography of the terrain because we--our material on China was somewhat dated. Speaker 2: Yeah, now (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) They woke us up, they woke-- Speaker 2: --in those days China was closed right, to the West? Speaker 1: Right, China was closed, was closed to the West. But these guys went in, these, these F-100 pilots went in, and they shot down several MiGs and they--because it was a dog fight. I mean you know, we invaded their air, air space but they got the photography out. And so we got this call early in the morning. I had a buddy, he and I were really good at it and they--we went in there on a Bausch and Lomb [Bausch & Lomb Incorporated] and re-flew that mission. I mean we were tied up like, for something like twelve hours trying to rectify. I don't know if you're familiar with--you know when cameras, when cameras take pictures they can only cover a certain area. Everything else outside of it becomes distorted. In order for you to have good photogrammetry as they would call it, you've got to take the distortion out. And you've got to try to get as much of a 180 degree shot as you possibly can. In other words when they're flying, if they make a maneuver and go up like this in a whirl and this, all this and the cameras still running, you've got to try to find out what part of that film you can use and what--I mean sometimes we'd just take little portions no bigger than that. But if you got it rectified, that is, got it to the right size, got it almost to a 180 angle to, to the, to the ground, then you can begin to use it and identify. And then we had to correct the Chinese coordinates because the Chinese were very accurate about how they would put their coordinates. I mean they would take the corner of a projection. It might be ten degrees, thirty minute, fifteen, fifteen point ten seconds and you would have to adjust your grid to fit their longitude and latitude. It was very interesting work years ago. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I haven't touched a drafting pen or a Bausch and Lomb rectifier or any of that in fifty years, I guess, forty something years cause it's changed so much now. They don't--they put up a satellite and it can give you instant--well, one of things we weren't, we really weren't worried about missiles in those days because we knew that because there was a built-in inaccuracy--because we could not, at that point we could not go back. We could not go out and take a look at the world like they can today by satellite and through satellite position, global position, they could come up with accuracy and where you are in this world's planet. But in those days we were using Mercator projections and it was very difficult to tell. So you know you, if you programmed a missile to hit Los Angeles [California] in those days and you were coming from Russia, you might wind up hitting San Diego [California] or Tijuana [Mexico] or something, you know. Speaker 2: So it wasn't that tight, you know like-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --yeah. Speaker 1: Cause you have it built in and as you go over, as you go through each longitude, you know you have a--your air compounds. Speaker 2: Okay. So a lot of calculations have to be done? Speaker 1: But now I'm sure they have it down, it's such a science now. They can drop a missile down your, down your stove pipe if they want to. Story_ID: 307309 Speaker 1: So what rank did you attain in the [U.S.] Air Force when you were--? Speaker 2: I obtained the rank of staff sergeant. Speaker 1: Okay. And-- Speaker 2: Played a lot of basketball in the Air Force, played on a couple of base teams. But the Air Force wasn't exactly pleasant you know. We used to have to fight and scrape for every--for respect. Speaker 1: Okay. Now this is shortly after the Air Force was integrated-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and shortly after it actually becomes-- Speaker 2: Well, you know the service was integrated I guess by a-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --fiat, by a Truman [President Harry S. Truman] edict in 1948, I think it was. Speaker 1: Right. So-- Speaker 2: He determined the services had to be integrated. But even you know going in in '54 [1954], there was still the old traditions and the prejudices and biases that hung on. Speaker 1: Yeah, I've been (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I imagine today it's quite different. Speaker 1: I've been told it didn't happen overnight, you know. Speaker 2: No, it didn't happen overnight. It was tough. It was tough getting rank, you know because the guys who evaluate you they--you know, most of the service in those days was made up of southerners. The southerners protected their point of view. Speaker 1: Okay. So do you have any stories about that, about your--in your own case? Speaker 2: Well, yeah. Well yeah, I ran into it a couple--well what really got me involved in politics, my dad [David Cunningham, Sr.] had been, had moved back to Memphis [Tennessee] by then. He was pastoring in Memphis. And I--he, he was a very good friend of Senator Gore [Albert Gore, Sr.] cause you know Senator Gore withstood a lot of pressure in Tennessee in the days when segregation now--it's segregation then, segregation now, segregation forever. And they used to advertise that on the radio. And they used to--politicians would run and you know, we've got to keep separate and we're going to keep them segregated. I mean they used to--I, I've been through Memphis when there have been some very nasty campaigns and when they tried to get rid of Senator Gore, my dad was one of his co-chairs, was very supportive of the Gore family. And that's one of the reasons why I have historically been very supportive of Al Gore, Jr. [Albert Gore, Jr.], because his dad was true and Al Gore, Jr. also was true. I've known him over the years. So I was concerned about the treatment I was getting in the squadron [15th Reconnaissance Technical Squadron]. I got passed over a number of times for a promotion. So I wrote my dad and my dad wrote, wrote Senator Gore. And I came in the squadron one day, all these colonels and majors and lieutenants and a couple of generals were sitting there wondering, well what's the matter? "What's the matter airman?" "What do you mean what's the matter?" Oh, when I came in this one, this one, E9 sergeant had been giving me a whole lot of guff, came to me and says, "Why did you write your senator?" I said, "Sergeant I would suggest you not ask me that question. That's not your right to ask. I would suggest that you respond to what the senator's asking you." Because as you know Al Gore was chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee and chairman of the appropriations subcommittee for the armed services [U.S. Armed Forces] so they had to answer the redline telegram. So I said, "My God, look at how these guys jump when a politician speaks." So two months later I was promoted. I said, "My God, this politics must be something," so that's when I decided, I'm gonna have to take a look at that in the future. Story_ID: 307310 Speaker 1: When did you come out of the [U.S.] Air Force or are there--? Speaker 2: I got out of the Air Force in 1960. Speaker 1: That's the year that-- Speaker 2: And I entered, I entered University of California, Riverside [Riverside, California] to finish my last two years of college. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Did you have any opinions about the election that year, Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] and Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy]? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I was very much--I thought that Kennedy certain, certainly was the candidate. But I--the--but you know that was the year they also had the convention [1960 Democratic National Convention] in Los Angeles [California]. And I thought Lyndon Baines Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] made a whole lot of sense, which turns out later on you know Lyndon Baines Johnson became Kennedy's vice president, certainly equipped himself and showed us his concern for the direction of America. And I, I thought he did a fairly good job. Speaker 1: Did you go to the convention that year? Speaker 2: Oh, I was outside the convention. I wasn't there. I was out, went up to take a look and see what it was like, you know. They were at the sports arena [Los Angeles Memorial Sports Arena, Los Angeles, California], few blocks from here. But I was curious so I went to see what the convention was like and all you could do is get around it, you know. You couldn't get into the immediate area because I wasn't a delegate. Speaker 1: Okay. So you're at the University of California at Riverside. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And, what did you major in there? Speaker 2: I majored in poli-sci [political science], econ [economics] minor. And, of course I had been divorced, re-married and I had a child on the way at that point which is my, is now my oldest daughter. And I worked my way through college. I used to work for Golden State Mutual Life Insurance Company. Speaker 1: Now that's a black insurance company, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Then I played in a band, jazz band. Speaker 1: Now what did you play? Speaker 2: Fender bass. Speaker 1: Okay. Now when did you take up the bass, now? We haven't heard that story. Speaker 2: Well, it was when I was in the Air Force, I--you got to have something to do you know in those down hours, you know. You fiddle around and I learned upright bass, took some lessons in England and learned to play the bass. Speaker 1: Now what kind of jazz were you playing in those days? Speaker 2: Well we played a lot of straight-ahead jazz, you know. I mean, some things, some, you know, we didn't often get into too much of Thelonious Monk, because Thelonious Monk is somewhat complex, complicated. But we played a lot of straight-ahead stuff, you know. Played blues, you know, blues, blues, the blues, now blues can be complicated too. I'm gonna say that there are some simple blues. For the bass, it can be some of the simple blues changes but as time went on and it's, it's--as you became faster with the fender bass you know, the bass lines became very, very complicated, and not only complicated but begin to tell the story themselves in a solo. Speaker 1: Okay. Now-- Speaker 2: By then I was out of school. I haven't touched a bass since. Speaker 1: Okay. Did you ever play any rock and roll, like Chuck Berry style or--? Speaker 2: Well, I, we used--no, no, not Chuck Berry style. But we used to do some of Ray Charles' stuff. As I say we do a lot of blue--we'd do blues and then we'd have these Sunday afternoon matinees you know, and you know some of the bands would come down from Los Angeles, Three Tons of Joy. We used to do that stuff. Gene Norman used to sit in, come down. We'd have him in the showcase and those kinds of things. Played up in Idyllwild [California] mountains every now and then, up at Lake Arrowhead, down in Palm Springs [California], you know, college students trying to make a buck (laughter). It was fun. Story_ID: 307311 Speaker 1: Were there any particular teachers or people in the community that were kind of like a mentor to you when you were trying to learn about politics and get out of school? Speaker 2: Well, at that time the City of Riverside [California] had all of its city council members were elected at large as you were--you have to realize Riverside was going through a growth period. When I first went to March Air Force Base [March Air Reserve Base], Riverside, the population was only twenty-seven thousand. And as I said you know, a few years later it was thirty, thirty-five thousand and all five of the council members lived within about a half-mile of each other. And in the--you know, I always was a member of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and Urban League and other groups of that nature and there was quite a deal of concern about, how do we change, reform things so that people have a chance to have full representation. And a number of us including Tunney, John--you know John Tunney [Senator John V. Tunney] who subsequently went to [U.S.] Congress and subsequently became state senator, I mean became a U.S. senator, he was also stationed at March Air Force Base. And he was-- Speaker 1: That's the son of Gene Tunney the-- Speaker 2: Yeah, the boxer. Speaker 1: --the boxer? Speaker 2: Yeah. And we all collaborated together to change the City of Riverside so that people were elected by wards, by districts. Of course we had to go through a whole lot of unhappiness because people say you're bringing Chicago [Illinois] style corrupt politics, you know with ward style politics. But only way people can get represented is to be able to have representation from their district, from people who know and understand and realize and who are somewhat empathetic and sympathetic to what their positions are. So we went through a great deal to change the way council members were elected. So it was my--I was graduating from UC Riverside [University of California, Riverside, Riverside, California]. I had been selected by Coro foundation to do a year's internship here in Los Angeles [California] in public affairs. But they had wanted me to run for city council in Riverside and I told them no, that I was off to Los Angeles. I wanted to go to the big city. Speaker 1: Now what year is this? Speaker 2: This was 1962. Speaker 1: Okay. So you're selected by the Coral Foundation? Speaker 2: Coro, C-O-R-O, Coro Foundation. Speaker 1: C--Coro, okay. Okay. And you were--okay. So did you go to Los Angeles? Speaker 2: I came to Los Angeles. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: I was in that internship for twelve months and that's during--that's where I met--well the internship is just, is just, is just tremendous because it gives you hands-on experience involved in the political process, involved in community affairs. Had an opportunity to meet most of the leaders and shakers in the cities, counties, state. And Coro was--has such a respected name in terms of its internship in public affairs that it carried a--you carried--you brought a certain aura with you when you met people at nature. I worked for a state legislator who got elected that year by the name of Charlie Warren [Charles Warren], went to the state legislature. Jess Unruh [Jesse M. Unruh] was, as you know was the speaker and the leader of the state legislature [California State Legislature] and I became part of Charlie Warren's staff and therefore we worked to help you know with the state legislature, worked in and out of Sacramento [California]. That's where I first met Tom Bradley. I met a tremendous number of people who later on would--I would be involved with on a political basis. Speaker 1: Okay. All right, so you did--the internship was a year? Speaker 2: It was a year's internship. Story_ID: 307312 Speaker 1: And then from that you had time to, you--I took a couple of years and did my thesis and I got my master's [degree] from Occidental [Occidental College, Los Angeles, California] as a result of that. But after that I, you know I had family--I went to law school for a year at Loyola Law School [Los Angeles, California]. But that wasn't--I had a family I had to take care of. I had two kids I had to be responsible for and so I started looking around for a job and I got hired by Dukane Corporation to go to West Africa-- Speaker 2: Now-- Speaker 1: --to set up this whole West African marketing operation. Speaker 2: Now Dukane makes educational projectors (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) They made educ-- Speaker 2: --and film strips and that sort of thing? Speaker 1: Well in those days, Dukane was making language labs because the biggest problem in Africa, particularly West Africa where I was working was the tribal languages, the inability for people to communicate with each other. And so we built these elaborate, lavish language laboratories which were just to set up tapes that had the ability to play back and to--but you could control them from a master control or you could sit at your desk and you could get certain odd tapes so that you could practice, speak into the tape back and forth. So my territory was all the way from Senegal to, down to the Cameroon. Speaker 2: Okay. Now that must have been quite a cultural shock, you going from (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Aw, let me tell you. Speaker 2: You're going from Cal, from Riverside, California-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --and you're raised in St. Louis [Missouri]-- Speaker 1: I got to tell you, it was-- Speaker 2: --but you going all the way to West Africa. This is like-- Speaker 1: Well, I went to West Africa on a visitor's visa, knew I was going to live in Lagos [Nigeria] and I had to find my own way to get a permanent residence visa. And do you know I did that? I--it was a very interesting--the company said--and they're owned by Motorola now I think. Motorola eventually bought them. They said to me--it was out of St. Charles [Illinois] so you're familiar with--they're out of St. Charles. So they said to me, said well now--they had had somebody over there who had done one or two language labs but it wasn't very productive. So they said we want you to, you know to be efficient as you go down, as you land, you'll land at Senegal. I want you to take--go to--from Senegal I went to, which is the next country? Either Sierra Leone down to--I went through several countries and capitals including-- Speaker 2: Is it Guinea this next time? Okay, you said (unclear). Speaker 1: I didn't go through Guinea. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Guinea was a tough place you know. It-- Speaker 2: Senegal is Gambia-- Speaker 1: --(unclear) I think was-- Speaker 2: --was Gambia I think. Yes it's (unclear). Speaker 1: Oh Gambia, I went through Gambia. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Went through Gambia, Cote d'Ivoire, Ivory Coast, went through Liberia. I did say Sierra Leone didn't I? All the way to, finally I got to Lagos. Now when I started the journey I had almost fifteen hundred dollars in express checks, American Express checks. By the time I got to Lagos, Nigeria after six weeks, I had a dollar and fifty cents left because I had not been able to get any money where, you know I had to get somewhere where I could stop and let--and cable for some money. Speaker 2: Okay, we're going to pause here and change tapes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Man, this is exciting. You, so you went over there around a, on a-- Speaker 1: Sixty-four [1964]. Speaker 2: Sixty-four [1964], that's when countries were in the midst of getting independent (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) They had gotten independent. Speaker 2: I mean those countries were independent for the most part, right-- Speaker 1: Right-- Story_ID: 306273 Speaker 1: So you're working for Dukane [Dukane Corporation] from '64 [1964] to '67 [1967]? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Emerging African countries in West Africa and-- Speaker 2: Well, yeah, there were a lot of countries emerging in those days. As I say, I visited quite a few countries. The most livable, well for--well let me see how you put that? I mean for amenities, the best at that point in time one of the best places for amenities was in Ivory Coast [Cote d'Ivoire]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They had the Hotel Ivoire [Sofitel Abidjan Hotel Ivoire, Abidjan, Cote d'Ivoire] which was a continental hotel and I'm telling you it was, it was, it was kicking man. Had a night club up on the top, it had a swimming pool, it had, I mean it had--I mean it was like Western style enjoyment. The most--I've been through a lot of rugged places. I mean I went to Bamako, Mali, stayed at the Grand Hotel and boy that was tough. That was tough. Speaker 1: The Grand Hotel was kind of tough, huh? Speaker 2: Yeah, it was kind of tough. You sit there in the mornings, you get breakfast. And you know you're right on edge of the, you're right near the edge of the desert. Now you know the desert may be about a hundred, hundred fifty miles away, the Sahara. And--but the, you know it's dry, sandy and you can come down and you get your eggs and your food and the flies attack it. (Makes sound). So you got to fight flies. And the funny thing, you know what happens to you culturally, I mean it got to the point where--which I don't think I could do that here in America anymore, you know. A fly drop in my milk, I flip the fly out and keep drinking the milk, you know. I mean, cause what you gonna do? What are you going to do? You're getting your eggs, you just flip the fly out of your eggs and keep eating, you know. You fan the flies away, you know. But I guess you have to be subsumed by a culture like that before you just accept it as, as a thing to do. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I went up to Timbuktu [Mali], which was interesting, pretty, pretty dusty up there. But you know that used to be the center of a great empire, and you just stand-- Speaker 1: It was right in the center of Songhai and Mali. Speaker 2: Yeah, Songhai and Mali. And you stand there and you say, I just can't believe this. I just can't believe this. But it was, it, it was, it was good to do. I'm glad I did it. Story_ID: 306274 Speaker 1: --As I was telling you before, I left with about fifteen, sixteen hundred dollars in traveler's checks, and by the time I got from Dakar [Senegal] to Lagos [Nigeria], after six weeks of traveling, I had a dollar and fifty cents left and all these--packed like two or three suit cases, et cetera. And they always tell you if you--the books that were out at that time said, Lagos taxi drivers are some of the toughest guys in the world. You--they--you got to make certain that you got--know exactly what your fare is going to be beforehand. And so I, you know you try to find these taxis and they, they attack you. And I told this one taxi driver, "Well look I'm from America. I don't have but a dollar and fifty cents and I got to go to the hotel." I'm trying to remember the name of the hotel. It was a hotel down in Lagos and it was a pretty nice hotel. I went there and he said, "Well okay, you can pay me when your money comes." And sure enough you know, I--he took me there and I checked into the hotel. Finally I was able to get cabled, some money cabled to me and I paid him and he eventually became my driver while I was in Lagos because we had that kind of trust over the years, you know. I met a very--got on the elevator the first night I was there. Was headed up to, I guess I was headed up to the bar to get some food and this big guy is standing in the elevator. He says, "Okay get in brother." And it was a young man from Oklahoma by the name of Don Simmons [Donald Simmons] whose father had--was Jake Simmons [Jacob Simmons, Jr.] out of Oklahoma. They had opened up the whole area for Phillips Petroleum [Phillips Petroleum Company; Phillips 66]. Phillips Petroleum as you know was one of the first oil magnets to go into Nigeria and do oil drilling. And so Don, Don ran that operation over there and he and I got to be fast friends and we, we ran around a lot together and we did a lot of things together, had a lot of fun in Nigeria, watched the country change. Speaker 2: Yeah, and sort of they went into a civil war, I think-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --a little later right? Speaker 1: Well you know, Nigeria was--is a country that had been chiseled out of a number of tribes. There are over two hundred and some odd tribes in Nigeria, whether it's--and then you know you have the Islam, Islamic consideration, the Christian consideration and the hedonistic or idolatry and they all come, they all come into clash with one another. The northern region is basically Muslim. Then you have the--and the three great tribes, and I guess I shouldn't put it this way, but this is the way I learned it, are the Hausas of the north and the Urhobo of what used to be of the west and of course the Ebos of the east. But there are so many different, you got the rivers and the Ibibios and the Ga and the Fante and the Twi, and there, I mean there are just hundreds of tribes there. And you, and you have some great areas, I mean metropolitan areas. Lagos is a large city. Ibadan [Nigeria] is a large city. Kano [Nigeria] and Kaduna [Nigeria] are two pretty traditional areas. And you have, you have the--Benin [Benin City, Nigeria] which is a big rambling city. Then on the east you have Enugu [Nigeria] and Port Harcourt [Nigeria]. And I used to drive to those, to that country and that--you know, you got to be hearty to do that because the time I was driving going there the bridge over the Niger [Niger River] had not been completed so you'd have to take ferry, put your car on a ferry and go over there. And of course I was driving on the wrong side of the road because I had American car. I took a 1965 2+2 Mustang and they were going wild over there about this Mustang. And I used to run up and down the roads. I had adventure after adventure over there that was--summer was pleasant--well most of it was enjoyable, you know. Story_ID: 306275 Speaker 1: I had a great deal of success in selling their equipment. Of course, the first--one of the things I learned after about eight or nine months was that most of that part of the world is committed to British products. Now you know, that's another cultural thing, you know. Although people want the American lifestyle there are certain products that they find acceptable if it has a British label on it. And one of the ways we were able to increase my success was that we were able to negotiate a franchise or at least a licensing agreement with the British so that Dukane's [Dukane Corporation] equipment could be on the British list. And that way you know when governments got ready to buy it, they felt comfortable because you know, here's a British--it's a British sanctioned product. So we were able to do that which led to some success. I--Liberia I found to be a very interesting place. As you know Liberia is going through a lot of turmoil right now. It's just come through some and still going through some. But what used to blow my mind was on the, on the ocean [Atlantic Ocean] front was this eight story palace built for the president. I mean Tubman [William Tubman] had one heck of a palacious place. Speaker 2: An eight story--? Speaker 1: Eight story, I mean it stood out. They also had, they had a beautiful Masonic temple there made out of black onyx, yes sir. Right next to it was the hotel I used to stay in, the Ducor Palace [Ducor Palace Hotel, Monrovia, Liberia]. It was up a hill. And the people you know, people were fairly easy to get to know because many of them had American background. But--and I put the language lab that was in the University of Liberia [Monrovia, Liberia] and I asked my brother [Ronald Cunningham] a few months ago, next time he went to Liberia would he see if the equipment was still there. But he says it's pretty hard to identify anything in the country anymore because it has really just deteriorated you know, very difficult. I think--I remember, I was in, I was in Ghana at--I was staying at the main hotel in Ghana. Of course since then they've changed. They now have what's called the Black Star. And they had Vegas style gambling across town at what they used to call at that time the Black Star Hotel [Bolgatanga, Ghana]. And I went over there one night, they had this, they had the all peoples' third world convention. You know people came from all over the third world. And lot of folks were in there gambling and I used like to play the roulette wheel. And so one night I wound up next, I wound--this night I wound up next to this big mountain of a guy, he was wearing his Kente cloth with his robe you know, one shoulder out. And being an observant, I noticed that he would put down a chip and if he was any--no matter where his chip was, they would pay. You know they would, they would pay, you know. They'd call out the number but then they, he would tap and they would pay him. So three times I put my chip next to him and got paid. The guy came over and tapped me on the shoulder and he says, "We're not paying you next time. Matter of fact we want you to leave (laughter). You, you can't do what he does." Turned out this gentleman was the secretary of housing for Ghana. So in those days they let secretaries pretty much have the run of what they needed, you know (laughter). Story_ID: 306276 Speaker 1: Also, '66 [1966], you know that was the first time that the commonwealth nations ever met in--outside of--in Africa, on the African continent. Speaker 2: This is British Commonwealth? Speaker 1: British Commonwealth, Commonwealth of Nations and they met in Nigeria and they principally were staying at the Federal Palace [Federal Palace Hotel, Lagos, Nigeria]. And I had--have a friend who was in a diplomatic service who had been, who had worked for USIS, USIA whatever they call it, and-- Speaker 2: USAID [United States Agency for International Development], I mean the-- Speaker 1: Well, not AID, but-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --U.S. Information Service-- Speaker 2: Oh, okay. Speaker 1: --or U.S. Information Agency [USIA]-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --whatever they call it. So, Horace used to live down the street from me and Horace and I got to be pretty good friends. Speaker 2: This Horace Dawson [HistoryMaker Horace G. Dawson]? Speaker 1: Yeah Horace Dawson. Speaker 2: (Unclear). Speaker 1: H.G., that's my buddy. And he was down the street from me and you know our kids were pretty much along the same age, Patroclus [ph.] and his other--well one's a lawyer and the other's an artist, you know. And so H.G. came by and says, "Hey Dave [HistoryMaker David S. Cunningham, Jr.], let's go. I'm going to the Federal Palace and I'm going to meet some of the--I'm going to see some of the old guys I used to know in Uganda and other places." So we jumped in the car, went over to Federal Palace and we sat down. It was Milton Obote [Apollo Milton Obote] and a couple of other African leaders who I can't, whose names I can't remember right now. And we sat there and we're having, we're having a nice time and Milton Obote told Horace that you know, "The teacher's in trouble." 'Cause he was talking about Balewa, Tafawa Balewa [Abubakar Tafawa Balewa]. He said, "Teacher's in trouble. I hear a lot of stuff and teacher's in trouble." And so this was like on a Sunday--this was like on a Saturday night or so. The Commonwealth conference ended. They flew out the next day. That Sunday night, early Monday morning that was the first coup. That's when they took over the government, man, and Nigeria hasn't been the same since. I was there when it, when it first happened. Speaker 2: So that very night, when the conference was over, the--? Speaker 1: Well the conference was over I think that Saturday but that next Sunday, that Monday morning, I mean we got up--now you could always tell something was going on cause one, the phones didn't work, you know. Electricity was going off and on, you know because you know the, you know how to pull a coup. The first thing you do is, you roll oil drums out on the airport on the runways so nobody can land, right. You close off the roads. You get control of the radio station and play soft music. You turn the telephones off and (laughter), and if the, if the power is going down and the telephones are off, you know, I guess their having a coup this week, you know. Speaker 2: Okay, so that was like, what year was this 1966 (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That was '66 [1966]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Sixty-six [1966]. And then they, then they had a couple of coup there after I left in 1967, and just--you know when they started shooting across the bridge and you get pinned down, guys jump up out of the ditch and put guns in your car, you, you know, you got to carry your passport. Well, when I lived in Nigeria, I never carried a passport, never carried--I had it with me but I never carried it around because it was, it was like driving through the United States. Nobody stopped you, I mean you know. The thief might, thief may--might stop you and might try to rob you but other than that you know, I mean wasn't any government (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) How did people-- Story_ID: 306277 Speaker 1: --How did you relate to the people in Nigeria and how did they relate to you? What was your impression of them and--I mean the average person? Speaker 2: Well, you know, I, you know I was in my thirties and I guess I was, was not as conservative and cautious as I would be now. I mean I used to go to the night clubs you know, night clubs would be outdoors. You know I mean, be packed tight you know, you just speak to people, you know you just be pleasant with people. I mean I never, I never ran in--the only, the only thing I ever ran into in Nigeria and most of West Africa was people trying to do their hustle. And this is--you run into the same thing here in America. It's just to the degree to which they hustle might be different than how we hustle here in America. I mean some hustles can be very, very, can be very, very deadly, I mean--but that was the same kind of idea I got that people were hustling and trying to make their way you know. Speaker 1: Okay, now did you take your family over with you or--? Speaker 2: I had, I had a daughter that was born, my daughter who just turned forty was born in Lagos Island Hospital [Lagos Island Maternity Hospital, Lagos, Nigeria], yeah. So--and I had a, my older daughter was there with us and she went to private school there while we were there. Story_ID: 306278 Speaker 1: So you came back in 1967? Speaker 2: Yep, came back in 1967. Speaker 1: Had the U.S. changed? Well, in a way. We had riots and that sort of thing (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, yeah you had--I watched the Watts riots on television from Nigeria. It had changed. I came back and went to work for Hughes Aircraft Company, in their community (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Here in Los Angeles [California]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And El Segundo [California], in their community affairs department. I was their manager of community affairs. We developed that Hughes Active Citizenship Campaign which eventually became regulated and you now know them as political action committees [PAC]. We're the reason congress put regulations on PACs. Speaker 1: And how did you, I mean did you have to kind of--well this is the first time this was done you say so, it was a--did you have to invent all this yourself or how--? Speaker 2: Well no, we had, we--well, well first of all I met--there was a mission going--there was a mission of businessmen who came to West Africa and I met Hyland [Lawrence A. Hyland], Hyland who ran Hughes Aircraft Company. And he said, well we got to talking, he said, "Well if you come back to America call me." So I called him when I came back and he offered me two or three jobs and I took the one that I thought was the most challenging. That was manager of community affairs. And at that time they had, Hughes had--was, was making certain that their employees were publicly, were politically involved. They could contribute, they had dues check-off, you could contribute to a candidate if you so desired. If you did not indicate, you could either indicate a candidate or you could indicate a party or you could split it between the two. If you did neither, then we would make the decision where your campaign contribution would go. So that meant that we spent a lot of time talking to politicians or politicians trying to talk to us or trying to greet and meet us. And in those days as you know, Tom Bradley ran for mayor of City of Los Angeles and I encouraged our people to support Tom Bradley. He didn't win the first time but the second time around he did win and he asked me, would I run for his seat? Story_ID: 306279 Speaker 1: So you ran for city council [Los Angeles City Council]-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --after Tom Bradley was elected-- Speaker 2: In 1973-- Speaker 1: --in 1973, okay. Speaker 2: --at his urging, at his insistence, matter of fact. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because he got elected mayor and he had been the councilman of this district and he asked me would I run for his seat (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Were you surprised or did you--had you thought of yourself as a politician? Speaker 2: Was I surprised? No, no--I had run for, I had run for the state senate [California State Senate] in a district that was contiguous to this where we had--there was a politician who was in a seat that should have been a African American seat and he had been very insensitive to some of the needs. But so many black guys got into the race that we split the vote. Of course I came within twelve hundred votes of getting him in the primary despite all that because I pretty much financed the campaign myself. I had--I came back at--after leaving Hughes Aircraft Company, I started my own consulting firm [Cunningham, Short, Berryman and Associates, Los Angeles, California] with two other partners and we had a fairly successful company. And they supported me in my efforts to run for state senate and although we lost, Tom Bradley ran for mayor the very next two or three months after that and he won. And he said, "You did so well I want you to run for my council seat. I think you'd make a good councilman." Speaker 1: Okay, so this is in 1968? Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy-three [1973]. Speaker 1: Seventy-three [1973], I'm sorry. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Seventy-three [1973], okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Seventy-three [1973], so you-- Speaker 2: Tom first ran in 1969. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And he lost that race to Yorty, and he came back and beat him the next year. Speaker 1: Okay, that's Sam Yorty [Samuel W. Yorty], yeah. So what did--how did it feel to be, to run for office in--here in Los Angeles [California]? I mean how did you--? Speaker 2: It was a challenge. Really the most exciting experience was to get elected. Then the next most exciting experience is to be able to perform, do something, make some changes, bring some things into fruition. Story_ID: 306280 Speaker 1: So what were the issues that you were, that you thought were the most important in those days? Speaker 2: Well you know, when you think about it, running for local public office, the most important issues are kind of constituent service that you can provide for people. I mean people have needs, some that are perceived to be extremely important and cer- some that are ankle biting and some that are just unnecessary perception on their part because some of them may not know how to personally handle their own affairs. So they look to government or look somewhere else for help or assistance. How do you, how does one fill a pot hole? How do you get peoples' trees trimmed? How do you get a, recreational services to them? How do you get parks? How do you keep the parks clean? I mean big issue, I mean to deal with the niche issues that you know the public likes to write about as fancy and important like gay marriage, gay rights. I mean it's, that's not what a--that's not what politics is all about, nor do I feel that politics should be involved because that's not where--if people make their decision on that, they will get--they, they will lose out on getting the kind of services that they need. Those are not the issues of today. Those are not the issues that make a community great. Now discrimination against people because of their sexual orientation or because of who they are, the skin complexion or because they're female or for whatever the reason that is just bad government no matter what level you're at. That is bad behavior. That is abhorrent behavior no matter what level you're at. So I mean that shouldn't even be, that, that shouldn't even be an issue. People should be respected because they bring, they are people and they have something to bring to the table. So, I mean the final analysis, there any real burning issues? Well what do you do about education? I mean really to a great extent education has become so politicized about how do you get the resources to, to, to schools so the children can learn? And there's no doubt about it no matter what anybody might say if you throw enough money at a problem, it will have some impact. Now the money may be siphoned off by others who intercede it, who intercept it before it gets to its target, but that's another story, and that's corruption. That's another story in and of itself. But I--anybody that say that money can't solve a problem, most of the issues that poor people have can be solved by throwing money at the problem. Good health insurance, the right of people to go and get health insurance, to see a doctor, to get the drugs and medicines that they need will certainly allow them to be healthier, which then will allow them to be able to have time to utilize to study, to learn, to read, to write, to do all those other things. And if you can do those things, you will be creative enough to be able to hold employment, have jobs or to own your own business. So all of those things given those opportunities and it takes money to do that. It takes money to educate people. It takes money for them to have good health. It takes money for them to have good transportation. If you do--if you throw enough money in it, we can eliminate poverty. Speaker 1: So, now non-Angelinos watching this, can you describe the district you represented or the ward you represented and--? Speaker 2: Yes. I represented what was known as the Tenth Council District. It was a highly cosmopolitan district, not only in terms of the heart of the city it was the only district in the City of Los Angeles [California] that was surrounded by other districts all around it. It had a council district on every side of it. It was pretty much in a changing area. The City of Los Angeles, the bulk of the population of the district was made up of whites and Jewish people with a--the next largest grouping was blacks, the next largest grouping were Asians-- Speaker 1: Okay, we're gonna pause here (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) then Hispanics. Story_ID: 306281 Speaker 1: I knew the police when I--I knew police were probably following elected officials around. I--when I first went on I had--see, I went on a special election so I was the new boy on the block. And I'd see Davis [Edward M. Davis], chief of police out all the time. He said, "We need to get together." Well you know I was meeting all department heads because the City of Los Angeles [California] is a very interesting city at that time. The mayor, we had a weak mayor system, strong council [Los Angeles City Council]. The council was actually the administrative body in the City of Los Angeles. Departments had to report to city councilmen. Now of course Tom Bradley was shrewd and strong enough and had enough of us who were allies who were able to give him the power he needed to accomplish what he wanted to do in terms of his mission and his, his issue and his program. But--so I was meeting with all the department heads and they would come to the office. Well Davis kept saying, "We got to meet. We got to meet." I said okay. So I had inherited the secretary who used to work for the police department so I told her, "Call Chief Davis, make an appointment for him to come over and meet." And so I get this schedule one day and she--it shows that I'm supposed to go over to Parker Center [Los Angeles, California] and meet the chief of police. I told her, oh no. The first meeting with all department heads will be, will meet with me here in my office. You know after all I do know the idea of command and control, right, having been a management consultant and then had run, had been manager in private business. Speaker 2: And that's important those kind of dynamics make a lot of-- Speaker 1: That dynamic is extremely important. And so I told her and I so I said, "You call Davis back and tell him that I can't make that appointment. He has to come over here. The first appointment will be here in my office." So she gets--calls me back and says, "Well, Chief says he can't get here. He says he's just too busy and he doesn't see how he could adjust his calendar to do that." I said, "Get him on the line." I said, "Chief I highly respect how busy you are." I said, "And that's just fine." I said, "And I can understand if you can't get here to meet with me and for us to sit down and to talk about your department." I said, "I'll tell you what, we don't have to rush. If it's three or four budgets from now that's okay." He said, "Hold on just a minute. Hold on just a minute. Let me see if I can get a hold of my secretary and clear my calendar." So he came back and he said, "I think I can clear my calendar." I said, "Well hold on, let your girl talk with mine 'cause I don't know what my calendar looks like." So anyway, we got it--he came over. I put the chair there in front of my desk and I said, "Sit down Chief." So, told him who I was. I said, "Before we begin this meeting I just want to set some ground rules." I said, "I think it's important for you to understand that I've heard that police officers do follow elected officials." I said, "I'm going to assume that you're following me for--to protect me because so far as I'm concerned, I don't have anything to hide. But if you want to provide me with that protection surreptitiously, that's just fine. You have my permission." I said, "Secondly, at this point in my life I'm single." I said, "I certainly enjoy the pleasure of women," and I said, "so I'm not going to any motel or anything. You know where I live. If you peep in my window to take a picture, I only have one request, before you release those photos I need to see a copy of the negative so I can tell you which ones show me in my best light because if you're going to release anything on me, I want to look good in it." "Oh no, no, no, no, no. We--," I said, "Okay, now we can sit down and you tell me about your department." But you have to make it clear to people that you--when you're in that position that you understand what your function and your role is. And he and I never had a problem 'cause he understood very clearly if we did have a problem, it would be reflected in my approach to the budget. And one of the things that's extremely important, if you have budgetary--if you have a budgetary responsibility, you'd be surprised what you could do with some of these hardcore bureaucrats and particularly when it comes to public service, people who are in public service and who are in law enforcement. Once you understand what you have in terms of budgetary control, we can change some of the attitudes that some of these, some police departments have. Story_ID: 306282 Speaker 1: Now you were fairly close to Tom Bradley, the former mayor--Mayor Tom Bradley in Los Angeles [California]. And tell us a little bit about him and you know this is for history so this is-- Speaker 2: Well Tom Bradley was a very interesting person. One of the things about Tom, Tom Bradley was a very controlled and controlling person. Controlling in the sense that he had a pretty good idea who he was, had a pretty good idea of where he wanted to go and he was very close-mouthed about where--certain things. And he liked to present a sort of defensive standoff posture between you and him. And one of the things that Tom Bradley used very well, Tom Bradley was very efficient in his use of the English language. He was very efficient in his time with you and he used silence as a very, very strong defensive weapon. And once you understood that about Tom Brad--I could break Tom Bradley down on a one-on-one basis like he (laughter)--I could have him going through a wall you know. But he was also--once you got Tom Bradley, if you got to know him as I eventually got to know him, Tom Bradley was a jovial, very funny, very relaxed person. But he was very, very guarded about his public image and his public persona. But now he had a certain body language which I learned to read over a period of time. I use to kid him, I'd make him laugh, say, "Tom you don't have to stand here that stiff. I mean come on buddy you know, I think, you know what you--who are you trying to scare, you know?" And he'd just laugh you know. He'd catch himself. He'd get back to his, to his rigid, you know 6'5"--the guy is 6'5" you know he's pretty overpowering you know. And I just say--but he was quite a, he, he was quite some person. He was very thoughtful and he was good for the City of Los Angeles. Speaker 1: I heard a story--we heard a story from--about the Black Business Chamber of Comm--I guess the Black Chamber of Commerce was meeting and they, I think Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] had just been elected and I believe that's how it goes, yeah. And-- Speaker 2: Governor or just been elected president? Speaker 1: President. Well, it may have been governor. And, well it was--yeah there was--well there was a Republican, you know, governor now, yeah-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --governor I guess and he said well you know we need a Republican president on the Black Chamber of Commerce because we are Republicans. And that was a--it seems kind of humorous you know in a way, you know. Speaker 2: Uh-huh, yeah. Speaker 1: And so somebody volunteered to be the republican you know president you know of-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --the organization. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So he didn't--he was, seemed like a very shrewd political person. Speaker 2: Oh, who is that Tom? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Oh yeah Tom, yeah Tom was very shrewd, he'd have made a great poker player. He knew how to hold his cards close to his vest. Story_ID: 306283 Speaker 1: I remember one incident where as you know there were three of us black fellows on the city council [Los Angeles City Council]. We sounded, actually it sounded like an Irish law firm, Cunningham [HistoryMaker David S. Cunningham, Jr.], Farrell [Robert Farrell] and Lindsay [Gilbert Lindsay]. I mean, what more Irish names can you find than that? And I remember one time that Tom Bradley, we were having this fight with the fire, firefighters union and the police union and they wanted to have a binding arbitration. Well now Tom hadn't said, hadn't discussed anything with you know supposedly his allies, hadn't said anything to me about his position on binding arbitration. So you know we're working with the unions, we try to help some people in terms of their political aspirations and the union's extremely important. So we didn't see binding arbitration on the second review would create a whole lot of problems. So we have a system where you know you bring in a motion or--and you got to make a municipal law, you do it on the first reading. So we passed it on the first reading, Bob Farrell and Gil Lindsay and myself, we all voted for it and didn't see anything that was that harmful about it. So we get this call from Tom Bradley. Tom Bradley would like to see you, Gilbert and Bob. So we go up into him to his office to see him. Tom Bradley lit into us. He said, so Gil Lindsay, I don't know whether you ever knew him. He was the first black on the city council. He was put on the city council at the age of sixty-four, supposedly just to serve out an unexpired term that lasted longer than most people's--he was on the city council until he was ninety years old. He died at the city council. But Gil was a very gregarious, outgoing, full of life, fun loving sort of guy. And so he said, "You didn't say anything to us Mr. Bradley." He said, "Well why would I have to say anything to you? You know I'm running for governor. I'm not sure any--this kind of thing will work for me. These guys aren't going to support me." And so we're sitting there. Gil says, "Okay well Mr. Mayor what do you want us to do?" And that's the kind of guy Gil is. So, he said "I want you to go back down there and change that." So he said, "You got that, Bob?" Bob says, "Oh yeah, Mr. Mayor." So he said, "Do you understand that Dave?" So I did a Tom Bradley on him. I sat there and looked him dead in his eye for about twenty-five seconds, you know. And finally he said, "Did you, did you hear what I said?" I said, "Mr. Mayor this ought to teach you a lesson. You need to talk to us. If you got something on your mind, if you got something that's a big issue, let us know so we don't get embarrassed out there in a position. And now we got to go retract and we're going to be, we're going to be--people are going to look at us." "It doesn't really matter. We, we got to kill this matter." So we said that's okay. So we eventually went down and corrected the matter you know, but we took an egg, we took an egg in the face, you know simply because he was playing his cards too close to the vest. And I think as time went on, he learned that with some of us you can't, you know, you better get us in the loop or it creates problems you know. After that I remember one time he had decided that he was having trouble with the housing authority [Housing Authority of the City of Los Angeles]. The housing authority was doing--was having some problems. So I'm sitting in the office. I had a constituent in and I'm having a meeting and my secretary buzzes me and says, "Mayor Bradley is sitting in the foyer. He would like to see you. However he said just take your time. He'll wait." So I said, "Well, tell him I'll be right with him and I told the other person--," 'cause you know he's the mayor. I respect him. Told the other person, please you know if you don't mind can we put this over, we'll reset the date. The mayor is sitting patiently outside and I would like to see with the concern is. So he came in and shared with me and I shared with him what my thoughts were and we subsequently went forward with what he, what the two of us thought was the best course of action. But he began to learn that it worked much better when it was done that way. Story_ID: 306284 Speaker 1: What are some other highlights of your career at city council [Los Angeles City Council]? You served until '86 [1986] right? Speaker 2: I served until '86 [1986]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Uh, there were so many highlights. You know we met--we had a lot of heads of state came through, from the Queen of England [Elizabeth II], the Queen of Holl--of the Netherlands, which is my wife is subject to the Queen of the Netherlands because she is Dutch. She's from Holland--born in Amsterdam [the Netherlands], Holland, and is a Dutch citizen. Prince Charles [Charles, Prince of Wales], we met Prince Charles. We met leaders from all over the world, came through the City of Los Angles [California]. One of the highlights I'll never forget though, on Fridays the city council has you know we'll just kind of call them the open meeting where you give commendations to all kinds of people who have earned or merited in your eyes. And one Friday we had this Cardinal Wojtyla [Karol Wojtyla] who came before the city council, spoke, talked about his journey through Poland, what it was like and left this gold medallion, big gold medallion which at that point we think was about, worth about twenty-five thousand dollars. A month later-- Speaker 1: He left it with the city council? Speaker 2: Yeah, he left it as a gift to the City of Los Angeles. A month later we're sitting in council, president of the city council says, gentlemen, there has been a new cardinal. There has been a new pope elected and it's Pope John Paul, what is it the II [Saint Pope John Paul II] was it? The one-- Speaker 1: I think so, right. Speaker 2: --that just died? That was former Cardinal Wojtyla, he had been before our council a month before he got elected a pope. And immediately you had to remove this gold medallion which we had in a trophy case right in the hallway of the city, of the council because now it was valued at somewhere in the neighborhood of a hundred thousand dollars, so we had to take it, you know--too many people would want to walk off with it. So we had to take it and put it in the archives. But I thought that was a highlight to have met the pope before he was pope. Speaker 1: Yeah, Karol Wojtyla, I guess-- Speaker 2: Cardinal Wojtyla. Speaker 1: Okay, anything else? Speaker 2: Well, I you know, I can't go without saying you know I have a total of six children. One is-- Speaker 1: Well, about your city council (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, about the city council? Speaker 1: That's what--yeah. Speaker 2: Oh-- Speaker 1: Yeah, I'm not--this isn't the end. Yeah-- Speaker 2: Oh okay. Speaker 1: --but I'm say--but--we're getting there but-- Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: --like what--how did it, your term in city council end? I mean why did you--? Speaker 2: Well I had never went on the city council with an intent to stay. I ran for [U.S.] Congress and lost and I determined that I did not want to be on the city council when I was fifty-three, fifty-four years old. Either do something else or--I mean either, either in Congress or somewhere else. Story_ID: 306285 Speaker 1: I decided I had an opportunity, I looked around and I had an opportunity to get a fairly decent career in another area and I left the city council [Los Angeles City Council]. Speaker 2: So what did you leave the city council to do? Speaker 1: Go to investment banking. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But they were such sharks, I decided later on a couple of years afterwards to open my own firm and I have my own consulting firm [David Cunningham and Associates, Los Angles, California]. And I've been doing that for, now for about eighteen, nineteen years. Speaker 2: Now what do you do? What kind of consulting do you do? Speaker 1: Well, it's public affairs, advocacy, lobbying. You know I know pretty much the difficulties of the mind of a public elected official, what his, some of his stresses are and what goes into the make-up and decision making process. So I can pretty much frame a client's issues so that a public elected official can better understand them. Speaker 2: Okay. Can you give us a for instance of how that works, of who would come to you and what you're going to do? Speaker 1: Well I've represented big tobacco in the past. Not that--from the position that there are many issues involved in tobacco other than just health issues. And there are some health issues involved in tobacco but there are also some economic issues involved in tobacco. And there are some black farmers whose--who have raised their children, who have put their children through college and who are continuing to put other--grandchildren through college raising tobacco. The product is not illegal, tobacco is not illegal at this time. It's illegal to sell it to certain people and there are some very stringent guidelines for that. So I mean it has been very important to bring it to the attention of elected officials what the difference is and how important it is for people to be able to have an opportunity to maintain their livelihood. Speaker 2: Okay, anything else that comes to mind that (unclear)? Speaker 1: Well I mean you go through all kinds of issues. I mean have worked on workers' comp which carries a lot of, it carries a tremendous number of technical and political issues with it, you know, because people get injured on a job, they need to be able to be rehabilitated if they possibly can. If they're injured for life they need to have some, some means of compensation for doing their best job and getting injured doing it. But you have to also be aware that there, that much of this--or some of this is tinged with fraud and you have to make certain that you can set up the circumstances in such a way that you can eradicate as much of the impact of fraud as possible. So that--you have to be able to present reforms and protect the client's interests at the same time while you make certain that it meets the needs of the public. Story_ID: 306286 Speaker 1: We always ask this question, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: Well, my hopes for the African American community. One of my hopes is that we can take our rightful, continue to maintain our rightful place in American structure. I would be hopeful that as we go down the line that we can take some of our sensitivity and turn it into positive approaches to things. I don't think we should accept blindly any one leader's point of view about where we're going. I think that we're going to have to encourage our young people to be able to utilize their intellect and their talent and their God-given ability. I think we still have a marketplace that we need to penetrate a little more. I think the example of Magic Johnson, former basketball player and what he's done with his athletic ability to develop economic stability for himself and for a whole organization and to build companies and to build real estate involvement and to build wealth is extremely important, and we need more of that. We need more Bob Johnsons. But I, I think by and large that the African American community has a lot to be proud of. We have some embarrassment, and you know I mean let's face it, we do have crime within our communities but a number of communities have crime. We can't turn our back on it. We've got to do something to encourage these kids to have opportunities. We're going to have to try to take the gang experience and turn it into a group experience that has a positive aspect, such as--the biggest gang I knew of when I was growing up was the Boy Scouts of America, but that's because maybe that group is not gang-ish enough for today because they were about doing things that were of a positive nature, you know, merit badges, helping little old ladies across the street, doing a good deed, doing a good turn. You don't hear much of that talked about. However, we still have a number of African Americans who go into scouting and some of these kids are doing a lot of--becoming Eagle Scouts and becoming outstanding in their scouting activities. So those are the kinds of positive aspects that we need to take advantage of. Story_ID: 306287 Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done to this point in your life, what would you con- is there is any major thing that you would do differently? Speaker 2: (Laughter) I'm sure it's always something major you can do differently, but I can't change the past. I can only hope that I can change the future, but I don't know what that future might be. So I'm not going to have any regrets about what I did or didn't do because as they say, "The moving finger writes and having writ, moves on" ['The Rubaiyat,' Omar Khayyam]. I, I think I've had a good life. I have enjoyed a family. I have a family that I'm very proud of. We're not, you know I can't say that there's anything--I'm sure that there--I'm sure there are a number of things that I wish I would have done differently but I don't know whether I would be who I am if I had done them differently. Story_ID: 306288 Speaker 1: Tell us about your family, tell-- Speaker 2: Well I have six children. I've been married three times and I'm presently married to--my present wife [Sylvia Cunningham] and I have been married going on thirty years. I have a son [David Cunningham, III] that's a lawyer, very good lawyer here in the City of Los Angeles [California]. He's served as president of the Police Commission. Just came through one of the toughest tenures that any police commission has. He's equipped himself very well. I have a daughter who is now working for FEMA [Federal Emergency Management Agency] trying to help the Katrina [Hurricane Katrina] victims. She lives in Riverside [California]. I have another daughter who lives in Atlanta, Georgia who we like to call Miss Cheerio. She's always full of cheer and good hope. And I have a twenty-one year old daughter [Amber Cunningham] who plays for Rice University [Houston, Texas] on a basketball scholarship. She's in her fourth year. And she's majoring in psychology. She's played in the NCAA [National Collegiate Athletic Association] tournaments. She's played in WNIT [Women's National Invitation Tournament] couple of times so she's enjoying herself. And I have an eighteen year old son that just accepted a basketball scholarship to the University of California, Riverside [Riverside, California] named Sean [Sean Cunningham] and we're looking forward to him having a good, productive year. He's right--he's at my alma mater so I feel pretty good about that. And then I have my seventeen year old son [Brian Cunningham] who's still here at home and going to--a senior in high school and looking at several opportunities to go to college. Speaker 1: Okay. He's--now we've met him a little earlier, plays-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --football and was on 'Jeopardy' at one time. Speaker 2: Yeah, he was on 'Jeopardy.' He went on there and did very well and I'm very proud, I'm very proud of him. He, he's pretty much, he's a very insightful young man. So he's the last pea in the pod here at the house so he's the one looking out for dad. Story_ID: 306289 Speaker 1: What would you consider at this juncture to be your legacy? Speaker 2: What would I consider what? Speaker 1: At this juncture to be your legacy? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well one, I would--family, my children are my legacy, no doubt about that. That you can't undo, that you cannot erase, that's them. I think my involvement with public affairs in the City of Los Angeles [California] is my legacy. I certainly hope that all of the other things that I have done in my life serves my legacy. Speaker 1: Okay. Is there anything we haven't asked you that you think we need to cover before we ask our last question? Speaker 2: Oh I don't know. I think you've probed about as deep as you can. Speaker 1: Well the last one is similar to legacy. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Yeah and it's phrased differently. How would you like to be remembered sir? Speaker 2: Well I would like to be remembered as a good man who gave his best in all that he did, that was true to what he believed in. Speaker 1: All right, well thank you very much. Speaker 2: Thank you. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My pleasure. Story_ID: 306290 Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay Mr. Cunningham [HistoryMaker David S. Cunningham, Jr.], just tell us who's in the photo. And group--start, your left, viewer's left, work left to right. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): And go ahead then when you're ready. Speaker 2: Well this is a photo of the family at my seventieth birthday party recently held. And starting on the left is my--Amber [Amber Cunningham] and to her right is Sean [Sean Cunningham], then Robin [Robin Cunningham]. Then the little fellow holding my hand is my grandson, Surmier [Surmier Cunningham]. Then behind him is Brian [Brian Cunningham], my youngest son. The guy in the middle is me and to the right of me is David, III [David S. Cunningham, III], and then to my immediate right is my wife Sylvia [Sylvia Cunningham] and to her immediate right is her mother, Joanna Fauss [ph.]. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, I'm going to have to ask your indulgence, do the first three people from the left one more time for me because I had my audio level low. So starting with-- Speaker 2: Starting on the left is Amber, my baby daughter. Next to her is David--no, I'm sorry. Next to her is Sean and right in front of him is Robin, my daughter Robin, and then right there below Robin, the little fellow is my grandson, Surmier. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Great, okay. We can move to the next photo now. Wait, go ahead and give me a description. Speaker 2: And that is my oldest son David, III on the right and with him is Robin and they're serenading me at my birthday party, seventieth birthday party. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Oh, shoot, I hope I don't run out of battery. Okay, let's go. Speaker 2: That's Sylvia and I on vacation in the early '80s [1980s]. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next? Speaker 2: And that's my baby daughter when she was very, very young. That is Amber. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next? Speaker 2: That's Amber at her prom three years ago, her senior prom. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Next? Speaker 2: That's Brian at two years old. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next? Speaker 2: That's Sean Kingsley playing in the back, playing in some--oh, playing in the park. He was two years old. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Next? Speaker 2: That is Sean on graduation day for Amber in nine--in 2001. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next? Speaker 2: Those are all my children except Brian. On the left is Leslie [Leslie Cunningham (ph.)], to her immediate right in the back is myself, to her--and in front of her--me, is Robin and below Robin is Amber with the balloon and the young man next to--with the hat on is Dave, III and he's holding Sean. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Next please. Speaker 2: And that-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, go ahead. Speaker 1: That is my oldest daughter. That's her portrait, Leslie June Cunningham. And she gave me that in 1979. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Very good, next. Speaker 1: That is my mother [Eula Lawson Cunningham] and father [David Cunningham, Sr.] at their fiftieth wedding anniversary. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, a description? Speaker 1: That's Sylvia and I on our wedding day. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Very good. Year? Speaker 1: Nineteen seventy-seven [1977]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Great, next. Speaker 1: That is Tom Bradley on the right, Sylvia in the middle and myself at one of Tom Bradley's campaign fundraisers. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Very good, next. Speaker 1: And that's my father and myself when I was sworn in for my second term in city council [Los Angeles City Council]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Great, next. Or year? Speaker 1: That was in 1975. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Speaker 1: And that was--that is Jimmy Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] and David Cunningham in 1976. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Speaker 1: And of course that's Brian with Alex Trebek where he won on 'Jeopardy.' Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Great, next. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): And go ahead with a description of this one please sir. Speaker 1: This is a portrait of my father and myself. I was eighteen months old sitting in my dad's lap. Speaker 2: Nineteen thirty--? Speaker 1: That would be roughly 1938...