 Story_ID: 645576 Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers; our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Ma'am, can you please give us your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Almeta Elise Cooper [HistoryMaker Almeta Cooper], A-L-M-E-T-A, Elise, E-L-I-S-E, Cooper. Speaker 1: And, ma'am, what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: December 27, 1950, Durham, North Carolina. Speaker 1: And what is your occupation and title? Speaker 2: I'm a lawyer and my current title is executive director, HHS [health and human services] advocacy, regulatory and quality improvement programs. Speaker 1: Okay, HHS advocacy (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Advocacy, regulatory and quality improvement programs at The Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center [Columbus, Ohio]. Speaker 1: At Ohio State University [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio]? Speaker 2: Ohio State University Wexner, W-E-X-N-E-R, Medical Center. Speaker 1: Medical center, okay, and what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today is May 10, 2013. Speaker 1: Okay, and where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: Bexley, Ohio. Speaker 1: Okay, in your home, right? Speaker 2: Yes (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 645577 Speaker 1: So before we go in--go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we always ask and they only require a short answer. The first one is, do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Yes, I love greens and vegetables. I'm a vegetable person, almost any kind of vegetable. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: My favorite color is red. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: My favorite time of the year is the spring. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I like the spring just because I think it, you know, it sounds a little trite, but the whole idea of the rebirth and kind of the fresh smell in the air and the flowers blooming and the trees, I, I enjoy the spring, although I'm a person who likes, I'm happy wherever. I mean, there are some people who say they can't stand the cold. I've lived in Chicago [Illinois], I've lived here [Bexley, Ohio]. The weather doesn't really define me or bother me and I don't mind the heat so I've been able to adjust wherever I've been. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: No I don't. Speaker 1: Okay, the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: I have several sayings that my father [Horton Cooper] imparted to me and one of them is: you should always have a dollar for the robber because if you don't have any money, they'll kill you (laughter). It's really about being prepared, but that just always sort of makes me, makes me laugh. Story_ID: 645578 Speaker 1: Well I'm going to ask you about your family history now. I'm going to ask about your mother's side and your father's [Horton Cooper] side, separately (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: --then we'll put them together. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Pat- my mother's full name is Patricia Carter Coles, C-O-L-E-S [Patricia Coles Cooper]. My mother was actually reared by her aunt [Patricia Hawkins Carter] and so even her biological mother's family name, is Coles [Mary Carter Coles] but I think if someone were trying to locate her, her, most people knew her by Patty Carter. Speaker 1: Okay, so she's known as Patty Carter? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: She was born in Richmond, Virginia and she was born in June, 1924; June 2nd, 1924. Speaker 1: Okay, now what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family? How far back can you trace them? Speaker 2: My mother's grandparents, actually, and I, and I think some members of my family can go farther than that but my mother's people were free blacks in North Carolina and her grandfather was a state senator in North Carolina during Reconstruction, Hawkins Carter [Hawkins W. Carter], and my mother, when we were little, she used to, her, she would talk a lot about the family, stories about one of her aunts in particular who was, I believe, sold in An- what I think was Annapolis [Maryland] as a slave and bought--brought into North Carolina and so I think in my family, on my mother's side, through family history, people do have a fairly good idea just because of that experience of being free blacks and that was their, that was kind of their big thing that they could read and write and that they were free in North Carolina. That meant a lot to them. Speaker 1: Now is there a story about how they got free? Speaker 2: You know, I don't know the story. I know they were in Warrenton, North Carolina but I do not know the story of how they gained their freedom. Speaker 1: Okay. So they were freed prior to the Civil War then, you say? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. This is in Warrenton-- Speaker 2: Warrenton, W-A-R-R-E-N-T-O-W-N [sic.], Warrenton, North Carolina. Speaker 1: North Carolina, okay. Speaker 2: North Carolina. Story_ID: 645579 Speaker 1: Now what about Hawkins Carter [Hawkins W. Carter]. Now he was in the state legislature? Speaker 2: Yes. He was a senator from-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --from North Carolina and he was in-- Speaker 1: State senator in, yeah, yeah, state senator, though? Speaker 2: Yeah-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --during Reconstruction, and he was from Warrenton [North Carolina]. I do know that my mother's mother [Cooper's maternal great aunt], Patty Carter [Patricia Hawkins Carter], who was a head nurse at Lincoln Hospital, was a black hospital in Durham, North Carolina, was the executor of his estate when he died. Speaker 1: Okay, any stories about him? Speaker 2: Well, I mean, the most exciting thing to us was that he had been a senator but I believe that he was also, I believe a farmer. I could, I do have some information on him but I could tell you more about that but I'd have to refer to it but he, he had, he and his, he was married to Nannie Boyd [Nannie Boyd Carter] and we do, I have pictures of him and his wife and there were pictures which, unfortunately, I don't believe they survive anywhere. There were also some pictures of her parents. Speaker 1: Okay, Nannie Boyd-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. So, now do you know if he stayed in office long 'cause he was, he must have been in office, say in, 1866 or so or? I'm thinking right after the Civil War. Speaker 2: I could tell you that. I have some information on him which I can look at quickly and see if I can give you that. Speaker 1: You don't have to look it up. I just wondered if you, if you knew 'cause it, I know they, there's usually some drama around how long you could stay and once the South started coming back, you know, a lot of people that had those positions were in jeopardy, you know, I mean-- Speaker 2: Right, right-- Speaker 1: --really, serious jeopardy. Speaker 2: --exactly. He, I do know that he had a, that, you know, he had several family members and that he was born in 1842. Speaker 1: Okay, so he was a young man when he went into the senate [North Carolina Senate] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 645580 Speaker 1: So did your mother's side of the family stay fairly well to do in North Carolina (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, my, I mean I think they, they lived comfortably. I mean, I certainly, I don't know if you would describe him as well to do but my, my mother [Patricia Coles Cooper] is, my aunt [Cooper's maternal great aunt, Patricia Hawkins Carter] that raised my mother, who was the head nurse at Lincoln Hospital [Durham, North Carolina], my mother attended Palmer high school [Alice Freeman Palmer Memorial Institute] which is in North Carolina [Sedalia, North Carolina], it's a private school for co- you know, for African Americans. So, I mean, I think she did enjoy, you know, some privileges. She also was a graduate, what was then North Carolina College for Negroes, which is now North Carolina Central University [Durham, North Carolina]. So, I mean, I think in that regard, they did enjoy privileges that possibly, you know, of many of their contemporaries may not have had at that time. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She had, her, the rest of her family was in North Carolina, I mean, excuse me, in Richmond [Virginia]. So she was in contact with her biological sisters and brothers even though she was, you know, reared separately, which, from what I understand was not that uncommon at that time. Speaker 1: Okay, but is there a reason why she was reared in North Carolina instead of-- Speaker 2: Well she was reared in North Carolina with, with-- Speaker 1: Yeah, with an aunt, yeah. Speaker 2: --with an aunt. Well, that's what I'm saying. I mean, I, from what I can understand, that was not uncommon. My aunt was never married and had no children. She was a nurse and she was very supportive and helped her family and it may have been that that was the reason why, you know, my mother was given to her at birth. It was kind of because she had been so helpful and supportive of the family and she was by herself and, but it was never really a clear story, you know, of why specifically my mother, as opposed to any other sibling was the one. I think it was just happenstance. Speaker 1: Did your mother have a large, did she have a lot of brothers and sisters? Speaker 2: Yeah, she did. I believe she had seven or eight brothers or sisters. Story_ID: 645581 Speaker 1: Did your mother [Patricia Coles Cooper] have any stories about growing up that she shared with you? Speaker 2: Well, she lived at, at 412 Massey Avenue [Durham, North Carolina], across the street from the hospital; and one of her mother's sisters [Mary Carter Oglesby] lived with them and she had a first cousin who also lived with them, Isador Oglesby, and they were brought up like sister and brother and she ate all of her meals in the hospital and she was very, she always wanted to be close to her biological sisters and brothers so she would always beg her mom to, you know, have them come and visit for the summer and she, you know, they were very close and my, and her mother [Cooper's maternal great aunt], Patty, Patty Hawkins Carter [Patricia Hawkins Carter], was very devoted to Lincoln Hospital. So kind of everything they did circled around what went on at the hospital as she was growing up. And then, of course, she, and Palmer [Alice Freeman Palmer Memorial Institute, Sedalia, North Carolina] was a boarding school so she went to Palmer, you know, once she was in high school. I'm not sure the, I assume it was from her first--you know, the ninth grade to the twelfth grade. Speaker 1: Okay, so Lincoln Hospital, I suppose, was a black hospital in-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --in-- Speaker 2: Yes, in Durham [North Carolina]. Speaker 1: --in Durham, okay, and is this Palmer, this is what they call the Palmer Institute? Speaker 2: Yes, the Palmer Institute. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Does she have any stories about the Palmer Institute, about teachers or special people that were there? Speaker 2: I believe Charlotte Hawkins [Charlotte Hawkins Brown] was the headmistress, if I'm not mistaken, and there are just lots of stories about her, you know, how she ran the school and, you know, they were to be young ladies and what I just mainly remember is that the way my mom spoke of her, very fondly but that she was, I, I have the impression she was quite a character. I, I can't forge any specific story but I just kind of remember the way my mother spoke of her, it just sounded as if she was quite a character and-- Speaker 1: Okay. So this is an all-girls? Speaker 2: No, Palmer was coed. Speaker 1: Coed, okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm, and in fact, Palmer was in existence, I want to say, up until maybe at least the '60s [1960s]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And they said, they have a large alumni association. They have regular reunions. Speaker 1: Okay, so, what did your mother major in in school? Speaker 2: My mother majored in social science and minored in history. She was a social worker. She became a social worker after she graduated from college [North Carolina College for Negroes; North Carolina Central University, Durham, North Carolina]. She married my father [Horton Cooper] right out of college and he was also a social worker-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and she, I know that they lived for a time after they were married in Kansas City [Missouri], where he worked at a settlement house and then eventually they moved to Roanoke, Virginia and she was the, a probation officer for African Americans. So she handled all, I believe, all of the female people who came into that system and after we moved from Virginia, then she continued to be a social worker. She worked at the New Jersey, State Home for Girls [Trenton, New Jersey] and then she worked for social services in Mount Holly, New Jersey, which is where she worked until she died. Story_ID: 645582 Speaker 1: Oh, I didn't ask you what, well what did her parents do for a living? Speaker 2: Her biological mom was a seamstress and, I'm trying to think what her, her father's name was Archer, her biologic- her biological mother's name was Mary Christ Coles [Mary Carter Coles] and her father, biological father was Archer Coles and I'm trying to think what his occupation was, and I'll have to think about that for a minute or so (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. All right. Speaker 2: It's escaping me-- Story_ID: 645583 Speaker 1: Well let's go onto your father's side of the family. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Yes, Horton, H-O-R-T-O-N, Cooper, C-O-O-P-E-R [Horton Cooper]. Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: November 2nd, 1916, Hallsville, Texas. Speaker 1: And how do you spell that? Speaker 2: H-A-L-L-S-V-I-L-L-E, Hallsville, Texas. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It's in East Texas. Speaker 1: Okay, now what can, how far back can you trace his side? Speaker 2: We have information on my dad's side, obviously, his parents, his grandparents and his great-grandparents and, although we have never been able to get the information but I think his family originally came from some place called Scottsville, Texas. Speaker 1: Now do they have any stories about emancipation or slavery on that side? Speaker 2: Well, you know, people in Texas always talk about Juneteenth, because they were made to work in the cotton fields and they didn't get the word on emancipation until June 19th, so that's always a big deal for people from Texas. My dad was kind of sickly as a child. He had asthma so he didn't work that much in the fields. He spent most of the time with his, his grandfather who had a kind of a general store and spent a lot of time with him. Speaker 1: Okay, so that's, well, that's, that's something. So, so his grandfather had a store? Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, my, my grandfather, my father's father was a teacher, I mean, and he and my grandmother, for whom I'm named, her name was Almeta [Almeta Horton Cooper] as well, they were both teachers and they had a schoolhouse near the Pleasant Hill Church [Pleasant Hill Baptist Church, Hallsville, Texas] out in, you know, near Hallsville where, where my dad grew up. So, I believe my grandfather attended Bishop College [Marshall, Texas]. Speaker 1: And your grandfather's name was-- Speaker 2: Thomas Carlyle Cooper [Thomas Cooper, Sr.]. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, Thomas Carlyle Cooper, and your grandmother? Speaker 2: Almeta, A-L-M-E-T-A, Horton. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 645584 Speaker 1: Did your father [Horton Cooper] have any stories about growing up in-- Speaker 2: Oh, in (laughter)-- Speaker 1: --Hallsville [Texas]? Speaker 2: Yeah, well, you know, they lived on a farm as, you know, and they grew cotton and they had, they had crops and he had a large family. My dad, his oldest brother, Thomas [Thomas Cooper, Jr.], who was named after my, named after my grandfather [Thomas Cooper, Sr.], and there were eight or nine of them and so there were, you know, there was always something going on. I mean, when you have that many children and they're involved with the livelihood and, of the family and then my--you know, they all had nicknames. My father's nickname was, Butter Bee [ph.]. I never did find out why he was named Butter Bee but I know my father's youngest brother, my Uncle Paul [Paul Cooper], who was very close to, his name, they called him Bought because he was the only one not born at home and when they brought him home, they told him they bought him at the store so they always called him, Bought (laughter) and then my, my Uncle Roscoe [Roscoe Cooper], who was my father's older brother, he was always very particular and they, they would camp out quite a bit, I guess, and he was, my dad would tell the story about my Uncle Roscoe was carefully whittling his fork and knife and they ate up all the food by the time he got, by the time he was finished and, you know, they would, they have the home place there and my dad would take us every summer. We spent two weeks every summer with all my cousins. I have twenty-four first cousins and there were some who were already in Texas and the ones who were from away, their parents would bring, we would always--so my, even though there were so many of us and we lived all, every place different, we spent a lot of time together as children and we're still close now. Story_ID: 645585 Speaker 1: So your father, you say, you went, you think he went to Bishop [Bishop College, Marshall, Texas] and-- Speaker 2: Oh no, my [paternal] grandfather [Thomas Cooper, Sr.] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Your grandfather went to Bishop? Speaker 2: --went to Bishop. Speaker 1: Okay. Your father went to-- Speaker 2: My father graduated from Wiley-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --Wiley College in Texas [Marshall, Texas]. Speaker 1: Your dad went to Wiley-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and that's the famous school for 'The Great Debaters' in college? Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely, and Clarice Pearson Lowe [Clarice P. Lowe], one of the people who was one of the curators for that movie, was a good friend of my father's. She was, she lived in Houston [Texas] but I believe that she was originally from around where my dad's people are. Speaker 1: Now you say she was a advisor? Speaker 2: For 'The Great Debaters,' Clarice Pearson Lowe. Speaker 1: Was she an advisor to the movie? Speaker 2: Yes, yes, she was, she was. Speaker 1: Okay, but she wasn't one of the characters in-- Speaker 2: No, no, no. She wasn't one of the characters. I said curator or advisors, historical. Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause there was a lady that was an original member of that debate team that was written in a couple, up in a couple of magazines. Speaker 2: Right, right, but no, but she was an advisor. Speaker 1: Okay, did your father know Melvin B. Tolson or, or-- Speaker 2: I'm sure he did, I'm sure he did. Speaker 1: Or James Farmer's (unclear)-- Speaker 2: But, you know, at that time before this story was as well known as it is today, I mean, what, I sometimes I regret that I didn't really know some of those stories, you know, or didn't know to ask them. My dad probably, my dad maybe even told me but, you know, I didn't at, you know, at the time I just didn't, didn't recognize the value of it probably. I don't remember him talking about that but, but I'm sure he would have known of it because the people who graduated from Wiley were very devoted to Wiley and, you know, he would take us. When we would go back to Texas, you know, we, he'd take us and we'd visit the campus and so, you know, he held it very near and dear to his heart because both of my parents [Patricia Coles Cooper and Horton Cooper] graduated from historically black colleges [HBCUs]. I mean, I can remember when I was in college [Wells College, Aurora, New York] and I kind of discovered black history, my parents kind of just chuckled and laughed. They said, "This is, you know, you're not telling us anything new. We, we know all about that," (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, so your dad went to school at Wiley and-- Speaker 2: Um-hm, and then he got his master's [degree] from Atlanta University in social work [Atlanta University School of Social Work; Whitney M. Young Jr. School of Social Work, Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay, all right. So, is, so he worked for the rest of his life as a social worker, basically? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. He, after he left Kansas City [Missouri], he then went to the Veterans Administration [U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs] in Roanoke, Virginia and he worked there until my parents moved us in 1960 to New Jersey. They really, it was really kind of the classic story of our parents wanted to give us you know, more opportunities and that's the reason why he went to work in the Philadelphia VA [Philadelphia Veterans Administration Hospital; Corporal Michael J. Crescenz VA Medical Center, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. Story_ID: 645586 Speaker 1: So you were right across the river in New Jersey or? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We lived in New Jersey and he worked in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. Speaker 1: Okay, and where in New Jersey was it? Speaker 2: In Willingboro, New Jersey. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My parents [Patricia Coles Cooper and Horton Cooper] were actually the first blacks to buy a home in Willingboro, New Jersey. They, although they, we lived in, Willingboro was originally Levittown. There was a Levittown, New York and then there was a Levittown, New Jersey but Willingboro was the name of that community before the Levittown was built and the people who lived there were able to get the name changed back to Willingboro. So, at the time that my parents moved there, they lived in a section called Millbrook Park [Willingboro, New Jersey] but there was actually another family, the James [ph.] family that moved in before they moved in. Story_ID: 645587 Speaker 1: Now is there a story about how your parents met? Speaker 2: My mom [Patricia Coles Cooper] was a volunteer at the USO [United Service Organizations] in Durham, North Carolina and my dad [Horton Cooper] was in the service; and it's just kind of surprising because I always had the impression that my mother was kept rather close and strict and so I never was quite sure how she was allowed to go volunteer at the USO but somehow or another she was and that's where they met. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: And, and then they-- Speaker 1: So he was, was he in the-- Speaker 2: He was in the [U.S.] Army. Speaker 1: Army then, yeah. Speaker 2: He was in the Army. Speaker 1: Is this during World War II [WWII]? Speaker 2: Yes. He never saw, he was in the Army, although he never went overseas. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then they, they intended to elope but my mom, at the last moment, couldn't bear not to tell her mother [Cooper's maternal great aunt, Patricia Hawkins Carter]. So, by, in the morning, when they got married at the Episcopal church there in Durham, they had a whole church full of people 'cause, you know, they just started telling everybody and so-- Speaker 1: Now is there a reason why they wanted to elope or they thought that was a good idea even though-- Speaker 2: You know, I never really thought much about the fact that they wanted to elope but for whatever, for whatever reason they wanted to, I, I'm not sure what the story was. I don't know if it was because my dad was older than my mom. You know, maybe she thought, I don't know, if she thought maybe her mother wouldn't consent, I'm not quite sure, but they married and, and my mom had never really, it was, it's, well, my mom had always, I mean, she, she was basically reared as an only child, she lived, you know, ate all her meals in the hospital [Lincoln Hospital, Durham, North Carolina], so she didn't really have a lot of domestication (laughter). So, I'm not quite sure where she got the spunk to think that she could elope or, you know, get married as young as she was but she, she did and the story of my mom is that when she got married, she only knew how to fix one thing and she only knew how to prepare one thing and one of the older black women in the place where they were living asked my mom, like, "How are things going" 'cause they knew she knew they were newlyweds. She said, "How are things going with that nice man?" And she said, "They're good." And she said, "Well, you know, honey, what do you fix him?" And she said, "Oh, I fix rutabagas." And then she was like, "Uh-huh, and what else do you fix?" She said, "Rutabagas." And she said, "You fix rutabagas every night," and she said, "But he likes them." (Laughter) And she said, and so this woman kind of just took my mom inside and said, "I need to teach you how to cook because he likes them now but he won't be able to, nobody can eat rutabagas every night." And how, I mean, if you know anything about cooking, how, it was rutabagas of all things that she knew how to cook. I've never known how, how that came to be (simultaneous). Story_ID: 645588 Speaker 1: So when you think about your parents' personalities, their looks, their sense of humor, how they walk, how they talk, their talents, who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: I think I take after both of them. I'm, my parents, I was, I was very close with my parents and I always called them Horton [Horton Cooper] and Patricia [Patricia Coles Cooper] and that's how I always refer to them, by their names. My dad was from a family where they just told a lot of stories and, and, and jokes and had a kind of a dry sense of humor which I think I got from my dad and my mother was the most incredibly warm and giving person and she loved people, she loved children. I mean, once she had a, she had a birthday party where she just invited children, just, just because, she was, my parents were very open to people and when I think back on just the kind of eclectic kinds of people that they were always friendly with, I really think what I take after them is being very accepting of how people are. I don't usually tend to prejudge or I kind of take people where they are but I think that's because my parents, I mean, even that we were living in Roanoke, Virginia, which was segregated, I can remember my mom had a young friend and he must have been a social worker with her that she kind of took under her wing and I remember, I just remember his name was Gregory [ph.]. He was a young white man and he was very fond of her, kind of like a second mom and I remember that when he got married, his wife wasn't quite as enthusiastic about this black couple that was, that was his, you know, that he was so close to and once he got married, I don't remember us seeing him very much after that but I, but, and I also think about, my mom was a social worker and she developed a close relationship with one of the judges that would, that she appeared before, you know, regarding the, she was a probation officer there so one of the judges, and we would go to their house which, I think, I mean when I think back on it was, it was probably a bit unusual and even after we left, we left Virginia, the wife of the judge, their names were, I don't know why I remember this, Maude [Maude Payton (ph.)] and K.A. Payton [ph.], I think, and her sister, Ruthie [ph.], lived in Morristown, New Jersey, which was near where my parents settled when they came to New Jersey and they also were in communication, then were quite friendly when my mom was alive. So, my parents, they were always doing things. My, even though they, they were a good team together, and they, when they worked together, there just seemed like there wasn't anything they couldn't accomplish. My parents were very supportive. I don't remember them exactly saying, you know, "You can be whatever you want to be," but when I went to go to law school [Northwestern University School of Law; Northwestern University Pritzker School of Law, Chicago, Illinois], I mean, there was never any question. My parents, and I really don't even know how they did it, they, they always owned a home. They were, my dad was very frugal and I think that came from his side of the family. I mean, he was very, very frugal and, but they owned property and they saved and they instilled those virtues in my sister [Patricia Cooper Scott (ph.)] and me and they always wanted us to be able to do, you know, to be self-sufficient and they did, and my mom and dad did everything they could to give us, you know, a really good experience, including moving from Virginia to New Jersey [Willingboro, New Jersey], which was, you know, they didn't have family or anything there. They did that because they wanted to give us a better opportunity. So they were just, they were just a lot of, they were always a lot of fun. They always, they always had, you know, something funny going on or a story and my dad was a kind of person who's very distinguished looking and not the sort of person that you would suspect that would be saying something really funny, under his breath, to make you laugh and then he would turn to you and say, "What's wrong with you? Why are you laughing?" (Laughter) You know, whether, it could be in church or wherever it was, he would just kind of turn to you and he would, always had kind of a mischievous smile and kind of a story to tell and kind of, he always was able to get the irony out of a situation. Story_ID: 645589 Speaker 1: So, you know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So he had--you said he had a dry humor? Speaker 1: Yes, yes. Speaker 2: Do you have a story about something that he said or did that--? Speaker 1: Yeah, they, well, I mean, for example. My dad [Horton Cooper] had a first cousin and I can remember when I was in college [Wells College, Aurora, New York], he and I went to his cousin's funeral and his cousin, Hut Horton [ph.], was quite the ladies' man apparently. He was very handsome and he used to, everyone, he, he had, he caught the eye of many of an attractive woman, apparently, and he, although he was always married to the same woman, he did have apparently multiple children and when we went to his funeral, you know, my dad leaned over to me and said, "I wonder who that is they're talking about?" 'Cause they were talking about all his virtues and all the things he did, which he did do a lot of good things in the community as well but, you know, that was just kind of the thing that, that kind of, the irony of that just kind of caught him. He's like, "Hm, I wonder who they're talking about?" Story_ID: 645590 Speaker 1: Now, can you name your brothers and sisters for us and put yourself in the order (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What's that? Yeah, I have one sister. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Her name is Patricia Carter Cooper [Patricia Cooper Scott (ph.)]. Speaker 1: Is she older than you? Speaker 2: She's older, she's four years older. Speaker 1: Okay. Is that it? Speaker 2: Yes, that's it. Speaker 1: Okay, it's just the two of you, okay? Speaker 2: Just the two of us, and she's, she's been long divorced but she has two sons, Julian [Julian Scott (ph.)], named for [HistoryMaker] Julian Bond (laughter), and Patrick, her, her--Patrick Scott [ph.]. Story_ID: 645591 Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: (Pause) My earliest childhood memory. I, I remember that there was a situation, and I don't know how little I was but I must, I know it was when we were living in Virginia [Roanoke, Virginia] and we moved from Virginia when I was nine and it was some time before that, I just remember, and my parents said this didn't happen. They, so something happened which I took it to be that it happened this way but I can remember that my, I believed that my father [Horton Cooper] said something or did something that would, and my mom [Patricia Coles Cooper] was not pleased with and that she chased him around the house. Now, they said that never happened so, you know, I don't know, maybe it didn't happen but apparently as a child, I was al- once I had something firmly in my mind, it was impossible to shake me, you know, from that belief (laughter). Story_ID: 645592 Speaker 1: And the other thing is, I can picture the house. We lived at 1430 Gilmer Avenue in Roanoke, Virginia and I can see that house just as clear, I may not be able to remember other houses that I lived in, but that house that we lived in, which my mom [Patricia Coles Cooper] always called the lunchbox because it was a small house and she said you could just put a handle on it and pick it up and move it around. I can picture that house. It was, oh, that's a, that's a funny story about my dad [Horton Cooper]. They bought the whole, at that time, the house that we lived in was considered to be kind of out from the center of Roanoke, Virginia, which is not a large city but it was a little bit out and my dad owned the whole block but we just lived on one lot and because, and the grass would get really tall and, and it was just too hard to mow so my dad would, I guess this is then. What they did when he grew up in the country, he would set it on fire and, you know, to burn it down and, of course, you know, they lived in the city so you really weren't supposed to do that and he had a little guy who would help him do--and he had told him, he wasn't real smart, I don't think, and he had told him, "Now, if the, when the firemen come, no matter what happens, you say, 'We don't know how the fire started,'" and he so convinced this young guy that when the firemen came, he started telling the story in earnest, he completely forgot that he had set the fire (laughter) and my dad always said that was pretty funny. He said, "Yeah," and then he completely forgot. He's told this story so earnestly, he said, "He had me believing that we didn't start the fire," but, you know, that was just kind of a funny thing that my, that my dad would, you know, those kind of things. Speaker 2: So, the house is a little house, this is in-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --Roanoke, Virginia-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --and you lived there for how long when you were growing up? Speaker 1: Until I was nine and-- Speaker 2: Okay, so that's (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) then we moved to New Jersey [Willingboro, New Jersey]. Story_ID: 645593 Speaker 1: So that's first grade through fourth grade, I guess, right? Speaker 2: I didn't start school in the first grade. (Laughter) I started school, actually, when I was younger. I was a spontaneous reader from what I understand so I just, which is I guess, you know, just what some kids do. So I started reading when I was around four and when I was tested for school, they wanted me to start in the fourth grade but my mother [Patricia Coles Cooper] thought that was just too much. So I started school in the second grade-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --which is the reason why, to this day, I can't cut and color in the lines (laughter). Speaker 1: So, so you were you, did you start school at six years old like most people who start first grade? Speaker 2: I started at six but most of my friends were in the second grade. So, I think that's another reason why I wanted to be in the second grade so I could be with my friends. My birthday is in December and I don't know what the cutoff was then. Speaker 1: Okay. What was the name of your school? Speaker 2: Loudon Elementary School [Roanoke, Virginia]. Speaker 1: Loudon, okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And Mr. Coleman was the principal. I think it was William Coleman [ph.]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: My second grade teacher was Mrs. Carter [ph.]. My third grade teacher was Mrs. Lipscomb [ph.] and my fourth grade teacher was Mrs. Trent [ph.]. I remember them very clearly. Speaker 2: Were they all favorite teachers or were they just-- Speaker 1: Yeah, they, well you know, it was an all black school and they were, they were very, you know, they were just, we had really, it was just really good. I mean, I just remember we learned a lot, it was very positive. I mean, I don't, you know, I don't, I don't think as a child I really had a grasp of segregation. I mean, I knew that there were places we couldn't go. I mean, you know, we couldn't, we could only go to the black movie theatre which was across from--my dad [Horton Cooper] was a deacon in the church and there was this one movie theatre which was the only place we could go but I don't really recall, I don't really recall ever, you know, having any sense of deprivation, you know, because I had great friends and we had a good school and I had good--great teachers. So, it was, you know, I was very happy. If, if, in fact, I often told people, I didn't know until I went to college [Wells College, Aurora, New York] that I had, had any kind of deprivation because my mother always worked and I never felt any sense of--my mother was very loving and supportive, I had no idea that I had been deprived of anything until I went to college and found out that, you know, children's moms, many of them, stayed at home. Story_ID: 645594 Speaker 1: This is Loudon Elementary School [Roanoke, Virginia]-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and now what were you interested in growing up? You could read early and everything but what were you interested in doing? Speaker 2: I was al- I mean, I loved to read books and so that was always something that I was interested in. I wasn't really, I mean, I can't remember, I mean I did everything, you know, that, with my friends did. I mean I had friends from school, friends from Jack and Jill [Jack and Jill of America, Inc.] and, you know, I know, you know, there was one family in the--that there was a family of brothers who were physicians who went together and built a pool and we would, you know, we would go to that pool and I know when I was young we went to camp. There was a camp and it was actually in Pennsylvania. Camp Oak Hill [Nottingham, Pennsylvania] was a camp for African Americans and I know we would go to camp in the summer and go, I believe we went for four weeks. I can remember we would take our trunk, I mean, our parents [Patricia Coles Cooper and Horton Cooper], we would go with another family friend who also had daughters who went to the same camp and we'd go to camp and I just, I just remember having very, you know, happy memories of, of my childhood, especially-- Speaker 1: Now were you in Girl Scouts [Girl Scouts of the United States of America] or-- Speaker 2: I was in the Girl Scouts. I was not a Brownie, but I was a Girl Scout and I was a candy striper. Speaker 1: Now a candy striper is a hospital assistant? Speaker 2: Yeah, you're a volunteer at a hospital. I also volunteered one summer for special needs children before, because at that time, not many people, there weren't as many jobs, I don't believe, for high school students to get jobs and so I volunteered for, you know, special, one summer we worked at a special needs camp, my friends and I. And in school I was, you know, always active in school, in, you know, active on the yearbook and I was a, I was a cheerleader (laughter) in high school [John F. Kennedy High School, Willingboro, New Jersey]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It's always, you know, I was always involved. Story_ID: 645595 Speaker 1: So you made good, good grades, I, I guess? Speaker 2: I was a good student. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Right, I was a good student. But I think the thing that was, that was always, I think that was helpful to me was that I was a good student, my, but my natural abilities were really more in, in reading and I was good in languages. I was never a strong math student so I always had to work really hard in math and I think that was always, that was a good thing for me because I, when I was coming along, people tended to be in a homogeneous grouping as opposed to now. I think you have more heterogeneous grouping of kids in school but I think it always made me appreciate because everything, I mean, I think for some people I had the perception that everything came easy for them but I had to work hard at that and I had friends, I had some friends who were really good in math and they would help me, you know, tutor me and help me to study and, and to be able to do what I had to do in math. So I think that was a good lesson for me that, you know, things don't always come easily. And, and I remember when I was, before, actually before I could read, my mother [Patricia Coles Cooper] ordered these, and I don't know, I think I asked her for it is what I remember, but I don't even know where I got this from, some, these records to learn French and I just have these little, you know, then of course it was a record and I could just remember, you know, learning the French words when I was little and that, and I've always, I've been fortunate--I was a German major in college [Wells College, Aurora, New York] and I had five years of French in high school [John F. Kennedy High School, Willingboro, New Jersey]. So I was always fortunate that I was, I had a facility for language. Story_ID: 645596 Speaker 1: Was church a big factor in growing up? Speaker 2: Yeah, my, we're Episcopalian and we always went to church. In Roanoke [Virginia] we went to St. Luke's [St. Luke's Protestant Episcopal Church] and in Willingboro [New Jersey] we went to Christ The King [Christ The King Episcopal Church] and then, I can't recall the name of the church that I attended in Chicago [Illinois] but it's right at, I think it's at 25th [Street] and King Drive [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive], around there, and then-- Speaker 1: Not an Episcopal church, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, there's an Episcopal church, there's the Baptist church right by Lake Meadows [Lake Meadows Apartments, Chicago, Illinois]. There's a Baptist church like at 31st [Street] and then the Episcopal church [Trinity Episcopal Church, Chicago, Illinois] it, you know what, it's not on King, I think it might be on Michigan [Avenue]. It's on Michigan. Speaker 1: Oh, St. Thomas [St. Thomas Episcopal Church, Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: I can't, I can't, it's-- Speaker 1: That's the one next to the Wabash Y [Wabash Avenue YMCA, Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: I think that one is further south. Speaker 1: That is further south. Speaker 2: That's farther south. Speaker 1: Okay, you're talking about, okay. Speaker 2: It's a little church. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: It's a little church and then in, when, well, and then, yeah, so I've just, yeah, we're, we were Episcopalian and I've just always gone to Episcopal churches. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And the church, the, I enjoyed the Episcopal church and then when my daughter [Elise Nelson] was a teenager and the Episcopal church that I attend here in Columbus [Ohio], didn't have a strong youth group and I had told my daughter that if she wanted to attend another church, that we could do that because I enjoyed the Episcopal church. It just, I relate to it, I find comfort in it, I've always had a lot of support, the sense of community but that if she wanted to attend a church that had a strong, you know, youth program, we could do that because I could, I'll be coming back to the Episcopal church after she, you know, left home, so, it's all worked out. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, and I, and I, you know the other thing I think, you know, my mom [Patricia Coles Cooper] was Episcopal, my dad [Horton Cooper] was Baptist and he was always very active in his church. He was a deacon and whatnot but I think the thing that I really appreciate is just the sense of values and the good values that come along from the, you know, being a part of a church and a church community. Story_ID: 645597 Speaker 1: Now what was the difference between, you know, North Carolina and New Jersey? I mean, what, what differences did you (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh there were, well in North Carolina, I never, I was born in North Carolina because my mom [Patricia Coles Cooper] went home to have both my sister [Patricia Cooper Scott (ph.)] and me at Lincoln Hospital [Durham, North Carolina] but I actually, my earliest memories of growing up were first in Roanoke and-- Speaker 1: Oh, Virginia, I'm sorry, Virginia, not North Carolina, that's what I'm really asking. Speaker 2: Yeah, in Virginia, yeah, yeah. Oh, I'm sorry. Speaker 1: Between Virginia. It's my fault because I said North Carolina but Virginia and North Carolina. Speaker 2: Would you say the question again please? Speaker 1: Yeah, once, what did you, what was the difference, I guess to you, I mean, what were the biggest differences between Roanoke, Virginia and then New Jersey? I know you're older (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, between Virginia and New Jersey? Oh, well it was a huge difference because in Virginia we lived in an all-black environment. Basically, we went to a black church [St. Luke's Protestant Episcopal Church, Roanoke, Virginia], I went to a black elementary school [Loudon Elementary School, Roanoke, Virginia] and then when I moved to New Jersey, I was the only black child in my elementary school [Millbrook Park Elementary School, Willingboro, New Jersey], only black girl. I was lucky, I mean, I didn't experience some of the, some of the, kind of very difficult situations that some of my friends did because, and I think it was mainly because I was quiet and I was a girl and so people didn't really, you know, I didn't get called names and I wasn't taunted or things like that so I was very fortunate I didn't experience that. You know, I, I mean there may have been an occasional person who said something that was racist but it wasn't an everyday thing and it wasn't, you know, it wasn't a situation where I was fearful or things like that. So, but that was a, that was just huge. I mean, just to go from an all black to an all, basically all white environment--that was, that was very different. Story_ID: 645598 Speaker 1: Okay, so you, you moved when you were about nine, right? Speaker 2: I moved when I was nine, yes. Speaker 1: And, what was the name of your school in New Jersey? Speaker 2: Millbrook Park Elementary School [Willingboro, New Jersey]. Speaker 1: Milford-- Speaker 2: Millbrook. Speaker 1: Millbrook, okay. Speaker 2: M-I-L-L-B-R-O-O-K, Millbrook Park Elementary School. Speaker 1: Okay, and were there any special teachers there? Speaker 2: My, my fifth grade teacher, Mr. Dominic [ph.], was very, I just remember was very friendly and supportive and inclusive and so he stands out and then, I mean, I guess, and then, even then I was in a special program so I went to high school in the eighth grade. They had just had a, a kind of an accelerated program where you could take ninth grade courses in the eighth grade and that program was really more about the ninety students who kind of moved as a group through that program so it really, it was more bonding with the students than it was maybe bonding with the teachers, although I think I had good teachers, you know, in high school and in particular I remember that I had a German teacher who was very supportive, Herr Cronmiller [Lance Cronmiller] (laughter). Speaker 1: So this is in high school? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And so eighth grade, what was the name of your high school? Speaker 2: John F. Kennedy High School [Willingboro, New Jersey]. Speaker 1: John F. Kennedy, okay. Now did they just name it for him 'cause you, let's see. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You started high school in '64 [1964], I guess, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, he had, you know-- Speaker 1: Or '63 [1963]. Speaker 2: Sixty-three [1963] Speaker 1: You must have started in '63 [1963]-- Speaker 2: Sixty-three [1963]. Speaker 1: --since you started in eighth grade? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: So, and he was-- Speaker 2: It was probab- I think it was probably named Levittown High School before the president [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy]-- Speaker 1: Was assassinated, okay. Speaker 2: --was assassinated. Speaker 1: 'Cause he was assassinated in 1963, in November the 22nd (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Right. Speaker 1: So, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So you think they, afterwards they renamed it? Speaker 2: Yes, I think it was afterwards. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So John F. Kennedy High School. Story_ID: 645599 Speaker 1: Did you take notice of all the legal activity around the Civil Rights Movement when you were growing up? Speaker 2: Yeah, my parents [Patricia Coles Cooper and Horton Cooper] took us to the March on Washington. My parents were very committed to civil rights. I mean my parents, although it sound, it doesn't sound very radical now, they were members of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] when that was considered to be, you know, quite controversial. You know, I don't think it ever occurred to my parents not to take us to the March on Washington. That was a big deal to them. My dad always was very much an advocate for civil rights and always wanted to see, you know, someone, I mean, I can remember that my dad was a big advocate for Muhammad Ali and he used to love to watch him and he appreciate--at a time when not everyone appreciated him. He was a brash young man but my dad, I just remember, he just loved him and I remember how excited he was when he changed his name from Cassius Clay to Muhammad Ali and he said, "If he wants to change his name, he can change his name," you know. "How dare they tell him he can't change his name," you know, that, so, you know, they were always, they were always involved. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. And that's true, a lot of people, and especially there were a lot of black people that took offense to him changing his name. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: They didn't like him 'cause he talked too much. He wasn't the quiet, you know, you know, approval, he didn't have the approval of white people, you know (unclear). Speaker 2: Well my dad liked him because he was outspoken and he was well spoken and smart and that he could, and that he was such a positive image. I just remember my dad really liked him and that, I mean, that made a real impression on me. Speaker 1: Now do you have any memories about the March on Washington itself? You were there, were you all, did you get a chance to, or did you think that Dr. King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] speech was historic when you heard it [I Have a Dream]? Speaker 2: Well, I was rather young at the time. Again, my parents took me and I knew that I was there. I mean, I probably remember, I mean, I, we walked, it was hot, I can kind of remember the speeches. I don't think, to be honest, at the time, I probably didn't fully appreciate the historic nature of it. I just knew that it was important and that my parents thought it was important for us to be there and to be a part of it and, you know, what it stood for but I don't think I was advanced enough to really be able to say, you know, "Wow, I'm here in the presence of Martin Luther King, Jr." I just, you know, there were a lot of people who we knew who went and it just, I, I knew it was important and the value that my parents put on it. Speaker 1: So you would have been twelve, I think? Speaker 2: Right, I was twelve. Speaker 1: Right. Story_ID: 645600 Speaker 1: At age twelve growing up through high school [John F. Kennedy High School, Willingboro, New Jersey], were you interested at all in the law? Speaker 2: No, I was not. How I became a lawyer was serendipity (laughter). Speaker 1: Well, we may not be, be time to get to it yet, but I'm just asking at this stage in school-- Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: --were you interested? Speaker 2: No, I didn't-- Speaker 1: Well, what were you thinking about in terms of a career? Did you have anything in mind? Speaker 2: I had no idea. I just, you know, at that point in my life I knew you go to school and, you know, you do your work and, and you go to college but, I mean, I didn't, it wasn't because I had, you know, some people do have that, I want to be a nurse, I want to be a teacher, I want to be a lawyer. I didn't at that age. I did not have an identifiable passion. Speaker 1: Did you have any heroes or sheroes at that age? Speaker 2: At twelve? Really, it wasn't until much later where I had a specific people that I focused on and really, you know, deeply admired. I remember it was, again, much later, but Barbara Jordan was somebody that I really admired. Alice Walker, I really enjoyed her writing and thought she was, you know, I was very impressed by her but at a very young age, I don't, I can't recall someone specifically, you know, in terms of a historic figure or someone like that that I actually focused onto. Story_ID: 645601 Speaker 1: Now John F. Kennedy High School [Willingboro, New Jersey], and you said you were a cheerleader, right? Speaker 2: Yes (laughter). Speaker 1: You were on the school paper? Speaker 2: Yes, I was. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I was, I was. I worked on the yearbook, I worked on the school paper, I was on the debate team, you know, I was, you know, I just did those things because that's what you do in school and my parents [Patricia Coles Cooper and Horton Cooper] were supportive of it. Speaker 1: Okay, now these are all the verbal things that, you know, the debate team and, did you run for class office? Speaker 2: I was the, I think my sophomore year I was class treasurer. Speaker 1: Okay, and, and, now did you give us the names of the teachers or, your high school teachers that you really thought were important? Speaker 2: Oh, mister, it was, well, we always called him Herr Cronmiller. It was Lance Cronmiller. Speaker 1: Oh your--Herr Cron-- Speaker 2: And I was just, I'm trying to think of the name. There was another, we had a hist- mis- another history teacher who was very supportive in ninth grade and I can't think of his name right at the moment. Story_ID: 645602 Speaker 1: So, when you were a senior in high school [John F. Kennedy High School, Willingboro, New Jersey]-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --what were, what kind of counseling did you get, about--? Speaker 2: Well, you know, when I was in high school, and again, I was still in a fairly homogeneous track, all my friends were going to college and so I just assumed that I would go to college. Speaker 1: These are mostly white kids, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean, except for my friends, fortunately, I was always in Jack and Jill [Jack and Jill of America, Inc.] so I always had (laughter), I always had people who looked like me around and, you know, my friends in Jack and Jill were also going to college. So, I didn't, again, I just felt really fortunate because I didn't get off on a wrong path which, because I didn't have that passion to say, "Oh, I want to do this specific thing or that specific thing." So when I was a senior in high school, my first cousin, one of my first cousins on my dad's side was visiting, he had just gotten out of the, he had just come back from Vietnam and he had, he was a lawyer and he got drafted and he had just come back from Vietnam and he was visiting my parents [Patricia Coles Cooper and Horton Cooper] and I had been accepted into, to Wells College [Aurora, New York], it was a women's college that I attended and graduated from, and I had to fill out my first semester course selection and my parents said to my cousin, Bertrand [ph.], "Why don't you help her because you're much younger and you're closer, much closer to college than we are and you can give her good advice." And he sat down with me and he asked me, you know, "What are you interested in?" And I said what I'm saying now is that, "I don't have a specific focus, I just know I'm going to college." And he said, "Well what are you going to do afterwards?" "Well, I, I don't know. I'm going to probably get a job and do something." He said, "Well, what do you, you know--," and he kind of pressed me and, you know, "Well what about science?" I said, "Well, I'm not really a math and science person, I'm really more a person who likes reading and I like people." And after he talked to me quite a while, he said, "Well," you know, he was a lawyer, and he said, "well, maybe you should consider law." I said, "Oh, okay, that sounds good." And he said, "Because, you know, you like people and you like to read and you like to do this and that." And so he encouraged me to focus on going to law school after college and he advised me, and I know which was, I think great advice, he said, "Major in something you like so you can do well and take, you know, government and economics and these other courses 'cause that'll, that'll, you know, be good for you if you go to law school and you'll be able to be successful." And that's what I did. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So I was just very fortunate. I, I was really, really fortunate and lucky that, you know, kind of at a point in time in my life, my cousin was there to give me that advice, you know. I just-- Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: --I can't say that I was brilliant and I figured it out on my own. I was fortunate to have a lot of support. Story_ID: 645603 Speaker 1: Is there a story behind how you chose Wells College [Aurora, New York]? Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I had, I was, again, I was fortunate to have a facility in language and I started taking German, I had taken French and then I started taking German and I wanted to be able to take a certain number of German courses in high school [John F. Kennedy High School, Willingboro, New Jersey] so I wanted to go to a program in German for the summer and there, when I was looking around for programs to attend, I wrote to Wells College and, although they didn't have a summer program for high school students, the letter that they wrote back to me was so personal and they followed up with it and really made me feel like, oh, this is some place, you know, sounds really like a great place, like they're really interested in you as a person and it was, so I ended up going to Colby College in Waterville, Maine, but I always remembered that kind of interaction that I had with Wells and they would, then, once I guess at that time, once they had their, your name in their database, they kept in contact with you so I would get letters, I'd get letters from students and, you know, people encouraging me, "Well, you need to think about Wells when you're, you know, applying to college." And so I ended up applying to Wells. Speaker 1: Okay, so you did the summer program at Colby College-- Speaker 2: Um-hm, in Waterville, Maine. Speaker 1: --then applied to Wells for fall-- Speaker 2: And then applied to Wells and, and I was accepted and went to Wells. Speaker 1: Okay, so, you graduated from high school in '68 [1968]? Speaker 2: I graduated from high school in '68 [1968]. I both started and finished at Wells but I, the dean told me that I spent less time at Wells College than any other student ever to graduate from that college and I would be the last person that spent that much time away because, at the time, they had 4-1-4, which is of, you know, they had the short January term and then the fall and spring term. So, I spent my junior year at Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia], I spent my sophomore, second half of my sophomore year in Heidelberg, Germany at Schiller College [Schiller International University], and then every January I would do independent study, away from campus. So, I had a true liberal arts education. Story_ID: 645604 Speaker 1: Let me go back to '68 [1968], though, because this is such a turbulent year, there's so much going on. Dr. King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] assassinated, the Democratic National Convention [1968 Democratic National Convention, Chicago, Illinois] and the riots in '68 [1968]. Do you remember what happened in school when Dr. King was assassinated 'cause you're like a black person in an all white environment? What was the-- Speaker 2: You know, what I remember mainly, I mean, I just, well obviously everybody was very, well, I don't know about everybody, I was sad and I remember the riots and kind of the despair and I, I was very close with my parents [Patricia Coles Cooper and Horton Cooper], so I probably, you know, probably talked more with my parents than anyone else. It just seemed like such, you know, a tragedy and, and how could that be and, you know, he was, you know, nonviolent and he had been assassinated and, you know, just, it just seemed so terrible and I, I think the main, you know at that time, you know, the war was going on and there was a lot of anti-Vietnam [Vietnam War] sentiment and I think being in a liberal arts college that was kind of the feeling of people, that was also, at the time that I was in college and I was at Wells [Wells College, Aurora, New York], there was also a major incident at Cornell [Cornell University, Ithaca, New York] which was quite close to where I was where there were students who took over the student union [sic. Willard Straight Hall] and I did know those folks. I mean, we were in school together so it was pretty dramatic that that occurred. Speaker 1: This is in '68 [1968], as well, in the fall of '68 [1968]? Speaker 2: It was, you know, I'm not, it must have been, it was either the fall of '68 [1968] or the spring of '68 [1968] but in that, in that, in the first two years of college. Speaker 1: Or spring of '69 [1969]? Speaker 2: Or the spring of, yeah, in the spring, yeah, spring of '69 [1969] in those-- Speaker 1: Is that the one that made the newspapers and stuff, the magazine (unclear)? Speaker 2: Yeah, it was on the cover of all the magazines and everything. Speaker 1: At Cornell. Speaker 2: At Cornell, yeah. So it just, I think it was just a very disruptive, unsettling time because you just didn't know what was going to happen and just what to believe in and, you know, Marvin Gaye was singing about, what's going on ['What's Going On'], you know, and (laughter). It was, it was just an unsettling and troubling time. Story_ID: 645605 Speaker 1: At Wells [Wells College, Aurora, New York]-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --were there, how many other black students were there? Speaker 2: There were nine. Speaker 1: Okay, I know you know the exact number. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yes, I do. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: There were nine, there were nine. Speaker 1: And did, did the nine form some kind of bond or some kind of-- Speaker 2: Yeah, we had the Black Women's Society [Wells College Black Women's Society]. We were, you know, I think Beverly Tatum [HistoryMaker Beverly Daniel Tatum] has written a book about, you know, why are all the black students sitting at the same table ['Why Are All the Black Kids Sitting Together in the Cafeteria?: And Other Conversations About Race']. Yeah, there was definitely a bond among the students of color, they weren't, we weren't all African American. There were some Spanish speaking students but we did form a close alliance and we're very, even if you weren't friends, you were friends. It sort of, it was a support system. It was definitely a support system. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, you know, I had, again, I feel very, very fortunate that I had loving, supporting, supportive parents [Patricia Coles Cooper and Horton Cooper]. I, even though there were, you know, times that were difficult, I was able somehow, you know, with that support to be able to navigate. I don't think it's because I had some special knowledge or special talent but if I had any kind of special talent it's just that I'm a very resilient person but I don't--I think I'm resilient because of my family and the support and love that I had that allowed me to be that way. Story_ID: 645606 Speaker 1: At Wells [Wells College, Aurora, New York] now you said your, so your freshman year (unclear) (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So my first year I was at Wells. The spring of my sophomore year I was in Heidelberg [Germany]-- Speaker 1: Okay, now how was that? Now this is your first time out of the country or, or is it-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Again, I, I went. (Laughter) I mean, my father [Horton Cooper] was very frugal. I think I mentioned that so when I think back on it it's pretty amazing. I went, there were three other students from my college so I wasn't there by myself and we lived in a, in a pensione, you know, in a little hotel that was near the college [Schiller College; Schiller International University, Heidelberg, Germany] and when we arrived there, my dad allowed me to make a call when I arrived and then otherwise I had, you know, I wrote a letter almost like every day and my parents would write to me and then my sister [Patricia Cooper Scott (ph.)] has, had a friend who was married and living in Frankfurt [Frankfurt am Main, Germany] and at the end of my studies I got a Eurail pass and traveled around and then when I got to Frankfurt with my sister's friends, I was able to send a telegram to let my parents know that I was coming home. So it was very different from, you know, today's, we were communica- you know we're always in touch. I mean, my daughter [Elise Nelson] calls me on her cellphone and, you know, at any time but then, which is kind of hard to imagine, I literally for that six or seven months I was only, you know, I had what, two phone calls in or one phone call and a telegram. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Although I felt very--I mean, but I was writing all the time so I felt very close to my parents. Speaker 1: All right, so, now did you travel around the rest of Europe while you were there? Speaker 2: Not that much. We went to, I went with my classmates, we went to Italy, we went to Capri [Italy], we went to, I think, Rome [Italy] but, again, I was with some classmates and, you know, we did that on holiday so that was, that was very exciting (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you get to Paris [France]? Speaker 2: Actually, oh, my dad, who graduated from Wiley College [Marshall, Texas], who had never been any place in his whole life, when we were in high school [John F. Kennedy High School, Willingboro, New Jersey], I think it was when I was fourteen, my dad took us to Europe. I, I had forgotten that. My dad took us to Europe. Through the VA [Veterans Administration; U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs], the federal government had some, they don't, you don't hear of this much anymore but they had like a charter and all of these, you know, people in the federal government were able to go and my dad took us on this trip and we did, you know, kind of the Europe on eight days, you know. We had the travel book and we went to, we went to London [England], we went to Paris, we were in Nice [France], we went to Rome, it was very exciting. It was very, very exciting. It was, it was kind of interesting because back then, people didn't quite know what to make of what we were or who we were. I mean, it was just kind of strange but, you know, my dad, they would, they thought, and I don't know why, but my dad, they sometimes thought was from India and they asked my mother [Patricia Coles Cooper] where, what country in Africa was she from and I don't know what they thought we were. And then I know one time my sister, my sister, who did not speak any Italian but my sister is a person who can just, I don't know, kind of intuitively understand so we had gone one night to this Italian restaurant, I'll never forget, and my sister could always figure out food and she was saying, well this is this, and this is this and the waiter thought she was Italian because she, she was explaining to us what was on the menu. She didn't know any Italian but somehow or another she figured it out, so, yeah. So that was the, I'd forgotten that but, but my dad--oh, and that was the other thing. My dad tried to use his, Texas German, in Germany, did not go well (laughter). Speaker 1: The Texas German-- Speaker 2: His Tex- yeah. Speaker 1: --now there are a lot of Germans in East Texas. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Were there, I mean, really, so-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. I'm just saying he learned German at Wiley College, you know, some thirty years previously and that was the German he was trying to use when we were there and people had difficulty understanding. That's why I call it his Texas German (laughter). Speaker 1: Now there's a lot, that's a significant group, group of Germans there. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Story_ID: 645607 Speaker 1: So that's, the sophomore year you went to Germany [Schiller College; Schiller International University, Heidelberg, Germany], came back and then you spent like a, was it a year at Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia]? Speaker 2: I spent a year at Spelman. Speaker 1: This is your junior year, right? Speaker 2: My junior year. Speaker 1: So, okay, so, so far, you've got like two semesters at-- Speaker 2: As I said, that's what the dean said. No one would ever be able to, but see my dad [Horton Cooper] told me, I was on the four year plan and my dad told me, I could do whatever I wanted to do as long as I started and stopped in that four years. So, one of the reasons why I did not transfer to Spelman was because I was on the four year plan and because I had been a German major and had so many credits in German, I really didn't feel that I could easily switch majors and when I was at Spelman at that time, there weren't that many, there weren't enough advanced courses-- Speaker 1: In German. Speaker 2: --in German. I took a class at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] but it just, it wasn't going to be enough for me to be able to meet my dad's requirements 'cause my dad was very firm on the fact that, you know, you graduate in four years, (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Story_ID: 645608 Speaker 1: I guess I should ask you about the German trip on some level. Was there anything that you, you think surprising about your trip to Germany or did you learn anything that you really--? Speaker 2: I think-- Speaker 1: Or what did you learn there, I guess, is the question? Speaker 2: Well, I mean, obviously, at the time I learned German. I had a professor who had to give a paper in English, an economics professor. I took a class in German in economics and then I helped him kind of, Americanized his paper. I read it for him and helped, you know, him Americanize it. That was kind of interesting. And then the other thing was that by the time I came home, I was really, you know, when you're in another country and when you're in, when in that time being in Germany the wall [Berlin Wall] was still up. You know, we went into East Germany, it was really kind of frightening. You know, the soldiers would get on your bus and they'd have guns and they'd make you, you know, they'd look at you and look at your passport and it was pretty intimidating. You feel more like, you don't think of yourself as a black American, you think of yourself as an American 'cause people are looking at you as an American. And then, you know, so that was kind of a different experience. You know, just that kind of being viewed in that way as opposed to being viewed as a, as an African American or as a black American or as a Negro or whatever word was being used at that time. So that was, that was different. And I remember on my way, at the end of my studies [at Schiller College; Schiller International University, Heidelberg, Germany] and after I'd been on my Eurail pass, I saw Ella Fitzgerald in Tivoli Gardens in Denmark [Copenhagen, Denmark] and I can remember, well I always, I had always liked jazz anyway in high school [John F. Kennedy High School, Willingboro, New Jersey] and I had seen Ella Fitzgerald and Duke Ellington before but when I saw her in the Tivoli Gardens, I just started to cry. The tears just gushed down. I just felt such a connection to this woman, you know, and to hearing her, you know, she was amazing, you know, even then, her voice was always so youthful and so beautiful and I just remember being so excited to connect to that other black person, you know, even though she didn't know I was down there in the audience, I just was like, "Ah," and it was, it was, and that was a different experience, you know, just to, 'cause I don't think I had realized that I had been isolated for so long and I just kind of, you know, learned to go along with it and, but in that moment, I was just like, how thankful I was that she was there and singing and it felt like she was just singing to me. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That was really-- Speaker 1: Hm. Speaker 2: --it was very moving. Story_ID: 645609 Speaker 1: Now at Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Now Spelman, this is your ju- junior year? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Now, what happened at Spelman? Speaker 2: I loved Spelman. I had a great experience. I lived in, again, because I was a language major, I lived in Bessie Strong [Bessie Strong Hall; WISDOM Center], which is a small dorm, and we didn't have a house mother, we had a student as our person in charge of our dorm and I also, my best friend from Wells [Wells College, Aurora, New York] who was from the Virgin Islands, Leticia Gardine [ph.], she also came to Spelman, she was in a different dorm, but I mean I just made friends there. I, it was, I just, it was just, I enjoyed everything about it and what I really remember is that at the AU library [Robert W. Woodruff Library], the Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] library, they had the most amazing collection of works by African American authors. Their first publications, the first editions, and I can remember I did a paper on David Walker's appeal ['Appeal to the Coloured Citizens of the World,' David Walker] and I can just remember being astonished that I was able to check that book out of the library. In fact, I was a little disturbed by the fact because at Wells, you would never have been able to take a, you know, not, not just the book but I mean it was literally like a first edition. It was not like in the-- Speaker 1: This is from 1820s, 1830s-- Speaker 2: Yeah, it was not in like the special collection, whatever-- Speaker 1: --1831 [sic. 1829], I think, uh-huh. Speaker 2: --it was, you know, I checked that book out and I just can remember thinking, oh, why is this so, you know. Speaker 1: That's a 1831 edition, so, you know. Speaker 2: And, but I just remember there were, you know, I just, and just being at Spelman, one of the most wonderful things about being at Spelman is that you could just be you. If someone didn't like you, they didn't like you because they didn't like you, it wasn't because you were black, it was just, I don't like you, you know, and that's very liberating, or like you, I mean, I shouldn't just say, like or dislike, I mean, but it was very liberating because, you know, you were around all of these people and it was just very comfortable and just, and, and, you know, we had great teachers and the arts were amazing, the productions that they put on, the Morehouse-Spelman Players were just outstanding. I mean, I had, Millicent Jordan [Millicent Dobbs Jordan] who's one of the Dobbs sisters, was my, one of my English professor and she was just wonderful. I had-- Speaker 1: Now is that the anthropologist, the one that went to-- Speaker 2: She, no she was the, well the Dobbs, there were several of those. There was Mattiwilda [HistoryMaker Mattiwilda Dobbs Janzon] who was the opera singer and then Millicent who was my teacher. She was a English professor and I forget what all the other sisters did. Speaker 1: I think that's Robert Jordan's [HistoryMaker Robert H. Jordan, Jr.]-- Speaker 2: Mother. She's, that's his mother. Speaker 1: That's Robert Jordan's mother. Speaker 2: Robert Jordan's mother. Speaker 1: Yeah, she was, she was an aspiring anthropologist. I don't know if that's what she did, she taught in college, but I-- Speaker 2: In college, she was a-- Speaker 1: --but I know she traveled to Africa and collected masks and things. Speaker 2: Yeah, she also had twin sons [James Jordan and Dobbs Jordan], too, who were my age and then she had the older son who was the newscaster. And then, I remember I had a really wonderful constitutional law professor [at Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia], Abraham Davis [Abraham L. Davis], who was really great. [HistoryMaker] Richard Long taught African art. I took that class. Those, those just kind of stand out. I remember, I just, it was so fascinating. I mean, it was just the, everything about it was, in terms of the, the cultural experience, the friends that I made, there was, you know, now I will say this-- Story_ID: 645610 Speaker 1: At that time, unfortunately, there were some administrative challenges at Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] that I hadn't experienced in my, in my college experience but that, that my overall experience was just a wonderful one and I, I, in fact, I wanted my daughter [Elise Nelson] to attend Spelman and for years, when I lived in Chicago [Illinois], I was the area representative for Spelman, I just, and when I lived in Nashville [Tennessee], I would do things for Spelman. I was just always very active with the Spelman alumni club. I just, it's a, it's a wonderful coll- you know, it's a wonderful college and I just had a, it was just a very, for me, it was very, very positive. I think it filled me out and made me a better person because I was able to grow into being me without having to, you know, prove that I, you know, prove anything to anybody. You know, you could just be you. You could just, just exist and excel or not, whatever, you didn't have to, you know, you weren't representing your race, you were just, you know, in a very positive environment and there were so many, you know, wonderful people who were there. Speaker 2: Now who was, who was the president? Speaker 1: Mr.--Dr. Manley [Albert E. Manley] was still the president and he, he, wait I'm trying to, wait, was Dr., yeah, Dr. Manley was the president and also that was another reason why I chose Spelman because he, as I recall, he, his family and my mom [Patricia Coles Cooper] were friends growing up and I can remember we used to get Christmas cards from Spelman and that's kind of what put Spelman in my mind. So, that, I mean, I guess there were other places I could have applied, you know, other historically black colleges [HBCUs] but Spelman was the one that, you know, came to mind. And the other, this is, totally has nothing to do with the Spelman experience, but I will say it was really hot. It was so hot there were dogs laying in the street (laughter) and I can just remember. You know, like you see that in movies or you read about it in a book but I just remember it was really hot and, of course, we did not have any air conditioning. There was no air conditioning. And, but it was, it was, it was just a wonderful experience. It was a wonderful--I, I really, I'm a big Spelman supporter. Story_ID: 645611 Speaker 1: So now, your senior year you're back at Wells [Wells College, Aurora, New York], right? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay, and so what happened your senior year? Anything significant? This is, this would be 1972 (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Nineteen seventy-two [1972]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy-two [1972]. You know, I was, I was president of the Black Women's Society [Wells College Black Women's Society], I remember that. You know, I was a German major so I, you know, was doing things to do that. I applied to law school and I was, I was accepted to Northwestern [Northwestern University School of Law; Northwestern University Pritzker School of Law, Chicago, Illinois] and, again, I some--you know, I was kind of in the right place at the right time. I had a friend from Chicago [Illinois] and she invited me to come home with her and her dad was friends with a judge, well he wasn't a judge then, he was a lawyer, a black, a prominent black lawyer in Chicago, named Eugene Pincham, and he had graduated from Northwestern and her dad arranged for me to spend the day with him and I just shadowed him and he was just, I mean, he was a phenomenal person and he later did go to the bench [Circuit Court of Cook County] and he was, at the time, the only thing that I had heard about was University of Chicago [University of Chicago Law School, Chicago, Illinois] and he's like, "University of Chicago, you need to go to Northwestern. You need to apply to Northwestern," and I was, you know, and he had been so generous of his time and everything, I was like, well, of course, you know, and I applied to Northwestern and I was able, I was accepted and that's where I went. Speaker 1: You couldn't have had a better mentor than Eugene Pincham. Speaker 2: Yeah, he was all, oh, he was just fabulous. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's, I mean, that's a really (laughter), he's really a legend in Chicago. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] R. Eugene Pincham. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And his son [Robert E. Pincham, Jr.] was a year behind me at Northwestern. Story_ID: 645612 Speaker 1: On the recommendation of Judge Pincham [HistoryMaker R. Eugene Pincham], you go to Northwestern law school [Northwestern University School of Law; Northwestern University Pritzker School of Law, Chicago, Illinois] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes. Speaker 1: Now well, well, tell us about that experience. This, this is being in the fall of '72 [1972], right? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know-- Speaker 1: Well, wait a minute now. Let's, let's go back to Wells [Wells College, Aurora, New York] for a minute. Now did you graduate with any honors or any, was there anything special about graduation that you, that we skipped? Speaker 2: Well, you know, I mean, I grad- you know, my major was German and I graduated in good standing and with, you know, good enough grades to get into Northwestern (laughter). So that was, that was-- Speaker 1: And were there any special teachers at, at Wells? Speaker 2: Oh, yes, my department chair, both, when I graduated and, sorry, when I first started, Frau Fleissner [Else Fleissner], was the department chair. She had been there for years and then she retired and then a new person came and, Marie Lane [ph.], and she was very wonderful. I mean, I just, well I, I enjoyed my major and they, you know, made it interesting and I enjoyed, you know really when you're a German major or at least, you're really kind of a German literature major and, you know, I just, I had a great experience. I had small classes and it was, you know, very stimulating, very interesting and I had, again, I was very fortunate I had good friends at Wells as, in addition to the friends, you know, that I had made at Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] and so it was a, it was a good year; and then I went to law school. Story_ID: 645613 Speaker 1: Fall of '72 [1972], Northwestern law school [Northwestern University School of Law; Northwestern University Pritzker School of Law, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: Yeah, and that summer be- between, I had another, I had (laughter)--the summer between college [Wells College, Aurora, New York] and law school, I worked for Western Union [Western Union Company] as a customer service representative and it gave me an appreciation for customer service, it has given me for the rest of my life because at that time, Western Union had one office in Morristown, New Jersey, it was a twenty-four, seven operation. And so if you called Western Union from your local number, you actually got Morristown, New Jersey and that summer it was very, very hot and they used to have candy grams and they would, no one understood that they didn't deliver the candy grams like they did a telegram. They put the candy in the mail so people would go out to their mailbox and there'd be this molten mass and they would be very unhappy and they would say, "Get me, Operator 837," and they would tell me their tale of woe and I'd say, "I'm very sorry," you know, whoever it was. "I have to, you know I can credit you but that's all we can do," and they were never happy. And the other thing they used to have, is that they had these machines where you could actually go through and find either a night letter or a telegram that someone had sent and I'll never forget there was a young man, 'cause you know, well, now, I don't know that people send telegrams, but back then, if it was an emergency, it was urgent, people would send a telegram and they expected it to be delivered. And I remember this young man called me and he said, "I sent my girlfriend a telegram 'cause I couldn't get to--," wherever it was he was supposed to meet her "and she doesn't believe me," and I was able to go through, 'cause I mean, there were hundreds of them, you know, it wasn't just, 'cause it was for the whole East Coast and if you knew the approximate time, you could, you could find it and I remember, and I found his telegram and she was astonished that he really had sent a telegram but it hadn't been delivered. And then the other thing that would happen is, I'm one of the three black people who cannot carry a tune at all. No one in my family can sing and people would also have singing telegrams and they would say, "My singing telegram was not delivered. Can you sing it to--" whoever's on the other end of the line (laughter) and I would go like, "Are you sure you want me to sing 'Happy Birthday' to someone? 'Cause I really don't have a good voice." (Laughter) So that was another kind of funny thing in that summer between college and law school. Story_ID: 645614 Speaker 1: So fall of '72 [1972] at Northwestern [Northwestern University School of Law; Northwestern University Pritzker School of Law, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Well, who was there and what happened? How was law school? Were you (unclear)-- Speaker 2: You know, law school (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Or was it what you expected? Speaker 2: I don't think I really knew what to expect. I, Northwestern is very oriented towards corporate law. You know, some law schools, like Wisconsin [University of Wisconsin Law School, Madison, Wisconsin] might be more government and others might be, you know, different, I mean, you don't actually major in a particular subject in law school but at Northwestern I took corporations. I mean, my parents [Patricia Coles Cooper and Horton Cooper] were social workers. I didn't really know anything about corporations. I'm pretty sure I never heard the word debenture before in my life. You know, so not only was I reading challenging material but I had to have my dictionary and then you had, so but, you know, it was, again, I mean, those people that you meet in law school, you kind of, you form a bond with. I know when I've gone back to class reunions, you see people and it's like, it's like, oh, you know, it was yesterday 'cause you just, you have that common experience of law school and, you know, that was at the time, I don't know if you recall, there was a TV show called, 'The Paper Chase,' you know, where they had the Socratic Method and you had professors who'd call on you and, you know, try to make you quake in your shoes and sometimes they were quite successful. And it was, it, you know, it was law school. I guess, I do remember thinking after I got out of law school that, this is it. I'm not going to any more school. (Laughter) After that three years, I was like, I, this is, this is enough, this is enough. Story_ID: 645615 Speaker 1: Okay, so, did you have a favorite class in law school, or a favorite instructor? Speaker 2: You know, I, I don't, I can't think of a favorite in law school. I think my, you know in law school, it was kind of go to law school and get done, you know, learn and move on and that's kind of where I was. I mean, the thing, what made the law school experience a positive one is where the law school is located. It's located on the Magnificent Mile, it's, you know, in a great area and while I was there, Samuel Thompson [HistoryMaker Samuel C. Thompson, Jr.], who was a tax professor, an African American tax professor, I was his research assistant and that was a great experience for me and he was prolific. He had come from a big New York Wall Street law firm [Davis Polk and Wardwell, New York, New York] and his whole thing was, do you know he used to say, and he'd be all excited, "Oh, Almeta [HistoryMaker Almeta Cooper], they have twenty-four hour administrative support, you can work twenty-four hours straight," and I would be saying, "I'm just a student, I have to go study." (Laughter) And he would, you know, 'cause he was just prolific and he would always be, you know, doing research and writing and, you know, churning things out and, and that was exciting to have him be at the law school and, 'cause he taught there. Thomas Todd was teaching there. He was an adjunct professor but he taught there and at the time that I was at Northwestern [Northwestern University School of Law; Northwestern University Pritzker School of Law, Chicago, Illinois], it was the largest number of African American students whoever went through the law school before or after. They had Thomas Edmonds who was actually from North Carolina was the dean, not the dean of students, not the academic dean but the dean of students and so he had, he was really responsible for bringing in a, a, a significant mass of students. So, it was very comfortable from that standpoint. You know, it wasn't just ones or twosies, it was a significant number. Speaker 1: Now I think at that time, Thomas Todd was associate- maybe it was the tail end of when, of his association with Operation PUSH [Rainbow PUSH Coalition, Chicago, Illinois]. I know he was associated heavily with Operation PUSH-- Speaker 2: He had been. Speaker 1: --and presided when Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] was out of town and he-- Speaker 2: He was, I think on the tail end of his PUSH relationship and Jesse Jackson, of course, was big, big, big, 'cause, you know, people would, you know, go to PUSH and everything. Speaker 1: So 1972 in Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I'm thinking, so [HistoryMaker] Thomas N. Todd, did you have a class from him at all? Speaker 2: I did not, I did not, I did not (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, yeah, he's a great public speaker and-- Speaker 2: He was, he was absolutely. He was absolutely. Speaker 1: Who were some of your fellow students with this big class? Story_ID: 645616 Speaker 1: Who were some of your fellow students there [Northwestern University School of Law; Northwestern University Pritzker School of Law, Chicago, Illinois], at? Speaker 2: Well, I'm trying, well I guess, Barry Barnes [Barry M. Barnes], William Preston [ph.], Renee Phillips Johnson, Thomas Preston [ph.], Ron Kennedy [Ronald E. Kennedy] was not in my class but he was a third year student. Ronald Kennedy was a third year student when I was a first year student. William Jackson [ph.], Stephanie Bradley [ph.], these just happen to be, Richard Bordelon [Richard A. Bordelon] and his brother, Leon Bordelon, Gail Durham Hasbrouck, who's the general counsel of Advocate Health system [Advocate Health Care] in Chicago [Illinois]. There were, Ivery Foreman who is a partner here in Columbus [Ohio] at Vorys, Seymour, Sater and Pease [sic. Vorys, Sater, Seymour and Pease LLP]. There were, there were quite, I mean, I can't name everyone off of the top of my head but there were, there were a significant, there were a significant number. Speaker 1: Okay, I just thought that there'd be some significant names in that group, that big of a group. Speaker 2: Well, they were all significant (laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah, okay, all right. I know Julieanna [Julieanna Richardson] would have wanted me to ask, get some of it on record. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah. Story_ID: 645617 Speaker 1: At the end of that three years [at Northwestern University School of Law; Northwestern University Pritzker School of Law, Chicago, Illinois], you're, no more school for you and-- Speaker 2: Yeah, and I (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and, now what happened? You were--what-- Speaker 2: I worked for a law firm. Speaker 1: Um-hm, okay. Speaker 2: I worked for a law firm after my second year and that law firm extended me an offer. I worked at Vedder, Price, Kaufman and Kammholz [Vedder, Price, Kaufman and Kammholz, P.C.; Vedder Price, P.C.]. Speaker 1: This is 1975? Speaker 2: Yes, I graduated in 1975 and-- Speaker 1: Okay. And you worked for, I'm sorry, what's the name of the firm? Speaker 2: Vedder, V-E-D-D-E-R, Vedder, Price, Kaufman and Kammholz, K-A-M-M-H-O-L-Z. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was a great law firm, I had a great experience. I figured out that I really wasn't a loss--law firm kind of person. It didn't send chills up and down my spine to run down to the accounting office and see how many hours I had billed in a week, you know, or if I was number one in terms of hours billed but it was a great, I learned a lot, it was great training and from there I went to the American Medical Association and started my career in health law. So-- Speaker 1: Okay, so-- Speaker 2: --worked out great for me. Speaker 1: --how many years were you at the firm? Speaker 2: I was at Vedder, Price, I think, two years. Story_ID: 645618 Speaker 1: Okay, so 1977 you go to the American Medical Association? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay, in Chicago [Illinois]? Speaker 2: In Chicago. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: At that time, it was at 535 North Dearborn [Street]. Speaker 1: Okay, and what did you do for the American Medical Association? Speaker 2: I was the assistant director of the health law section. I was the first legal counsel for the Liaison Committee on Medical Education and I was the, I handled the appeals for the Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education, ACGME. So I was very heavily involved in medical education, both at the undergraduate and graduate level. Speaker 1: Now how did you get involved in medical, I mean, as such? I mean, was there a-- Speaker 2: Well, one of the things when I-- Speaker 1: --client that-- Speaker 2: --worked at Vedder, Price [Vedder, Price, Kaufman and Kammholz, P.C.; Vedder Price, P.C.], at that time, one of the lawyers there represented more health related profession- professional associations than any other person in the country and I got to work on some of that work and it was really interesting and then kind of when I knew that I wanted to leave the law firm, this position, which was in the Northwestern [Northwestern University School of Law; Northwestern University Pritzker School of Law, Chicago, Illinois] job bulletin was available and I thought, oh, well, you know, I've done some work in that area and it sounded, it was, I really enjoyed it and it would be great to work at the AMA and it worked out really well 'cause they made me an offer and I was there from, I was there until 1983, I think-- Speaker 1: Nineteen eighty-three [1983]. Speaker 2: --and then I was recruited from there to Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] by David Satcher [HistoryMaker Dr. David Satcher]. He was just starting as president of Meharry. Speaker 1: Okay, now, okay, 1983 is the big election year in Chicago. Were you there to see Harold Washington elected or did you leave before? Speaker 2: Harold Washington was elected after I left so I was not there during the dollars for, Washington for a Washington. I got to contribute, but I wasn't there like when he was actually elected and during the real most exciting part of it. I had already gone to Tennessee. Story_ID: 645619 Speaker 1: Okay, now how did you come to the attention of David Satcher [HistoryMaker Dr. David Satcher]? Speaker 2: I handled the appeal for Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] on behalf of the Liaison Committee on Medical Education. I was the lawyer handling the appeal. Speaker 1: An appeal on behalf of Me- now what was going on here? Can you explain to us what happened? Speaker 2: Well, it was an appeal. I mean, I think that's the only thing that's really appropriate for me to discuss. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, 1983 now, what's your position at Meharry? Speaker 2: I was the general counsel and corporate secretary. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And when I first went to Meharry I went as David's executive assistant. Speaker 1: Okay. What was it like working for David Satcher? He's-- Speaker 2: David Satcher is just a wonderful person. He's the kind of person, he has integrity, he had passion about what he was doing, he's the kind of person that if I brought to his attention that there was a, you know, some situation, he always wanted to do the right thing, you know, by, you know, for whatever the situation might have been. He, he's just a, he's a very hard working, bright man and very dedicated and I just think he was, he was kind of the right person at the right time. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He brought a lot of energy and just positivism to Meharry at that time. Story_ID: 645620 Speaker 1: Now was Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] in good shape before he showed up, or did he--? Speaker 2: Well, Meharry has had its struggles financially. Right at that time, President Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] forgave the mortgage on Hubbard Hospital [George W. Hubbard Hospital - Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] and, and subsequently, he invited, he invited Dr. Satcher [HistoryMaker Dr. David Satcher], the chairman of the board, F. Tremaine Billings [Frederic T. Billings, Jr.] at that time, C.W. Johnson, who was the vice president for academic affairs, and we were able to go. The president came to Tennessee, I want to say, we came, we met him in Chattanooga [Tennessee], if I recall correctly, and acknowledged that he had forgiven the debt on Hubbard which allowed, really released Meharry from, you know, that significant financial obligation and to take that money instead and put it back into the educational program. I mean, working at Meharry was just a labor of love. I mean, it's an institution that, between Meharry and Howard [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.] at one time they really graduated 40 percent of all of the physicians and dentists of color in the country. The percentage is lower now, and then Ph.D.'s, Meharry, I mean, most people think of physicians and dentists but also Meharry was a tremendous source of Ph.D.'s as well. Speaker 1: Ph.D.'s in the sciences, or? Speaker 2: In the sciences-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --in the sciences, in the biological sciences, yeah. Story_ID: 645621 Speaker 1: Is there a highlight of, of your tour at Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee]? Speaker 2: Oh, well, you know, obviously, the whole of getting the, getting the mortgage forgiven [on George W. Hubbard Hospital - Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee], just really work, every, at a place like Meharry, every positive contribution you make is just so important that you really have a sense that you are doing something that makes a difference. You know, I worked with the board of trustees and so that was very interesting. That time, Donald MacNaughton, from HCA [Hospital Corporation of America], was the chair of the board. From Chicago [Illinois], Ann Landers [Eppie Lederer] was on the board. She was always very interesting, very committed to Meharry. Speaker 1: Is she from Tennessee or-- Speaker 2: No, she's not from Tennessee. I, I, you know, I cannot recall right now what her connection was but I believe someone on the board made her aware of the contribution of Meharry and she became interested in it and then joined the board and served, and came to meetings and, you know, very supportive. Frank Royal [Frank S. Royal, Sr.], while I was still there, he was chair from Virginia, he was a Meharry--he is a Meharry alumnus, he served on the board. There were, there were just, there were always challenges and opportunities and, as I said, and when you can solve or, those challenges or, and turn them into opportunities, you just really felt that you were doing something important work and significant work so, that more so than anything else. And then, of course, while I was there, my, my daughter [Elise Nelson] was born at Hubbard Hospital so that's always a positive memory as well. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: And I was, while I was working at Meharry, I was married [to Herbert Nelson]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --in 1984. Story_ID: 645622 Speaker 1: Now when did you meet your, so, did you meet your husband [Cooper's ex-husband, Herbert Nelson] in Chicago [Illinois] or (unclear)? Speaker 2: Yes-- Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) I met him in Chicago. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I met him in Chicago. Speaker 1: Okay. Well now was he involved in law too? Speaker 2: No, he was a banker at the time. Speaker 1: Okay. He worked for, on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois], Independent Bank, Independent? Speaker 2: Right, Independence Bank [Independence Bank of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Independence Bank. Speaker 2: Right. Now we interviewed Alvin Boutte [HistoryMaker Alvin J. Boutte, Sr.] a few years ago, he was-- Speaker 1: Oh, okay, yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: --he was the president then, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, I remember. Speaker 2: Okay, all right. So, so was your husband in Nashville [Tennessee] at that-- Speaker 1: Then he, yeah, he did come to Nashville and then we lived in Nashville and, and then subsequently Elise [Cooper's daughter, Elise Nelson] and I, after my husband and I were no longer together, we moved to, back to New Jersey, which is where my sister [Patricia Cooper Scott (ph.)] was, and I, I accepted a position in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] so we went back to New Jersey. Speaker 2: Okay, so is that partially as a result of the split in the marriage that you went, moved to New Jersey? Speaker 1: I had a great opportunity to go to Allegheny Health, Education and Research Foundation. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So that was good. Story_ID: 645623 Speaker 1: Okay, so you were at Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] from '83 [1983] until--? Speaker 2: And then, after I left, before I went to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and after I left Meharry, I was at St. Thomas Hospital [St. Thomas West Hospital], which is a tertiary care hospital in Nashville [Tennessee] and I had, when I was at Meharry, I was really more involved with the health professions part of Meharry, with the tocologist, dentistry, medicine and allied health professions and, but, and even though Hubbard Hospital [George W. Hubbard Hospital - Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] was there and I dealt with Hubbard Hospital, when I went to St. Thomas, it was actually an opportunity to be in, be in a hospital. So that, that was another, you know, just kind of a growing experience, you know, just-- Speaker 1: Okay, so, well, okay. So what year was St. Thomas? Speaker 2: I think I was in St. Thomas like two or three years. Speaker 1: So this is, I mean, what year did you start there? I mean, you started at Meharry in '83 [1983], so-- Speaker 2: I left Nashville in '91 [1991] and I, I, well I know I was at Meharry in '87 [1987], that's when my daughter [Elise Nelson] was born, and-- Speaker 1: Okay, about how many years were you at St. Thomas? Speaker 2: Just a couple of years. Speaker 1: About two years? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, so, I guess 'til 1980--I mean you started about 1989, I guess? Speaker 2: Probably. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Probably. Speaker 1: Okay, that gives us some, even if it's not exactly right, it's pretty close. I'm trying to get an idea, so, okay. So you went to St. Thomas first, before you went back to New Jersey? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And you said it afforded you a chance to actually work inside, inside a hospital? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, you know, it was just a part of my experience. It filled out a part of my experience. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then I went to Allegheny Health, Education and Research Foundation, which is based in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. Well, actually, Allegheny was based in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] but they had a Philadelphia presence in campus; and that's where I was based, in Philadelphia. Story_ID: 645624 Speaker 1: Health and education foundation, what--education--health, education and research foundation. So what, what were they, what were they doing? Speaker 2: It's really a multi--it was a health system and Allegheny General Hospital in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] had a very, very strong cardiology program but in Pittsburgh, at that time, the university really was the predominant healthcare provider and Allegheny needed to have a relationship and to have residents to help sustain its, its program and in a very innovative and bold move, the head of the, of Allegheny General Hospital decided, well, if I can't figure out a way to make it work here in Pittsburgh, at that, he went to Medical College of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and the hospital acquired the Medical College of Pennsylvania as opposed to the Medical College of Pennsylvania, you know, acquiring the hospital. And so there were several hospitals related, St. Christopher's [St. Christopher's Hospital for Children, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], MCP, and then they had some suburban hospitals as well, so I went there and I was, again, very much involved in the, on the university or the educational side of the, so I worked very closely with the provost and with the deans and not, not on the hosp- more, more on the education side. I was the lawyer for the health professional colleges. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, you would handle, well what kind of-- Speaker 2: Faculties, students, all of, you know, all of the, all of those kinds of, research issues, whatever came up. Speaker 1: Okay, can you discuss anything that you handled in a general sense? Speaker 2: Well, I mean, in a general sense, that, that's what I did. I mean, probably the most distinctive thing about my tenure at Allegheny was, is that after the bankruptcy, I was the only retained lawyer because I had been, I had the unique position of being the lawyer for the educational side of the, of the enterprise. And so, you know, going into bankruptcy, everyone else was, there was, you know, re- was, there, reduced the, you know, eliminated, reduced the lawyers who were on the health system side. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. As I often tell people, it was a, an incredible experience, not one that I would like to have again, but I learned a lot and, and it also, you know, gave me, gave more dimension to my, you know, experience as a health lawyer. Speaker 1: Okay, so this is the first time you've ever been in a situation where the organization went through a bankruptcy, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. It was, it was the largest bank- at that time, the largest bankruptcy in the history of healthcare. It was pretty amazing. I learned a lot about bankruptcy at the time. Speaker 1: Okay, so, so you were there until, from '89 [1989] and then until-- Speaker 2: And then I came to, I came to-- Speaker 1: I'm sorry, '91 [1991] until-- Speaker 2: Ninety-one [1991], and then I came to Ohio [Ohio State Medical Association] in 1999, August of 1999. Speaker 1: Okay, so you were there almost ten years then? I mean, a long time. Speaker 2: I was there--I'm trying to think-- Speaker 1: Eight years? Speaker 2: Well, I think, well then maybe I didn't go in '91 [1991]. I know I was there seven or eight years, right. Speaker 1: Now is this the, I had here that you worked for Philadelphia MCP? Speaker 2: Right, that's Allegheny Health, Education-- Speaker 1: That's the same thing? Speaker 2: --those are all component parts of AHERF. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right, 'cause I was confused for a minute. Speaker 2: Yes, yeah. Well the names changed too. That's also confusing. The names changed. It was Allegheny Health, Education and Research Foundation, Allegheny University Hospital [Allegheny University Hospital Hahnemann Division, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], so we had, there were a lot of different corporate names in that period of time. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And so, and was it two thousand and--I mean, 1999 you went to, what was it (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Nineteen ninety-nine [1999], I came to Ohio. Speaker 1: Ohio, okay. So-- Speaker 2: But, so I may be off a year in terms of when I went to Philadelphia. Story_ID: 645625 Speaker 1: Ohio State Medical Association-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --is this, is this the state version of the-- Speaker 2: AMA [American Medical Association]. Speaker 1: --AMA-- Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: --then, right? Okay. Speaker 2: Yes, that's the easiest way to grasp it. It is the association that represents physicians in the State of Ohio. Speaker 1: Okay, and, all right. So what kind of, so you were, you were the, just describe what you do as general counsel for them? Speaker 2: Sure, as the general counsel, you're involved both on taking care of the business side of the legal affairs of the association and then involved, most state societies are set up as, they have a house of delegates so you work with the house and with the leadership and with health policy and advocacy issues. I wasn't a lobbyist but I did work in advocacy issues relating to managed care and a variety of pay- payor, payee issues that come up for physicians. And as you know, over the last, oh goodness, fifteen years, fifteen, thirteen years, there's been such a tremendous change in healthcare in the way in which physicians are paid that there were constantly issues and challenges and opportunities in terms of the relationship between payers and the physician community and we were very involved in, in those issues. And one of the things that I did while I was at the OSMA, we also took on tort reform. I was instrumental in creating a frivolous lawsuit committee [Ohio State Medical Association Frivolous Lawsuit Committee] because one of the issues that exist in, when you're thinking about tort reform, is trying to get rid of any unnecessary litigation that causes the cost to increase or makes it a challenge for physicians to be able to practice medicine. So, we felt that there was an opportunity to really, and that was one small area that we could attack and have some impact on and we were, we were glad to be able to be active in that area. Speaker 1: Just for the record, tort law has to do with lawsuits filed by-- Speaker 2: Lawsuits, medical malpractice, civil, a tort is a civil wrong, yes, so is medical malpractice and, in the context of physicians and trying, because at that time, the market was very, very difficult. There were some physicians who could not obtain professional liability insurance at any price and it was, you know, driving people out of the State of Ohio to practice medicine and so we really were trying to seek different avenues. One of the main things that the medical society, the Ohio State Medical Association was able to do was to be very successful in changing the laws, and that's tort reform. They were very, you know, to change some of the law so that it made it, the playing field more level for physicians and-- Speaker 1: Now these are serious allegations and, when it comes to medicine. People sue a doctor for malpractice 'cause it can--you know, this is life and death, you know, type stuff, so-- Speaker 2: Right, but not-- Speaker 1: --but we also have like a, you know, a lot of people that seem to have, you know, made out, you know, I mean, they kind of spend their life looking for this kind of-- Speaker 2: Well, you know, if you look at statistically, even with the medical malpractice crisis that existed then, physicians still were able to, were not found to have to make any kind of an indemnity payment in the majority of cases. So, but even with that being the case, still, the cost of professional liability insurance were, at that time, was just driving people out of Ohio. They just could not afford to do (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now did you have-- Story_ID: 645626 Speaker 1: Now this was in your file, a frivolous liability case filed against a Dr. Michael A. Banks, in 2007. Did, did you have anything to do with that? Speaker 2: Right, well, that's what I was talking about, the frivolous lawsuit committee [Ohio State Medical Association Frivolous Lawsuit Committee] that I was involved in, is that what, there were several cases and I'm not sure if this was Dr. Banks' case but there was a case where, one example was, where the physician, the plaintiff, basically, had the plaintiff's lawyer tell the physician's lawyer that, "If you would agree to make a payment to me, even though I know that your physician doesn't have any liability, then we'll release you from the lawsuit." Well that's a very egregious situation right there and, you know, most malpractice companies at the time really didn't have the, the focus to really pursue when those types of situations arose so we were able to put a, you know, kind of shine a spotlight on that kind of conduct and say this is inconsistent with what the standards are in Ohio, you, you know, you cannot do that. And so that was a case where it was found in favor, the one I'm describing, in favor of the physician plaintiff, not the physician plaintiff, I mean, in terms of the physician who brought an allegation of frivolous lawsuit against the lawyer who represented that, that particular plaintiff. That we had another situation where a, a physician, we had another situation where a physician had a name that didn't sound like the typical name that you might hear in Ohio. It wasn't Cooper, it was another name, and the plaintiff's lawyer brought a lawsuit against this physician simply because she had the same last name as the physician who was actually involved in the medical care of the patient and the physician was very upset and she complained and we looked into her case and the lawyer did withdraw the case, but, you know, what people don't understand is once you're named in the case, you have to, you know, notify your company, you have to, you know, the company spends money to get you dismissed and so, you know, those, that, that all adds to the cost and expense of professional liability action. So-- Speaker 1: And adds to the cost of healthcare eventually, right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And adds to the cost of healthcare, exactly, exactly. So we were very excited to have some success in, in that arena. Story_ID: 645627 Speaker 1: Now this is, you start in 1999, I think? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: With--okay, '99 [1999]. Speaker 2: Yeah, my daughter [Elise Nelson] and I moved to Ohio. She was in seventh grade and we moved here and I went to the OSMA and it was just, it was just a very easy transition mainly because, you know, I had worked at the AMA [American Medical Association], a lot of the same types of issues, even though it had been in an earlier period. There was a great team in place, administrative team. Brent Mulgrew is the executive director of the Ohio State Medical Association and I, I really enjoyed the time that I was there and working with the physicians because it was, you know, something that I knew and I liked the people that I was working with very much. Speaker 1: Okay, so you were at the Ohio State Medical Association until, what year? Speaker 2: Until 2008. Speaker 1: Until 2008, and that's when you came over to Ohio State [The Ohio State University Medical Center; The Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center, Columbus, Ohio]? Speaker 2: Right. So I was eight years at the medical association. Story_ID: 645628 Speaker 1: Okay, 2008. Well tell us about the position you took and how you came to move from the other, from the Ohio State Medical Association. Speaker 2: Right. I had been, you know, at the medical association and I would just, I had, I felt that it was time to, you know, look at, you know, a different opportunity and I was actually looking at several different opportunities and surprisingly, because there really often, isn't very often positions such as the one that I have, that I had at The Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center [The Ohio State University Medical Center; The Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center, Columbus, Ohio] that becomes available, so, right at that time that I was looking around, the position for associate general counsel and associate vice president for health sciences became available and I applied and I was selected. So, you know, as you can imagine at a health system the size of the Wexner Medical Center, we had five hospitals, we have about a million outpatient visits a year, about a half million inpatient visits, you know, there's a psychiatric facility [Center for Psychiatry and Behavioral Health] and acute care facility, cancer hospital [Arthur G. James Cancer Hospital and Richard J. Solove Research Institute], the comprehensive cancer center [The Ohio State University Comprehensive Cancer Center, Columbus, Ohio], we had sixteen thousand employees and so there's just a lot going on, there's just a lot going on. And, again, because of my background coming from Allegheny [Allegheny Health, Education and Research Foundation], 'cause of my experience as both on the professional association side and having been a health lawyer for so many years, it was, you know, it was a fairly easy transition. Just the magnitude, the biggest thing, I think, at OSU [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio], is just the magnitude of what's going on because you just have so many things going on. And then, of course, the Office of Legal Affairs for the university, there are lawyers at the medical center side of the Office of Legal Affairs and there are lawyers on the university side of the Office of Legal Affairs, it's just, you just, there's just always something to do. That's just very, that's very challenging. Speaker 1: Okay, so Ohio State University is a, is either the first or second largest university in the country, depending on what year it is. Speaker 2: Depending on what year it is. It's either the University of Texas [University of Texas at Austin] in Austin [Texas] or Ohio State, depending on what year it is, as you said. Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: So, yeah, the magnitude is what you're talking about. Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm, just, you know, when you, we had eight hundred, about eight hundred physicians who are employed physicians in the, employed by the university and working in the medical center and in the outpatient facilities. Story_ID: 645629 Speaker 1: What's been the biggest challenge working f- at Ohio State [The Ohio State University Medical Center; The Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center, Columbus, Ohio]? Speaker 2: Well, in the last year, probably the single largest challenge I've had, and it's been in the papers so I can talk about it. We did have an unfortunate incident in which there was a mistake in referral of a proficiency test in our clinical laboratory and a proficiency test is a test that's used to validate the testing that is done in the clinical laboratory. It's not, it does not involve a patient, an actual patient, and what happens is that you're supposed to treat that sample just as you would treat a real patient specimen except you do not process it all the way to its natural conclusion but you send it back to the testing authority and in this instance, one of our employees mistakenly referred it, treated it as a patient specimen and referred it to another laboratory. So, in the clinical laboratory world, even though at the time OSU was doing 10 million tests a year and ten thousand of these proficiency tests, there wasn't any flexibility in the way the code of regulations were written to allow CMS [Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services] to be flexible with the medical center in terms of what kind of penalty would be assessed and, fortunately, during the time, during the nine months or so that this process was going on there was, the TEST Act [Taking Essential Steps for Testing Act of 2012] was passed which did give CMS more flexibility but in addition, we had very excellent outside counsel. I was able to identify the top lawyer at, Hope Foster [Hope S. Foster], who was at the Washington, D.C. law firm of Mintz Levin [Mintz Levin Cohn Ferris Glovsky and Popeo, P.C.], who represented us and through the teamwork, both of the staff and the leadership in the laboratory, with excellent representation, I'm very pleased to say that in the end we were able to resolve the situation with CMS and it did not result in the very severe penalty of not being able to own or operate a clinical laboratory. So, but along the way we discovered a lot of opportunities that we could, that we needed to address as an organization and as a result of that, one of the things is that, in fact, I'm just in the transition of beginning to do this. I'm now the executive director for HHS [health and human services] advocacy, regulatory and quality improvement program so I will be doing more of this type of work to try to assist us as an organization in addressing any issues that we might have that relates to that, that regulatory environment. Story_ID: 645630 Speaker 1: So is there anything that you've done that you're the most proud of here? Speaker 2: Well, I, I, I feel, well, there are things that I've done both as a com- you know, in my civic involvement as well as in my professional involvement, as well as, of course, I'm extremely proud of my daughter [Elise Nelson] (laughter). Speaker 1: Well professionally first. Now we'll get into the civic. Speaker 2: Okay, well, you know, I think professionally, and when I look at over the five years that I've been at the medical center [The Ohio State University Medical Center; The Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center, Columbus, Ohio], every year we've had some type of significant achievement by the legal services group at the medical center. We've brought in eight hundred physicians, clinically integrated them over the last eighteen months or two years. We have expanded the, the medical center is in the midst of a two--of a billion dollar medical center expansion which is going to successfully conclude in January of 2015. We, on an annual basis, we have a very effective risk management litigation and quality program which has been very good in identifying cases that should be settled, identifying cases that should proceed to litigation, and also serves as an early warning system. If there's anything systemic that needs to be addressed within the clinical services that are being provided, we've also, we also support the college of medicine [The Ohio State University College of Medicine, Columbus, Ohio], the School of Rehabilitation and Health Sciences [sic. The Ohio State University School of Health and Rehabilitation Sciences, Columbus, Ohio], which is where the allied health professional students are trained. There are a number of affiliated entities which are supported by the medical center. We've been successful in helping to monitor those as well as to support the five hospital boards in terms of the overall administration of the medical center and the medical staff and the strategic goals and plans of the medical center and I've had a terrific team of lawyers working with me during that time. And so working together I think we've just had a, a legal services product to be very, very proud of. Story_ID: 645631 Speaker 1: I don't know what you can say about this, but what do you think of the Obama healthcare plan [Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2010] in terms of, you know, from the seat that you occupy today? Speaker 2: Well, I think that if, if you, it depends on how you're looking at the affordable healthcare plan. There are lots of different parts to it. I think the mistake that the people sometimes make is that they talk about it, globally, as if it's one monolithic program, which it really is not. It involves the health exchanges, it involves access for patients in the Medicaid programs. It also gives greater patient access and I guess as a, I'd have to step out of my role as a lawyer for a moment and just say as a parent, it certainly was very helpful to me that my daughter [Elise Nelson], my adult daughter, was able to be on my health insurance until she, after graduation, and until she has obtained a job that does have adequate benefits for her. So, I, you know, certainly see the benefit of that. You know, there are some parts of the bill that are not good for academic medical centers but there's a lot, you know, the elimination of the disproportionate share provisions but, you know, there's a lot to be seen because the law, the other thing is, is that people don't think about the fact that the law comes into place in stages. So we still, there's a lot to be seen about what the full and complete impact is of the law but I think, overall, one thing that everyone agreed in is that we do need some type of healthcare reform just because of the cost of healthcare and some of the challenges in terms of accessibility. So there are definitely parts of it that are very good for academic medical centers and parts that, you know, do present a challenge. Speaker 1: Are there any, what would you, or do you have any thoughts about what could be done to lowering health costs in this country? Speaker 2: Well you know, as a lawyer, I mean, one of the things that our medical center [The Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center, Columbus, Ohio] has been looking at is, as other medical centers are, is trying to remove inefficiencies, duplication of, of efforts, trying to really work and, it sounds a little cliche, but really trying to work smarter, trying to really put a value on the value base transformation which I think is, you know, looking at patient population management, so that we really, in our medical center, we really are trying to focus on improving people's lives and making sure that you have participatory preventive medicine as a part of what you do. I mean, all of that, there's just, there's no one single silver bullet. If there were, we would have found it by now; but I think that, you know, looking at all of these different opportunities is really what's gonna, you know, get us there. Story_ID: 645632 Speaker 1: Tell us about some of your, I know you're involved with The Links [The Links, Incorporated], YWCA [Young Women's Christian Association]-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --you're a tutor-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and well tell us about some of your volunteer activities. Speaker 2: Probably some of the personally, most satisfying civic work I've done is that I volunteered for, a couple of years, at a local school as part of a program to help kindergartners pass their proficiency test and just to see the progress over a year of the students, that I had two students that, each year that I worked with during the time that I was doing it. It was just amazing and the school where I worked, the students were from extremely disadvantaged, social backgrounds. They spoke, something incredible like thirty-seven different languages. They were challenged by the fact that many of their families moved during the school year more than once and knowing all that but still seeing how enthusiastic and bright and just wonderful the children were that I worked with. I mean, you could really tell that you were making a difference helping them, giving them that 'cause it was very difficult for the teachers to be able to give all the children the attention, the extra attention that they needed and sometimes they didn't have a parent at home who could read and write in English so they couldn't be that extra set of eyes and ears to help the children. So, that was very personally rewarding. I've also really enjoyed, I've been on the board of the Women's Fund and the Women's Fund is actually a national organization but in the chapter here [Women's Fund of Central Ohio] in, in Columbus [Ohio], I was actually introduced to the Women's Fund by my daughter [Elise Nelson] when she was in high school. She was actually a grants reader and she said, "Mom, I think you would really, really appreciate this organization" because the Women's Fund is all about advocacy for girls and women and really, they use the philosophy of, we want to actually change people's lives. It's not just a kind of a passive involvement. So, not, you know, the, that whole adage about, you know, if you teach someone to fish, they'll be able to, you know, eat for life, you know, rather than just giving them something. So that's kind of the philosophy of what the Women's Fund does and that's been very, very rewarding. The Links has been near and dear to my heart because I've been in several different chapters as I've moved around. When I came to this chapter here in Columbus, Ohio, I was very fortunate to be able to help in the design of a program to do diabetes education and screening. Diabetes is a huge problem in our country and in Ohio so that was, that's been very helpful and exciting, as well as the many other programs that The Links do. I had the opportunity to be a president of our chapter and just work with really wonderful women who are very, very talented and very, very giving so, you know, that's, that's been outstanding. I, I think because both of my parents [Patricia Coles Cooper and Horton Cooper] were social workers, as I mentioned earlier, I just really feel it's important to, you know, for someone like me who I feel as though I've been very blessed to have really great opportunities and really good support that I want to be able to do for others, you know, to give back some to the community that I've been fortunate enough to experience. Story_ID: 645633 Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could go back and change it? Speaker 2: I think you learn from every experience and one of the things, one of--from my perspective, personally and individually, I think that even, despite the fact that I'm a lawyer and despite that I, the fact that I know that, you know, life is not always fair but I think that's, those two social workers that were my parents [Patricia Coles Cooper and Horton Cooper], kind of brought me up to always be looking for people to do the right thing and to be fair and I think that, you know, as I, sometimes I feel that in that continuing to hold on to that expectation, I may, I may sometimes persist in believing that somebody's going to do the right thing longer than maybe reasonably I ought to. So, even at this late date, you can teach an old dog new tricks. I'm trying to, you know, I don't want to lose my spirit of optimism because I think that's good for me but I do think that I am working on being more accepting of, sometimes you just have to accept a situation or people where they are and that it is what it is, you know. So, I think, I mean, I think, I don't think that's necessarily, I don't want to say that in a negative way because, you know, I don't see myself as being a negative person. I think I'm just generally a positive person but I do think you have to continue to learn and adapt and take what you learn and apply it to the next situation or apply it, you know, so that you can benefit and not just simply say, oh, you know, I had that experience, oh, you know, and just not take anything away from it; to apply it as you go forward. Story_ID: 645634 Speaker 1: We always ask this question. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: The biggest concern that I have is that I feel as though we are losing ground that even though, even though there are lots of organizations that are trying to help, you know, young people or help in our community, when you look at the health status and the economic status, if you just look at the unemployment rate if, and I'm, I don't have the, the exact numbers but from what I can understand, the unemployment rate in our community is double that of the community at large. That really worries me because I feel as though we may be going to a place that disproportionately, adversely affects us and I just, I worry about that, I worry about that because you have, people have to have hope and if you don't have hope, you know, you know, what's--we are such a, we have brought so much to this, every culture in society that we participate in and it would be a shame if that larger community of, of people of color are not able to participate in the benefits that our country has to offer and it just worries me that, what I can read and what I can see, you just, again, I guess because I'm in healthcare I just see the health status issues which really concern me and if you, you know, if you're in a social economic place where you can't eat well and you can't get good healthcare, that perpetuates not being able to advance as a group. You know, my mother [Patricia Coles Cooper], years ago, used to say and it was considered very radical at the time, she used to say that, that when segregation ended, it was bad for us as a, as a race and people would look at her and say, "Why do you say that?" And she'd say, "Well, because when everybody had to live in the same neighborhood, people saw that there were different kinds of ways to succeed. They were exposed to people, positive role models in their community," and I'm just, I'm just not always sure that young people are seeing that kind of, or having that exposure to positive experiences on a broad scale, not just the ones, you know, just that one or two, I mean, there, again, there are lots of people who are working very hard to make a difference but I'm, I just worry and I, I, I worry about, is it enough. Story_ID: 645635 Speaker 1: I've heard that you are also involved with book events, a book club or something or, or literary events too? Is this true? Speaker 2: I'm not sure what you're referring to. Speaker 1: Okay, a friend of mine here in Columbus [Ohio] was saying that she was at some kind of a book event here, I think, and I don't, I'm not sure what it is either. Speaker 2: Oh, well, you know, what. I will tell you that in the last year I have had two good friends who have published books. One of them, I just went to a book signing for her, this past week, Earlene Wandrey, and she wrote a book, 'Walk In My Shoes' or 'Take a Walk in My Shoes' [sic.] or 'Walk In My Steps' [sic.] and, Earlene is just an amazing woman. She is an African American woman who really, through her own talents and skills, has, she lived in Chicago [Illinois] in Lake Meadows [Lake Meadows Apartments]. She left Chicago, she came to Ohio, she had a number of different kinds of businesses, a shoe business, a resale clothing business and, and she's always had tremendous amount of faith and she wanted to share her story and she's also overcome a very, and been a cancer survivor for, gosh, I don't know, five or six years with a pretty serious form of cancer. And so, yeah, so I do so- well, I love books so naturally, well, I bought several books to support her at her book signing that she had recently. Story_ID: 645636 Speaker 1: Now, tell us something about your daughter. Now, I know this is going to be difficult to try to-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) Okay, I'll try not to just talk your ear off but my daughter, Elise [Elise Nelson], is living in Washington, D.C. She is, she just had a promotion after six months on her job. She is the executive officer to the deputy administrator of NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration]. You know, Charles Bolden [HistoryMaker General Charles Bolden, Jr.], who's the black astronaut, is the administrator of NASA and she has been working there for a year. She graduated from Bryn Mawr College in Philadelphia [sic. Bryn Mawr, Pennsylvania]. She was a, her major was growth and structure of cities [Growth and Structure of Cities Department] and she's one of those people that The New York Times talked about, talented young people who have a series of unpaid internships. So she worked at a human rights organization in Cape Town, South Africa. She worked for the Aspen Institute [Washington, D.C.] in their women leaders of the world program. She volunteered for Congressman Tim Ryan in Ohio and then she worked for a year for a boutique consulting firm that had international banking clients and then she was very fortunate to apply for and to obtain a presidential appointment that she has now to work at NASA and she's loving it and enjoying it. She's, I'm a mother so I will say I think she's a, she's a very personable and wonderful young woman. I have really enjoyed being her mother. Story_ID: 645637 Speaker 1: Now is there anything I haven't asked you that we need to discuss before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: I think, well, I did talk a bit about like what I think about what's happening with the African Americans in this country but one thing I do think is that when I have been coming along, this is something that I'm not sure that it continues to exist but I know, was a young woman when I first started working, when I worked at the American Medical Association or when I worked in a law firm [Vedder, Price, Kaufman and Kammholz, P.C.; Vedder Price, P.C.], there were people in positions, they were not necessarily professional staff who worked in any place I worked. Now for example, when I worked at the AMA, they were always so proud to see me as a young lawyer working in their organization. There might be someone who worked in the kitchen or it might be someone who worked on the custodial staff, and they were always just so encouraging and supportive. I know when I left, when I left the law firm and I had, people would say, "Well how did you get that?" I'd say, "Oh, doesn't everyone have that?" And I would just be--because there'd be some nice person in the mailroom who would always be looking out for me or when I worked at the AMA, you know, it exposed me to the fact that there were some people, they would come to me with their, I couldn't represent them but I could, you know, give them a little advice on some of the legal problems that they had because there were, some of the people who worked in the kitchen and worked in the positions that were not professional staff, they were really experiencing things that I was unaware of because I'd been very fortunate not to have those struggles and I, I think it's important that people, and again, I think because my parents [Patricia Coles Cooper and Horton Cooper] are both social workers and they always stressed this to us, to my sister [Patricia Cooper Scott (ph.)] and me, to really appreciate the value of human beings. I mean, I probably particularly think about it in terms of who I am and I am, and, you know, an African American woman, but I really think it's true, you know, across the board that you, that's really important to never lose sight of that, to treat people with dignity and respect; and, you know, to be caring about your fellow human beings. I, I just--that is something that's very important to me. Story_ID: 645638 Speaker 1: Well the, the last question is similar to legacy but a little bit different. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: I would like to be remembered as a person who valued my relationships with others. I mean, my family and my friends are extremely important to me and my professional reputation and my personal integrity, I want people to be able to think of me as a person that they can respect and admire and who they would want to feel comfortable around. Kind of, one of the things that was really a compliment to me, when I was the president of the American Health Lawyers Association, one of the, at the, at the end of your term they always do kind of a roast and they look at qualities or part of your personality and one of the things that they came up with is they had these little bracelets made that said, you know, "In a difficult situation, what would Almeta [HistoryMaker Almeta Cooper] do," and that, to me, was the, that was a very nice compliment. Speaker 1: Now that was in 2003 when you became the president of the-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --American health committee? Speaker 2: Yeah, yes, and the, I'm, you know, and I've been, again, I've been very fortunate. I mean, I received the David J. Greenburg award [David J. Greenburg Service Award] which is the, served, which is the highest award you can get as a health lawyer because, but what's important about that is really the respect of my peers that, that awarded that, made that award to me and when I hear people say that they value the support that I've given them, either, because I've done a lot of mentoring or as a friend, I also feel like that that's really important, that someone else can benefit from the knowledge that I have. One of my closest friends always used to say to me, she was going to, she would share with me a piece of knowledge and she'd say, "I've already made that mistake. I'm going to share this with you so you can make a new mistake," and so I like to be able to think that I've been able to help people not make the same mistake. Speaker 1: Okay, I, I like that (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: Thank you very much. Speaker 2: Oh, thank you, thank you. Story_ID: 645639 Speaker 1: I served as a president of the Columbus [Ohio] chapter of The Links, Incorporated. From left to right, the officers were Lorraine Brock, Greta Russell, Debra Plousha Moore, myself, Jackie Woodard [Jaclyn Woodard] and Carolyn Pettigrew. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Go ahead. Speaker 1: My parents, Horton and Patricia Cooper [Patricia Coles Cooper], were married in 1944 in Durham, North Carolina. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: My daughter, Elise, made her confirmation in Cherry Hill, New Jersey, at St. Bartholomew's Church [St. Bartholomew's Episcopal Church]. She was accompanied by myself, my daughter, Elise, and my ex-husband, Herbert Nelson. Speaker 2: About what year is that? Speaker 1: I don't know-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and I don't know what year this is. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Just an estimate's fine. Speaker 1: My family has regular family reunions every two years in Longview, Texas. My nephew, Patrick [Patrick Scott (ph.)], my sister, Patricia Cooper [Patricia Cooper Scott (ph.)], my uncle, Paul Cooper, my cousin, Carol Cooper [ph.] and myself and that picture was taken probably about thirty years ago. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Go ahead. Speaker 1: My family gets together as often as we can. This is my cousin, Jarene Fleming Williams [ph.], her son, myself and my, and my daughter, Elise, and that picture was taken about five years ago. Speaker 2: My daughter, Elise, and I celebrated my fiftieth birthday. Speaker 1: My, my daughter, Elise, was born April 3rd, 1987. She and I are in Nashville, Tennessee, just after she was born, one, a couple of weeks later. Speaker 2: My daughter, Elise, and I often practiced when she took Suzuki violin in Nashville, Tennessee in 1989. Speaker 1: My nephew, Patrick, and my dad, Horton Cooper, in New Jersey about thirty-five years ago. Speaker 2: My nephew, Julian [Julian Scott (ph.)], my nephew, Patrick, my daughter, Elise, and myself in New Jersey about twenty years ago. Speaker 1: My aunt, Nell Hunter [ph.] of North Carolina, and myself, in 1984, in Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 2: I graduated from high school [John F. Kennedy High School] in New Jersey [Willingboro, New Jersey] in 1968. This is my graduation picture. Speaker 1: In 1972, I graduated from Wells College in Aurora, New York. This is my graduation picture. Speaker 2: This is a photograph of me and Kay McGhee [HistoryMaker Kathleen McGhee-Anderson] at Spelman College [Atlanta, Georgia], in 1970. Speaker 1: This is my wedding day, July 7, 1984, my husband, Herbert Nelson. Speaker 2: This is New Year's 2013, myself and my daughter, Elise Adele Nelson [Elise Nelson]. Speaker 1: This is myself in New Jersey in 1998. Speaker 2: You can take that out. Speaker 1: You looked pretty good. Speaker 2: Oh, I don't know. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): It gets stickier in age. Speaker 2: Yeah, I didn't realize. Speaker 1: (Unclear) back. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. This is when I was named as an outstanding young citizen of Chicago when I was thirty-one. Speaker 1: This is Josh Billings [Frederic T. Billings, Jr.], chairman of the board of Meharry Medical College [Nashville, Tennessee], C.W. Johnson, vice president for academic affairs, myself, David Satcher [HistoryMaker Dr. David Satcher], the president of Meharry Medical College and the president of the United States, Ronald Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan], in 1985, approximately. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): That's you protecting that before. That's a different story. Speaker 1: This is my daughter, Elise, on her fourth birthday at her favorite restaurant, the Ultraviolet Diner in Nashville, Tennessee. Speaker 2: Oops. Speaker 1: Probably need something--there's a couple more (unclear). Speaker 2: Oh, okay. Oops. Speaker 1: There's some paper towels in the kitchen? Speaker 2: Yeah, I can go get them. They're right on the counter. Speaker 1: I can get them. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. This was taken for an occasion? Speaker 2: This is my professional photograph for business purposes, taken in Columbus, Ohio, two years ago. Speaker 1: This is a picture of my mother, taken in high school, in Durham, North Carolina. Speaker 2: Just tell me what year that says? Oops, in this book. Is that a year on it? Yeah, 2009. This is my daughter, Elise and I when I was a woman of achievement in Columbus, Ohio, for the YWCA [Young Women's Christian Association]. Speaker 1: This is 2012, my daughter, Elise Adele Nelson, my niece, Michaela Morgan [ph.], myself, my sister, Patricia, my nephew's wife, Samantha [ph.] and my nephew, Julian. Speaker 2: This is my daughter, Elise, and myself, taken several years ago at a birthday celebration for Margaret Lee [ph.]. Speaker 1: Let's see. He's my [maternal] great-great-grandfather. Speaker 2: You said for Margaret Lee? Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: I know her, I believe. Speaker 1: In North-- Speaker 2: She lives in--she last was in Europe now, or at least it was in Europe. Speaker 1: Oh, she lives--this is Hawkins Carter [Hawkins W. Carter] who was my great-great-grandfather. He was the senator during reconstruction in North Carolina. Speaker 2: This is Hawkins Carter's wife, Nannie Boyd Carter, and she was married to Hawkins during the time that he lived in Warrenton, North Carolina. Speaker 1: Now, let's see the book. Speaker 2: Let's try to get this little picture here if it's possible. This is my sister and me in Roanoke, Virginia around 1953. Speaker 1: Okay now, let's see. Do you want to do the-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Did you do that--there was one picture that I, oh, no, we got that picture, never mind. Yeah, I wanted to do that one. Speaker 1: Yeah, I thought you did. Speaker 2: This is myself when I was president of the American Health Lawyers Association, and they always asked the question: "What would Almeta [HistoryMaker Almeta Cooper] do?"..