 Story_ID: 656188 Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Ma'am, can you please state your full name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: Yes. Audrey, A-U-D-R-E-Y, my middle name is Anne, A-N-N-E, my name at birth was Brodie, B-R-O-D-I-E, and now my last name is Collins, C-O-L-L-I-N-S [HistoryMaker Audrey Collins]. Speaker 1: And ma'am, what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: I was born June 12th, 1945 in Chester, Pennsylvania. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your occupation and title? Speaker 2: I'm a federal district judge here in Los Angeles, California. Speaker 1: All right, and what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date? That's a good one, I don't--December 18th, okay, 2013. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: Actually we're in my chambers in the Roybal Federal Building and Courthouse in Los Angeles [Edward R. Roybal Federal Building and United States Courthouse, Los Angeles, California], which is part of the Central District [Central District of California]. Story_ID: 656189 Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we always ask as sort of a warm up and-- Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: --they only require a short answer. First one is do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Probably anything that is in the dessert category. Pie would be a favorite food. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Blue probably. Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite time of the year. Speaker 2: Right now probably, right around Christmas. Speaker 1: Okay. A favorite vacation destination. Speaker 2: Santa Barbara [California] and also outside New York [New York] in the fall. Speaker 1: Okay, and the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: I don't know, probably something like let's just get it done (laughter) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Okay, all right. Story_ID: 656190 Speaker 1: Now I'm gonna ask about your family history. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your mother's side separate from your father's [Furman Brodie, Jr.] side and then we'll--I'll ask about your father's side and then put 'em together. So can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: Yes, Audrey Ernestine Moseley Brodie [Audrey Moseley Brodie]. Speaker 1: Okay. Can you spell it for us? Speaker 2: It's Audrey, A-U-D-R-E-Y, same as mine. And then Ernestine, E-R-N-E-S-T-I-N-E, Moseley, M-O-S-E-L-E-Y, Brodie, B-R-O-D-I-E. Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: April 23rd, 1924, Norfolk, Virginia. Speaker 1: Okay. Now what do you know about her side of the family? How far back can you trace them and what are the stories about them? Speaker 2: Yeah, not as far back, well not that far back at all. I actually do have some of that information, but I don't have it memorized. I know, I knew her parents of course, my grandparents. And I know that their parents I think have--I have pictures of their parents and I think they were all born free. Certainly from the South, and as far as I know, from the Dolphin, Virginia area. Her parents were educated; my grandmother Rachel [Rachel Moseley] through high school, or finishing school, whatever it was called then. And then she became a homemaker and my grandfather Ernest [Ernest Moseley], my mother's father, worked on the railroad. And he had some type of position associated with mail, mail on the railroad. But I don't think he actually worked for the post office [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service]. This has been unclear to me. And I've also wondered if, if they really knew he was African American 'cause he was very fair. But at any rate, he worked for the railroad until his retirement, and had something to do with picking up the mail and delivering it to different places on the railroad. And I believe my grandmother's father, he owned property and I'm not exactly sure how that happened. But she had some of her own money through some properties that he had had. And I believe he also worked for--he was somehow in insurance, which just seems very unusual to me for those times for an African American. But--so she had money from properties. And they lived--but I knew of them course, they already had their home in Norfolk and lived there for as long as I knew them. Speaker 1: What did you say the place was? Speaker 2: Norfolk. Speaker 1: Norfolk. Speaker 2: Yes Norfolk, N-O-R-F-O-L-K, Norfolk, Virginia. It's on the water. It's a big naval shipyard place. A lot of people there work for the military. Speaker 1: That's right, Tidewater area. Speaker 2: Yes, that's Tidewater, right (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And Chesapeake [Virginia] and all that, yeah, yeah, right. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay, okay so that's your, that's your mother's, your mother's people come from around that area. In-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --the area of Norfolk, okay, all right. Story_ID: 656191 Speaker 1: So did your mother [Audrey Moseley Brodie] grow up in Norfolk [Virginia] too? Speaker 2: She did, she grew up in Norfolk, she went to Booker T. Washington High School [Norfolk, Virginia]. She finished number one in her class at sixteen, and went to Howard University [Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now what, what did she concentrate on at Howard? Speaker 2: She was in education and she finished Howard I think in three years, came back to Norfolk and taught at Booker T., taught English for probably about ten years before she met my father [Furman Brodie, Jr.]. So she lived at home with her parents and her brother Wendell [Wendell Moseley]. Wendell eventually--he married and he moved out, but stayed in Norfolk with his wife and family; they had two children. And my mother stayed at home until she married. By the time she married, she was twenty-nine, which seems pretty young to me since my daughter's [Rachel Montez Minor] thirty-five and still not married. But at the time, it was considered pretty much bordering on the old maid status. So she met my father--and oh, I'll wait to get to that. But she met my father and married him because I think it was a very good match. And also as I said, twenty-nine, she was considered quite old to be getting married then. Was one of the changes we've had since then. Speaker 1: Yes ma'am. So did your mother have any stories about growing up that she shared with you? Speaker 2: And she also during that time period after Howard when she went back and was teaching, she went to Michigan, University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] and got her master's [degree]. And I believe that the state paid for it because this was during the time that she could not go, of course, to an integrated school in Virginia. So I believe this--that she actually received financial assistance to go to Michigan and get her, get her master's. Story_ID: 656192 Speaker 1: Now this is one of the strange stories we hear over and over again about the South, the southern states, you know, trying to comply with federal regulations I guess, sending black students who graduated from the black schools [HBCUs] in those states, paying their way to University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan], University of Minnesota [University of Minnesota Twin Cities, Minneapolis, Minnesota], Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York], you know, all these, you know--which some consider better schools actually than the ones-- Speaker 2: Well that's, that's true. That's certainly an argument. Growing up, I mean she really never talked a lot about it. It was like when she was growing up, I know it was a very close knit family. There was of course all of the social life was within the black community. And I mean I remember when I went there as a child, it was certainly still that way. And so they had a very active social life. Her mother [Rachel Moseley] was in the, The Links [The Links, Incorporated] I know and so that was part of it. I mean they were considered middle class, certainly at the time. And they had a lot of relatives who lived right--almost on that same street [in Norfolk, Virginia]. My mother's godmother lived across the street, and her aunt, we called her Aunt Reets [ph.] lived across the street also, just a couple of doors down. So there was a lot of time spent with her family. A big day on Sunday was driving the car, 'cause my grandfather [Ernest Moseley] had a car. And maybe they would take a drive in the car. I know she told me a couple of times they went to the airport, and that was really exotic to go to the airport and see the planes. But most of their social life seemed to center on clubs. I think my mother [Audrey Moseley Brodie] learned to play bridge very early because some of the clubs, that was what they did, they played bridge. And one of the pictures I do have that I could show you later is--it's kind of a strange picture to me. It's like a garden party, which I always think of as something that sort of white people had garden parties. But of course black society then mirrored white society in, in every way. And I think black middle class society really said well we can do it; we can do all of this. And so there's a garden party. And my mother and her brother [Wendell Moseley] and about fifteen other people are sitting around these chairs in lovely dresses and suits at this garden party. On the other hand, my mother was, was very, very smart and I think in terms of social live, you know, boyfriends, that type of thing when she was a teenager and a teacher, it was probably somewhat restricted because, and this was still true I think when I was growing up, really smart girls sometimes have a hard time finding boyfriends. Really smart girls who don't hide it and she certainly, she certainly never hid it, how smart she was; they'll tell you that. Really brilliant. And it is unfortunate. I mean one of the things that I think about is if she were growing up, even when I grew up, I mean there's no question to me she would have gone to law school. And in fact she considered going to law school years later after she retired from teaching. For various reasons she didn't, but it wasn't her age. I think that my brother [Furman Brodie III] was in law school and she didn't wanna sort of--not compete with him, but sort of do it at the same time, and then she just didn't do it. But no question in my mind that she could have gone back in her late sixties or seventies and probably been the number one student there; I know she looked into it. Story_ID: 656193 Speaker 1: So, those are the main things I know. Even when I was a little girl and stayed in Norfolk [Virginia] at their house, which was 771 Johnson Avenue in Norfolk, it was very old fashioned compared to where I lived in--outside Chester [Pennsylvania], and then in Yeadon, Pennsylvania. And you could actually hear the clonk, clonk, clonk of the horses' hooves. The iceman would come down the street because when I was little, my grandparents [Collins' maternal grandparents, Rachel Moseley and Ernest Moseley] still had an icebox; didn't have a refrigerator yet. They got one of course later. But I remember when I was really little, they had an icebox. And so every day clonk, clonk, clonk, the iceman would come and you'd get these huge cubes of ice. And then clonk, clonk, clonk, vegetable man would come, and the rag man. I mean I still remember, my earliest memories of this guy, you know, rags and ice. These guys like calling out. 'Course they were all African American, it was an African American community. So I can only imagine how much more, I guess rural seeming it must have been, although this was the city. I mean this was not rural, this was the city. But I loved that sound, you know, the horses' hooves clomping down the street. And that's one of the things I remember. Story_ID: 656194 Speaker 1: Now let me go to your father's side. Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Furman Lawrence Brodie, F-U-R-M-A-N, L-A-W-R-E-N-C-E, Brodie, B-R-O-D-I-E. And he was a junior [Furman Brodie, Jr.]. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: His date of birth is June 11th, 1894. Speaker 1: Okay. So it's like, like a thirty year difference between your father and mother's age. Is that right? Speaker 2: Between my--well when they got married, my father was fifty. They got married on June 12th, so he had probably just turned fifty the day before, and my mother [Audrey Moseley Brodie] was twenty-nine. So they were, they were basically twenty years apart (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)Okay, so. Speaker 2: Did I do the math wrong? I'll have to check on her, her date, but I know he's 1894. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: She would have been 1914 if they were twenty years apart. Speaker 2: Nineteen fourteen [1949], okay. Did I say 1924, so maybe it was 1914. I will check. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: And his history is very interesting, his whole family history. His father [Furman Brodie, Sr.] I think I mentioned to you before we started, was born a slave in 1856. I think I should check my notes, but I got that. And I don't really know much about him other than what I have read because by the time my father married and had the children, of course his parents were long dead 'cause he didn't get married 'til he was fifty. But his father of course became emancipated I guess maybe when he was five years old or whenever the word got out. And later some missionaries came and visited the South Carolina area where he was. And by--he was very smart, he was sixteen. So they said well we would like put, put you in school. We'd like to have you to go to school and learn to read and write 'cause he did not know how to read and write. And that was when he went to ar- Onarga, Illinois to-- Speaker 1: Spell that for us. Speaker 2: O-N-A-R-G-A. And he was there for six years. He supported himself; I assume they must have given him some type of financial support to get up there. And I don't know whether he stayed there the whole time, whether he went back home during the summers, I don't know that. But I know he worked the whole time and essentially put himself through; although he must have had some financial assistance from them. And so I do have the Onarga schoolbook, yearbook that I will show you, which I believe is from 1906 and it has a picture of him when he's obviously much older. But a picture of him and his story. So after six years, I think he, he was like--I think they found him when he was sixteen and he entered--okay I'm really messing this up right now. Entered maybe when he was sixteen or so, he didn't finish 'til he was twenty-two. And then he went to Biddle, which is not the name of this institution anymore, it changed names to Johnson C. Smith [Johnson C. Smith University, Charlotte, North Carolina]. But he had the calling to be a minister. And so he went to Biddle University and spent however many years that took, another four or six, to become a minister. And of course he never made a living as a minister, which was unusual those days. It would have been very unusual for him as a black minister in the South to make a living at it, so he was a farmer. A minister and farmer. And he married Annie Pierce, P-I-E-R-C-E [Annie Pierce Brodie]. And they had twelve children, one of whom was born, either born dead or died very shortly thereafter, but eleven lived to be adults. And my father was the third of those. The oldest was a girl, Beulah [Beulah Brodie Green], then Alfred [Alfred Brodie], and then my father. So normally the son, the first son had a lot of responsibility in the family, although Beulah was very smart. Again, kind of another example of how women just weren't considered to be the spokespersons a lot. But my father did--had a lot of responsibility within the family because Alfred who was the oldest son, had a harelip or cleft--I think it was called harelip or cleft lip. And they didn't have enough money to have it fixed. I also don't know how common that operation was in those days, even if you had more money. But I remember him very well. He was an uncle who lived in New York and he never did get it fixed. So I mean I remember as a child and an adult speaking with him and the voice was muffled. You could make it out, but it was muffled. So he never did have it repaired. So my father assumed a lot of responsibilities as sort of the oldest son, even though he wasn't the oldest son. And they had an interesting history and like a lot of ministers I guess, they moved around from, from place to place. But my father was actually born, the older children were born at a placed called Due West, that's D-U-E, W-E-S-T, Due West, South Carolina. And I visited there once. We took a kind of road trip down south. And it really doesn't exist anymore. I mean we found it. I think we almost drove by it and then we went back, there's not really anything there. But (laughter), but you can find it. And so they lived there first; and then they, they moved. Story_ID: 656195 Speaker 1: Morganton [North Carolina]? We were in a place called Morganton for a while as my grandfather [Furman Brodie, Sr.] ministered. And I have read in the family history, which was put together by, partly by my Aunt Myrtle [Myrtle Brodie], and then partly by my late brother's wife, that what the congregations would do for the ministers in those days is they would provide food, produce mostly, I mean it wasn't really money. But they would do something called storming the minister's family, which is when they brought over a lot of food. And they would help out in various ways. But that was how they lived, basically. And my grandfather was not only a minister and a farmer, he was a teacher and he had classes. He would--he and his wife [Annie Pierce Brodie] and Auntie Annie [Annie Brodie Fortune] helped a lot too. They would teach the local kids, of course the African American kids. So that was what they did. So as they got older, the kids kind of helped each other. Of course they all grew up, they, they moved away to various places; several to New York City [New York, New York]. I think three moved to New York City as is kind of typical migration patterns. Some of the sisters did stay in the South and taught. The women mostly became teachers. One brother became a principal of a high school. He stayed in the South Carolina area, he was tragically killed in a car crash. One brother went to Chicago [Illinois]. Three went to New York. One of the sisters married a minister and actually was through that sister and her husband [Allen Fortune] the minister that my parents [Audrey Moseley Brodie and Furman Brodie, Jr.] eventually met. So my father--and then my father worked his way through undergrad and then Meharry. He went to Meharry dental school [Meharry Medical College School of Dentistry, Nashville, Tennessee]. Story_ID: 656196 Speaker 1: Two questions. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Back to your [paternal] grandfather [Furman Brodie, Sr.], what denomination was he? Speaker 2: Presbyterian. Speaker 1: Okay. Now that's interesting (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was a Presbyterian minister. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And in fact one of my aunts, Helen [Helen Brodie Robinson] who lived in New York [New York] all her life, she married a Presbyterian minister, James Robinson [James Herman Robinson]. He's not well known now, but I was just looking at the materials and consult them at a break. Apparently he was one of the group of Harlem ministers who were very, very active. I mean he was good friends with like Adam Clayton Powell [Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.]. He did a lot of good social work in the city. But his name has kind of not been, hasn't really been remembered. But he was sort of in that group of influential black ministers in Harlem [New York, New York]. They divorced, so I never really got to know him. I, I think he wasn't quite strict enough in some of his ways from my aunt (laughter), is what I've gathered. Speaker 1: What do you mean? Now your aunt was very strict. Speaker 2: Well I, I think, and, and she never discussed it. I mean the people in that era, in that generation often didn't discuss things, and I really wish I had pushed and had gotten the full story. But I think he probably had girlfriends. And my aunt, they were very strictly brought up as Presbyterian, I mean I think they really believed in absolute fidelity in the marriage. And I think at the time a lot of the ministers probably did have girlfriends. And I think, I've always thought that was the cause of their break up (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Unclear) some of them do now. Speaker 2: But I, I don't really know. Speaker 1: Some do today as well. Speaker 2: Yeah es- I know. Speaker 1: But this is also an age of, you know, temperance was a big issue as well. I don't know what the, you know, and that, you know split the country sort of apart. Speaker 2: Right, and my father's [Furman Brodie, Jr.] family and my mother's [Audrey Moseley Brodie] family, it's just something else they had in common. My mother's family was also very strict Presbyterian. So they had that in common. And in fact as I said, they met in church when my father's sister Annie [Annie Brodie Fortune] was, was married to Reverend Fortune and he came to Norfolk and became the minister there. And my mother--that was her home church. And so they met in church. Speaker 1: Now this is a Fortune you mentioned? Speaker 2: Reverend, his name was Reverend Allen Fortune. And he married my aunt Annie. And so he, like again many ministers, you move from place to place. So eventually he was moved to the black Presbyterian church in Norfolk, Virginia. My mother, that was her home church. She, she had always gone there. Her father, although Ernest [Ernest Moseley], although not a minister, was the closest thing to it. I mean he was always an elder. He was always at church. And Sundays were very strictly observed when I was young and stayed there. You did not turn on the radio, 'cause of course there was no such thing as TV. But you didn't turn on the radio. I don't think he even read the Sunday paper. And there was no drinking. And there really wasn't drinking in my father's family either. So they were well suited in that. So yes, temperance did, the temperance issue, even with my aunt and Reverend Robinson, could have been an issue as well as the, the having girlfriends (laughter). Story_ID: 656197 Speaker 1: I know we don't often hear stories about black Presbyterians, but I know I have interviewed a couple others, you know. And I can't think of her name now, but I know a famous one, but I can't think of her. Well okay. So your father [Furman Brodie, Jr.]--now where did he go to undergraduate school? Speaker 2: So he went to undergrad, I'm sorry, at Biddle [Biddle University], it was Biddle then. As I said later became Johnson C. Smith [Johnson C. Smith University, Charlotte, North Carolina]. So he went to undergrad at Biddle, and then Meharry [Meharry Medical College School of Dentistry, Nashville, Tennessee]. So he worked to put himself through school in a couple of ways. He was a barber, and in fact when my brothers were young, he did their hair for a while 'til they didn't like that and they went to another neighbor who was a barber. And he was a porter on the railroad. So that gave him something in common with my mother's father [Ernest Moseley], although he was just a regular porter. He had nothing to do with the mail. And of course I've heard since then--and he never talked about this, but many stories of how every porter was called George and the treatment of the porters. But that was how he put himself through school. As I said he didn't really ever talk about that. And then after he finished school, he helped his sister Myrt- Myrtle [Myrtle Brodie] through school. So a lot of times when kids, when child, adult child, they're not kids anymore, would help another one. So he particularly helped Myrtle who later moved to Norfolk [Virginia] so we would see her when we would go to Norfolk to visit my [maternal] grandparents and my uncle [Wendell Moseley], who had stayed there. She married a college professor. So--and he wanted to do that and he wanted to, he wanted to be a success. He wanted to feel like he could support a wife before he married a wife. And that seems very novel now also in some ways when a lot of people do marry younger. Although now I guess it's trending older again for marriages. But that was his idea anyway that he would not--he was not ready to get married until he could support a wife. So he went to Chester, Pennsylvania eventually, and set up his dental practice. And in fact, he was in dentistry for fifty years in Chester, even after we moved from Chester. He would make the commute from where we lived in Yeadon [Pennsylvania], which was outside West Philadelphia [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], to Chester. And in those days there weren't freeways, there was no such thing as a freeway. So he would get on, I think it was [U.S.] Route 13 for most of the way. It was not a good road. And he would do this commute, you know, six days, I guess five days a week. Not on Sunday. Of course he didn't work on Sunday, and Wednesday was a day off. But he would commute. So when he was ready to get married, then his sister [Annie Brodie Fortune] who at that time married to Revered Allen Fortune at the Presbyterian church in Norfolk said--I think she said something like, "Well I have a nice young lady for you to meet." And I don't know if she had said that to my mother [Audrey Moseley Brodie] too, but somehow my father went down to Norfolk to visit his sister, very normal, and he met my mother. Twenty year age difference, 'cause I guess he was forty-nine then. I don't know if he was forty-eight or forty-nine. I don't really know how long they courted because this would have to--this would have been like a long distance relationship, in essence. And those are, those are hard to do unless you already have a relationship first and then the two people have to part, but you've got that relationship. So that was kind of hard to do and I really, again, didn't ask, they didn't tell. What are the details? Like how did you really get to know each other? How were you secure enough? You only see this person you know, a short time to, to get married. But of course he was the minister's brother-in-law, and he was a dentist in Chester. So they, they did get married. And-- Speaker 1: So he's almost fifty and your mother's thirty, twenty-nine. Speaker 2: So she was, I believe she was twenty-nine. And he was forty-nine, but he had just turned--they got married on June 12th, his birthday is June 11th. So I think he would have--I think he had just turned fifty. So when the three children were born, he was fifty-three, either fifty-two or fifty-three, I mean depending on when we were born during the year. But he was approximately like fifty-three, fifty-six and fifty-nine when the three of us were born, 'cause we were born three years apart. I was born, I was actually born on their second wedding anniversary. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So I guess he was fifty-two. So probably he was fifty-two, fifty-five and fifty-eight. Story_ID: 656198 Speaker 1: Okay, so your parents get married; and now when you think of their personalities, their sense of humor, how they walk, talk, their talents, you know their opinions, what they look like, who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: It's hard to say. I mean I think in a lot of ways I take after my mother [Audrey Moseley Brodie]. But if I look at my father's sisters, I certainly see some similarities. It's interesting because of the age difference, you would assume that it was an obvious age difference. But of course when you're kids, they're just your parents; you don't think about it. And frankly personality wise, my father [Furman Brodie, Jr.], although he had really--they both had an extreme work ethic. And I think my brother Bruce [Bruce Brodie] and I both have this sort of Protestant, Presbyterian work ethic. But my father was sort of more lighthearted. My mother was always very serious and mature. And I think that tended to diminish any appearance of age difference because he was sort of the more lighthearted one, laugh more. And my mother was always the more serious person. And so I think it made her seem older than she was, actually in some ways. And he was because he was lighthearted, you know as they say in the song, young at heart ['Young at Heart']. And so I--and then in those days women dressed older to me. I mean a woman who got to be in her forties, fifties, sixties, you know their dresses made them look matronly. I mean now women in their sixties and seventies, you can't tell by the way they dress necessarily. And so she you know was just a very mature sort of solid person. And I don't think the age difference was, was that obvious. At least it wasn't to us. But I think probably in a lot obvious ways I do take after her much more. My diction, she was an English teacher. She always stressed proper grammar and diction. Academics. On the surface, she was certainly the more brilliant, although I mean I just have to give it to my father. I mean it's amazing to me. He--this was obviously an extremely smart man. He still had the diction of the South and occasionally he'd make some, you know, minor errors or whatever. But I mean to put himself through undergrad [Biddle University; Johnson C. Smith University, Charlotte, North Carolina], to put himself through dental school [Meharry Medical College School of Dentistry, Nashville, Tennessee], to go through what it takes to set up a dental practice. I mean it's an amazing--this was an amazing man, and such a hard worker. And very active. Story_ID: 656199 Speaker 1: There's a Presbyterian church in Chester [Pennsylvania] and he stayed there, you know, went back. He did, actually he did commute six days a week because on Sunday he certainly did not work; that would have been unacceptable. But he drove to Chester for church. So he did commute six days a week (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Did the whole family belong to that church in Chester? Speaker 1: At first we did. At first when we moved away from Chester, and that was done for the schools. So that we could go to better schools. So at first when we moved away, we all commuted on Sunday to the African American Presbyterian church in Chester that he was a part of. And then after a while, my mother [Audrey Moseley Brodie] determined--I'm not exactly sure why, but she decided that we were going to go to a local, much closer Presbyterian church. And my father [Furman Brodie, Jr.], I don't know if they argued about it. They never argued in front of us, they never had arguments. But he kept going, for the most part, to Chester. And we went to the Lansdowne Presbyterian Church [First Presbyterian Church of Lansdowne, Lansdowne, Pennsylvania], which was like a mile away. And at the time I think we were the second black family in that church; it was a white church. Very pretty, very different vibe, obviously, than the black Presbyterian church in Chester. But my mother I think determined--I don't know if it was the ride, the commute or, or she just thought this is our community, this is where we live. So we're gonna go to church here. And so we stayed in that church. My mother and my brothers [Furman Brodie III and Bruce Brodie] and I went to Sunday school and church there. Lansdowne, Aldan Presbyterian church. In fact that's where I got married. Speaker 2: Okay, okay. So, so was the church a major influence on your development growing up do you think? Speaker 1: Well you know I would say I went there every Sunday. And we certainly--we went to Sunday school, we went to church. I would say it was probably much more--a much bigger presence in both of my parents' lives probably than, than in mine. But certainly I kept going to church. When my kids were born, I brought them up in the church. At least I, I tried. My son [Timothy Collins] went, you know, you can only handle them through high school. So my son he went all the way through high school. He was in youth fellowship, you know we went to church every Sunday. And then if they wanna rebel, they can rebel and then they can come back later. My daughter [Rachel Montez Minor] rebelled about tenth grade. She was like okay I'm not going anymore. "What?" You know, so we had one of our fights, which was not uncommon during her teenage years. She's now what I would consider like a lot of young people, but much more so with her, she actually is very spiritual, but she doesn't go to church, okay. And I guess at this point I'm hoping for the grandkids. I mean I go to one church when I'm in L.A. [Los Angeles, California]. And then there's another church that I go to sometimes. On the weekends sometimes we go someplace else, to Santa Barbara [California] and I, I go there. So--but interestingly enough, the churches that I go to now are Episcopalian. Occasionally I still, I go to the Presbyterian church near where we live, which is where I took our kids. But my husband's father is Episcopalian and I've kind of come to like some of the formality there, so I tend to go to Episcopalian churches when I go. Story_ID: 656200 Speaker 1: Now can you name your siblings for us, beginning with the oldest and-- Speaker 2: Sorry. Speaker 1: Can you name your siblings, yeah; and from the oldest (unclear)? Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yes. I had, I had two brothers, and one is deceased. Furman Lawrence Brodie, same spelling, same name, the third [Furman Brodie III], was born three years after me. I was born in '45 [1945], so he was born in '48 [1948]. And then the youngest Bruce Ernest Brodie [Bruce Brodie], was born three years after that. So he was born in '51 [1951]. He was born in March of '51 [1951]. And he is now here in Los Angeles [California]. Essentially, he followed me out here. I mean that's getting a little ahead, but he's out here in Los Angeles and he is currently the chief deputy of the alternate public defender's office [Los Angeles County Alternate Public Defender]. So if we look out my window, which we can't right now, but if you were to look out my window, you could see the Criminal Courts Building [Clara Shortridge Foltz Criminal Justice Center, Los Angeles, California], which they've now renamed something else. And he spent a lot of hours there as did I, and his office is just one over. So he's out here with me and our, our brother unfortunately died several years ago. Speaker 1: Okay, so it, so it was just the three of you-- Speaker 2: It was just, it was three of us (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) when you were growing up, okay (simultaneous). Story_ID: 656201 Speaker 1: You grew up right, right outside of Chester [Pennsylvania] then? Speaker 2: Well we moved, so I was in Chester, I was born in Chester. And I have heard that the hospital, even though it was Pennsylvania, you know, Chester is just north of the Mason Dixon Line. It's pretty close to the South. And apparently the maternity ward or the nursery I guess is actually where they keep the babies, was segregated. And I, I had heard that the black babies were kept in a different and not as nice place as the white babies. I think my mother [Audrey Moseley Brodie] once described it, she didn't talk about it a lot, as kind of a former broom closet. And so when--then my brother [Furman Brodie III] was born. And then it was almost time for me to go to school. I had been in this preschool or whatever, private preschool. And I think that's when my mother decided okay, the schools here in Chester are not acceptable as far as I'm concerned for my kids. Chester was already going downhill. Chester, and I'm no historian on Chester, but I think its heyday was World War II [WWII]. And it's just unfortunate that my father [Furman Brodie, Jr.] didn't begin his practice in West L.A. [West Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California]. I mean not West L.A.--West Philadelphia [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] 'cause a lot of black dentists did very well there. But Chester, although it was okay when he first started and it boomed during World War II because they had shipbuilding. They had Sun [Sun Shipbuilding and Drydock Company], Sunoco [Sun Oil Company, Inc.; Sunoco, Inc.], something, shipbuilding companies. But right after the war, that was it. And Chester went downhill very quickly, and was essentially--I mean I remember even when we visited on Sundays it was, you know, it was model cities, it was this, it was that. It was, it was not good. But she saw it coming, not surprising for my mother. Story_ID: 656202 Speaker 1: And so she [Collins' mother, Audrey Moseley Brodie] said we need to move. And so that's when we moved to Yeadon, Pennsylvania, which is near--I mean if you're from here, none of these places mean anything, but it's outside West Philly [West Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. It's near Upper Darby [Pennsylvania] I guess is a little, little bigger place a lot of people have heard of, Darby, Upper Darby, it's near there. And when we moved there, there were certainly other black families in Yeadon. It was largely--but it was, it was pretty segregated. There was sort of the white area of Yeadon, which was up at the other end, that's what we used to say. Up at the other end near the school, and then we moved, the area we moved, did have some black families, many black families, but they were on other streets. The street where we moved to, Lincoln Avenue, we moved to 44 Lincoln Avenue, didn't have any black families. So my father [Furman Brodie, Jr.] proceeded to buy this house, unknown to us or anyone else, the house across the street which was being built, was being built by a black doctor, but he was using a white man as a straw man. You know about that. Speaker 2: The white man was the face of the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was right, was fronting, was the public face. But nobody knew that Dr. Fisher, black doctor, was, was building that. But they found out that my father, you know was, was buying this. And so shortly before we moved in, somebody broke into the house and flooded, tried to flood it. They stopped up the faucets and all the drains, all of that. And so when my father went over one day, then from the third floor, second floor--it was one of those big back east houses. There was a lot of flooding, and down to the basement. It was a lot of water. So that was most unpleasant. Speaker 2: So what year is this now? How was-- Speaker 1: So this is 1951. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I was born in '45 [1945], so we're trying to move, so it's like '50 [1950], '51 [1951]. 'Cause we're trying to move in time for me to start kindergarten, so I guess it was like 1950. So there was a slight delay. The wallpaper was coming off, peeling off, and some dam- there was some damage. So they had to fix that, and then he moved in. And then just about the same time, that's when Dr. Earl Fisher [ph.] and his family surfaced as the true owners of the house across the street. And so there were the two of us. And so a lot of neighbors moved off the block and the neighbor right next door to us who owned one of the little local newspapers and bank--no I think he just owned the bank, he owned the bank in Lansdowne [Pennsylvania]. And he wouldn't speak. And of course I was too young to know what was going on. And I would see him sometimes when I'd come back from school on the bus and I would say hi because I was properly trained to speak to adults. And he wouldn't say hi. And I'm like, "Mom, he didn't say hi." I mean it's sort of funny, you know, pathetic. My mother'd go, "Well you know, I don't know," whatever she would say. "He didn't hear you, don't worry about it." So eventually--I can't remember if he moved before he died, but you know, the problem surely took care of itself. And the whole block became basically African American. Except there were two nursing homes, one at either end. But-- Speaker 2: Yeadon is spelled Y-E-A-D-O-N. Speaker 1: Y-E-A-D-O-N, Yeadon. Speaker 2: Yeadon, okay. Speaker 1: Yeadon. Actually there's some people from Yeadon. I mean [HistoryMaker] Donald Bogle who writes all of these wonderful books about African American movie stars and Hollywood. Speaker 2: Yeah, 'Toms, Coons, Mulattoes, Mammies, and Bucks' is the name of his book. Speaker 1: Yes, Donald Bogle grew up across the street from me. I realize you're thinking wait, all these people can't be across the street. Okay I mean some are catty corner, but literally he was in my, in my block. The Bogles were across the street, and there were about eleven of those kids. And now one of them owns [sic.] The Philadelphia Tribune and lives in the house next to me where the guy lived who owned the bank who wouldn't speak to us. So now one of the Bogles [HistoryMaker Robert Bogle] owns that house and lives there, which I think is justice (laughter). Speaker 2: Donald Bogle, right? Speaker 1: Donald Bogle, right, yeah. Speaker 2: He's one of the--great critic and, right. And right around black film. Story_ID: 656203 Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: What kind of childhood memory? Speaker 1: An earliest. Speaker 2: What's my earliest childhood memory? My earliest childhood memory is probably when we were still in Chester [Pennsylvania], watching, two of them, I remember watching 'Kukla, Fran and Ollie' on TV, and the TVs then needless to say is black and white, but they were also round. They were small, round screens. So the, the unit was a very small unit, and of course they were--it was a piece of furniture then. I mean it was wood. It was in a very pretty wooden cabinet, but it was literally a round screen. So I remember watching 'Kukla, Fran and Ollie'. And the other very early childhood memory I have is my brother Furman [Furman Brodie III] taking pots and pans and throwing them down the front stairs. As you'll see from a picture I will show you later, my father [Furman Brodie, Jr.] and mother [Audrey Moseley Brodie] owned a house or building. The bottom floor was my father's office and we lived on the second floor. So my father just had to go downstairs, first floor was the reception room was right when you came in off the street. And then the rest of it was his, his actual lab 'cause he did a lot of stuff there, and of course where you were--where he waited on you, where he was working on you and he had two of those rooms. So upstairs, we were upstairs. And of course I was very quiet, so no one would have known. But my brother, he loved to throw these pots and pans and it was-- Speaker 1: This was in Chester, right? This is in Chester before you moved to [Yeadon, Pennsylvania]-- Speaker 2: Right, so this is in, right, this is in Chester. And so I heard later the rather startling--because my father trying to work on somebody and I could hear all these pots and pans come down. Speaker 1: So he did this as a regular stunt? Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean he loved, you know he's a boy. And he loved trucks and noises and stuff. So I remember he would, he would do this. I'm sure he didn't do it terribly often 'cause you know, my mother was, was not working then, so she was around. But somehow he would manage to do that and I kind of remember that clatter, and I remember watching that TV show. Those were--and I remember kind of being outside and actually amazingly my mother kept a lot of movies at the time, of course the movies that you would take, home movies which we called them, were on these thin strips, like Super 8 [Super 8mm film], I don't even know what it was. I, I don't know the technology. And she got them transferred when we got older to either Beta [Betamax] or VHS [video home system]. And more recently, I've actually been able through a friend to convert them to DVD [digital video disc]. So I, I haven't seen all of them, but I was actually watching myself as I guess I'm two years old or something and I'm coming out the door and I've got on this little bonnet. So that's pretty, pretty special, pretty special. So I just sort of remember that. And we always had a dog, we always had a dog then, so I kind of remember the dog. So those are my earliest memories (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What, what was your dog's name? Speaker 2: Actually it was my father's dog. My father hunted. We later had family dogs and then when my kids [Timothy Collins and Rachel Montez Minor] were growing up we had family dogs. But this dog was kind of my, my father's dog, so it stayed outside. The hunting dogs as compared to the house dogs, were never allowed in. This was my father's rule I guess. And so we--but I could play with it a little bit when I went outside. And he would maintain--that part of it--maintained, he was a country guy. I mean that was his only recreation. He did not go out. They rarely ate out. They didn't like--go to a lot of shows. My mother loved the theater, but he didn't really care for it, he didn't really go. But come that time of year, September, October through whatever, November, he would hunt. And he would get up early. I don't remember it from Chester, I remember this from much later. I mean he would get up at some ungodly hour and all he hunted was really like rabbits, squirrels and pheasants. He didn't hunt anything large. But I think that was something he remembered from his childhood. I mean I never got into with him like the psychological aspects. But he, he did that. I couldn't understand why anybody would want to do that for many reasons, like get up early and go out in the cold. But he would bring home the game and he would skin it and dress it and then he would wrap them up and we would--he would give these as gifts. I mean we ate some. Nothing was wasted. We ate some. And then he would give like rabbits as gifts to his friends and I guess special patients. So that was something they did. And my mother learned to cook rabbit. I can't imagine she knew how to cook it before, and we would have rabbit. So that was his like only recreation. Story_ID: 656204 Speaker 1: We always ask this question too: what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: (Pause) From Chester [Pennsylvania] I don't--I'm trying to see if I remember. The only thing I remember from Chester for sights and smells, there was a funeral home across the street from us and I just remember that it, it didn't actually scare me. But you know I just remember it was a funeral home. And then the, the church was kind of on the other side of the street. And I do remember both then and a little later as I said, sort of from Norfolk [Virginia] I remember that sound, like I was already telling you. It's interesting how I just brought that up, the sound of the horses' hooves. I loved, I did love that sound because I don't know. It just seemed to me like it was from an earlier time and I thought this is kind of amazing. This is--like it's--'cause we had refrigerators, the icebox and the horses. And it was very soothing, so I remember that. And then later I guess I remember like when we were in Yeadon [Pennsylvania], it was very pretty, the leaves. I've always loved like the leaves in autumn, it was particularly beautiful. And so in recent years, I've taken to going back--we don't travel a lot either, I don't have time. But the last several years we have gone back to--not Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] 'cause I don't have anybody there anymore. But the New York [New York] area where my first cousin lives. My mother's brother's daughter is in Yonkers [New York]. And we stay out in Tarrytown [New York] and I just look at leaves and I take pictures of leaves and I walk in leaves. So it's just, it's just so beautiful. And I think of that and I associate that I think very much with my growing up because of the seasons. Because I've never quite gotten over missing the seasons. And I, I romanticize winter a little bit because I never had to deal with the ugly part of winter. I never had to drive because by the time I would have had to actually have a job and drive in the snow, I had moved out here [Los Angeles, California]. So I was never the one out there with the shovel. I didn't have to shovel it, I didn't have to drive in it. So I do miss the seasons. I don't miss the humidity of--but I miss sort of the snow and I remember how beautiful that was and watching that come down, and the leaves in, in the fall and then when spring came; how beautiful that was. So I used to go to New York kind of in the spring, 'cause that's what's beautiful. But I've kind of switched to the autumn because I just love looking at the leaves and that sound. You talk about a sound. I even took video this year when I went back to New York on my little iPhone, of me crunch--there's just the crunching. I'm walking in the leaves and they're crunching. So just that's a great sound to me, the crunching. So I think--I hope that answers your question. Story_ID: 656205 Speaker 1: So your, your neighborhood in Yea- in Yeadon [Pennsylvania], you were, you were discussing some of the neighbors and so, so you had an interesting set of neighbors then I would guess, with [HistoryMaker] Donald Bogle living across the street (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) Yeah, of course at the time, who knew, right? But he was--you know it's interesting--he was always interested in movies. Even when we were kids. At the time it wasn't really black movies so much, but I remember Liz Taylor [Elizabeth Taylor] who almost died several times when she was still young and beautiful, she almost died. I remember one, one of the times she almost died and had to have a tracheotomy or something, 'cause I, I was into Liz Taylor too. And Donald, like he was so upset. We, we thought Liz Taylor was gonna die. So he, he was always very, very interested in that. But yeah on the other side of us we had Reverend Logan [ph.], who was the priest at one of the major African American Episcopalian churches in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. So it--and there was another Reverend Lee [ph.], it was, it was, it was an interesting block, yeah. Story_ID: 656206 Speaker 1: Now where did you start school? What was the name of your first school? Speaker 2: You know, I think I--but I can't tell you where it was, but I believe I went to a preschool, Friends, Quaker. But I, I don't know where that was 'cause we were still in Chester [Pennsylvania] at the time. But my mother [Audrey Moseley Brodie] found some place. I don't remember anything about it. But then when we moved in time for me to go to school, I went from kindergarten through sixth grade to a school called William B. Evans [William B. Evans Elementary School]. It was the only elementary school in Yeadon [Pennsylvania]. And then of course I went to Yeadon Junior Senior High School. And that went from sixth to twelfth grade in Yeadon. It was the only, it was the only school. I mean my class size was like eighty-three. When I graduated high school, there were eighty-three of us, and I was the valedictorian. So I mean that's the size we're talking about. And since then of course, those schools don't exist like that anymore. There's been consolidation like everywhere. It was just too small I guess to continue. And so the schools in Yeadon as I understand, have been consolidated with Lansdowne [Pennsylvania], Aldan [Pennsylvania], which is the place I was telling you we went to church [at First Presbyterian Church of Lansdowne, Lansdowne, Pennsylvania]. So I--when I say it doesn't exist, the building exist that was the junior high school, junior senior high school. But I think it's now--I don't know what it's used as. It's one school within that consolidated system. It's not Yeadon Junior Senior High School. And I believe--and the original elementary school, William B. Evans, has been torn down and replaced by a new building that I saw the last time, one of the last times I was there. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So what was the--so African Americans were, were a definite minority. Speaker 2: Definitely a minority. Speaker 1: At William B. Evans, right? Speaker 2: At, and at Yeadon Junior Senior High School (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, all right. Speaker 2: --we were definitely a minority. Story_ID: 656207 Speaker 1: Now William B. E- Evans [William B. Evans Elementary School, Yeadon, Pennsylvania] first. I, I assume you really liked school, I would guess, right? Speaker 2: (Nods head) I always liked school. And I always did, you know, pretty well (laughter) until we got to like chemistry. But I, I had you know decent teachers I think, and I, I did well and I always liked school. And of course I always brought home my work and my mother [Audrey Moseley Brodie] always was there to help all of us with our, with our homework. So it was a very academically oriented setting due to the fact that by now, maybe not at first, but she went back to teaching. She didn't go back until my brother Bruce [Bruce Brodie], the youngest, was maybe--I don't know, I, I'm think he was ready for school then. And so she taught in the Philadelphia school system [School District of Philadelphia]. She taught at Overbrook for many, many years. These were the glory years. I don't know if you're familiar with Overbrook High School [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], Wilt Chamberlain, Wali Jones. Okay, so she, she taught. She actually taught Wali Jones. I don't think she ever taught Wilt. But she taught Wali. Speaker 1: Now Wali Jones had a really a wild shot. You ever seen him play? Speaker 2: Yes, but not--I mean I saw, I saw him personally in high school, when he was in high school. And since then I mean you know, I saw him on TV. Walt Hazzard. Speaker 1: Yeah, Walt Hazzard, right, who came out and played at UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Came out here, right. So she taught during those glory years. She didn't teach 'em all, but I know she taught Wali 'cause she, she said, and my husband [Timothy R. Collins] always remembers this, Wali has a good mind, you know it's kind of like if he would apply himself more to his academics. And then eventually she taught at another school called University High School [University City High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. Speaker 1: Did she remember Art Thomas, Arthur Edward Thomas [Arthur E. Thomas] who became the president of Central State [Central State University, Wilberforce, Ohio]? I know he went to Overbrook. Speaker 2: I don't think so. Speaker 1: And he talks about the dipper all the time. Speaker 2: I don't remember. Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, he's the head, the head of (unclear), Washington, D.C. But yeah, anyway that's, that's the big--so she taught all the big athletes anyway. Speaker 2: So you know that's really all I remember. I remember the teachers were all white. I'd never had a, I never had a black teacher in either the elementary school or the junior senior high school [Yeadon Junior Senior High School, Yeadon, Pennsylvania]. Some were nicer than others, but you know I, I did well. I was, I was pretty serious I guess about school all the way through. Story_ID: 656208 Speaker 1: Reverend Robinson [James Herman Robinson] to whom my Aunt Helen [Helen Brodie Robinson] was married, was the minister at Church of the Master [New York, New York] and the founder of Crossroads Africa [Operation Crossroads Africa]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: All right, so grade school [William B. Evans Elementary School, Yeadon, Pennsylvania], we had you in grade school, and did you have any--were there any teachers that you really were focused on in grade school who were a role model for you, or-- Speaker 1: You know I wouldn't say that any of my teachers in grade school were a role model. Probably the closest role model I had was--remained my parents [Audrey Moseley Brodie and Furman Brodie, Jr.], okay. And now I can confirm--yeah, this says that my mother was born in 1915, so you were closer, I said '24 [1924], and you said '14 [1914], so she was born April 23rd, 1915, okay. Speaker 2: Okay, all right. So, so none of the teachers were really considered a mentor or, or-- Speaker 1: No (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) took, took a special interest in your development? Speaker 1: No. I would say none of them took a special interest in my development at all that I remember in grade school. But I, I really didn't see that as a deficit 'cause I said my mother was pretty much my role model. And at home, we had books, magazines literally spilling out of everywhere. We, we must have taken virtually every magazine that you could subscribe to in those days. You know, Life, Look, Ebony, Jet. Maybe not Jet, but Crisis [The Crisis], which was the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) NAACP, right. Speaker 1: Right, NAACP magazine. So there was always something to read. And then my mother was a voracious reader, so we had books and I was always encouraged to, to read. So no I don't remember any of the teachers in elementary school really being a role model. They were nice or not nice to varying degrees, but I was never, I mean I was never in trouble or anything. But they weren't as warm and fuzzy as I think teachers later became (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You think it was due to race in your case? Speaker 1: To tell you the truth, I don't remember that they took special interest in anyone. There was a nice teacher, Mrs. Pie [ph.] in fifth grade. She was, she was nice. She was probably the warmest. The sixth grade teacher was, that I got was just a terror. I mean she didn't care for anybody. She was okay as a teacher, but so no, I have never, you know, ascribed it to racism. I just think as a whole that was maybe a time before teachers became sort of the warmer fuzzier people they were later. Speaker 2: The school marm model of teacher. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: They were the terror. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Mrs. Pie, Miss Pie was nice, but the others were, were often quite kind of on the strict model, you know. They--I don't think that they really socialized much with the students afterwards. You were there, you went home. You know in high school, maybe you had clubs. So maybe more of an opportunity to get to know some of the teachers. Story_ID: 656209 Speaker 1: So in middle school, now you're, you're in middle school in the--this is the mid-'50s [1950s] I guess, right in? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And it was really run as, as one school, but because the elementary school [William B. Evans Elementary School, Yeadon, Pennsylvania] was K through sixth [kindergarten to sixth grade], and the Yeadon Junior Senior High School [Yeadon, Pennsylvania] was seven through twelve. So then we didn't have a separate middle school the way they often do now. I mean everybody was in the same school 'cause it was so small as it was. So there wasn't any separate graduation that I recall, even after eighth grade. You just kind of kept going. It wasn't any graduation 'til twelfth grade. But yes, so I was born in '45 [1945], so I guess by now--I, I know I graduated high school in '63 [1963], so now we're in probably you know '58 [1958] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Mid-'50s [1950s]. Speaker 2: Fifty-seven [1957] through '63 [1963] is those, those six years. Story_ID: 656210 Speaker 1: Now looking at the posters out here of Audrey Hepburn and having [HistoryMaker] Donald Bogle across the street, were movies important when you were growing up, did you? Speaker 2: Yes, I think, you know I grew up--early rock and roll. So we listened to rock and roll, much to our parents' horror. Speaker 1: This is like Fats Domino and-- Speaker 2: Right, Fats Domino. There was WDAS [WDAS Radio], which was the black radio station in Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. And I--so I listened to WDAS. But I, but I certainly liked some white artists too. Buddy Holly to this day I, you know I really like Buddy Holly. I wasn't into jazz at all. My husband [Timothy R. Collins] was in high school, I really wasn't into jazz myself until like much later. It was pretty much rock and roll. But Johnny Mathis, my goodness. I mean we were in love, you know my girlfriends and I were in love with Johnny Mathis, who apparently I missed last night. I fell asleep. I think he was on 'The Tonight Show' ['The Tonight Show with Jay Leno']. But--and we were devastated. I remember when we first found out that Johnny Mathis was gay, and I'm not sure that was the term that was in at the time. It's like we couldn't believe it. But we didn't--I barely knew what that was at the time. But because of course we all thought we were gonna grow up and somehow manage to meet Johnny Mathis. But I certainly knew about Nat King Cole. My parents [Audrey Moseley Brodie and Furman Brodie, Jr.] did not listen to a lot of music, so I did not again have any tradition of jazz, rhythm and blues or even singers like that. They didn't listen to radio very much. But my mother was more into--you know they watched TV and she went to the theater quite often. She was a theater person. But I certainly very much like I did know and appreciate Nat King Cole. But you know we went through certainly rock and roll and I more--I liked more the, the groups though, you know The Drifters, The Platters. I mean The Platters, they're still fantastic to hear. And The Drifters. Later of course the Four Tops, The Ronettes, you know I mean the girl groups, The Shirelles, The Supremes and all, I loved, loved all that. And, and TV, you know we watched, I watched TV and I read. Speaker 1: Did you watch 'Perry Mason'? Speaker 2: I did. Speaker 1: I'm just asking. Speaker 2: Yeah, I did. I can't say at the time that it really occurred that's what I wanna do. But it was a good show, so yes I watched, I watched 'Perry Mason.' I can't really remember other shows that I watched all the time. We did not watch 'Amos 'n' Andy' at the time. I think my parents, I don't know, I mean we never discussed in great detail. I don't think they were fond of 'Amos 'n' Andy.' Since then, I have come to appreciate 'Amos 'n' Andy' and I actually have a lot--we have a lot of 'Amos 'n' Andy' tapes of varying qualities. Some are okay, some you can hardly, you can hardly hear. But those actors were great actors in roles that didn't allow them to, you know, perhaps fully express the full extent of their intelligence. But-- Speaker 1: Well in the case of Algonquin J. Calhoun the lawyer. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: He probably did not express this. Speaker 2: Right. But I've come to, to appreciate it. But there wasn't much black TV on. I know Nat King Cole had a show ['The Nat King Cole Show'] on for a while. As you know it did not last. But he was, he was just the most amazing singer. Sammy Davis, Jr., was amazing. So I did watch TV and listen to as much rock and roll as I could. Anyway the 45s [45 rpm record] of course. But so I listened to mostly black groups. I liked, as I said, the kind of ballads and stuff, you know, The Flamingos. I mean all of these, all of these groups that we remember much more than something like the--kind of the novelty songs, I didn't like those as much. But that was a difference because I think the white kids weren't really--they were listening to rock and roll, but they were more listening to, you know, Elvis [Elvis Presley] or something like that and-- Speaker 1: Pat Boone maybe. Speaker 2: Yeah, Pat, Pat Boone, which I didn't like either Elvis or Pat Boone (laughter). But as I said, I love Buddy Holly though. Story_ID: 656211 Speaker 1: In high school, so we (unclear) in high school then where we have like clubs and, and student government and that sort of thing. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, I was in a lot of clubs. I, I actually was the vice president of the class my senior year. So I, I did do some student government. Ran for, for that office. In fact, in my senior year, we had the typical officers, president, vice president, secretary and treasurer, and two of us were, were black, which was pretty good. That's pretty unusual. Although blacks were a distinct minority, it's, it's not like you--I, I'm sure you interviewed people who have said I was the only black student in my grade, maybe. I was the only black student in my school, you may have interviewed people. It, it wasn't that minimal. I mean in my class of eighty-three, you know there were probably eight, I mean I haven't added, but there were, there were probably like seven or eight black kids. So it wasn't quite that minimal. We were certainly a minority. I'll tell you what we didn't have. We didn't have--'cause where I was at the time, we didn't have any Hispanic or Latinos that I knew of. We did have some, of course we did have some Asian, not so many. But we, we were definitely a, a presence. But there were very few--there were more women than--more girls than guys. So socially it was a difficult environment, it wasn't a great environment. And it's not like I was really so into--I was about sixteen before I was at all interested in guys and there just weren't really any at Yeadon High [Yeadon Junior Senior High School, Yeadon, Pennsylvania] that I would, that I would be interested in. But I was in other clubs too. I was in Future Nurses of America. I wanted to be a nurse at the time; had some interest in that. And I can't remember all the other clubs I was in. I mean I was in quite a few. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But I remember Future Nurses because they would show us pictures of operations. I remember sitting there eating a muffin while I was watching this heart operation and somebody saying to me later "How could you sit there and eat and watch this operation?" I said, "Well I--," you know, "no problem for me," (laughter). But I think chemistry, which was taught by this older really very cross gentleman, I just never got it and he never went out of his way to help at all. And I, I don't know, some people just got it; I didn't get it instantly. That course and geometry were my like problem courses. And at some point I switched from nursing or the medical field to being interested in, in, in government and law. So I, yes I was active in a lot of clubs and I graduated first in the class. I said there were only eighty-three. And then it was off to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]. My mother [Audrey Moseley Brodie] wanted me to go to Howard and I wanted to go to Howard because I had never had a black teacher. You know I said there were none in elementary school [William B. Evans Elementary School, Yeadon, Pennsylvania], let me add there were none in the junior senior high school. Speaker 1: So--so you graduated in '63 [1963]? Speaker 2: Sixty-three [1963] from Yeadon High. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 656212 Speaker 1: You know there's been a book written about 1963, all the things that ha- happened and impacted the black community, including first the assassination of Medgar Evers and the March on Washington, the Birmingham bombing [at the 16th Street Baptist Church, Birmingham, Alabama], the assassination of John F. Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy]. All that occurs in 1963. Speaker 2: Right, I was a freshman (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Demonstrations all over the country. Speaker 2: Right, I was a freshman at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]. 'Course this--we've just had our fiftieth anniversary of the assassination of JFK and I may be skipping ahead a bit, but only by a couple months, to say I was in first year psychology class at Howard's campus. And somebody came into the class and said the president had been shot, and class was immediately halted. We went back to the dorm and started trying to look at TV. We didn't have individual TVs in our room. And find out what happened. And I, I actually went downtown on the day that the casket--'course the casket was, was brought back that day, as we all know. But, but when they actually brought it up to the Capitol [U.S. Capitol, Washington, D.C.], flag draped casket, I went down and, and watched that. And it was just so devastating as we've just all gone through, as people had given their memories of the fiftieth anniversary. I didn't really watch many of those programs because I remember it and I have a very good book from Life that had all the photos at the time. So yes, Howard's campus was quite affected. I mean everyone was-- Story_ID: 656213 Speaker 1: Was your family really for Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] when--I know that, that the Kennedy, Nixon [Richard Milhous Nixon] race was maybe the last time that I can remember that the black community was kind of split over which candidate. Speaker 2: It was somewhat split. It's interesting because I think most people think that of course all African Americans were for Kennedy. I was. I was. But my father's age, as you recall, he was fifty when he got married [to Audrey Moseley Brodie]. He knew his father [Furman Brodie, Sr.] had been born a slave. And I'm sure, although I'm so sorry I never got any of the stories, I'm sure he had wonderful stories from his father. My father [Furman Brodie, Jr.] was a Republican. I mean and I found that at the time impossible to understand and we had arguments I'm sure, polite ones, 'cause my family, we don't have--we didn't have big arguments. But of course now it's completely understandable to me why my father would be a Republican and would not be able to adapt or get out of that way of thinking, even though times had changed so much. Speaker 1: Even then like all the southern segregationists were in the Democratic Party. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Still. Speaker 2: So my parents were for Nixon and I was for Kennedy. I mean I remember sitting at home and what the tenth or eleventh grade during the Cuban Missile Crisis, that was very scary because I think we were within the range in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. They, they were saying if the Russians launched missiles, Philadelphia was in the range. And I mean--and I just so admired the way that he, President Kennedy had handled that. And so I was very much a Kennedy supporter. Speaker 1: Right, he seemed to be the, he seemed to be the candidate of youth or people who would think-- Speaker 2: Right, but my parents were, were Republican. Story_ID: 656214 Speaker 1: What did you do over the summer between high school graduation [from Yeadon Junior Senior High School, Yeadon, Pennsylvania] and going to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]? Speaker 2: I can't remember. I mean I had, I had like little jobs in those summers, but I can't remember--I can't place which ones they were. I know a couple of summers I worked at like just a local rec center [recreation center], which my son [Timothy Collins] later did too. Just kind of things like that. But I can't remember if that was one of the summers I worked at the rec center or, or what I did. Whatever I did, it wasn't, obviously wasn't very memorable, or if I just got ready. I can't even, I can't remember how soon I had to be down there. So I'm not sure. I know I had had little summer jobs, but they were just kind of working around the, the area or the neighborhood. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I don't really remember. Speaker 1: I know Howard usually starts up in--you have to be there around the first week of August I think. Speaker 2: Right. So I don't, I don't really know what I did. And then during those summers, I--at, at college, I was either--I know one summer I went to summer school, one summer I went to the Experiment in International Living, and I was in Italy. So I don't remember what I did after my first, first year (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, that's all right. Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous). Story_ID: 656215 Speaker 1: So when you arrive at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], had you been to the campus before? Speaker 2: Oh yes. I had been with my cousin, my mother's brother [Wendell Moseley] who stayed in Norfolk [Virginia], he had two kids and one of 'em was a girl. So she's my first cousin and she's two years older than I was. So I started switching--instead of staying at my grandparents' [Rachel Moseley and Ernest Moseley], I would go stay with them because it was much more fun because here I had this you know, girl cousin two years older. And guys would come over to the house. So you know I politely said thanks, but no thanks to staying anymore with my grandparents, and moved over and would, would spend the time with her. So she went to Howard first. And she loved Howard and I had visited her I think one homecoming before I went to Howard. I was down there for something, and I'm pretty sure it was homecoming. So I was definitely sold. My mother [Audrey Moseley Brodie] didn't need to sell me at all, although you know, she loved Howard and wanted me to go to a black school [HBCU]. But it just looked like so much fun to me and I, I wanted to go and, you know, have black teachers and black students and, and so when we would go to Norfolk too I would, I would stay with her and, and her family. Speaker 1: So. Speaker 2: So I had been. Story_ID: 656216 Speaker 1: Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], you had your first black teachers at Howard, right? Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That was my first black teacher. Speaker 1: And you had, and you had decided to focus on political science then? Speaker 2: Right. You know once I got past the--you know you have to take all of your introductory courses. But yes, I focused on political science. I majored in that. I lived in the dorms all four years. And again, it was just great. I mean the only places I applied to, I applied to Howard, I applied to Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee], I applied to maybe one other black college [HBCU]. And then I did apply to one sort of mainstream college, I don't know if it was Michigan [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan] or--it was some place, but I wanted to go to Howard and I, I, I got a scholarship. I mean it was, it was great. So I really enjoyed, I really enjoyed Howard. Speaker 1: So now I have some notes about who was there when--now you took classes from Chancellor Williams, right? Is that true? Speaker 2: Chancellor Williams? Speaker 1: No, I guess not (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't think so. Speaker 1: This is somebody else's. They've thrown me off with, with this outline. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But who did you have, who--that you remember? There was a lot of great professors there, so-- Speaker 2: There were. Oh, boy, I'd have to look back. Actually one of the people I remember was not African American, Bernard Fall was there. You know he wrote 'The Two Vietnams' ['The Two Vietnams: A Political and Military Analysis']. He was like this expert on Vietnam. He was later, he later died. I can't remember if he was killed in Vietnam, but anyway I did have him for one or two classes. I remember Benny Pugh [ph.], but I don't think he was a professor. I think he--I worked with him on student affairs 'cause I was somewhat active in student affairs, Benny Pugh. And of course I remember Rankin Chapel [Andrew Rankin Memorial Chapel, Washington, D.C.], the minister at the time, but his name just escapes me too. I am not great on recall of names. I usually have to go back, so I, I don't remember. And we had a wonderful first year teacher for introduction into social sciences, poli sci [political science]. But you know I don't remember, I don't remember her name, actually. But sorry, just drawing a blank (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The, I guess the great Howard teachers are still there, like E. Franklin Frazier or Sterling Brown [Sterling A. Brown] and people like that? Speaker 2: Yeah, I don't think they were the--I don't think they were still there. I did not, I know I did not have courses from them. I just, sorry, just drawing a, a blank. I mean I can see the minister very well, but I can't remember his name right now either. 'Cause I used to go to Rankin Chapel-- Speaker 1: The minister (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) on Sundays. Speaker 1: Wa- was Howard Thurman still there, who was the religion pro- professor that--? Speaker 2: Don't know. Story_ID: 656217 Speaker 1: What about other students? Now you were in political science and Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] was highly politicized in those days, so-- Speaker 2: Yes, although I graduated just before some of the demonstrations, like Hubert Brown [H. Rap Brown; Jamil Abdullah Al-Amin], Hubert, Hubert Brown if you were thinking of him, he actually as in my class. And I guess by my senior year they were having some demonstrations against the administration. But by the time they really had like the takeover of the administration building, I think Hubert was in med school [medical school] and my brother [Bruce Brodie] was there and I was at American U [American University, Washington, D.C.]. So by the time they had like the, you know the real big protests, I was in D.C. [Washington, D.C.], but not at Howard. And my brother was there 'cause I remember he, he called and he came up to stay with us in our apartment one or two nights when there was like tear gas or something in his dorm. But I do know, I did know Hubert Brown who was--and Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture] I knew. I can't remember if Stokely was actually still a student there, or had come back. But I knew Stokely Carmichael slightly. And I knew Hubert Brown and his then girlfriend and then he later, they later got married. Johnson, Beverly Johnson [ph.]. And so I wasn't--but I had actually left the campus by the time some of those--the big, the big demonstrations which must have been like sixty, I don't know, '69 [1969] maybe because I was there from '63 [1963] to '67 [1967], and my brother was, you know like I said younger, younger, a lot younger than I was. Speaker 1: I know there was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But I was still there 'cause my husband [Timothy R. Collins] was still in dental school [Howard University College of Dentistry, Washington, D.C.] for two years after I graduated. So then I went to American U and got a master's [degree], 'cause I could do that in a year and a half. And then after that we left. But I remember--course the riots were there. Speaker 1: Sixty-eight [1968]. Speaker 2: Yes, when we were, when we were there. So we had gone up to stay with my parents [Audrey Moseley Brodie and Furman Brodie, Jr.] for the weekend, and then we came back in the Volkswagen, my husband's Volkswagen. I remember you had--you were stopped and you had to show where you lived. And I mean the National Guard and the rifles and the whole thing. So I remember that. Story_ID: 656218 Speaker 1: Now you, you graduated in '67 [1967], got married [to Timothy R. Collins] that same year. Speaker 2: I got married two weeks after I graduated. Speaker 1: Okay, and-- Speaker 2: That's what people did then (laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah, riots were in '68 [1968]. Speaker 2: Right, so I was still living there (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So--but at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], I mean what did you--now you were there when Lyndon Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] came to campus and delivered-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and delivered this once in a lifetime presidential speech, right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So do you remember that? Speaker 2: I mean I remember his being there (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did, did you go? Speaker 2: Yes. I, I remember his being there and I remember the speech. I mean I don't remember the specifics, I just remember being there. Story_ID: 656219 Speaker 1: Well in terms of p- political science, I know that Howard's political science department had to be a lot different from the civics classes you had in, in Yeadon [Pennsylvania], so what--what did you learn? Speaker 2: (Pause) I'm sorry? Speaker 1: So what did you learn at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] that was different from what was at, taught at Yeadon High School [Yeadon Junior Senior High School, Yeadon, Pennsylvania], you know. Speaker 2: Well Yeadon, I mean you know that was high school. I'm sure I had civics of some kind because that's what they did then; they don't do it anymore, they don't have civics, which is a great loss. And I know Justice Sandra Day O'Connor you know, one of her goals in life now is to try to restore civics to the curriculum. So I'm sure we had it. But I mean Howard of course was just more in depth, examination of both our political system and then, and then others and some comparisons with other, other countries, essentially, parliamentary system, et cetera. So I mean it was, it was a very good program, and I can't say that there was any one thing that made me think I wanted to study law. But just being in that environment at that time, even from high school on, although high school was very different. You began to realize I mean people like Thurgood Marshall are in this environment. You know we have the [U.S.] Supreme Court downtown and all of these changes taking place. And this is an area in which you could do some good. To tell you the truth, I initially was interested in criminal defense because that seemed--I mean very logical at the time. You wanna defend people. It wasn't until later events took place that I switched over and became a prosecutor, both because that was where the opportunity was at the time, and I came to realize that you--there's really a lot of power in the prosecution. They are the people who decide whether to bring the charges in the first place. They have a lot of discretion in how a case is disposed of, which has to do with sentencing, and most of the victims are black or people of color across the country, and certainly here in L.A. [Los Angeles, California]. But the goal, at the time you know, you thought well I'm going--I wanna obviously gonna defend, you know. So certainly being in that atmosphere at Howard. I mean there were so many things going on. Even the fine arts, you know, was amazing. I didn't know Debbie Allen at the time, I think she was behind me. But just that--here you are and you know, you can do anything. Which was something my mother had already instilled in us of course that there's no limit because you're African American or a woman or whatever. And in fact I remember when I went through that phase, Future Nurses of America, I'm gonna be a nurse. My mother said, "Well why don't you wanna be a doctor?" And I thought okay. But I, I, I didn't at the time. I mean to me it was a nurse. And she's like, "No, why don't you wanna be a doctor?" So our--I think our, our parents [Audrey Moseley Collins and Furman Brodie, Jr.] raised us to obviously you're gonna get educated, you're--and you can do whatever you want. You decide what to do. Story_ID: 656220 Speaker 1: I also pledged a sorority and, but that was it. I mean I did that probably a lot to please my mother [Audrey Moseley Brodie]. Speaker 2: Which one? Speaker 1: AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And my cousin who was in it. And by the time I graduated though [from Howard University, Washington, D.C.], I was getting married in two weeks. I got married, my husband [Timothy R. Collins] had no interest in it. He's not in a fraternity and it was just something that I said okay that was something I did in college and that's behind me. My cousin on the other hand, has stayed in it all these years. And is getting her fifty year pin next spring at the AKA boule, which I think is wonderful for her. But I just really never--I didn't keep up my interest in that. Story_ID: 656221 Speaker 1: --The president of Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] I believe was Nabrit, right, James Na- Nabrit [James M. Nabrit, Jr.] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. James or Jimmy Nabrit. Speaker 1: Okay. Well the law school pe- people that was a colleague of Thurgood Marshall. So did you have any courses from any of the-- Speaker 2: From Nabrit? I don't even know what--if he was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Not from him, but-- Speaker 2: Right, yes, I don't even know if he was teaching. We certainly heard him, heard him speak. But, but no, 'cause of course at the time I did not have time to go to law school at Howard and finish because my husband [Timothy R. Collins] just had two years left [at Howard University College of Dentistry, Washington, D.C.]. So that was one reason--I, I didn't have time to go to any law school 'cause they're all three years. So I didn't have any courses from any of the law school professors. So I just had--I had to do something that I could get done in a year and a half, and I did. So I got my master's [degree] in again, government. And then I taught for a semester while I was waiting for him to finish. I taught at an inner city school. And that was challenging to, to come in and just teach for the end of the school year, one semester. But I actually got copies of 'The Autobiography of Malcolm X' [Malcom X and Alex Haley] through the American University [Washington, D.C.] Black Student Union. I asked them to donate copies of the book to the students, and they did. And so I tried to work through that book with them, hoping that it would be motivational. And I think for some of them it worked, you know it was (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now what--what school was it? Speaker 2: Dunbar. Speaker 1: Dun- Dunbar High School [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar Senior High School, Washington, D.C.]? Speaker 2: Right. Story_ID: 656222 Speaker 1: Your husband [Timothy R. Collins] was studying for dentistry, right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: You were telling me off camera that he did- he never really practiced as a dentist? Speaker 2: Right. He never--well I shouldn't say he never practiced. Once he finished dental school [Howard University College of Dentistry, Washington, D.C.], he went into the U.S. Public Health Service. And so for two years he practiced dentistry in the Bureau of Prisons [Federal Bureau of Prisons] because the Public Health Service services prisons and Indian [Native American] reservations and [U.S.] Coast Guard facilities. So for a year we lived in Terre Haute, Indiana, and he was one of the dentists at the federal penitentiary there [United States Penitentiary, Terre Haute]. And the second year we lived in Denver, Colorado, and he was one of the dentists at the Englewood, spelled with an E, youth facility there [Marvin W. Foote Youth Services Center, Englewood, Colorado]. And then he wanted to come back home. He's an L.A. [Los Angeles, California] native. He was actually born in L.A. One of the, one of the few people in this city who was born here. And so we came back to his home. And then he worked as a dentist actually for a year in a clinic in Watts [Los Angeles, California]. And then at that point the, he was--he got his master's in public health and went into administration. He worked at UCLA dental school [UCLA School of Dentistry, Los Angeles, California] for five years, largely in diverse admissions--diversity of admissions. And then for several years he actually ran, he was the administrator of a dental clinic for the waiters' union. The waiters' union here has their own dental clinic, but you have to have a dentist in charge of it. And because his father was a waiter and he felt a need to give back because he was raised on tips, basically, on the salary. So he did that. But it really wasn't a great job because there were no benefits, like retirement, anything. So after five years he went back to the county where he had worked also as a dentist in the L.A. county jails. So he came back, he worked for public health [Los Angeles County Department of Public Health]. Well first it was health services [Los Angeles County Department of Health Services], and he became the L.A. County dental director. So he would go out and examine the dental clinics and make sure they were up to standards. And then that became part of public health. And he also became like a state wide expert on fluoridation. And became involved in trying to expand fluoridation because in minority communities, prevention is the best thing. And if you can get kids to have fluoridated water, then they won't have the cavities, they won't need much dental work that they can't afford. So he's been retired for four years. He retired in October four years ago. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, so in 1969 you, you were teaching at Dunbar [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar Senior High School, Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 2: For one semester. Speaker 1: Yeah, and you moved? Speaker 2: Right, that's when he graduated. So then, then that's--we moved for one year to Terre Haute, Indiana. Speaker 1: Terre Haute, okay. Speaker 2: 'Cause he was assigned, it's, it's the [U.S.] military, essentially. So he was assigned to Terre Haute, Indiana, the federal pen. And then the next year we were in Denver 'cause he was assigned to the Englewood youth facility. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So that was his two years in the service. Then we moved here. Speaker 1: All right, so by nineteen seventy--the end of '71 [1971]? Speaker 2: Yeah, so that's like '71 [1971]. And so then-- Story_ID: 656223 Speaker 1: Now you served as a student affairs counselor? Speaker 2: Right. The first real job I got here was at USC [University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California]. I mean I taught for like six weeks from May to June at, at John Adams High School [sic. John Adams Middle School, Los Angeles, California], which was a job my aunt got me when some teacher decided to leave in May to go on vacation. And that, that was, that was really a difficult teaching assignment. But anyway by that summer, they, they offered that they wanted me to come back to John Adams, which is down near USC. It's an inner city school. But I said, "No, no, I don't think so." So I got a job at USC and I was the director of the. Norman Topping Student Aid Fund and just also a general student counselor. And that's a scholarship fund, I believe it's still in existence, but I'm not sure. It gives money to low income students of every color, about a quarter African American, Asian American, Hispanic and Caucasian. And then you sort of just watch the kids and mentor the kids. You select who gets the awards, they're partial scholarships. And then as I said, I was also just a general, general counselor. So I did that. And then I said if I'm gonna go to law school, I got to get to, got to get, got to get it done. Time to apply. I've been here, got my feet on the ground and I applied to law schools and went to UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, School of Law, Los Angeles, California]. Story_ID: 656224 Speaker 1: So UCLA law school [University of California, Los Angeles, School of Law, Los Angeles, California]. And, now did you start attending in '74 [1974]? Speaker 2: Seventy-four [1974] to '77 [1977]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So the fall of '74 [1974] graduated, May or June of '77 [1977]. Speaker 1: Now you started I guess at the beginning of--you were there during the Watergate hearings, right? I mean you were starting law school around that time. Speaker 2: I guess so. Speaker 1: So I mean what I'm--reason why I mention it is because like law was really in the news, everybody's watching lawyers like all day long, hash over the Watergate mess. The John Dean--every, everyone testified as a lawyer. Everybody, you all the, you know, the judiciary committee [U.S. Senate Committee on the Judiciary], all these lawyers on T- T- TV for ten hours a day. Did you--well you're in first year law school (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Did I watch? Believe me, first year of law school I wasn't doing much of anything but, but studying. Of course I had one, one child [Timothy Collins] at the time. Fortunately I did not have to work. Most students at UCLA don't. But it was intense. I'd been out of school for a while. Little older than some of the students, so I was feeling the pressure. And I was studying very hard. I--on the other hand, I think I was very well motivated. But yeah, I was studying pretty hard. Story_ID: 656225 Speaker 1: Did you have any--were there any other African American students? Speaker 2: There were. I mean UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] at the time was, was working hard on affirmative action, as a lot of schools were. Now as you may know, things are not so good in California for higher education because they're not supposed to, you know, have the affirmative action programs that take race into account. Actually, there was a--interesting you're here now because Dean Slaughter--I, I was just thinking about him because his son [Fred W. Slaughter] has his application to be a superior county judge in Orange County [California]. So Dean Fred Slaughter at UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, School of Law, Los Angeles, California] was the one who was more or less in charge of the minority admissions program. And he's a great guy; he's still--he's not there anymore, but certainly still alive and well. And so I had applied through that, as well as regular admission. Still not sure which program I was admitted in because they said well you could be admitted either way. So we might, you know, if we need that slot for someone else. But we did have a pretty good I think group of people. And I studied with Rickey Ivie who is now like he has his own law firm and is doing very well in town. It's basically an African American law firm and he raises money for UCLA. And then Jan Rogers Brown, Janice Rogers Brown who went on to be on the California Court of Appeal [California Court of Appeal, Third Appellate District], the California supreme court [Supreme Court of California], and then was picked for the federal D.C. circuit [U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit]. And I think the plan was that maybe they thought sometime she'd move up to the [U.S.] Supreme Court. But of course then the Democrats won the presidency, so that hasn't happened. But Janice Rogers Brown was in our class and in our study group. So I mean our study group was Jan Rogers Brown, Jack Adele Greer [ph.], Rickey Ivie, Keith Wyatt [W. Keith Wyatt]. So we, we studied together. We were all in section one. They just divide up people and one of my other colleagues here, Percy Anderson, African American judge, was at UCLA. Not in my class. He was a couple years ahead. So we had a good, good representation. Speaker 1: Okay. Any African American professors? Speaker 2: We did have a couple. It wasn't amazing, but criminal procedure and labor law were both African American professors. I did not have either one, and now I'm struggling for their names, which will come to me later. Reggie [Reginald H. Alleyne]--they'll come to me later, but right now I cannot pull out their names. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But one was in labor law, and McGee, McGee [Henry W. McGee, Jr.] was one, okay. He was criminal procedure. But your first year, you're just assigned your professors by whatever section you're in. So I did not have, I did not have either one of them. Those are the only two that I remember. Speaker 1: Okay. Now did you--what did you I guess focus on in law school in terms of--what a--aspect of the law were you attracted to? Speaker 2: I took several courses in constitutional law and then in criminal, criminal law. Speaker 1: Okay. And did you have a favorite professor, or is there a, you know, a mentor? Speaker 2: I really liked Susan Prager [Susan Westerberg Prager]. At the time she was a professor. She was--she then became dean. And she was the longest sitting dean of any major law school when she left. She was there for sixteen years as dean. But when I knew her first, she was a professor and I took her for three courses, and I think she was probably my closest thing to, to a mentor. Story_ID: 656226 Speaker 1: So are there an- any stories about law school [University of California, Los Angeles, School of Law, Los Angeles, California] before we--? Speaker 2: Well, one thing that was interesting was (laughter) I mentioned my age. This guy came up to me very early in first year, much younger guy. And he said, "How, how old are you? I had heard you were older." And I said--I don't know, I think I was twenty-nine or whatever. I said twenty-eight or twenty-nine. He said, "Oh my gosh, you are old." Which--it's kind of amusing now as we look back from our more advanced age to have somebody say that. It was--at the time it was just--I, I looked at him, like what are you gonna say to somebody who says that to you? And then the other thing is we had--as students of color, the school provided sort of extra tutorials and you could go to them or you didn't have to. But if you needed like a tutorial for students of color who had, had maybe come in through this program. And so I mostly just went to the study group with the people I mentioned, all of whom are African American. But I think I may have gone to one or two of these tutorials, I can't remember. And so I heard that some of the white students, I don't know, one or two, went to the administration and said, "Well we don't care if some of the other students of color go, but Ms. Collins [HistoryMaker Audrey Collins], she shouldn't be able to go," (laughter). "She shouldn't be able to go." And I don't know if they thought that it was because I didn't come in under that program, or what. But they, they raised some objection. And then the other thing I'll always remember is--law school, there's signs up everywhere. And I just remember seeing the sign at one point which was--I took it as a sign of protest against the EOP [Educational Opportunity Program], it was called the EOP program; it was called a lot of different things, affirmative. And somebody wrote, "There's no EOP in the NFL [National Football League]." Which there you go, that's what it said. Speaker 1: Okay, this is true. Speaker 2: So in a way it's kind of funny, 'cause actually there's so many African American players in the NFL. But I took it to mean there's no special privileges to get into the NFL, you have to earn it. It wasn't the greatest analogy 'cause there are so many black players. But, but anyway--so there was some resentment of the EOP program. But that--and those are the ways in which I remember it coming out. You know, "We don't want her to be able to go to this," and, "There's no EOP in the NFL." Story_ID: 656227 Speaker 1: Now did you clerk for some, some, someone in law school [University of California, Los Angeles, School of Law, Los Angeles, California]? I mean did you? Speaker 2: Did I clerk? Speaker 1: Yeah. (Unclear) Yeah. Speaker 2: I never clerked for, for a judge. (Pause) Trying to--okay first year I worked for--let me get my years straight, make sure I have this right. (Pause) Okay, I have it straight. It was unusual 'cause usually clerking was the second year. But Gibson, Dunn and Crutcher [Gibson, Dunn and Crutcher LLP], which is like one of the two biggest firms here, had a clerking program for first years. And so one other African American woman and I were in this first year clerking program for Gibson, Dunn and Crutcher, which I never talk about much. But her name's Beverly Baker-Kelly, and she went on to have like a great career too. But I, I didn't keep in such good touch with her. She and her husband who's a dermatologist, Paul Kelly [A. Paul Kelly], now live up in--around Berkeley [California]. And so they were very nice to us and I, I did work that summer. And they were interested in having me come back, but I already had the one son [Timothy Collins], I've mentioned that. I, I had one child and then I had another child [Rachel Montez Minor] my third year. And I could see that that was not an environment that was conducive for women who had families. So I really didn't wanna go back, although they were lovely to us. So that was my first year job after, my first year after law school. Then I was interested, as I said in criminal law too, so I was like what am I doing here at Gibson, Dunn and Crutcher. So I wanted to go to the public defender, but I had a Professor, Mueller [Addison Mueller]. He was this older, very nice guy. And he said well why don't you, "Why don't you look into the DA's [district attorney] office?" I said, "DA's office? I don't wanna go there, I don't wanna prosecute people; I wanna defend." And he said, "Now wait a minute, wait a minute. You--." I'd had a quarter away experience actually with the federal public defender [Federal Public Defender, Central District of California], where we went out and interviewed guys at Terminal Island [Federal Correctional Institution, Terminal Island, Los Angeles, California] and tried to help them with minor problems. We weren't lawyers, we couldn't really do much. We, we were mostly like liaisons. If they were having problems at home we would write letters, et cetera. So I'd had that experience, but it really wasn't representing people. So I wanted more of that. And so Professor Mueller said, "My son is really big in the DA's office [Los Angeles County District Attorney's Office] and you know maybe, maybe we could get you in as a summer law clerk in the DA's office." I'm like, "I don't know." So I kind of grumbled, but you know it was a contact. So I called his son, Phil Mueller [ph.], and I came down and I interviewed and I was accepted as a summer law clerk to the DA's office. And frankly, that was pretty good because I didn't have anything else. And I just fell in love with it. I mean they had us in prelims [preliminary hearing] and all of the victims who were walking in the door were people of color. And it was an opportunity to be in court and to do prelims under supervision of somebody. And so th- I spent my second summer there and that was when I decided I wanted to go back to the DA's office after I passed the bar, and I did. Story_ID: 656228 Speaker 1: Well who, who was in the DA's office [Los Angeles County District Attorney's Office] when you were there, that you remember? Speaker 2: Well the main person I remember--of course the person who hired me (laughter), was the DA, so that's John Van de Kamp. He was the first DA I worked under. So of course I remember him. But the other thing I remember is that he brought in from the outside two assistant DAs. You could either have them from within the office, but he brought in Andrea Ordin and Johnnie Cochran. And so that was when I first met Johnnie Cochran, who was of course the most amazing lawyer ever, just about. And Johnnie Cochran was trying to increase minority representation in the office and we talked about that. And he actually had me doing some interviews for new deputy DAs, even though I was a brand new deputy DA. So normally only more senior deputy DAs interviewed. So there was a little resentment of that, that I was being asked to interview for new deputies when I was just a new deputy myself. And this one older deputy DA, a white gentleman, expressed to me--I don't remember exactly what he said, but it was basically on the order of, "What do you think you're doing here? You should stop doing this, or this isn't gonna be good for your career." And so you know I told Johnnie Cochran and he said, "Don't worry, I'll take care of it," (laughter). And, and you know I kept doing it. But there, there was some resentment. There still weren't that many women in the office; there were more, and there weren't that many people of color. But of course Johnnie Cochran was just an amazing influence, and as time went on I, of course he left; he didn't stay in the DA's office very long. I think he was there for maybe two years. He was also in charge of the unit that investigated officer related--when officers were accused of wrongdoing. So it was he that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now this is something that haunts Los Angeles [California] more than any other city. Speaker 2: I mean it's a lot better now (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No the--yeah, that's what I've heard. Speaker 2: Yeah, but we had-- Speaker 1: But it was really bad. Speaker 2: It was, it was bad back then before--well it was Gates. That was when we had Chief Gates. Speaker 1: Daryl Gates, right. Speaker 2: Right, Daryl Gates. Speaker 1: All right. Did you have any--I mean were you really impressed by Johnnie Cochran? Speaker 2: Yes, I was really impressed by Johnnie Cochran. I was impressed by him then, I was impressed by him during the O.J. Simpson case [People of the State of California v. Orenthal James Simpson, 1995] and his amazing closing argument. I was always impressed by Johnnie Cochran 'til the day he died. Speaker 1: Okay. What, what was the--I guess what was the quality about Johnnie Cochran that you admired the most? Speaker 2: He was very charismatic. Of course he was extremely bright, but he was just one of the most charismatic people you would ever meet. And he, he knew that the way you win a case is through the jury. And he won that case, the O.J. case because--I think he won that case when the jury was picked. I mean he just knew how to talk to people. He knew how to read people. And he knew how to get that jury, you know, to listen to what he had to say through his use of language, his, his argument, the way he pulled together an argument. It was a masterful, masterful defense when you look at the evidence that actually existed against O.J. Simpson. Speaker 1: You finished law school [University of California, Los Angeles, School of Law, Los Angeles, California] in '77 [1977], is that it? Speaker 2: Right. So I started with the DA's office in January of '78 [1978]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Anything significant about the end of law school other than, you know-- Speaker 2: About the end of it? The end of it, well my daughter [Rachel Montez Minor] was born; that's pretty significant. She was born in February of my third year. But that was significant. I took off two weeks. People taped classes for me and helped me in other ways and that was the significant thing there. And then I took the bar. I worked at Legal Aid [Legal Aid Foundation of Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] for a few months while I was waiting for the bar results. And as soon as the bar results came out, then I was in the next class in the DA's office in January '78 [1978] and stayed there 'til I came here as a judge in '94 [1994]. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, all right so as a district attorney, I mean what--John Van de Kamp is still the DA, the DA until (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well he was the DA for a while. I mean DAs kind of came and went. Van de Kamp, then there was Philip, Philip-- Speaker 1: I think he left in '80 [1980], '83 [1983]. Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm not gonna know dates on this. Speaker 1: The attorney general of the state was in the '80s (unclear). Speaker 2: Right, so then there was Philibosian [Robert Philibosian], and then there was Ira Reiner who came over from the city attorney's office, and then there was Gil Garcetti who was the DA who appointed me assistant DA, and he was still the DA when I left (audio disturbance). Story_ID: 656229 Speaker 1: What were some of the cases that you worked on as di- district attorney (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now I didn't work on any big cases-- Speaker 1: You didn't? Okay. Speaker 2: --like journeymen cases. I worked as a preliminary hearings deputy. I was in the juvenile department for a while prosecuting cases and of course juvenile court is a little bit different 'cause it's much more--they're all minors, so it's much more secretive and there was no juries. And then I worked in--I was a calendar deputy. I also worked in our consumer protection and environmental division for a while. And I spent two years as the grand jury legal advisor, which is just a unique position, there's only one person who does that at a time, and you advise the grand jury, both when they're hearing criminal cases. And in L.A. County [Los Angeles County, California], they also have civil responsibilities, unlike the federal grand jury that just hears criminal cases and issues indictments. But they, they go out and they look at the jails and they take one or two topics of interest that they might study through the year, so I did that for two years. Then I was the head deputy in Torrance [California]. Then I was the assistant director of central trials for a couple of years, and the assistant director of the Bureau of Special Operations, which oversees all of the special, specialized divisions in the DA's office [Los Angeles County District Attorney's Office], like consumer protection, and major crimes, major, major frauds. And then I was the assistant DA when Gil Garcetti became the DA. I did that until I left and came over here. Speaker 1: Now all along the way, I mean in '87 [1987] you were the first African American to serve as the head deputy of the Torrance branch office. You were the first African American in '88 [1988] to serve as the assistant director of the bureau of--bureaus of central and special operations. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. And-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I was the first--I wasn't the first African American Assistant DA because Johnnie Cochran had done that. But he was brought in from the outside. But I was the first person from within the office to progress and hold that position, as well as the ones right under that, the assistant director positions. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay, you were appointed assistant district attorney in '92 [1992], is that? Speaker 2: Right, by Gil Garcetti. Story_ID: 656230 Speaker 1: So '92 [1992] is a big year in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] because of the riots (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, and I remember looking out the window. I was in the Criminal Courts Building [Clara Shortridge Foltz Criminal Justice Center, Los Angeles, California], again that's the one right up the street, which if we open the windows, we can see. And I was on the eighteenth floor, and I had a window that faced south. And you could actually see the smoke from the riots--civil unrest is the preferred term. But it was, that was something, that was something. Speaker 1: Do you--now did you--where did you live during this, during the time that you were-- Speaker 2: I've only lived two places here. One when we first moved here, in the area, I don't know, do you know L.A.? It's, it's near the L.A. County art museum [Los Angeles County Museum of Art] and tar pits. They now call this area Museum Square, which I find amusing. But it, it is actually near the art museum and the tar pits (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The La Brea Tar Pits, yeah. Speaker 2: Right. Yes, it's basically near Olympic [Boulevard] and Fairfax [Avenue], okay. And we lived there for quite a while. Then I guess mirroring my parents [Audrey Moseley Brodie and Furman Brodie, Jr.], we decided we wanted to move some place with great schools. We had our son [Timothy Collins] in a black private school, which was called School for International--golly, now I'm confusing it with Experiment, Experiment for International Living [sic. Experiment in International Living]. But, it was like the school of international studies or something; it was run by an African American woman and her husband. And some of the teachers were like Pakistani and Indian and--it was, it was pretty cool. But--and they had built a new building 'cause the first building was on Pico [Boulevard], so he had been going there since he was in preschool. And then they built a new school and we were--he was going there. And one of his classmates I remember was Eric Correa whose father is like this famous jazz guy. Speaker 1: Chick (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Willie Bobo. Speaker 1: Well, Chick Corea? Speaker 2: I guess so, or is it Willie--no I think his father is actually Willie Bobo. Speaker 1: Really, Willie Bobo? Okay, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, Willie Bobo. So it was great, you know and he was going to school with--it was, it was integrated, but I mean there were a lot of black kids, but it was integrated. But we could see some problems down the pike, and in fact the school later folded. So--and then my daughter [Rachel Montez Minor] was born. So we kind of copied my parents. You know, we tried to get to a better school area. So my husband [Timothy R. Collins] found this probate--you could go to court and bid on a probate. And it's like five doors inside Beverly Hills [California]. So it's right around--then it's like sort of Pico and Doheny [Drive], and it was a duplex, but all you need is--you need property; it doesn't have to be fancy. So it was like five doors inside Beverly Hills, but you could still go to the schools. So we bought that and we stayed there all these years, it's--in this duplex. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: And our kids went to Beverly Hills schools [Beverly Hills Unified School District]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Just like the kids who live north of Wilshire [Boulevard] (laughter). Story_ID: 656231 Speaker 1: Did you c- I--I was asking partially because I wanted to ask you if you could, you could feel the urban unrest coming, you know. Speaker 2: No, I don't think anybody had a clue. And in fact, that was one of the problems, you know 'cause I was on the Webster Williams taskforce, and then I was on another committee that kind of looked at the institutions and what we could do to improve it. But nobody saw it coming. There was like no preparation. And then one of the things that I just learned is when, when there's a crisis like that, communications is so important. And I think this problem still exists locally, nationally, state level. Just the ability to communicate. As sophisticated as we are with email and text and all of these things that I don't even know how to use, getting one organization to be able to talk to another in a time of crisis, is still not done well. And back then, which of course is a long time ago, I mean radio comm- just basic, simple things like commanders trying to talk to each other on walkie talkie. You know it was before like the cell phones now. Things just--communications just went to hell, okay. And it escalated out of, out of control. And you know you had things like firefighters couldn't talk to police, and so there were fires. And the firefighters weren't sure where to go. And then the police would try to tell them, "No, don't go there 'cause you're gonna get fired on. People are shooting at you." And so then they would get there and they'd have to leave. So firefighters couldn't talk to police; police in one area who needed backup, couldn't talk to police in the other area. Of course all of this against the backdrop of complete civilian distrust of the police in that area. But--and so you, you didn't have people that they could go to and try to calm things down for a long time. But it, it just happened so fast and there's another case that some people believe fueled this, other people believe had nothing to do with it, called the Du case [People of the State of California v. Soon Ja Du, 1991], have you ever heard of this? Story_ID: 656232 Speaker 1: The Du case [People of the State of California v. Soon Ja Du, 1991] and I will be as quick as I can. But there was a young teenage girl, and actually I do remember her name, although I'm bad on names, Latasha Harlins. And she went into a Korean grocer's market and she bought--she was attempting to purchase something, and I think it was a soda or drink of some kind. But apparently she was walking out without paying for it. And the Korean grocer stopped her and there was some physicality, and the Korean grocer ended up actually killing her. And she, she shot her. And this went--was going to go to trial in front a new judge. And I, I think it did, it did go to trial. She was found guilty of some degree of homicide, and the judge put the Korean grocer, it was a woman, on probation. And there was so much unhappiness in the black community about this. And relationships at this time were also not good between the Korean commercial community and the black community because many Korean merchants had moved into black neighborhoods. And a lot of the community members felt that they were being ripped off, essentially at these neighborhood markets. But quite often, the residents couldn't afford to go to like, you know, the big markets and it was a convenience. Didn't have a car, they went there. So this happened a few months before the civil unrest. And a lot of people felt that there was something brewing. This goes back to the question you asked me, did anybody see it coming, and I said, no, emphatically no. And that's true. No one saw that flashpoint coming. What would happen in an intersection would, you know, could spawn all this. But I do have to say looking back, and many people have looked back at the Du case, and said there, there was a lot of just unhappiness in the African American community, although this was more or less aimed at a particular group, the Korean American community. So there were a lot of attempts after that to bring about conciliation and discussion between those two communities, the African American community and the Korean American community. So just a little detour there. Story_ID: 656233 Speaker 1: What role did your office play in the Rodney King (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, the role the office played officially of course was the prosecution of Rodney King and when that did not go--start o- are you talking about the prosecution of the, of the four police officers in the Rodney King beating? Speaker 1: Everybody. Speaker 2: Because what happened there was when it started in L.A. County DA's Office [Los Angeles County District Attorney's Office], the DA's office prosecuted the officers, and that was not a successful prosecution. Then that's when the federal government came in, [U.S.] Department of Justice did its own civil rights investigation, and of course I was not a district judge at the time. I was in the DA's office. And then they brought their prosecution, which was successful. And so the officers--I think all of them, or three of the four, were found liable, guilty, in the criminal prosecution. And in fact, there's a famous sentencing case that came out of it, U.S. versus Koon [Koon v. United States, 1996], Koon was one of the defendants. So the DA's office, the role was that it initially did prosecute the officers and for various reasons, I mean I, I can't really tell you why, you know, a prosecution was not successful there and it was here, I mean there are different reasons. But-- Speaker 1: Does the Simi Valley [California] trial-- Speaker 2: A lot of it was, was venue and you know at the--O.J. talking about issues like that, many people later criticized the DA [Gil Garcetti] for bringing that case downtown [Los Angeles, California] because they said if he had kept that case in Santa Monica [California] with the Santa Monica jury, then the DA's office would have won the case. But you know he felt it was proper to bring it downtown, more representative of the whole community, and of course we know and we've discussed that Johnnie Cochran won that case for O.J. Simpson [People of the State of California v. Orenthal James Simpson, 1995]. So venue, yeah, can make a difference and people have made those arguments about the Rodney King prosecution, that because it was in the community it was in, no matter what the DA did, they were never gonna win that case. Speaker 1: But during that time, you were a U.S. assistant district attorney, right? Speaker 2: Right. But so I, I had no role in the prosecution of that case. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Story_ID: 656234 Speaker 1: In '92 [1992], you were appointed chair of the Subcommittee on Moral Character for the state bar committee of bar examiners [Committee of Bar Examiners]. Speaker 2: Oh yes. Speaker 1: (Mumbles) Were you the first Af- African American to hold that position? Speaker 2: You know, I don't know because that committee rotates. And I don't know who the people might have been on before me, so I cannot answer that. I was--I think I was the only African American on it at one time, but our state bar [State Bar of California]--you know how every committee is staffed by a state bar person who is your liaison and essentially does a lot of the work in between the meetings. And our state bar staff person has become one of my best friends, Cloey Hewlett [Clothilde Hewlett]. She worked for the state bar, she staffed that, she's now with a firm. She worked for Gray Davis. And then Teri Jackson [HistoryMaker Teri L. Jackson] who was an African American judge up north, later got on that committee. So the state bar really does a good job of--I, I think of staffing its committees with good representation. I mean they, they do I think go out of their way to try to have diversity on these committees at any given time. But whether I was the first one who was ever on it, I don't know 'cause that committee had been in existence for many, many years because it-- Speaker 1: Okay, well even more important is like what is the committee--what do they do and what is their role? Speaker 2: Well when you take the state bar, of course there's the written exam. And then there's the--and I think almost every state has this, the sort of moral character part of it. And so this committee looks to that. A--and of course for most people, 99 percent, there's no issue. I mean you, you don't ever look at the hundreds and thousands of applications. But if someone has had say a conviction in the past that might call into account their moral character, not speeding, you know, I mean not speeding ticket or not even some convictions that don't seem to have anything to do with moral character. But in those cases where an individual has committed fraud, a famous one recently that they're looking at right now, is this journalist, former journalist who lied and made up stories. I can't remember his name, but it was in the press like a month ago. So this was a guy who essentially just completely made up stories, his stories were published. He was-- Speaker 1: African American? Speaker 2: Pardon--this was back east, but now he came here and went to law school. Speaker 1: Is that the one who worked for The New York Times? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: An African American young man (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I believe--I, I think so. But there'd been several like that. So it was all fraud. And now he says well I'm rehabilitated. So the question is can he--should he be allowed to practice. And you know, there's opinions on both sides. So that goes--that kind of thing goes to the committee. But any conviction, doesn't have to be high profile, or high publicity. If you were committed of embezzlement, say you were working--you know embezzled from your company, then you have to show rehabilitation. It's not that you're never gonna get your bar license, but the committee has to be convinced that enough time has gone by that you've shown remorse and rehabilitation. So that's what that committee does. Speaker 1: Yeah, I know his name is Jayson-- Speaker 2: Yeah, Jayson something, Streator, I don't know. Speaker 1: Taylor [sic. Jayson Blair]. Speaker 2: That's a perfect example. Sometimes murder cases, although sometimes murder is, is, is actually easier to deal with. You know if somebody gets mad and kills somebody. Speaker 1: Well if he's not convicted, you can't say he murdered anybody. Speaker 2: Right, but I mean there have even been murder convictions that have come through, but it doesn't have that--even though it's obviously morally horrible to murder somebody, say it was self defense, or that was your--you had a good self defense defense, it didn't work, but it was kind of heat of passion or something like that. That may cause fewer issues sometimes than something like somebody who habitually lied for a living. Because they say well you know, you're not gonna murder anybody else; that was something that was done, you know, we understand the circumstances. But golly, you might go back and lie again. So that's what that committee does. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right. We have a general audience who's gonna be listening, you know--or they're not gonna be all lawyers or something. That's why I ask you to try and explain. Speaker 2: I think every state has something like this, they just handle it differently. Story_ID: 656235 Speaker 1: All right, so now in '94 [1994] you were honored by the National Black Prosecutors Association; and right after that, you were nominated by President Bill Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] to a seat on the district court bench for the Central District of California [U.S. District Court for the Central District of California] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, which is here. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, I was the first Clinton appointee to the Central District. The Central District is huge, it's L.A. [Los Angeles County, California], Orange County [California], Riverside County [California], San Bernardino County [California], Ventura County [California], San--and San Luis Obispo [San Luis Obispo County, California], hope I got 'em all, Orange, Riverside, San Bernardino, L.A., Orange County, Ventura County and San Luis Obispo, seven counties, almost 20 million people. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So well, well tell us about this then. Were you surprised or did you-- Speaker 2: I was surprised when, when people suggested that I do it because I had never done any federal work. I'd never done any federal cases, I'd never been a judge. I was very surprised when people suggested I applied, and for a long time I, I didn't apply. I had just begun to think about being a judge on the state court system as something I might wanna do. And all I can say is people bugged me enough that for some reason, I applied. And if I had known how difficult it was and how unlikely it is that they would pick anybody like me from the state court system with no federal court experience, not part of the inner circle, which is called the federal family, I wouldn't have applied. But I did, and I did well in the interviews and I got on, passed on to meet with Senator Feinstein [Dianne Feinstein], whom I did not know. I mean I was not political, I have never been. 'Cause once you become a judge, you can't do political things on the federal side. You can't give money, you can't go to these events. But I had not been political, and she had never met me. For some reason, she liked me and she nom- you know, she recommended to President Clinton that I be nominated, and I was. So it was a great surprise to a great many people (laughter), I think. Story_ID: 656236 Speaker 1: How'd you like the job? I mean you're still do- doing it, so you must like it (unclear). Speaker 2: Yes. No it's, it's a wonderful job. Both being a trial, trial judge and then the time I was chief judge. The variety is one of the best things. I mean there's some negative things about the system that aren't working right now; we're not getting new judgeships. We haven't had any new judgeships since 1990 and look how our population in the Central District [Central District of California] has boomed since then. So our caseload has just sort of gone up exponentially. But the variety is fun because you get to do everything, unlike many courts that are divided into departments, which makes a lot of sense. You know you either do criminal or you do civil, you do probate, you do family law, you know you do long cause trials, you do juvenile. We do everything. I mean I get civil and criminal cases, all at the same time. I get motions in criminal and civil all at the same time. You might be doing a criminal trial, you might be doing a civil trial. And the variety of cases within the civil arena is breathtaking. From constitutional law to things that are removed from state courts. You get your Fair Labor Standards Act [Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938], as well as your state labor code violations. You can get many employment law discrimination cases under both federal and state law. Discrimination based on sex, age, gender, race. Your Americans with Disabilities Act [Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990]. And again a lot of these also have state law counterparts. You get a lot of Americans Disabilities Act. And then you just get cases that are removed from state court because the defendant is not a California corporation. So again, a lot of California labor code, wage and hour violations, you know I didn't get my overtime, I didn't get my rest period, breach of contract. Just regular old breach of contract. I have a huge one involving Boeing [The Boeing Company] and some international corporations over some big deal they tried to do, Sea Launch [Sea Launch Company, LLC; Energia Overseas, Ltd.]. They were gonna launch satellites into space and it failed and everybody's suing everybody else. It's breach of contract. But they're from all different places, so there's diversity. So I've got, I've got breach of contract. It, it's just amazing--like copyright and intellectual property. Copyright, trademark, patent, just a little bit of admiralty law, not much but you know, if, if it's admiralty law, it has to come here [U.S. District Court for the Central District of California]. A little bit of--occasionally like a railroad case under the railroad act has to come here. So you truly never know what you're gonna get. I mean after nineteen years, I still see new stuff where I look at--I go, "What is this? I've never seen this before." Story_ID: 656237 Speaker 1: Does it put you in a position where you've got to--I mean your- in order to do research on these cases and I mean you've got to have a real diverse staff I guess and a big staff (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Well of course my law clerks are in the next room. I have my two law, we have two law clerks. At the court of appeal level they have four, which is interesting because of course their cases are extremely complex. But we have so many and every Monday is motion day. So as soon as they finish working on one thing--and right now we're working on a very complicated search warrant issue. Actually it's not a regular search warrant, it's a wiretap. Working on a very complicated wiretap issue, whether that should be suppressed and whether law clerks--I mean January 6 calendar, this is all on calendar--working on a very complicated copyright, trademark issue. So we have--I have my judicial assistant and my two law clerks, and then of course you have your calen- your deputy who assists you in court, your courtroom deputy. And when you're in court, you have a court reporter. But essentially it's just the two law clerks and me (laughter). Speaker 1: That's a lot to keep up with. Speaker 2: Yeah. It, it keeps you on your toes, it keeps you flexible. You're never gonna say, "I'm bored." You're never gonna say, "The same old thing." I mean there are some cases that are in the same category and you go, "Another wage and hour case. Yeah, class action wage and hour case." But there's always so much new that you're never gonna be bored. Speaker 1: Okay, so this is a good thing. Speaker 2: Which is a very good thing. Keeps you I think flexible, which I think helps to keep your brain going and keep you young. You know you don't wanna just do the same thing or worse than that, do nothing, you know. So it's great, and it's great working with, you know, younger people, the law clerks. That's good. Speaker 1: So is that, that the biggest challenge of this particular judgeship [on the U.S. District Court for the Central District of California], the divers- the diversity of cases? Speaker 2: I think right now probably the biggest challenge is just the volume. As I said, we should have--the last time I checked (unclear) chief judge, we needed eleven more judges. We have authorized twenty-eight active judgeships, and based on our population and caseload, we needed eleven more. So if you got twenty-eight and you need eleven more, you're working really hard. Story_ID: 656238 Speaker 1: Now what's holding up the appointment of more judges? Speaker 2: [U.S.] Congress will not authorize any new judgeships. There's been a judgeship bill before Congress virtually every year that is based on statistics. This is how many new judgeships you need from all over the country, all over the districts, all over the country; at least the ones that need it. And it just doesn't go anywhere because if you approve new judges, then that president gets to pick them. So the party that's not in power saying, "Well wait a minute, that means this president, not in my party, is gonna pick," you know, like say for the Central District [Central District of California], "five more judges? No." Then another party gets in power and it's the same thing. "Wait a minute, this, this party's gonna get to pick 'em?" Gridlock. Speaker 1: Yeah it's (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I mean they could work out a compromise, like let's approve six new judges for the Central District. This president in power now gets to pick three, we'll hold the other three 'til you guys get in power and then you get those. I mean it doesn't take too much to figure out there could be a compromise, but it just doesn't happen. Speaker 1: Do you--is this time where--is the present time or recent times the most, I guess the most obstructionist time for Congress in terms of appointing these? Speaker 2: I, I think it's a very difficult time. Course I'm sure we--you, you know and whenever this is taped or finished, we're now in a slightly different atmosphere where the [U.S.] Senate has just changed its rules so that it's gonna be easier to confirm judges. But that's for existing vacancies, which is a separate problem. Right now we don't have any, we had vacancies for a long time. But it still doesn't deal with new judgeships. So as you know there'd been just so much talk about how this current Senate would not approve, not just judgeships, but a lot of President Obama's [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] other vacancies in key agencies at high levels. So with this Senate rules change, you know that at least will--is designed to ease that so that the vacancies can be filled. But in terms of the new judgeships, boy that bill just hasn't gotten anywhere for years. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Not just so--it's not just the current, you know it's both parties (laughter) sort of don't wanna see the other party get all of these new judgeships. Story_ID: 656239 Speaker 1: Do you have any stories you can share with us about cases that have come before you, that--? Speaker 2: I mean I, I definitely have some interesting stories or interesting cases. That gets us into probably a, a slightly longer discussion. I would say Humanitarian Law Project [Humanitarian Law Project v. Reno] is probably the case that I've done that's received the most publicity. It's been, it's been now many years and there have been other cases since then, but this was the--designed to assist in detection of terrorists and for the most part when the law was challenged, and the law was originally passed under the AEDPA [Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act of 1996], then the PATRIOT Act [Uniting and Strengthening America by Providing Appropriate Tools Required to Intercept and Obstruct Terrorism Act of 2001], then you had another act. I, I upheld the law for the most part. The law said basically that it's a crime to give material aid or support to terrorist groups. And then it kind of broke that down. Like you know you can't give them training. You can't give them personnel. You can't give them expert advice and assistance. You can't give them weaponry or whatever. So most of it I said was fine. But some of the terms I did find were vague, like personnel, what does that really mean? I mean what if you're, if you're just--the group you believe is good has been labeled a terrorist group and you're trying to just lobby for them or give them educational materials. Is that, is that training? Is that personnel? What does, what does that mean? So I found some of the terms were just unconstitutionally vague. I was upheld by the Ninth Circuit [U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit], and then some revisions were made to the law, so they sent it back to me to look at it again. I found at this time that some of the phrases were still unconstitutionally vague, although personnel I thought with the amendments, was okay. But they had added yet another term that I found was unconstitutionally vague. Went back to the Ninth Circuit. The Ninth Circuit upheld me again. Went to the U.S. Supreme Court, which agreed with the portions of my opinion that, that okayed or approved the law. But it found that the Ninth Circuit and therefore I, were, were wrong. We were reversed on finding these, some of these terms constitutionally vague. So at the time it got a lot of publicity because at the time I was I think the first, or one of the first federal judges to find any portions of this law under the AEDPA and PATRIOT Act and the next law, to be unconstitutional. But subsequently, you know there were a lot of other cases, other judges had similar opinions and it's kind of gone back and forth to look where we are now of course in the current atmosphere over data gathering, which is also supposed to combat terrorism. And now we've had the first federal judge the other day say that this is looking unconstitutional to me. So it's--you know it's an ebb and flow. Story_ID: 656240 Speaker 1: But at the time, that was the case that got a lot of publicity [Humanitarian Law Project v. Reno]. Last year, shortly before this time, I ruled in a case dealing with nativity scenes out in Santa Monica [California] that got a fair amount of publicity [Santa Monica Nativity Scenes Committee v. City of Santa Monica] because there had been for years, just what I'm sure was a lovely nativity, sort of series of nativity scenes that were unattended, but you know I pictured as sort of these big scenes from, from nativity and you would sort of walk from one to the other. You'd walk down the street near the ocean there, Ocean Avenue. And then some people who didn't like that or atheists, whatever, they started demanding that they have, you know, that they have their opportunity too. So they put in applications and they got a lot of the applications by lottery that cut back on the space for the Christian nativity scenes. And it was a, just a--then they had a hearing and city council [Santa Monica City Council] said, "Well okay, we're not gonna have any," you know, "because this is becoming--just taking up too much time and these are serious constitutional issues. So there can't be any unattended. There can't be any unattended scenes during this time of year." And so the people who represented the Christian nativity scene sued. And I found--I upheld the city. I said you know they, they can do it that way. It was very similar to a case from another circuit, Knights of Columbia [sic. Knights of Columbus], that said as long as it's a reasonable restriction and there are ample alternatives, they can have attended scenes, they can have it on private property, that it's okay. I actually--I thought the Ninth Circuit was gonna rule before this Christmas, so somebody would know you know, I mean I think I'm, I, I think my decision was right, but the Ninth Circuit has not ruled yet. So that got some, some publicity. Story_ID: 656241 Speaker 1: And then there are always the cases you do that don't get publicity, but you think are interesting. Speaker 2: Is there one that (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, there was one this year that just fortunately it was resolved, never got much publicity. A little bit in a newspaper near Camp Pendleton [Marine Corps Base Camp Pendleton, San Diego County, California], 'cause this came from the Marine base there, Camp Pendleton. It's unusual because normally federal courts, we don't get involved in [U.S.] military affairs. That is not something I wanna get involved in. But this young Marine, Rios [ph.], had gone to superior court, big fight with his wife. You know nasty situation, accusing each other of physical violence too. But anyway he went to a superior court judge, a judge gave him certain visitation rights. And then he gets in trouble back on the base. They decide they're gonna court martial him for certain things on the base, and then this thing with his wife too, where they accuse him, despite the fact that they had kind of a little preliminary hearing and the officer in charge of that said, "Don't charge him with this alleged physical altercation with his wife; you're never gonna win. In fact, the DA [district attorney] has brought charges against the wife, not him. Don't, don't bring this against him." Well they brought it against him and said, "Because the son was allegedly kicked in the course of this domestic dispute, you can't see your son. We're not gonna let you see your son." Well he protested through something called Mast [Captain's Mast], which is I guess the only way in the military, at least the Marines [U.S. Marine Corps], that you can lodge this protest. So he said well no, "I should be able to see my son. This isn't right. You know you can't just say I can't see my son because you're, you're now court martialing me, which is basically on a lot of other junk, plus the domestic violence." And he actually sued here [U.S. District Court for the Central District of California]. So I said, "My gosh, I've never seen anything like this. The military." But then I, I said, "Wait a minute. We have a superior court judge who has an existing order giving him visitation on the weekends and this and this, and, and, and these people are just ignoring that." So there's the case that deals with what you have to look at to see if you can even have jurisdiction to go into a military situation. And if there's a constitutional right involved, and you certainly have a constitutional right to associate, to, to be with your children and care for your children. Of course subject to limitations. A constitutional right involved and he has exhausted his remedies, which he has. He went through this Mast procedure, grievance, when he was turned down. Then after that the standards were kind of similar to preliminary injunction standards, likelihood of success, and irreparable injury. And I found he had shown both. So I said, "They can't do this." You know, "You are ignoring an L.A. [Los Angeles, California] superior court judge's order," probably unknown to him, "and this guy now at this point has been like fourteen months without being able to see his kid, except you say he can see him for two hours on Friday, but half the time the wife didn't bring him." So I, I enjoined it. And then they said, "Oh, okay well con- " because this court martial kept getting continued, so this was like months and months are going by and he can't see his kid. And you know what? They worked it out. They worked it out. I don't know exactly what they did, but I think they let him see the kid. I think they, they realized they were in violation of really of a L.A. superior court order. And I know they're the military, but this was, it was just wrong, you know. I also smelled there was something else going on here that they were proceeding with this despite this officer saying don't do it. There was, there was somebody who just didn't like him or, you know, it was something to, to me I felt was going here. So to me that's a really happy outcome. No publicity, other than--I think there was some like small article in a local paper down there near Camp Pendleton that I saw, 'cause they send us clippings. Under the radar, right thing is done. Story_ID: 656242 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Ma'am, can you please state your full name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: Yes. Audrey Brodie Collins, that's A-U-D-R-E-Y, B-R-O-D-I-E, C-O-L-L-I-N-S [HistoryMaker Audrey Collins]. Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: June 12th, 1945, and I was born in Chester, Pennsylvania. Speaker 1: And what is your occupation and title? Speaker 2: I am now an associate justice with the California Court of Appeal, the Second District, Division Four [California Second District Court of Appeal, Division Four]. Speaker 1: Okay, and today's date. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Okay, I think it's November 14th, 2014. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're in my chambers, which is located in the Ronald Reagan off- state office building [Ronald Reagan State Building], 300 South Spring [Street] in Los Angeles [California]. Story_ID: 656243 Speaker 1: Now we're gonna pick up where we left off, which is about 1978-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --when you start with the district attorney's office [Los Angeles County District Attorney's Office]. Now how did that take place? Speaker 2: I had worked in the DA's office as a summer law clerk after my second year in law school at UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, School of Law, Los Angeles, California]. And I really loved it from the moment I got there; I enjoyed being in court. I enjoyed identifying with--I did identify with the victims, and felt it was really important for them to have someone that they could identify with when they came into the courtroom 'cause most of the victims in the downtown Criminal Courts Building [Clara Shortridge Foltz Criminal Justice Center, Los Angeles, California] were people of color, and there weren't that many deputy district attorneys who were people of color. So I enjoyed that very, very much and decided I wanted to go back when I passed the bar, and that's what I did. I was in the first class that they hired for 1978, which was the first class of people who had just passed the bar in November. Speaker 1: Okay. Now the district attorney at that time was John Van de Kamp, right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes it was John Van de Kamp and Johnnie Cochran was one of his two assistant district attorneys. He had two or maybe three assistant DAs. So Johnnie Cochran was actually I'm sure very important in the recruitment push for more women and people of color. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now this is the famous Johnnie Cochran who-- Speaker 2: It is the famous (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. Speaker 2: --Johnnie Cochran, yes. Speaker 1: Now, now passed, but who made such a world--achieved worldwide fame through his defense of O.J. Simpson. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Yeah, what was he like? Speaker 2: Johnnie Cochran was one of the most charismatic people that you would ever wanna meet. And he was truly committed at that time to increasing diversity in the DA's office. I think it shocked a lot of people that he went to the DA's office. But I think at that time he thought he would try to do some reform from within. And he did supervise the unit that looked at police--allegations of police misconduct. That was one of the things he did, plus devoting himself, as I said, to trying to increase diversity inside the office. And then of course he left and went on as you said to become world famous. He was already locally very famous. But later became world famous with the O.J. Simpson case [People of the State of California v. Orenthal James Simpson, 1995]. But completely charismatic, had the jury in the palm of his hand (laughter). I think every, every case he ever tried, from the moment he picked the jury, he had probably won the case just because of the empathy that he showed the jurors and his skill in picking the, the right jury for, for his client. Speaker 1: Now--for those of us who watched the trial on television and in the media, we, we did not realize that he had once, you know, worked for the DA's office. Speaker 2: No, I think most people (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 2: --even now, probably don't, don't know that. But he not only I'm sure helped recruit me, but he then had me as a very young, new deputy DA, sit in on hiring panels, recruitment panels. And some of the deputy DAs who'd been there a long time didn't like that because normally you had to be in the office for quite a long time before you would be selected to be on an interview panel. So there was some resentment I think that Johnnie Cochran asked me to do it. But of course I did it anyway and he backed me up when there was some resentment or people felt that I was too new in the office to be able to do that. Story_ID: 656244 Speaker 1: Well what are some of the highlights of your early years in the DA's office [Los Angeles County District Attorney's Office]? Speaker 2: I think I had so much fun just doing preliminary hearings. I did that first. And I had kind of an untraditional career in that I had some assignments that weren't just all the usual assignments. I worked in juvenile. That was quite usual. And then I worked in consumer protection for a while, which is unusual. It was the only civil unit in the district attorney's office. And we handled cases in which businesses were accused of violating consumer protection statutes. So that was unusual. And then I also was the grand jury legal advisor for two years. So only one person, only one deputy DA can do that at the time and you advise the L.A. County [Los Angeles County, California] grand jury which has both civil and criminal duties. So usually someone who is tactful and considered diplomatic is asked to do that because your job is to kind of guide, gently guide the grand jury, especially in their civil duties and kind of hopefully make sure that they're doing things that are quite within their realm and appropriate. And then you're in there for the criminal presentations as well and you instruct the grand jury. So a lot of the people who have held that position have in fact gone on to be judges I think because of the fact that the office has selected people, as I said, who have kind of a tactful, diplomatic touch. So that, those were early, fairly early experiences that were memorable. Story_ID: 656245 Speaker 1: Now in '83 [1983], John Van de Kamp becomes the twenty-eighth attorney general of California. So, so someone new comes in, I guess to the DA's office [Los Angeles County District Attorney's Office]. Who, come--who took his place and how did that change things? Speaker 2: Philibosian, the next DA was Bob Philibosian [Robert Philibosian]. Of course it's a nonpartisan office, but he was a Republican. And I believe he was appointed by the board of supervisors [Los Angeles County Board of Supervisors] I believe to fill the remaining term. But then at the next general election, Ira Reiner, who had been the city attorney ran against him and defeated him. So then Ira Reiner was the DA. And then the last DA while I was there was Gil Garcetti, and he's the one who promoted me to assistant DA. So during my time there, I became head deputy first, that was, actually that wasn't 'til Gil Garcetti. And then I became the first African American assistant bureau director. I was an assistant bureau director in two bureaus, central trials and special operations [Bureau of Special Operations]. And then Gil promoted me to become his--one of the three assistant district attorneys, so right under the DA I was there. And he, in fact he had two women, Sandy Buchita [ph.] and I, she was a Caucasian woman and I was an African American woman. And then there was a man who was sort of the equivalent of the chief deputy. But so that was, those were all great, great assignments. And I also served on the Webster Williams commission following the civil unrest in the summer of '92 [1992]. Gil, I guess Gil Garcetti was already DA then and I was one of four people who was selected to interview a lot of the LAPD [Los Angeles Police Department] officers who had been on duty during the civil unrest and try to see what were the causes, you know what were some issues that could be identified to make sure that didn't happen again. Speaker 1: Okay, well let me (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So that was interesting too. Story_ID: 656246 Speaker 1: Let me just go back maybe to--and then we'll, we'll head towards that. But back to '87 [1987] you were, when you were appointed deputy, head deputy of the Torrance [California] branch, right? That's 1980- '87 [1987], '88 [1988]. So did anything memorable happen during this period of time (laughter)? That was a long time ago, but-- Speaker 2: Right. Now I mean I would say it was a fairly standard assignment. I had been downtown [Los Angeles, California] as a calendar deputy, when you're sort of the senior person in one particular courtroom. And I think Gil Garcetti was another individual like John Van de Kamp who really was very, very interested in diversity and making sure that the office was represented at higher levels by women and people of color because that had not been the case. And so he asked me to go out first as acting head deputy in Torrance. And then after I had been the acting head deputy for a while, I, I was promoted to head deputy. So you do get to make like the tough calls. If a case, if there's a case and they want a plea agreement and it's tricky, then they come to you. And of course you're just in charge; you're the administrator of you know maybe fifteen deputy DAs [district attorney], depending on how large your branch or area office is. So it was very interesting. I wouldn't say there was anything terribly unusual that went on while I was, while I was out there. But I enjoyed it very much. And it was interesting 'cause I'd been downtown most of the time. So that was my one assignment that was away from downtown and when you're assigned out of downtown, you try to go out and meet people in that area. You know you meet with law enforcement or meet with community groups and kind of learn the culture of where you are. And so that's in the South Bay [Los Angeles County, California] and it was--it's a very nice city, good size place too. So I did enjoy it; and then I was asked to go back downtown to be the assistant DA. Story_ID: 656247 Speaker 1: Now while you were there, you were the first person of color to serve as president of the Association of Deputy District Attorneys, right? Speaker 2: Actually, right, that was--1984 was the year that I was elected president of the Association of Deputy District Attorneys. And I was the first African American. And I may have been the first woman. I have not been able to absolutely verify that, but I may have also been the first woman. It was a very close election. I'd been on the board for many years and was the only person of color on the board. But usually it was an older, male, white person who was elected president, so I decided to run. And it was an extremely close election. It was quite, quite remarkable I think that I was able to, to kind of pull that off and, and win. And that was quite an achievement. And it was many, many years later. In fact, it wasn't until last year that there was another person of color apparently who was elected president-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --of that group. Speaker 1: So that was '84 [1984]? Speaker 2: I believe that was '84 [1984]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes, and I can check that, but I just, I did look at that and I believe that was '84 [1984]. Speaker 1: Okay, so you were--is that when you started serving as head deputy of the Torrance [California] branch? Speaker 2: I think that was later that I served. Speaker 1: That's later, after you-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I think that was considerably later. Actually I do have some dates here. I was in consumer protection from '80 [1980] to '83 [1983]. I was the grand jury legal advisor from '83 [1983] to '85 [1985]. I was the calendar deputy from '85 [1985] to June of '87 [1987]. I was the head deputy in Torrance from June '87 [1987] through October '88 [1988]. And then I was the assistant director in two separate divisions from '88 [1988] to December 1992. And then from December 1992 to May 1994, I was one of three (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, well, just keep me on point when we get to 'em (laughter). Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: We don't wanna read 'em all (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 1: --through now. Speaker 2: But I just wanna keep the-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --date, yeah the-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --dates straight-- Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: --right. Speaker 1: Okay, so you, you've gotta keep 'em straight for me, so-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I do have an outline but-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --it's, it's--doesn't give me all the dates. Story_ID: 656248 Speaker 1: In '88 [1988] you're assistant director of the bureau of central and special operations, right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And you're, that's when you were the first African American to do this. And anything sig- significant happen, I mean that, you know-- Speaker 2: In both of those divisions 'cause I think '88 [1988] to '92 [1992] I was in two divisions, central trials was where I was first an assistant director. I mean it's an administrative position. Central trials is the huge, downtown Criminal Courts Building [Clara Shortridge Foltz Criminal Justice Center, Los Angeles, California]. That's where you have central trials. And so there were two assistant directors and we basically just sort of divided up the trial divisions. And at that level, if, if there's a really key case where there's a disposition, they might come to you. You're also at kind of the management level where if there are personnel issues, you get involved. If there's some personnel problems. We also get involved with any outreach efforts. I, I know we had something called Safe Harbors, which was a very early effort to do what's become very common now. Sort of more outreach to the community to try to work with gang problems, and I was selected to work on that. I remember I went to several community meetings with law enforcement and other representatives to community leaders, talk about that. So those were the kinds of things you did. And then you served on the sort of a management council and went to those meetings as well. Speaker 1: You know that's the period of time when--and I don't know how, what the gang problem is like now, but that's when it was really in the news with the Crips and the Bloods and Ted Koppel who had the gang--the L.A. gang problem on 'Nightline.' And there were movies made about, 'Boyz n the Hood' and 'Colors' and probably a few, you know, a lot of attention (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's, I mean it's still going on and I, you know I was sheltered from the gang issue somewhat when I was in federal court because you know the federal courts don't usually handle much of that. I mean we handled a lot of drug cases and sometimes those were gang members. But in terms of murders, no, the DA [district attorney] handles those. And so now that I'm here in the Court of Appeal [California Second District Court of Appeal, Division Four] and I'm starting to see these appeals of the murder convictions, I'm kind of back in it again. And even though the numbers are way down, thankfully, compared to that earlier time and due to the efforts of, of a lot of things, including you know, some of the police chiefs. It's stunning to me how quickly and cheaply life is lost in these situations. I mean there's just no forethought, it's sometimes, "Okay somebody got beaten up in our gang, let's go get somebody." And they just go out--they don't even know if this is somebody from the other gang. It's just a shoot--they shoot from the car. And it's over. I mean literally these things happen so quickly. And of course so often it's an innocent bystander, a child is murdered instead. So thankfully the numbers are down. But each individual case that you look at is still so senseless (sighs). That's just again what I'm struck by--how, how sad and senseless it all is. Story_ID: 656249 Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask you about this next item because of the historical associations here. The--you were awarded the John Mercer Langston Bar Association's Loren Miller Lawyer of the Year Award in 1988. Now who is John Mercer Langston and who was Loren Miller? Speaker 2: Okay, Loren Miller was one of the early--well they were both early African American lawyer leaders. And so the Langston Bar Association is essentially the African American legal lawyer group in L.A. [Los Angeles, California], it was the original one. Now of course there's others, there's Black Women Lawyers' [Black Women Lawyers' Association], et cetera. Speaker 1: It's a chapter of the National Bar Association? Speaker 2: It's an affiliate. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I mean both were, both Langston and Black Women Lawyers I think are affiliated with the National, National Bar Association. And the reason the Langston Bar Association started was because African American lawyers were not welcome to join the county bar association. The L.A. County Bar Association [Los Angeles County Bar Association] did not welcome African American lawyers. So a group of, of lawyers said well okay, we'll, we'll form our own. And it's often been asked now well do you still need the Langston Bar Association? Do you still need Black Women Lawyers? Because of course now you can join, you're welcomed in the bar association, in the county bar, but of course the answer is yes. You do still, you do still need it. So they have awards every year for lawyer of the year and Loren Miller was as I said early outstanding lawyer. And then they have--to recognize the judge, they have the, the award, the Jefferson, Bernard Jefferson Justice of the Year. And I was fortunate to be awarded that one later in 2006 at the same time my brother [Bruce Brodie] received the Loren Miller Lawyer of the Year. And I think that was the first time they had siblings receive the judicial award and the lawyer award the same year. And Bernard Jefferson was a justice here on the California court of appeals [California Second District Court of Appeal, Division Four], his picture is right out, down the hall. I think you may have passed it on your way in. And he's just famous as a, a wonderful justice and he also wrote the book on evidence in California ['California Evidence Benchbook,' Bernard S. Jefferson]. So he's very, very well known for that. Speaker 1: Okay. I'm glad I asked that question (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So originally yes, so originally I did win the, the--it was awarded, the recipient of the Loren Miller Lawyer of the Year and then on one--I think it's probably one of the happiest nights of our, our lives, my brother and I later were awarded the Bernard Jefferson Justice of the Year for me and the Loren Miller Lawyer of the Year Award for him in 2006. Story_ID: 656250 Speaker 1: In '89 [1989] now you, you served also on the executive committee of the Los Angeles County Bar Association, right? Speaker 2: Right. The board of trustees. This it's certainly--now efforts are made to recruit as much as possible, both lawyers from the public sector, the DA's office [Los Angeles County District Attorney's Office], public defender, and lawyers of, of color. And in fact now even the state bar of course has had African American leaders. Some time ago, quite some time ago, Sam Williams [Samuel L. Williams], he was the first African American president of the state bar [State Bar of California]. And that must have been twenty-five years ago. He, sadly he died shortly thereafter. But there have been others and last year they had the first Latino president of the state bar [Luis J. Rodriguez], who's a friend of mine. Story_ID: 656251 Speaker 1: Probably a lot of things happened in 1991, but I just--I wanna ask you about Rodney King. That's when Rodney King was beaten up in '91 [1991], it was in the news, video, everybody could see the video and they kept showing it on the news over and over again and people could clearly see that this is a violation, this is police brutality. And but it had--still had to go to court. So that's when the problem start- when it goes to court. Well the problem started when he got beat up, actually. Speaker 2: Right (laughter). Speaker 1: Rodney King, but what did you think when you saw the video for the first time? Did you--what were your thoughts? Speaker 2: I think probably I thought what many, many people thought at the time, that this is horrible and it's caught on tape. So the good thing is, it's on tape. There's not gonna be any problem with you know, a trial. I think that was the first videotaped crime, or at least largely publicized crime that I, that I remember. And I think everybody thought at the time, well if it's on tape, you know and horrible as it is, you're gonna take that to trial and not gonna be a problem. And of course time has shown that is not true. And even fairly recently in Orange County [California] there was a highly publicized case in which a police beating of a homeless, kind of mentally challenged, mentally disturbed man, was caught on tape. And there were mixed verdicts in that. So we have, we have learned that of course defense attorneys like Johnnie Cochran, whatever, that's, that's their job is to show there's more to it than what's caught on tape. But at the time I think like everyone else, I thought this is horrible, and this will go to trial and will, you know, certainly be a victory. That did not work out like that for one reason or another. It was not tried downtown, it was tried in a branch office. Some people later said, and of course hindsight, you know everybody's always willing to quarterback these things later. Is that the right word? But I don't know, Monday morning, yeah, Monday morning quarterback felt that trying it in Simi Valley [California] was a big mistake because your jury is drawn from where you, where you try it. And so people thought well-- Speaker 1: How did that happen? How did that happen? Speaker 2: 'Cause it can be tried in the area where the crime occurs. Although the DA [district attorney] has the discretion to also try it downtown. Now of course the reverse of this happened with O.J. Simpson case [People of the State of California v. Orenthal James Simpson, 1995], in which Gil Garcetti was criticized for trying that downtown instead of trying it in Santa Monica [California] where the murders occurred because people said if you tried out there, you'd have a different jury pool with more people from that area, Brentwood [California], Santa Monica, West L.A. [West Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California], and you might have won. So each time I think the DA took what he thought was a principled stand, but where you try a case really does matter. So as, as you know, the DA's office [Los Angeles County District Attorney's Office] did not secure a conviction, although later the federal government, the [U.S.] Department of Justice, U.S. attorney's office did bring the civil rights violation case and did secure--they did find the officers were guilty, and those officers were in fact put in prison. But that was, that was an interesting one and a good learning experience. Speaker 1: Now, now you, you witnessed all this from the vantage point of assistant district attorney and deputy general counsel of the Office of Special Advisor to the LAPD, the board of commissioners [Los Angeles Board of Police Commissioners], right? Speaker 2: Well, well I, I was in the DA's office. As I said, I did not have any part in it. Later was the time when I was on this special commission, the Webster Williams. But that was, that was something I did while I was in the DA's office, but it was not officially part of the DA's office. And, and so there was that separation. I mean several of us who were in the DA's office were asked to serve on it, but it was separate from the DA's office. It was the Webster Williams commission, which was separate advisory group that issued its own report. Speaker 1: Okay. So there was that after the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And that was after the, that was after the civil unrest. After the Reginald Denny beating, which was a, you know, reaction to, to the verdict. So it was all in that same timeframe. And I, I remember being in my office on the eighteenth floor of the Criminal Courts Building [Clara Shortridge Foltz Criminal Justice Center, Los Angeles, California]-- Story_ID: 656252 Speaker 1: I'm sure you knew Christopher Darden and Marcia Clark, right? Speaker 2: In the O.J. Simpson case [People of the State of California v. Orenthal James Simpson, 1995]. I knew (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh no, that's not--that's right, that's right, that's right. Speaker 2: I knew everybody in the--I think I knew everybody in the courtroom except for O.J. Simpson. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I did not know him (laughter), I had no desire to. Speaker 1: That didn't happen until a couple years later, but I just thought I'd mention that. Speaker 2: Right. In fact the murder was exactly one month after I left the DA's office [Los Angeles County District Attorney's Office]. I left the DA's office in May 1994, and the, the murder which formed the basis of the prosecution was June 12th. And the reason I remember that is June 12th is my birthday. And I remember that happened and it was very shocking. So I had left the office. Speaker 1: What, what was, what was your impression of the--I guess the--was there a change in flavor in the DA's office at some point? You know considering these high profile cases and I just, I just wonder. I mean--the Los Angeles Police Department had such a bad reputation nationwide. I mean people would come to L.A.--I mean the first time I was called the N word was in Los Angeles [California] by the LAPD. And I'd been in the South and everywhere else. But there's a--that's just a personal story, but a lot of people have that same sense that, you know, Malcolm X, you know when he was with the Nation of Islam, made a big speech about police brutality here in Los Angeles with the picture of a man who had been cut open by the police. But so these--to some extent the justice, the criminal justice system in Los Angeles was on trial in both of these trials, you know. And I know you served on several committees to, you know, ethics oriented (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, the Rampart one later. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Well you know Gates, I, I think really things improved greatly after Gates finally left. In the O.J. Simpson case of course it wasn't police brutality, it was incompetence that was alleged. And I think Johnnie Cochran again was very skillful in playing that up for, for the maximum. I mean some attorneys I think would not have been able to portray that as effectively as, as he did. Any investigation you could always criticize later. But he did a very good job of not only portraying it as an inept investigation, but with the DNA of, of making that issue one that was so confusing for the jury that they rejected the DNA evidence, which is something that still a subject of some controversy. And, and I think he just--I, I mean he just out lawyered the DA's prosecutors who were very good, but not the most experienced in the office. And I don't know how, you know, how they were, how they were selected. There were actually attorneys in the office who had been around longer and had tried more high profile cases. But in any event, his closing argument was also magnificent. Of course as people remember. So once Gates left, things started to improve (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This is Daryl Gates, the police chief. Speaker 2: Right, Daryl Gates. I mean Willie Williams [Willie L. Williams] came in, and he was from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. And he didn't last too long, there were some problems and some issues. But he certainly I think began to look at some issues and make some changes. And then of course Bratton [William Bratton] came and, and really brought about some lasting change. And of course once he left, his, one of his lieutenants, or one of his top guys, Charlie Beck has been the police chief since. And it's just continued that progress. So I think there really has been, you know, significant change, significant progress during, during this time. Story_ID: 656253 Speaker 1: As you said, you were leaving when the O.J. Simpson--just before the O.J. Simpson (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, I had, I had gone, I had left. Speaker 1: --case [People of the State of California v. Orenthal James Simpson, 1995] went to trial. And, and you were appointed. Now, now were you active in Democratic politics? Speaker 2: No. I had never been and still have never been, active in politics. I had never met Senator Feinstein [Dianne Feinstein]. So she is the one who says that this was totally a merit based process and I believe it was because I had never met her; I had never contributed to her campaign. And I was only persuaded to apply because so many people said you ought to apply; they have four vacancies. And I said why would I apply in the federal court [U.S. District Court for the Central District of California]? I don't know anybody there, I don't know anything about federal court; I've never been in federal court. And I really did not think I had a chance. And if I'd known more, I'd probably still--really wouldn't have applied. But finally I just said okay. I had just started thinking about my future. I was very happy being the assistant DA [district attorney] with Gil [Gil Garcetti] and had assumed he was going to run and win again and I would hopefully stay. But I had begun to think that at some point I would like to be a judge. And of course that assumed that would be L.A. superior court [Superior Court of California, County of Los Angeles], which is my home, home court, state court. But eventually I was persuaded to apply and it was very competitive at that time because now it was opening up with the Democratic president, Bill Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton]. We had two Democratic senators. And so I applied through--actually both through Senator Feinstein and Senator Boxer [Barbara Boxer]. But Senator Feinstein's office called me first and I went for an interview. They interviewed a lot of people. And I was fortunate to be very high- highly rated after that interview process and I went up to meet with Senator Feinstein in San Francisco [California]. And she decided to recommend me to President Clinton as the first selection in the Central District [Central District of California] under his presidency. And he did, he nominated me. So I have to say people were stunned. Both because it was unheard of for someone to go from the DA's office directly to the federal bench, as well as the fact that I, I had no contacts; I had no political pull. I mean people were like, "Who is this, who is this?" I mean they, they knew me if they were in the county criminal justice system. But on the larger framework of California Democratic politics, you know, "Who is this?" Nobody knew who I was. I didn't even get a great rating from the American Bar Association because the local--that rating at that time the rating group, the group of people who rated California, or at least Los Angeles [California] candidates, was made up mostly of partners in the big downtown civil law firms and they had never heard of me. And they didn't think I could do it. I mean I think there were a substantial number of people who thought I just couldn't do this job. So Senator Feinstein of course was, was not affected by that, and I went through. Story_ID: 656254 Speaker 1: Now did you have any difficulty getting approved? I know 1994 was the year of the Newt Gingrich revolution [Republican Revolution], but we were saying off camera you were appointed before-- Speaker 2: I was appointed-- Speaker 1: --the (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) while there was a Democratic majority in the [U.S.] Senate. And in--I was able to avoid all of the problems that later colleagues had, you know which it took them literally years to be confirmed. And some candidates even gave up. But when I went through, of course there were the normal nerves of going through this process, Senate judiciary confirmation process is not something you do every day. But in retrospect, of course no one knew what was coming, I really had an easy time. My, my feeling was in those days it was so routine, they had a hard time just getting the number of senators together to come in and, and, and sit. And then I was very lucky because Arlen Specter who was Republican from Pennsylvania, was, was one person who began sort of questioning me sharply, although I was in the DA's office [Los Angeles County District Attorney's Office] and he of course had been the DA [district attorney], so I think that was in my favor to begin with 'cause he had been the DA in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. But somehow he ended up asking me--or I brought up somehow ties to Pennsylvania, 'cause I'm from Pennsylvania. I was born in Chester [Pennsylvania], like I said. And he said, "Oh, you're, you're from Pennsylvania." I think he just sort of realized that. He looked down, "You're from Pennsylvania?" And I said, "Yes." And he said, "Do you have any relatives who are still in Pennsylvania?" I said, "Yes," 'cause at the time I did and after that it was, "Oh, okay." It's like, he like votes, okay. So he was fine, and then he just asked me kind of the standard DA type question. And [HistoryMaker] Carol Moseley Braun was there and Senator Feinstein [Dianne Feinstein] introduced me. So I was so lucky. As I said, I couldn't appreciate the full contours of my luck until later when I saw--when things changed and I had colleagues who took two years, three years. Richard Paez took four years I think. Not to get to the district court [U.S. District Court for the Central District of California], but when he was nominated from the Ninth Circuit [U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit]. I mean it was like four years. So I was incredibly lucky. Story_ID: 656255 Speaker 1: Now you were not the first African American elected--I mean selected for the federal bench from California? Speaker 2: No. And I'm glad you brought that up because sometimes even our local newspaper, our local African American paper, the Sentinel [Los Angeles Sentinel]. When they did a profile of me, they said I was the first--I think they said I was the first African American chief judge. That's not even true. The first African American judge in the Central District [U.S. District Court for the Central District of California] was David Williams [David W. Williams]. And he was a remarkable man. In fact, I think he was the first African American judge, federal judge west of the Mississippi [Mississippi River]. So he was the first. Then Terry Hatter [Terry J. Hatter, Jr.] who was the first chief judge, first African American chief judge. And then Consuelo Bland Marshall, who was African American woman, and the second African American chief judge. So I came after all of them. And David Williams was incredibly nice to me when I started; he did not know me at all and was just very, very supportive and he became almost like another dad to my husband and me, 'cause he was a senior judge at that time. He was wonderful. So not only is this--was I not the first here, but wasn't even--I wasn't even the first African American chief judge since Terry Hatter and Connie Marshall preceded me here. And then there were others up north, Thelton Henderson [HistoryMaker Thelton E. Henderson], and I think he was already on the bench I'm sure when I started, up north. And he's a remarkable person. I, I hope you have or will interview Thelton Henderson, a remarkable person, as well as Terry Hatter and Connie Marshall. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: And of course there have been, there have been others after. Most recently Andre Birotte [Andre Birotte Jr.] who just had his investiture two weeks ago and Eric Holder [HistoryMaker Eric H. Holder, Jr.] came out and spoke at that investiture 'cause Andre Birotte was most recently the, the U.S. attorney here. He's African American, first African American U.S. attorney in the Central District, and is now the most recent federal judge. Story_ID: 656256 Speaker 1: So what were your duties as--? Speaker 2: As just a regular--okay. Before I became chief judge, of course I was a district judge [on the U.S. District Court for the Central District of California] and as a district judge, you hear the full range or panoply of cases. You know in many superior courts because they're so large, they're divided. So you either hear civil or criminal or probate or family law or whatever, dissolution, dependency. But all across the country in federal courts, federal judges hear everything. So we hear civil and criminal, so both the same time, you have motions one day, civil in the morning and criminal in the afternoon. And when you have a trial, it might be criminal. Of course they have priority, but it might be criminal, it might, it might be civil. And the kinds of cases you hear--constitutional law, of course everybody thinks about that and recognizes that the federal courts hear constitutional law issues. But you also have civil rights, civil rights cases of course. We were talking about police brutality. Those actually can be brought in either state or federal court. But generally speaking, plaintiff's attorneys will prefer to bring those police brutality and other--it's not just brutality, but just maybe wrongful arrest. It doesn't have to be any violence involved, if you're detained unlawfully, or arrested unlawfully or held, that's a civil rights case too. And then employment discrimination under federal and state standards. Intellectual property is copyright, trademark, patent. Those can only be brought in, in federal court. And then anything that's under a federal statute, Fair Labor Standards Act [Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938], and of course there are the state equivalents. But if you're not getting paid overtime, if you're not getting paid time and a half, whatever. Americans with Disabilities Act [Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990], again there are state equivalents, but one of the big cases I had near the time I left in fact, was brought under the Americans with Disabilities Act in Orange County [California]. The prisons, the jails there, the jail system. Some of the inmates brought a lawsuit under the Americans with Disabilities Act. Computer fraud and abuse, truth in lending. So all of these statutes, and of course class action, getting a lot of class action. Then there are also the cases that started in L.A. superior court [Superior Court of California, County of Los Angeles], or another superior court within our jurisdiction, and then are removed to federal court because of diversity. And it doesn't--you know it's a huge area that's covered, the Central District [Central District of California]. It's not just Los Angeles [Los Angeles County, California]. It's Orange County [California], Riverside [Riverside County, California], San Bernardino [San Bernardino County, California], Los Angeles, Ventura [Ventura County, California], Santa Barbara County [California] and San Louis Obispo [San Louis Obispo County, California]. So I mean it goes halfway up the state, it's 18 or 19 million people. That's the largest district court in the country, along with the Southern District of New York [U.S. District Court for the Southern District of New York], depending on whether you're looking. If you're looking territory, I mean we're the clear winner. The number of judges--I think we're about equal. There are twenty-eight active judges in the Central District if we're full, which we rarely are. And there about eight to ten senior judges at any time. And then twenty-four magistrate judges and twenty-four bankruptcy judges. So it, it really is the hugest district and covers an enormous amount of, you know, of, of territory. Story_ID: 656257 Speaker 1: I know in 2003 you ruled that a ban on expert, quote, expert advice and assistance, unquote, to terrorist groups contained in the U.S. PATRIOT Act [Uniting and Strengthening America by Providing Appropriate Tools Required to Intercept and Obstruct Terrorism Act of 2001] was also--what was void for vagueness. Now this is after 9-1-1 [September 11, 2001] did you have a lot of cases like this about, you know security and terror and (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There weren't a lot, there weren't a lot. But there were certainly some, and I was one of the first judges in the country, if not the first, I think there was another judge around the same time, to find that portions of this law which was at the time under the Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act [Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act of 1996], was unconstitutional. Actually, I upheld most of the law, which did prohibit the provision of material support to any groups that had been labeled as terrorist organizations by the federal government. The plaintiffs who represented a couple of groups, they represented Tamil. I mean some of these groups frankly I, I, I had never heard of. The group in Turkey and a group in Sri Lanka, the Tamil Tigers [Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam]. And they had various attacks on the statute in question. And for the most part, I actually found the statute to be constitutional. I didn't find that it was overall a suppression of the First Amendment. But I did find that certain portions of it were vague, meaning if a person can't really quite figure out whether they're violating the statute by just looking at it, then to me that's a problem. And so you couldn't provide for example, personnel or training or expert advice and assistance. And these groups said, "Well we, we don't want to provide fighters or money for fighting, but we just want to help these groups to lobby--," for example in the UN [United Nations]. "We want to train them on how do you go to the UN and lobby. How do you seek humanitarian assistance, et cetera." So you know we, we don't want to do anything--give them guns or train them to be fighters. But what does it mean to say you can't provide personnel? What does it mean to say you can't provide training? So obviously training, yeah, we wanna provide training in lobbying. How do we know if that's gonna violate it? And so I found that it was--that those terms--and, and this kind of went on and on because there was humanitarian one and two and three as the statute would be amended and changed because then it was under the PATRIOT Act and it, you know, there were changes. But in essence I found that most of it was constitutional, but that these particular terms, personnel, training, expert advice and assistance, were, were vague. And the Ninth Circuit [U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit] upheld me originally, and then they were going to hear it again en banc, but then [U.S.] Congress amended some of those terms to try to make them clearer. So instead, I got the case [Humanitarian Law Project v. Reno] back again. And I found that most of it was still too vague with, with one exception. Training, I said okay, you've amended it and that's fine. And the Ninth Circuit upheld me again. Ultimately, the U.S. Supreme Court took the case and found that all of it was, was, was fine, was constitutional. They did not agree with the vagueness finding that I had made that had been upheld. But at the time, it got some publicity because it was--I was one of the first judges to find part of the, of these provisions to be, to be constitutionally unfirm. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So it took like several years for all that to occur (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, 'cause it had to go to the Ninth Circuit and then as I said, they upheld, they upheld it. And then they were going to look at it en banc. And then right before they were going to do that, Congress amended it. So then they said okay, we won't do that, we'll send it back. So it, it did take several years. There was a time that I could say half of my law clerks that I'd ever had, had worked on one version of this or another 'cause it went on for so many years. About six years I think-- Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) from beginning to end. Story_ID: 656258 Speaker 1: So it was in 2006 that you and your brother both won awards from the John Mercer Langston Bar Association. Speaker 2: Right that was when-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And it was a very happy time because my husband [Timothy R. Collins] and two children [Timothy Collins and Rachel Montez Minor] were there, his wife was there. His wife later died. So I think he--it was a very poignant time 'cause he remembers that as a very happy time 'cause we were all there together. Speaker 1: And your brother's name is-- Speaker 2: Bruce Brodie. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And he's now the chief deputy in the alternate public defender's office [Los Angeles County Alternate Public Defender] in Los Angeles County [California]. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, all right. Okay, okay so this is still--yeah. My outline, I keep seeing references to this struggle with the PATRIOT Act [Uniting and Strengthening America by Providing Appropriate Tools Required to Intercept and Obstruct Terrorism Act of 2001], you know (unclear). Speaker 2: Right. First it was part of the AEDPA [Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act of 1996], and then it was part of the PATRIOT Act. So they kept relabeling the legislation as well. Speaker 1: Okay, on through 2007. And then--when--do you remember when it was actually resolved by the [U.S.] Supreme Court? When their ruling was made? Speaker 2: I don't have the year right (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 2: --in front of me. It was certainly before I became chief judge [of the U.S. District Court for the Central District of California], I think. So maybe 2007, maybe sometime in there. Story_ID: 656259 Speaker 1: Now you ruled on another case--where you threw out a suit filed by a former Beach Boy band member against (laughter)-- Speaker 2: Oh, Mike Love-- Speaker 1: Right. Right. Um-hm (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) the Beach Boys, yes. Speaker 1: He filed a suit against Brian Wilson. Speaker 2: Yes. And you know I really don't know too much about the group, but I had a law clerk at the time who was a Beach Boys fan. And he would explain to me how most of them are related, they were cousins. And Brian Wilson I guess was considered the genius, but he was troubled, troubled. But anyway I found the lawsuit didn't have any merit, and I did dismiss it and was affirmed by the Ninth Circuit [U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit]. Speaker 1: Okay, and I have a note here that Love had sued Wilson numerous times in the past. Speaker 2: Yes. It just--sad situation when families argue and disagree. Speaker 1: Now and also in 2007 you outlawed automated software to make mass ticket purchases in order to stop--touts? I don't know what that (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Ticketmaster [Ticketmaster Corporation; Live Nation Entertainment, Inc.]? Speaker 1: Yeah, I guess. Speaker 2: Right. You know I think other companies are always trying to, to figure out a way to get in there and kind of reboot their system. And so it was one of those kind of technical things. But I, I found there were violations. And if it, if it was appealed, then I was affirmed. I, I don't think that was ever reversed. Story_ID: 656260 Speaker 1: Tell us about the Myspace case. Speaker 2: I'm sorry? Speaker 1: The Myspace case in 2008. Speaker 2: Myspace? Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: I have to say I'm drawing a complete blank on that one, I don't know (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. I have a note here. I don't know if it's, you know, I didn't make that one, so it says here that you awarded Myspace $234 million in damages over junk email sent to its members in the largest anti-spam ruling ever. Speaker 2: If so, it may have been a stipulated, although nobody stipulates to that kind of award. But I really don't remember that, so it must not have been--it must have been something where they--where, where whoever the defendant was, just kind of collapsed and didn't present any opposition. Because I would certainly remember if it had been really opposed. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And of course sometimes that happens and you know it could be 200 million, it could be 500, doesn't matter because if these people have disappeared, you're not gonna collect dollar one. And I suspect it was one of those. Story_ID: 656261 Speaker 1: Yeah, in 2008 I think there was a really contested case between the, the billboard company and the-- Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Speaker 1: --City of Los Angeles [California], right. Speaker 2: Yes, World Wide Rush [World Wide Rush, LLC v. City of Los Angeles] and Vanguard [Vanguard Outdoor, LLC v. City of Los Angeles], and, and there were others. But I think those were the two that are usually remembered because they were published opinions. And it's very interesting the timing, you're bringing this up as I'm being interviewed now because although the law seemed settled, now there's been a new wrinkle. But anyway to go back to that time, billboards in L.A. is a huge issue, it's a huge topic. And there are different kinds of billboards. So these cases dealt with like sort of the standard billboards. But there had been also litigation over billboards which light up at night, I don't know if you've seen those. So these billboards are not part of this. And there's also been litigation that I had handled earlier over what's called sort of super graphic billboards. And these are thin, almost plastic looking signs or banners that were being draped over entire buildings. So you might have a building the size of the building we're in now, and these would start--they would be hung from the top and come all the way down and obscure your vision, much as my vision is now obscured by the shades you've put up. These would be draped over entire buildings. So that was also a separate category, although I had, had some cases dealing with those and had found that those were violative, and should not be allowed. But these were sort of the standard billboards. So the business owners were challenging a Los Angeles city ordinance which restricted their ability to have the billboards where they wanted and were willing to pay for them. And I looked at it and found--I never found it unconstitutional per se, but I found that as applied to these companies, the city , the city was itself not exercising this in any sort of cohesive, coordinated way and that there were exceptions. They would grant exceptions for these special districts. They had exceptions down here near Staples Center, it's called L.A. Live [Los Angeles, California]. It's movies, you know, it's a big entertainment center, which is great. And so they had allowed these big signs to face the freeway and were distracting to motorists as they drove near L.A. Live. And there were all of these exceptions. There were others. So I said well this is just too riddled with exceptions to be consistent, and you're not applying it properly. And so I ruled in favor of the billboard owners in World Wide Rush and Vanguard. They--the city appealed because I'd ruled against them. And the Ninth Circuit [U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit] reversed me. And said essentially under the test for commercial speech, which billboards are, the Central Hudson test, that the city had shown proper purpose. And, and I agreed with that. The proper purpose and that they sort of went no further than necessary. They weren't any more restrictive than was necessary. They were entitled to have their exceptions and that was fine as long as their central purpose was still being accomplished; that they were overall reducing the number of, of billboards. That they could have a lot of leeway in how they did this. And so of course having been reversed, I therefore ruled in favor of the city when the cases came back and that was the end of it. So about two weeks ago an L.A. superior court judge, in fact he's here now sitting pro tem [pro tempore] on the Court of Appeal [California Second District Court of Appeal], ruled that the entire ordinance or statute was unconstitutional as--under the California Constitution was violative. And I, I had not separately ruled on that. Actually, I found the California Constitution had the same standards and that again, this was just wrong as applied. So he's gone even further and found the whole thing is unconstitutional. So now after what seemed settled. After I was reversed and the billboard owners thought that they had to, you know, live with the restrictions, now the whole scheme has been upended and we'll see what happens. Story_ID: 656262 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So this is just before you were made chief judge [of the U.S. District Court for the Central District of California], right? And you were made chief judge in 2009. Speaker 2: Right, January, 2009. Speaker 1: Okay. Now was this a surprise to you, or-- Speaker 2: No, it's very different than in the superior court. 'Course it wouldn't be a surprise too in superior court either. Because in superior court you have to run for office. So you--you have to decide you wanna be the presiding judge and you actually run for assistant presiding judge and then you automatically become it. No, in the federal system, it's all by seniority. So actually you know years in advance that if things go according to plan, you will be chief judge. Now of course things don't always go according to plan; things can happen. If a judge is elevated or leaves, that could change the order because it all depends on who is the most active, who is the active judge who hasn't yet reached a particular age. So things can throw it out of whack. But you know years in advance that if everybody stays in place, this is the order of chief judges. So I, I did know. Of course no one can force you to do it, and there have been a few times when judges have said, "I just don't wanna do that," or when they've started it and said, "I hate it." But you, you know it's coming, so you have time to think about it. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. How did you like that responsibility? Speaker 2: I think it's something you accept. I said you have time to think about it. It's a lot of work. But I, I accepted that and I, I thought I really should do it. Even though I was the third African American chief judge almost in a row, 'cause it was Terry Hatter [Terry J. Hatter, Jr.], then Connie Marshall [Consuelo Bland Marshall] succeeded him, so that was two in a row. Then Alicemarie Stotler [Alicemarie Huber Stotler] who was Caucasian and our first from Orange County [California], and then me. So it wasn't that I needed to do it because no one, no one African American had done it. But across the country there are very few still African Americans who have been chief judge. So I did think that based upon that, my family history and just my history of accepting responsibility that, that it was something I needed to do. And I--there were certainly many parts of it I enjoyed. Actually enjoyed being the public representative, or the public face of the court. I enjoyed writing the articles urging that our vacancies be filled, that our temporary judgeship be- I want it to be made permanent, that's what we tried to do. We still haven't gotten that done, but it has been extended. I enjoyed--and I even didn't mind going to bar association events or many, many nights you're out telling anyone who will listen about your budget problems, your, your space problems, the fact that you need this temporary judgeship made permanent. Of course there, there are parts of it that aren't as pleasant. When you have personnel issues and just the fact that, that there's not enough money. But overall, I thought it was a great experience because you get to work with so many great people. I got to work very closely with our clerk of court who actually also was new. I mean one of the great things was I had a veteran clerk of court to work with. And four months before I was due to become chief judge, she walked into my office and told me she was leaving. So we, we got a new clerk of court. And so instead of my being paired with a veteran, it was kind of the two newbies starting together. But that creates a, a bond, and we became very close, my new clerk of court. So I liked that. And most of the judges are great and will help you in any way they can. You know you--it's part of your job as chief judge to form the committees, and that happens in October and that's just like a giant puzzle with everybody wanting to be on this committee and you have to put them together. But most of the judges are very helpful. I, I enjoyed meeting chief judges from across the country. Once a year you have an annual conference in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] with all of the, the chief judges. And when, when I was doing it, we actually did have a fair number of African American chief judges because these were the judges who came in when I did, during the early part of the Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] administration. So what I've learned is quite often a judge who's the first or second in a new administration is gonna end up being the chief judge fifteen, sixteen years later. So we had a pretty good, we had a good group of African American chief judges, which has gone down since then, unfortunately. So I, I did enjoy that a lot. It's, it's a lot of work, but it's ver- it is a very, very important assignment. Story_ID: 656263 Speaker 1: And I did get a chance to--you know I had some priorities of my own. I was very interested in reentry because there's a fairly high recidivism rate as you might imagine everywhere there is; a fair high recidivism rate of inmates. They get out of the bureau of prisons and then they return. So one thing I wanted to do was to try to see if there was something creative that we could do about that. So I started in January and that October I had a two day seminar, reentry seminar. And I, I worked very hard with my administrative law clerk to put that on. We partnered with USC [University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California]. One day it was downtown, one day it was at USC. And we had quite a few experts from all over the country come and talk to us about reentry, evidence based practices. We had some politicians. And then after that we, we began what was called the STAR Program, Substance Abuse Treatment and Reentry Program. And one of our African American judges headed that up and met--he meets every week with a group that's selected by probation along with this judge, and along with representatives from the U.S. attorney and federal public defender as people who might need some help. They've had substance abuse problems, that's the group they're looking at. Although he does not cut out people who've had some violence too. So you know if he thinks they can make it and benefit, if they're gonna need help with getting back into society, he will select them. Now obviously he can't select everyone. But they, they've now had about five classes go through, and a couple weeks ago when he was out here, Eric Holder [HistoryMaker Eric H. Holder, Jr.] not only spoke at the investiture for Andre Birotte [Andre Birotte Jr.], he attended a graduation. Not for, not for this group, but for our other program that I'll talk about in a minute. So this is, this is an effort that the federal government has really gotten behind, you know, particularly under Eric Holder to try to do something to break the cycle. To have more reentry programs. And of course Eric Holder also is trying to reduce the sentences for some drug related crimes. So the STAR Program though is a true reentry. It's after you're released from the bureau of prisons. And some of their stories, I've gone to the graduations, are, are really inspiring. But what we also wanted to do was catch people before they get sent to prison. 'Cause once you're in prison, you know there's that stigma and a lot of people won't hire you. We couldn't do that because Eric Holder at that time and the [U.S.] Department of Justice would not agree to a true diversion program, meaning you divert somebody out of the system before they go to prison. But then a couple years ago they changed their minds and the Department of Justice said, "Okay, we're gonna allow that." So we jumped on it and with pretrial services department and again the U.S. attorney, federal public defender, we started a true diversion program. It's called CASA, which is Conviction and Sentence Alternatives Program. And so selected groups of people who had to agree to plead guilty to fairly--these could be like fairly minor offenses. But again, it's something they did because they were usually on drugs. And so, you know, you steal or even it could be bank robbery if it's not violent. Or some kind of fraud, you're writing bad checks. You need money for, for your drug habit. So you plead guilty. The, the deal is, so you do have to plead guilty. But if you come to the meetings once, once a week and you get counseling and you get tested every week and you're testing clean, then at the end of that time if you don't have any prior criminal history, they will wipe out the conviction. The conviction, you can withdraw your guilty plea, it'll be wiped out. If you've had prior criminal history, then you're gonna get sentenced, but it will be probation; you don't have to go to prison. So it's a very successful program too and we have judges downtown doing it as well as in Riverside [California] and Santa Ana [California]. Story_ID: 656264 Speaker 1: In two- 2011 you ruled on a, a case involving disabled inmates in Orange County [California]. Speaker 2: Right, that was a case that actually was first assigned to a judge in Orange County because it was the Orange County jails. He had found there were not any violations of the Americans with Disabilities Act [Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990] in the Orange County jails. They appealed, the Ninth Circuit [U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit] reversed him and he was gone; he had retired by the time that happened. So I inherited the case [at the U.S. District Court for the Central District of California]. So I actually had a, a court trial. And at the end of seven or eight day court trial, I found that there were violations of the Americans with Disabilities Act. And had a, had wonderful assistance from a law clerk. We wrote a very thorough order and at the end of the order, I enjoined it, issued an injunction and told the parties to come up with a plan because I can't come up with the specific plan to end this and stop this and I don't know the timetable or how long it's gonna take to do all of these things. A lot of these are physical changes that have to be made to the building. And so I would say this. The county worked well with the plaintiffs and their attorneys. And I think the county knew there was no point appealing again because my order was very thorough and I, I think part of the reason they fought so hard earlier may have been financial. And by now they were in a little better shape financially. So I told them the areas where they had to make changes. Half of this was physical. I mean just in terms of going to take a shower, or in terms of being able to go to the bathroom or use the basin, physically it wasn't possible the way it was set up. Things were too low or too high or they didn't have the required support for people who were transferring from wheelchair to shower or wheelchair to toilet. And exercise was not being provided for the inmates with disabilities as well. So that was a separate area. And then there were rules that if you don't have a violent past, you could have contact visits. But they didn't have anywhere where they were allowing the disabled inmates to have contact visits. And they weren't making provisions for them to go to class--educational classes that were being offered. They didn't have any way, basically to get them to these classrooms. And so they were just sitting there. So I said well you need to, to deal with, with all of these things. Even the notices for grievance. People have to be able to complain, so you have to have notices and you have to put them down low enough so somebody in a wheelchair can read them. And you need monitors, you need staff members who are actually going to be paying attention to this. So they, they went away and they came back with a plan. And for physical modifications, they had, you know, here's what we can do, short term, meaning like zero to three months, maybe it was three to six months, and then this is gonna take longer, so this is kind of moderate amount of time. And then these are gonna take the longest, like a year. So they, they did a nice job in all of those areas, even in the reception area where you were processed in, they didn't have somewhere where a person in a wheelchair could come up and be comfortable. And in terms of transportation to court, everybody else, "Okay get on the bus." But if you're in a wheelchair, they didn't have a way that you could easily do that and you would wait, have to wait a long time to go and to come back where they'd make some special arrangements. So we had a, a monitor too from outside who, who worked with it. And after a couple of years, then I ended the injunction because one of the, the big issues is you know, I, I think there's a feeling that federal courts if you have to intervene, you should intervene only to the extent necessary, and only as long as necessary to fix whatever the unconstitutional issue is. And of course right now there's a big battle going on in our state because judges up north, including Thelton Henderson [HistoryMaker Thelton E. Henderson] whom I mentioned, it's a three judge panel, have ordered the governor [Arnold Schwarzenegger] to end the overcrowding. And the jails are, the prisons are so overcrowded, they've been ordered to reduce that to no more than 137 percent over capacity. And of course Governor Brown [Jerry Brown] has appealed twice to the U.S. Supreme Court, which has backed the federal judges. So--but even--and then there was a strong dissent because those dissenting justices you know, Scalia [Antonin Scalia], Alito [Samuel Alito], Thomas [Clarence Thomas] said, "Well no you shouldn't be interfering, they're doing a good enough job." So the feeling is if you, if you are intervening, you do it for no longer than necessary. So it was contested at the end, the plaintiffs wanted me to continue to have the monitor and continue the oversight. But I didn't feel they had made that showing. I felt the county had made a showing that they had in good faith, completed everything that needed to be completed. And there were some items also that pertained just to women inmates 'cause they were someplace different. So I did end the oversight. But that was a very interesting, very interesting case. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I think prisons are so often, you know, out of sight, over mind. You just don't even think about the Americans with Disabilities Act in relationship to that. Although we see it around us all the time, but you don't think about it maybe with jails and prisons. Speaker 1: Okay. Right, right I--that's what I was thinking when I saw it. Story_ID: 656265 Speaker 1: So you served as a chief justice [of the U.S. District Court for the Central District of California] for how long? Speaker 2: It was like three years and nine months. Nationwide you can serve under the statute for up to seven years, seven years is the term. There used to be no limit and some, some judges were serving for a very long time and that would--it was found that was a problem. So they came up with this statute that said seven years, that's the term. But we in the Central District [Central District of California], only do it for four years, a maximum of four years because it's so much work and because there are enough judges that you can pass it, you know, you can pass it around and you know share the, the joys and the burdens. So our internal rule contrary to the seven years, is you only do it for four. And everybody has since that has come in, has, has you know, stuck to that. And the reason I stopped a few months short, was October is when we do the committee assignments. And I really thought the new chief judge should be in place to set his own committees. I didn't want to set committees for the next year when I wasn't gonna be chief 'cause that's--you should have in place your chairs that you want. So that's when I stepped down so that he could do that. Speaker 1: So that's in two, what, what year is that now? Speaker 2: So that was 2012. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I stepped down September 2012. Story_ID: 656266 Speaker 1: You continued on the federal bench until--? Speaker 2: I did, I stayed as an active judge. I could have gone senior. You know there's this designation of senior judge. So by then I was eligible to be senior, but I, I said, "Well let me just think about what do I wanna do." Because being chief, one of the advantages is it feels like kind of a culmination, even though you've done nothing to deserve it, it's just seniority. I think it's kind of a, a natural transition time when you step down for you to say "Let me now pause as I end this, this very different assignment and think what do I wanna do? Do I wanna stay an active judge, do I wanna be a senior judge, do I want to retire and go out and do private judging," which so many judges are doing now. Making some nice money and you know it's not unpleasant. "Or do I want to do something else?" And there, there were some interests that a group had in me that they would like me to come with them and be a private judge, settlements, mediations. I thought about it and I thought, no, I don't want to do that. I wanna keep being a judge. Being a senior judge, which was a wonderful, wonderful thing when I first started. The senior judges were revered and that was my goal at the time, to get to the point where I would be a senior judge. But it's changing in the federal system. Maybe largely due to budget cuts. Also due to the fact that most judges just aren't doing that anymore. They aren't staying senior, although Judges Hatter [Terry Hatter, Jr.] and Marshall [Consuelo Marshall] have, but a lot of them are going out into the private sector. And with the budget cuts, senior judges are gonna be subject to shared courtrooms, like everybody is now except active judges. And I think they're gonna cut their staff. So I decided I didn't wanna do that. So I just stayed active like another two years, but I thought you know I'd love to be on a, on an appellate court; I haven't done that yet. And of course there's the Ninth Circuit [United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit]. You think well then why don't you go to Ninth Circuit in your own system? But President Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] really is not appointing people to the Ninth Circuit who are above about--I mean fifty, fifty-one years old seems to be about his cutoff. And I had been interested in the Ninth Circuit, and some of us were interviewed way, way early in his first administration. But we did not go any further than that initial interview, and the people he has appointed are wonderful, but they are in that age group. Whereas our own state governor, Governor Jerry Brown being the age he is, he does not consider age to be a barrier to appointment. And you know he was just elected to his fourth term; he had two terms when he was much younger. And he will--you know, he's the oldest governor we've had. So after considerable thought, I decided that this would be my best opportunity to be on a court of appeal and I, I applied [to the California Second District Court of Appeal, Division Four]. But I remained an active judge until I saw what would, what would happen because I didn't want to go senior and have people, they, "Oh you are retired," you know, "You're not--you're just retiring." Story_ID: 656267 Speaker 1: So you took a position in June, right, you were appointed in June as appellate court judge at the state level [California Second District Court of Appeal, Division Four] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) At the end--at, at the end of June, I was, I was told by the governor [Jerry Brown], I got a call that the governor had appointed me. My confirmation hearing--'cause that was just the appointment. You have to go through a confirmation hearing. My confirmation hearing was in mid July in San Francisco [California]. And that is when you are actually confirmed and you can take the oath. But I didn't take the oath because it all happened so fast, I, I needed to finish work back at the federal court [U.S. District Court for the Central District of California]. So I was confirmed by the, the three judge panel consisting of the chief justice of the California supreme court [Supreme Court of California] and our own Joan Dempsey Klein and Attorney General Kamala Harris. And then I went back for two weeks to finish up my pending motions. And then I started here and had a separate ceremony. I had a lovely investiture where I actually took the oath of August--office on August 1st. So I was sworn in August 1st. Story_ID: 656268 Speaker 1: Now is--is being an appellate court judge what you thought it would be? I mean and how is it, how is it (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know that's a good question. I don't, I don't know. I mean I'm still kind of settling in. I--my third research attorney in fact isn't starting until Monday, so I'm still not even fully staffed. I guess it is and it isn't. And you know I had not sat very much on the Ninth Circuit [U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit], only once early in my career. So of course you know that you no longer make your own decisions. That you, you now are part of a panel and you have to come together and be collegial. And I would say of course I knew that. But, you know, knowing it and experiencing it are two different things. And although I was--we were very overburdened in the district court [U.S. District Court for the Central District of California], still the one thing about it was when that order was ready to go, you said okay I'm signing the order, and that's it. I mean I don't have to ask anybody else you know, I finally get to it and done it, that's my order, Ninth Circuit can overturn me but I don't have to talk to anybody else about it. So it is very different to have people kind of come in after you've circulated your, you know, your proposed order and say, "Well let's talk about this. I don't really think this." So this is a learning experience for me. This is truly a transition time for me to, to learn what this is about and then of course I get their proposed orders and, and it is a, a great job because it is pure law. And you don't have some of the interruptions of temporary restraining order coming in, although we do have writs, which is kind of similar. But it is a lot, it is a lot of work. It is a great job, but it's actually--when people say, "Oh, you're relaxing now." No, I'm working, I'm working as hard. You know, all the transcripts to review. We have a very heavy caseload. So I am, I am still transitioning, but I'm lucky to be in a hard--I'm in a hardworking, good division. And each division as it turns out, has kind of its own little personality too. And so whatever division you're in, you know that's the group you work with. You really don't see or work with the people in the other divisions at all. So each one as I've now learned kind of has its own reputation or way of doing things. And I'm, I'm in a very good division with very smart, hardworking people. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Which I, I certainly prefer it 'cause I think if I were in a division that--where I didn't feel that was true, that would be very frustrating for me. So I am in--I am still in the transition period. I'm sure like with any job, you know, it, it just takes you nine months or whatever to kind of, to kind of get with it. But the people here are great, the staff is great, just like federal court they were. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Laura [ph.], whom you met, I mean she's, she's fantastic. I'm just sorry I don't get to see more of her. And my research attorneys, which is what they call law clerks here because it's a career position. So I think that title is meant to convey that--they're great. Story_ID: 656269 Speaker 1: Now we always ask this question of judges. Do you have a judicial philosophy? Speaker 2: You know, I, I think it's just to be fair, to ensure access to the courts for all, to make sure that people who come into the court, and of course now they're, they're lawyers; you don't really get litigants coming in much. You know, the individual clients. But to make sure that it's a courteous and welcoming environment for them, and just to, to make sure that everybody feels that they have had a fair and courteous hearing. And of course here, they get to choose whether they come in or not. If you want oral argument on the state court of appeal, unlike the federal, you can have it. And you get to say how long you want to talk up to the limit of thirty minutes. But if you don't wanna come in, you don't have to come in. But if you want to, it's a- actually a constitutional right under the California Constitution that you get to come in and argue for up to, you know, thirty minutes. Story_ID: 656270 Speaker 1: What do you--what, what are your future plans? You know how, how long are you gonna serve (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) You mean my next career? Speaker 1: Yeah, well you, you've-- Speaker 2: I'm sixty-nine. Speaker 1: Yeah, you've gone to the top of, you know, of the federal judge, you know, you've been chief judge here in California [on the U.S. District Court for the Central District of California]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And I mean what, what's next? What are you--do you--well retire- you're--are you looking forward to retirement? 'Cause you just took this job [on the California Second District Court of Appeal, Division Four], so-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) Right, I just took this one. Speaker 1: You still have a lot of energy. Speaker 2: Right, I do, I do. If I wanted to retire, I could have retired. Well I just came through the retention election, which was a relief even though everybody said, "You don't have to worry because justices on the court of appeals are retained." It's not--there's no one running against you. But once you're appointed, you do have to be on the ballot at that next retention election. So I did that. So now I have the rest of the term of the justice that I replaced, so that's eight years. So I have eight years to decide if I'm loving this at the end of eight years, then I can go for another term and be on the ballot again in, you know, 2024 or whatever. And so I guess I'm just gonna wait and see how I'm enjoying it and five or six years from now I'll decide whether I want to stay and do another--sign up for another twelve year term, whether I wanna go out in the private sector, I guess, if I'm still, you know, if they still want me I could do that. Although I, I kind of doubt that I will do that. Having opted not to do that once, I'm thinking that was kind of my decision. So I'll, I'll see where I am then. Story_ID: 656271 Speaker 1: We always ask this question: what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community to- today? Speaker 2: Okay. (Pause) I guess my concerns are, and these are not unique, that there, there seems to be among all young people, not just African Americans, but you asked me about African Americans, that they really don't know our history. And you know the, the voting, participating in the voting is very poor, and that's at all groups and in the, the voting in this state, in the election we just had, was really pathetic. Now my kids are an exception because they're very politically attuned. I mean my daughter [Rachel Montez Minor], you know, volunteered for President Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama], or she tried, she tried to. She gave money and I, I--she's already looking forward to next election and talking about volunteering. And--but for the most part, they don't seem to be aware of the history and the sacrifices that were made. That's one of my concerns, that when you don't value something, you're much more apt to lose it or take it for granted. That's a concern. Economically, I, I'm very concerned about the gap between, the growing gap between the very, very rich and everybody else. I mean it--when I grew up, it was like the middle class, you know and the idea was to grow the middle class. Get people out of poverty. I mean I remember LBJ [President Lyndon Baines Johnson], the War on Poverty. And so you want to lift people out of poverty and have everybody in the middle class, and then the rich people, that was fine. But now you know we have the rich and the super rich, and the middle class seems to be kind of really struggling and shrinking. And those who are very poor, that seems to be growing. And I, I don't think that's sustainable for this country as a society. I'm very concerned about that, and it especially impacts African Americans. But really I'm very concerned for the country as a whole. That's just not sustainable, to have the generation where you say for the first time this generation is not gonna be as well off as their parents, I mean that's recipe for social disaster. I don't see why people feel that they should put up with that. And I don't know where that leads. So I guess those are, are, are some of my concerns. I mean I don't think again that people are aware of a lot of our, our history. You know, our first African American judges and justices and, and all of that. But of course I have, I have hopes. I mean there are certainly some positive signs as, as badly as things are going for President Obama right now, I mean obviously that, that was a great step forward at the time. And you know I look at people like my daughter who's really politically aware. It's just that she seems to be the minority to me. But of course I think I'm naturally optimistic so I, I have hopes that somehow this is all goanna, like all gonna work out. But I, I do have those concerns about the direction that we're heading unless we can find a way to energize and grow that middle class. Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I mean there's no stability without that. Story_ID: 656272 Speaker 1: When you look back at everything that you've done to this point in your career, is there anything major that you wish you could go back and undo or do over? Speaker 2: (Pause) Actually, probably not. It's funny, there was a guy, I haven't seen him in a long time. He was in the DA's office [Los Angeles County District Attorney's Office] with me. And at several times in my career, he was like a mentor or would advise me and he would say, he said don't go into consumer protection; that's like a dead end. You know only people who go there are people who don't wanna do trials. Or he'd say don't do this. And I--the last time I saw him he said, "You know, you always--I advised you, but you, you did the opposite," and he said, "And it turned out great for you." So he said, "Like all you should do in the future is whatever I say, do the opposite." And when I look back, I think I, I had no intention--I wasn't trying to structure my career to be a federal judge. Such a thing never entered my mind, and yet it, it just all worked out that way. And if I'd done something differently, who knows what effect that would have had? You know it's like the twig and the river theory. If you ever go back in time, don't touch anything because if you touch the twig in the river, you could change all human history. So if I changed anything, I might not be where I am now, and I, I think I'm quite, I'm quite pleased with where I am now. I've been incredibly fortunate and I--but my proudest accomplishment is still probably my family, I mean my kids [Timothy Collins and Rachel Montez Minor]. I'm just thrilled. I've been married for forty-seven years to the same guy [Timothy R. Collins], who has been incredibly supportive. Without him pushing me and nagging me, I wouldn't have gone to law school in the first place probably. I wouldn't have dared to do each thing. He's always pushed. Speaker 1: And you met him--you probably told us in the first part. Speaker 2: Met him in college. He was at Howard [Howard University College of Dentistry, Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 1: At Howard. Speaker 2: I was an undergrad and he was in dental school. And he retired about five years ago as the dental director of L.A. County Department of Public Health [Los Angeles County Department of Public Health]. So you know, forty-seven years and then ver- very proud of my kids. So-- Story_ID: 656273 Speaker 1: Well tell us about your children. That, that's actually the next question, so (laughter)-- Speaker 2: Okay. Our son is Tim Collins, Jr. [Timothy Collins] and he went to Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California] undergrad and then Yale Law [Yale Law School, New Haven, Connecticut]. And he decided he--obviously he could have done anything at that point. He could have gone to a big firm. I tried to get him to go into litigation, but he didn't want to. He, he and my daughter had the, the bug, the entertainment bug, the L.A. [Los Angeles, California], you know they live in L.A. And so he has always worked in house for studios. So he's currently a vice president of business affairs at DreamWorks Animation [DreamWorks Animation LLC]. Just got that job a few months ago. And it's financially healthy. Entertainment business, no matter what end you're on, anything can happen, you know. And he's had two jobs where the studios were bought out by people, who then said, "We don't wanna make, you know, these movies anymore." He started at MGM [Metro Goldwyn Mayer Studios Inc.] and then Sony [Sony Pictures Entertainment] bought them out the next month and said, "We're not gonna make movies anymore. We just want the MGM library." And so then he went to Focus Features [Focus Features LLC] and something similar happened. So now he's at DreamWorks Animation, which is actually perfect for him 'cause when he was a little kid, he loved comic books and animation. Whenever he got A's, what he wanted was the next comic, you know, kind of rare comic books. So he has a decent rare comic book collection. And my daughter Rachel [Rachel Montez Minor], we kind of talked about her before we got started. She's on the talent end, just like he's on the kind of inside studio, so she's on the talent end. She's been a dancer, she's done some acting, she's been in some commercials. She actually just wrote a screenplay. As she's getting older, she's finally taking our advice to look behind the camera too to see some things you can do behind the camera. So she just wrote a, a screenplay, she's very politically astute and interested. She was thrilled to meet Senator Feinstein [Dianne Feinstein] last week at this party she went to. So we're, you know, very proud of her too. She actually, with another friend, wrote and put on a couple of shows, singing, dancing, acting The Roxy [The Roxy Theatre, West Hollywood, California], which is a local kind of theater here. It's like a nightclub that you can put on shows and she was telling me if Hillary Clinton [Hillary Rodham Clinton] runs, they're gonna do another one of these. So the last one she did, they sold out The Roxy for four nights. And she's still trying to find somebody who might be interested in working on that as--for TV, they just found somebody who might do that. It's, it's about how hard it is to have a stable relationship in L.A. And so it has different women kind of tell their, their stories and, through song and dance. So that--those are my kids. Story_ID: 656274 Speaker 1: Was there anything we haven't discussed before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: I don't think so. I did wanna get in about my husband [Timothy R. Collins] and kids [Timothy Collins and Rachel Montez Minor], so I had that down and I, I, I think, I think that's it. Speaker 1: All right, all right. Well, last question is well I'll combine two questions we usually ask, but you kind of alluded to legacy. I was gonna ask you what you would consider to be your legacy and you said really your family. The last question is how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Okay. I guess somebody who cared about other people, tried to make the legal system better and tried to be fair. Speaker 1: (Pause) Okay. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: That's good enough. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Thank you so much for sharing with us. Speaker 2: Thank you very, very much (audio disturbance)...