 Story_ID: 227663 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: My name is Comer, C-O-M-E-R, J. Cottrell, C-O-T-T-R-E-L-L. Speaker 1: Okay now what does the "J" stand for? Speaker 2: Joseph. Speaker 1: Okay, and what? Speaker 2: Joseph and actually I'm a Junior; since my father [Comer Joseph Cottrell, Sr.] is deceased I don't use that any more. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: I was born in Mobile, Alabama and December 7, 1931. Speaker 1: Okay, ten years before Pearl Harbor, exactly. Speaker 2: Yeah, and I remember Pearl Harbor very well. At that time they didn't have TVs remember, and the only way you knew about it was they had the newspaper boys that would go up and down the street, "Extra, extra, read all about it, United States at war with Japanese. Pearl Harbor struck today!" So that's the way we got the news back then. Speaker 1: Okay, you were ten years old then? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Kinda makes you think of Paul Revere doesn't it? Speaker 1: And, what is your occupation? Speaker 2: Right now I'm an investor. Speaker 1: All right and, and in the past you were the owner of Pro-Line [Corporation, Los Angeles, California]? Speaker 2: I was the owner and founder of Pro-Line Corporation, a hair products manufacturer. Speaker 1: Okay, and-- Speaker 2: One of the largest in the country at the time. Speaker 1: Yes, sir and you are also part owner of the--first African American part owner of a major league baseball team [Texas Rangers] too, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, and I was a partner with [President] George [Walker] Bush who became governor of Texas and currently today is the president and he's in a tough fight for survival as president. Speaker 1: Okay and what is today's date? Speaker 2: December, no, correction, it's October 26, 19--2004. Speaker 1: Okay and where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: Pardon me? Speaker 1: Where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're in Dallas, Texas in my office. Story_ID: 227664 Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth there are five lightweight questions we always ask and they only require a short answer. The first one is: sir, what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: My favorite food is gumbo. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: My favorite color is blue. Speaker 1: A favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Springtime. Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: The Caribbean. Speaker 1: And the last question is: do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: I shall survive. Story_ID: 227665 Speaker 1: I wanna ask you about your family history now and I'm gonna ask you about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Comer Joseph Cottrell, Sr.] side. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: But we'll start with your mother's side. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Helen Josie, J-O-S-I-E, Josie, Smith is her maiden name, of course it's Cottrell now. Speaker 1: Okay and you pronounce it "Cottrell." Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: And I started pronouncing it Cottrell after I got in the [U.S.] Air Force, prior to that I was called Comer "Catrel" (laughter), down in Mobile [Alabama]. Speaker 1: Okay, what made you change it? Speaker 2: Everybody pronounced it "Cottrell," once I got away from my own name and my own pronunciation, no matter how many times I say "Comer Cottrell," they would see it and pronounce it "Catrel," so both me and my brother [James Cottrell] adopted "Cottrell." Speaker 1: Okay, all right now what is your mother's date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: My mother was born in Mobile, Alabama in April 5th, in one of those earlier years (laughter), I don't remember exactly what year it was, but she's deceased now. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And she's deceased seven years ago, in January of 1991. Speaker 1: Oh, in January 1991, okay, all right, okay. Well, what do you know about your mother's side of the family, how far back first of all can you trace the ancestors on that side? Speaker 2: Oh, well I know that my father--my mother was a large family. The Smiths were a large family, and their grandparents were the Colemans [ph.], and they owned a lot of prime property in Mobile at the time and the street we lived on was known as Coleman's Lane [ph.], and it was the only unpaved street in the whole area. Because on the corner was paved, that's where the Congressman lived, Frank [W.] Boykin. And behind us, the street behind us was paved because directly behind us lived the mayor, and there was a park in the front of us. Speaker 1: Now is there a history in your family of people like serving those households or something, or is that--? Speaker 2: Well. Speaker 1: --why you were situated like that? Speaker 2: No, the Coleman family were in the oyster business, they were entrepreneurs and they would buy oysters and shuck them, and people came from all over town to buy Coleman's oysters and all of the brothers had oyster houses or shuckeries. Speaker 1: Okay so they called them shuckeries? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And it had been passed on from generation to generation. Speaker 1: Okay, so, Cottrell, I mean--I'm sorry Coleman Lane was that like, was it a large street but just unpaved or was it--? Speaker 2: It was. Speaker 1: --like a small-- Speaker 2: It was, it's--everybody who lived there had been related at one time to the Colemans. Speaker 1: Okay was it a large street or a small street? Speaker 2: It was a short street. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It only covered one block. Story_ID: 227666 Speaker 1: Are there any stories about that side of the [maternal] family back in the 19th century during the Civil War, or during slavery or Reconstruction or? Speaker 2: Well, all I know is the way my grand, great-grandparents had farmed that property around there and it became the prime property in Mobile [Alabama], and they lost it. As a matter of fact it was taken from them when the white people really wanted to buy that property. They just took it and almost confiscated it for taxes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: From what I understand that's something that was commonly done back in the day, they would take the people's property for taxes. Speaker 1: Okay, are there any, any stories about any of your relatives from way back or? Speaker 2: No I don't know of any particular stories. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I just know that's how all that property was lost. Story_ID: 227667 Speaker 1: Did your mother [Helen Smith Cottrell] talk about growing up in Mobile [Alabama]? Speaker 2: Yeah, she just talked about how she had to--directly on, at the end of Coleman's Lane [ph.] that's what it was called, it joined Conti Street, and Conti, at the end of Conti was Murphy High School [Mobile, Alabama] which was the largest high school in Mobile, and the main high school in Mobile - public. And she talked about how the white kids went to school up there and they had to walk many miles to get to the black school which was Dunbar [High School, Mobile, Alabama]. Speaker 1: So they were a block away from the big high school, the biggest one in Mobile, but they couldn't go to school there. Speaker 2: And then just another couple of blocks was the grade school, which they had to pass to go down--they had to walk several miles to the grade school for blacks. Speaker 1: Okay, what was the grade school called? Speaker 2: Williamson [Lillie B. Williamson High School, Mobile, Alabama]. Speaker 1: Okay so now did your mother have a chance to graduate from Dunbar? Speaker 2: Yeah, my mother graduated, she was an all A student, outstanding student, but she wasn't able--didn't have the resources to go to college. Speaker 1: Okay so what did she do for a living? Speaker 2: She became a domestic, and she managed a country club in Mobile, the Mobile country club [The Country Club of Mobile, Mobile, Alabama]. Story_ID: 227668 Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your mother [Helen Smith Cottrell] and father [Comer Joseph Cottrell, Sr.] met? Speaker 2: My mother left after working--after high school [Dunbar High School, Mobile, Alabama] she went to Detroit [Michigan] to live with her brother and his wife and my dad stayed in Mobile [Alabama] and he worked for the newspaper as a route manager for a newspaper. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The Mobile Press [Mobile Press-Register]. Speaker 1: Okay, so and how--? Speaker 2: And. Speaker 1: Okay, go ahead. Speaker 2: And they would communicate, they would write love letters all the time and he wrote her a very convincing letter and she came back to Mobile. Speaker 1: Okay, but how did they meet, did they just know each other from growing up? Speaker 2: From high school. Speaker 1: From high school? Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: All right. Story_ID: 227669 Speaker 1: Well, tell us your father's full name and spell that for us? Speaker 2: Comer, C-O-M-E-R. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: J. Cottrell. He was Comer "Catrel" (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) And you were Comer "Cottrell." All right now what is your father's birthday and? Speaker 2: He was born in September '03 [1903] I believe. Speaker 1: And was he born in Mobile [Alabama] also? Speaker 2: He was born in Mississippi, Jackson, Mississippi. Speaker 1: Okay, now what can--? Speaker 2: And, his grandmother was a slave and she was what they call I guess at that time a mulatto. Beautiful woman, and she was, she was born in Mississippi on a plantation, the Williams Plantation [ph.] there and we used to call her Mama Williams. Speaker 1: Okay, so she retained the name of the plantation that she was born on? Okay, now did she have any stories about growing up during--I mean having been in slavery or any of that? Speaker 2: We never talked about it. Speaker 1: Okay, so any, anybody in your family have any stories about Mississippi, about Jackson? Speaker 2: My dad he, he left there because his father's brother was lynched trying to vote I think. He was trying to--arguing about his right to vote and they were told at that time niggers don't have no rights, and so that's how that family got down to Mobile. Speaker 1: About what, what year would you guess that was when they moved to Mobile? Speaker 2: Early part of the 1900s. Speaker 1: Say about 1900 would you guess, or--? Speaker 2: I know my dad was born in 1903 and he was young. Speaker 1: Okay, so, so. Speaker 2: He was young, his brother was older. Speaker 1: Okay so maybe between 1905 and 1910 or something like that? Speaker 2: Probably about 1917. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, yeah that kinda makes sense because a lot of soldiers returning from World War I [WWI], were--had he been a veteran in the war? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: He wasn't, okay. Speaker 2: No, my dad was not a veteran either. Speaker 1: I know a lot of veterans when they came back from the war wanted their rights and would get in trouble in the South because of that. Speaker 2: They created big problems. Speaker 1: Okay, so yeah the whole family moved to Mobile. Story_ID: 227670 Speaker 1: Do you have the sense, correct me if I'm wrong, but other people I've interviewed from the gulf, in Gulfport [Mississippi] and Mobile [Alabama] and-- Speaker 2: I know Gulfport well, I was stationed in the [U.S.] Air Force over in Biloxi [Mississippi] at Keesler Air Force Base. And I'll never forget one day--it was Memorial Day and we had to go out in a parade and we had to march in Biloxi and as we were walking--I was walking on the right side along the sidewalk on the outer flank. And some little white girl run up to me and grab me, "Mommy, Mommy look at the nigger," (laughter) you know. What did I do? I just felt--I just looked at her, and the rest of the white guys they got upset you know, but it didn't bother me, I'm from Mobile, Alabama. I felt right at home. I just heard that so much. Speaker 1: So Mobile is supposed to be a little bit better for black people than say further up in the Mississippi or Alabama you know. Is that, that true, did you think so? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, Mobile was different because it's a seacoast, it's a sea port and a lot of foreigners came into Mobile, and if you were Panamanian or out of Panama or Cuba and you were brown skinned, you were looked as a foreigner and you could, you, you were welcome into Mobile whereas the black folks that were natives there couldn't do certain things. Story_ID: 227671 Speaker 1: Now, well tell me, now what did your father [Comer Joseph Cottrell, Sr.] do for a living, did he continue to work for the news [Mobile Press; Mobile Press-Register] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My dad was in the insurance business. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He went into the insurance business and as an insurance salesmen; then he got promoted. Speaker 1: (INTERRUPTION). Speaker 2: Okay, all right now we were--okay you were in the middle of a sentence. I was asking you what your father did for a living. You said he sold insurance and. Speaker 1: Oh yeah, and he was promoted to a district manager in Mobile [Alabama] and that was for Atlanta Life Insurance Company [Atlanta Life Financial Group, Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 2: This is a black insurance company, right? Speaker 1: Yeah, out of Atlanta [Georgia], it was the, at the time it was the largest of the black insurance companies, and-- Speaker 2: I can't think of the family that started it, but I can see the place on Auburn Avenue now. Speaker 1: Yeah, the Herndons I think it was. Speaker 2: The Herndon right, that's exactly it, the Herndons right? Speaker 1: Yeah as a matter of fact he, they sent him up to Birmingham, Alabama where he was still a manager of that district, and that's where he met A.G. Gaston, who had a funeral home, Smith and Gaston Funeral Home [Smith & Gaston Funeral Services, Birmingham, Alabama] and he befriended A.G. and told him about the insurance business and told him that he should--since he had a funeral home, he was burying people, that in the State of Alabama at the time, you didn't have an aff--you weren't required to have a certain capitalization to start a funeral home, I mean to start a burial insurance company. All you had to have is a funeral home with the ability to bury the people. So my dad talked him into setting up a burial insurance company and that was Booker T. Washington Insurance [Company, Birmingham, Alabama]. Story_ID: 227672 Speaker 1: Okay, we were talking about the insurance business and A.G. Gaston and-- Speaker 2: And I, I remember at one time my dad [Comer Joseph Cottrell, Sr.] came home, he had been with A.G. to pick up a body for the funeral home [Smith and Gaston Funeral Home; Smith & Gaston Funeral Services, Birmingham, Alabama], pick up a body and bring it back to the funeral parlor and he said A.G. went into another part of the building and left him back with that body, and he says he didn't know that dead bodies actually move. He says (laughter) that the gas was leaving out the body, the gas was in the--making a noise, a kind of like a croaking noise, said it scared the hell out of him. He says that he'll never forget that experience. Speaker 1: Ok so he basically had a career in the insurance business then right? Speaker 2: Yeah, as a matter of fact he subsequently went to work for Universal Life Insurance Company and that was in Memphis, Tennessee, the Walker Family. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then with Christian Benevolent [Funeral Home and Insurance Company; Christian Benevolent Funeral Home] in Mobile [Alabama] because he wanted to come back home and that was the Coopers, [J.] Gary Cooper who was a friend of mine. He was the only [U.S.] Marine Corps general that I knew, he was a general in the Marine Corps and he was also mayor of a Mobile suburb, Prichard, Alabama. Speaker 1: And their insurance company was called Christian Benevolent? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And last time I was in Mobile, Gary had a bank, I don't remember the name of his bank there. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We all went to high school together. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We were all Catholic and there was only one Catholic high school for blacks and that was the Most Pure Heart of Mary [Catholic School, Mobile, Alabama], and so we knew--all of the black Catholic kids knew each other. Story_ID: 227673 Speaker 1: Now did you know [HistoryMaker Bishop] Joseph Howze? Speaker 2: Yeah, Bishop Howze (laughter), yeah I know Bishop Howze, and this Bishop here, Fisher, Carl [Anthony] Fisher I knew him. Speaker 1: Yeah Joseph--we interviewed Joseph Howze in Biloxi [Mississippi] I guess it was. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: A couple of years ago right? Speaker 2: Yeah Speaker 1: And he grew up in Mobile [Alabama], right? Speaker 2: He was SD, SVD, SDVD [sic. SSJ, St. Joseph's Society of the Sacred Heart] or something. I think Father Fisher I believe was a Josephite. Speaker 1: Okay so, you grew up Catholic-- Story_ID: 227674 Speaker 1: What is your earliest childhood memory; do you have an earliest childhood memory, a first memory? Speaker 2: When you get as old as I am (laughter) after having brain surgery (laughter). I have--my memory stopped at a certain point. Speaker 1: Okay, well tell us this now, how many--do you have brothers and sisters? Speaker 2: I do have one brother who's younger, and if you wanna talk about memories, I can think about the fights we use to have (laughter). Speaker 1: So what would you fight about? Speaker 2: Hun? Speaker 1: What would you fight about? Speaker 2: Every little thing imaginable. Speaker 1: What, what's your brother's name? Speaker 2: Jim [James Cottrell]. Speaker 1: And so you had no sisters or? Speaker 2: No sisters. Speaker 1: Just one brother. Speaker 2: I never learned to dance because there were no sisters around. Speaker 1: So in your household was it just your mother [Helen Smith Cottrell] and your father [Comer Joseph Cottrell, Sr.] and you and your brother? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, with no grandparents staying with you or aunts and uncles and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No. Story_ID: 227675 Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Well Mobile [Alabama] has a particular smell, I know when I go down there even today and when I get off the plane I smell Mobile, it has a particular smell because it's down on the saltwater and the green grass, it's different and I love it, I love to get that smell when I get back down there. I feel close to home, I know I'm at home and close to Mother Nature and to the good earth. It's a great feeling. Speaker 1: Okay, any other sights and sounds and smells? What did it look like, what was Mobile look like or what did your neighborhood look like when you were growing up? Speaker 2: My neighborhood was, as I said we lived in an all-white neighborhood and across the street was a park and I can remember very well that we tried to go out across the street and play in the park, and the older white people would call the police to come get them nigger boys outta the park, and then being rebellious if the grass grew up high enough, we would set the park on fire (laughter), just being rebellious. Speaker 1: So wouldn't the grass burn off, burn up? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Oh, I guess they really liked that, the grass burning (laughter), wow. Speaker 2: They never did catch us. Speaker 1: So were things pretty rough for you all around there you know being surrounded like that? Speaker 2: Yeah, when we had to walk to school, remember I told you that we had to walk to school just like my mother [Helen Smith Cottrell] did, and we had to go past the white people's house to get--to pass the white school to get to our black school and there was one ole' lady that had some parrots, parakeets, talking birds and when we passed her house in the morning, these birds, she would have these birds out and they would be hollering, "Here comes the niggers, here come the niggers" (laughter). It was, it was amazing man and I remember we had some friends that tried to poison, tried to throw some poison corn in the cage, but it was--it didn't work. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's, now this is the depth of this segregation feeling that's we've never explored before the pet, the parakeet would actually call you all names from--? Speaker 2: Yeah, as a matter of fact there were dogs that just could recognize a black person and would only attack black people. It was-- Speaker 1: That's deep. Speaker 2: It's amazing how racist they were and how everything they were associated with took on their same sickness. Speaker 1: So, well any other memories of the neighborhood? Now did you--so did you and your brother [James Cottrell] have to kinda look for each other right, as you move from place to place, I guess? Speaker 2: No, he had his friends and I had my friends. Believe it or not we were just two years apart, but I was much further advanced that he was in school because I had been promoted--instead of getting one promotion here, at like from kindergarten to first grade and from first grade to second grade, I went from first to third. So that left me with friends that were different than his. Speaker 1: And he was younger than you? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, so that puts like a four-year gap sorta in terms of friends. Story_ID: 227676 Speaker 1: What was the name of your--you went to Williamson School, grade school [Lillie B. Williamson High School, Mobile, Alabama]. Speaker 2: Yeah and that was in a place called Maysville [Mobile, Alabama] Speaker 1: Okay, so that's outside of Mobile [Alabama], proper. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Mays-now-- Speaker 2: It was not a suburb but it was a community. Speaker 1: Okay, and Maysville community of Mobile you know. Now who was Williamson [Lillie B. Williamson], do you know your school was named for? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was never--after going there for seven years I never--they never taught the history. Speaker 1: Okay. Now I suspect it was probably named after some black person that founded it, but I don't know. Story_ID: 227677 Speaker 1: Now let me ask you some more about grade school though before we leave Williamson [Lillie B. Williamson High School, Mobile, Alabama]. Did you like school? Speaker 2: Yeah I was--did very well in school and the reason was I had cousins that--girls that use to wanna be teachers so they taught me. I was always willing to be their student. During the summer that's what we played, school, so I'd (laughter) be way ahead and they would have me as a student, so I would get my arithmetic and spelling done and reading. Speaker 1: Okay, what was your favorite subject in school or did you have a favorite? Speaker 2: I guess my favorite subject--I can tell you it damn sure wasn't math (laughter). I've never been a great math student, but the social sciences probably. Speaker 1: Okay, history and geography and--? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, are there any teachers at Williamson that you remember that, that really were helpful? Speaker 2: I know the one that I fell in love with, Ms. Johnson [ph.], she was a young teacher just out of college and she was my sociology teacher and I use to sit up (laughter) and cry when her boyfriend came and picked her up from school, I'd be so damn jealous I'd sit there and cry. Speaker 1: So what grade were you in when? Speaker 2: Sixth. Speaker 1: Sixth grade? Speaker 2: Yeah, Ms. Johnson, she was a beautiful girl and she was young too. Speaker 1: I guess in those days? Speaker 2: Yeah, because all the teachers were old maids like, you know. Speaker 1: Okay, so any other memories of school, did you engage in sports and that sort of thing in school, did you play ball or? Speaker 2: Not, not in grade school, but once I got to high school [Dunbar High School, Mobile, Alabama], yes. The only ball that I ever knew how to play was baseball, I never played football. We had a football team and we had basketball, but I never learned those sports. I can't hoop, as a matter-of-fact I killed the myth about black guys. I can't sing, I can't dance and I can't hoop (laughter), that's amazing. I like to tell white guys the story when I'm out. You know a lotta times I go to affairs and my wife [Felisha Cottrell] and I might be the only black couple there and all these white women wanna dance with me and I say, I'm gone kill the myth that all this stuff that you've been dreaming and fantasizing about, I can't perform. I say I kill the myth about black men being able to sing and dance and hoop, I can't do either. Story_ID: 227678 Speaker 1: Well tell us about high school, now you were getting ready to tell us before the tape ran out about Dunbar High School [Mobile, Alabama], right? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, over at Dunbar, yeah and that's where we use to play baseball, and I grew up at the time of Willie McCovey, Hank Aaron, Tommie Agee, Cleon Jones. Speaker 1: Were they, were they down in that area? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: They played in--? Speaker 2: If you recall, Mobile [Alabama] was a baseball town, that's where all of your top athletes came out of Mobile in baseball, starting back was Satchel Paige. Satchel Paige is from Mobile. Speaker 1: I didn't know this, now this is really something--Satchel Paige is from Mobile? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Hank Aaron? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Willie McCovey and who else did you say Tommie Agee? Speaker 2: Cleon Jones. Speaker 1: Cleon Jones. Speaker 2: And Tommie Agee. Speaker 1: Tommie Agee? That's, this is quite a line-up that's, a-- Speaker 2: And the younger boys were Willie Smith with the [New York] Yankees, and all those guys grew up when I did, they came along. Speaker 1: That's something, that's quite a collection of baseball players. Was the baseball coach, did they have a good baseball program, is that what happened? Speaker 2: No, we all played (laughter) in the field and that's foot--baseball in the field, there wasn't really no park. We'd lay out our bases in the field and it's no such thing as a home run over a fence, there were no fences. Speaker 1: So do you remember? Speaker 2: I remember it well, you'd go out on a Saturday and Sundays and go play out in the fields. Speaker 1: Now do you remember Satchel Paige ever coming back to Mobile and--? Speaker 2: Yeah offseason he'd be down there teaching the boys to pitch and to play. Speaker 1: Now do you remember meeting himself and talking to him? Speaker 2: No I don't remember, no I wasn't that good (laughter) he wasn't wasting his time with me. Speaker 1: Okay but you remember seeing 'em, but you weren't part--. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --part of that group that he was trying to train? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, what about Hank Aaron, did you ever meet him? Speaker 2: Yeah I know Hank. Speaker 1: Okay, and--. Speaker 2: As a matter of fact, Hank and I still talk to each other occasionally. When I had the [Texas] Rangers, I brought him out for Hank Aaron Day. Speaker 1: Okay, what about Willie McCovey? Speaker 2: McCovey, I didn't know him that well personally. Speaker 1: Okay, he was younger I guess? Speaker 2: I think he was. Speaker 1: Younger group, yeah. Cleon Jones I would suppose too, and--? Speaker 2: Yeah, he played with my brother [James Cottrell], they were younger than I was and Tommie is younger. Speaker 1: Yeah, Cleon Jones was a star with the [New York] Mets I know, right? When they went to the World Series? Speaker 2: Yeah and both Tommie Agee was. Speaker 1: And, well is there any coincidence that Hank Aaron, both Hank Aaron and well, no McCovey played for the [San Francisco] Giants, and Aaron was with the [Atlanta] Braves, right? So, yeah, they're all like great hitters. So, yeah that's a strong sports tradition you know I guess for Dunbar? Speaker 2: Yeah, well I tell you what, if you look out today, looking at baseball when we had the Rangers, we had a school for baseball down in the islands in Puerto Rico and you'll notice today most of the players are outta the Caribbean, Puerto Rico, Panama, Cuba; and the weather makes a difference, because Mobile was usually wet but never really cold so you could play baseball year around, and there were a lot of fields, vacant fields (laughter) so they had not built up the city. It's hard to find a field--a big, vacant field to play in in Mobile now. Story_ID: 227679 Speaker 1: Tell me about Dunbar [High School, Mobile, Alabama], did you continue to be a good student at Dunbar? Speaker 2: Yeah, as a matter of fact, in high school I had a scholarship to Tuskegee [Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama], but being Catholic my parents [Helen Smith Cottrell and Comer Joseph Cottrell, Sr.] wanted me to go to a Catholic school. I wanted to--they wanted me to be a doctor and I never--that never crossed my mind. I thought I might be a priest and that--I went to University of Detroit [University of Detroit Mercy, Detroit, Michigan] Jesuit school and I didn't have a scholarship, but that was a major adjustment to go up there and all white kids you'd share everything with and you'd been segregated all of your life. That's a tough experience for kids. I wouldn't want to send my babies up there to have to go through that if they had been raised like I was. Speaker 1: Now before we get you to the University of Detroit and talk about that in detail, now at Dunbar were there any teachers at Dunbar that you remember or any students that you--that really stand out in your mind? Speaker 2: Yeah, there was Earl Battle, who was the--who left. He was my algebra teacher and he left and he had me liking algebra and I told you earlier I--mathematics was never one of my favorite subjects but he had me liking algebra and I did well, but--what was I getting ready to say? Speaker 1: I was asking you about some of the teachers at Dunbar High School? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah that's--he was the one that I really didn't--. Speaker 1: Okay, so did you run for class office or anything like that, did you--? Speaker 2: Yeah, I was the secretary of my class just about every year. Speaker 1: Okay, okay so you were pretty popular, a pretty popular teenager in high school I guess? Speaker 2: And I had the grades, I got good grades. Story_ID: 227680 Speaker 1: So the University of Detroit [University of Detroit Mercy, Detroit, Michigan], you so you choose that because it was a Jesuit school? Speaker 2: Yeah, and I thought I might be a priest ultimately. Speaker 1: Now you seem like you, you liked girls at an early age with--you seemed to like girls pretty much at an early age so, did you think that you could stand it? Speaker 2: That was my downfall (laughter), I remember one weekend I went to visit my cousin and he had a pretty girl that lived across the street and she invited me over to her house, and her parents were gone and she let me kiss her and she talked about me because I didn't know how to French kiss, and she said she was trying to teach me how to use my tongue to kiss her and I didn't know what that was, but it did get me turned on that, when I came back I wanted more (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, so. Speaker 2: And it went further and further and the next thing you know I was--found something more interesting that being a priest. Speaker 1: I see, I see, okay so how long--did you stay at the University of Detroit? Speaker 2: I stayed there for a year and I left and went into the [U.S.] Air Force and the war had not broken out, the Korean War, but people were still volunteering. It was just at the end of World War II [WWII]. Speaker 1: So what year is this when you--when did you graduate from high school [Dunbar High School, Mobile, Alabama]? What, what year was it when you graduated? Speaker 2: Nineteen forty-eight [1948]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I went to the University of Detroit from '48 [1948] to '49 [1949]. Speaker 1: Okay and then you joined the Air Force in 1949? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 227681 Speaker 1: Now why did you join the [U.S.] Air Force? Speaker 2: Because (laughter) this is a funny one, my parents [Helen Smith Cottrell and Comer Joseph Cottrell, Sr.] had sent me--I mean my, my mother was not wealthy and my family was not, but my dad was--always took pride in--he was one of the few people in the neighborhood that wore a suit every day and the white people used to think he was a preacher or a teacher or something. Seeing him walk around with a suit on, but he was in the insurance business, so he was a businessman, but they couldn't imagine a black businessman with a suit on. If you're in business down there you got a janitor's uniform on cleaning the stores and things, but I used to love to see my dad, took pride in the way he dressed, and when he was a, when I was a kid he used to take me out. He was selling industrial insurance and he had a debit and you'd go out and see him sell somebody some insurance and it was a miracle. They'd give 'em their money and he'd give, had a little slip that he wrote his name on for a receipt and I'd say this is the best (laughter) that I've ever seen. Just--my dad can write his name and get money, I admired him. Speaker 1: Okay now you were telling us how this relates to the University of De--of joining the Air Force. Now you joined the Air--okay. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah but I know we really didn't have a lot of money, so I was up there in Detroit [Michigan] and I had a cousin that lived in Detroit and she used to come by and pick me up and take me to the race track with her after school and one day she called me and wanted to know what I had dreamed about. She was a habitual gambler and I told her what I--I said I dreamed I was down in Mobile [Alabama] fishing. She said "Well I'm a bet the fish roll" in the lottery, in the numbers it was called then and she says she put a penny on a number for me and for the penny I got five dollars back so the next night she called me and asked me what I dreamed about? I told her and whatever it was it came out and she had put a nickel on it, and I got twenty-five dollars. So the next night I couldn't wait (laughter) to get to bed so I could dream up some more money and she called me and the damn if it didn't come out the next time and then she took me to the racetrack and my mother had sent me my train fare to come back to Mobile and to buy some clothes while I was up there, and I went to racetrack with her and lost all of that, and I was too embarrassed to call my mom and say I lost the money at the racetrack, send me more to come home, I couldn't face her you know. Speaker 1: Okay so that's when you--? Speaker 2: Yeah, because I knew how hard that money was to come and I just couldn't bear, so I, some of the guys were joining the Air Force to going into the [U.S.] military service so I said well I'm gonna try that and I went over to join the Air Force, and when I joined the Air Force I took the test and I passed the written test well, but I couldn't pass the physical. I was way underweight and I had to be a minimum--for my height I had to weigh a minimum of 126 pounds. I only weighted 117, so the sergeant at the recruiting office told me--I told him that I got to go in with you. You can't let everybody go off and leave me, 'cause I've checked outta, off the campus. I have no place to stay. He said well you can go down to the train station and tonight you can stay there or go to the bus station and stay there and get you some bananas, get you a big bag bananas, eat those bananas and drink water and come back in the morning. Man (laughter) when I got back down to that place my stomach was cramping from all those bananas and the water. I got in there and I wouldn't go to the bathroom. I had to carry it and get it on the scale, so I'd--actually I'd made up enough weight that he let--I think I made 125 pounds and he accepted me. He said, "You're committed, so because you're this committed you will be admitted," so I was accepted. Story_ID: 227682 Speaker 1: Now what was your assignment in the [U.S.] Air Force, what did you, what did they assign you to do? Speaker 2: Well I went to--initial school I went to was to the--I went to Biloxi, Mississippi and I wanted to get back close to Mobile [Alabama]. Biloxi's only fifty miles from Mobile so I got to Biloxi and I was able to go home and Biloxi was the training center for radar operators and radio operators, electronics. There was an Air Force electronics school, so I completed that and was sent to Lockbourne Air Force Base [Rickenbacker International Airport] in [Columbus] Ohio and that's where I decided while I was up there I would go back to college and I went over to the University of Ohio [sic. The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio] and applied and while I was going to college at the University of Ohio, the Korean War broke out [1950]. Speaker 1: Now were you going to Ohio State University or Ohio University [Athens, Ohio]? Speaker 2: Ohio State in Columbus. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Lockbourne is in Columbus, Ohio. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah I just wanted to make we got that clear 'cause Ohio University sounds so much--you said University of Ohio, it's kind of--people, people get 'em mixed up. Speaker 2: It was Ohio State in Columbus. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Now where is the University of Ohio; but I don't remember hearing about that? Speaker 1: Oh, that's in Athens, Ohio. Speaker 2: Is that right? Speaker 1: Ohio University they call it is in Athens, right, near West Virginia down east of--. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --of Columbus right? Okay. Speaker 2: So there I was and the war broke out, the Korean War and it was about three o'clock in the morning when they came into the barracks waking us up, "Everybody fall out into the day room, we at war with the communists." And you know, naturally back then when you mention communist you thought of the Russians [Soviets]. I thought we were at war with the Russians, not--nobody was really thinking about Korea and when we got down to the day room the commanding officer was looking for volunteers to go to, he says it was Korea and all, everybody that wanted a nice trip to go overseas, they said you don't have nothing to worry about, we're just go over there and kick those gooks' ass (laughter), and it wasn't quite like that. I think that's the only war we never really won, but I--. Speaker 1: [The] Vietnam [War] too (unclear). Speaker 2: Yeah, but we, we did a truce in Korea. I don't remember what happened in Vietnam. Speaker 1: Yeah it really wasn't--we just got out I think, we just got outta there. Speaker 2: (Laughter) I remember the guys trying to hang on those helicopters and they got out, they sure did. Speaker 1: Okay, now did you, were you assigned to--you were assigned over here right or did you go to Korea--did you go to Korea? Speaker 2: No, I went to Okinawa [Island, Japan] and, but back to Ohio, they asked me--. Everybody in my outfit volunteered for that quick trip to Korea to see what the world was like as a visit. I didn't volunteer 'cause I told 'em that I would--I didn't wanna interrupt my school over at Ohio State. I was gonna stay there, so my roommate decided to stay with me, we were the only two left on the base. At the time we were there manning a early warning radar station, the Air Force was, it was a [Air] National Guard base--Columbus, I mean Lockbourne had been turned into a National Guard base, so we were the only two regular Air Force men left on the base and I stayed there about two weeks continuing my education, then one day a [U.S.] military policemen came by the barracks and wanted to know who I was and he had orders for me to go to Selfridge, Michigan. When we got off the plane in Selfridge Field [Selfridge Air National Guard Base, Michigan], a major came out and he looked at me and said, "Oh you the two yellow belly bastards that wouldn't volunteer hun?" I said, "Naw' I didn't volunteer because I was in school." I said, "I thought my education was more important to me than going over there to volunteer for something I knew nothing about." So he says, "Well, you're gonna go and I want you outta here on the next thing going to [Marine Corps Base] Camp Pendleton [San Diego County, California] and that's where you'll be assigned to for overseas, you'll get your overseas assignment." And we went down--I don't believe it was Camp Pendleton. Camp Pendleton was a [U.S.] Marine [Corps] base. Story_ID: 227683 Speaker 1: We went to San Francisco [California] to YBI, Yerba Buena Island and that's where we stayed until the next ship was going overseas going to the Far East and we were put on that ship, but we only went to Okinawa [Island, Japan] and that's where I was assigned to a radar site on Okinawa and sometimes being a Catholic had its advantages. My CO [commanding officer] was Catholic, the commanding officer was and he would take me with him aboard his own plane to Mass on Sundays, and we got to know each other and I would have my mother [Helen Smith Cottrell] make him fruitcakes and candy. He loved pecan candy that my mom made, and he treated me special, and he asked me about--he was telling me about the world is made up of two kinds of people, those that kick ass and those that get their ass kicked. "What do you wanna be young man?" I said I prefer to be the latter, sir (laughter), and he started heading me in the direction to get promoted. As long as I volunteered I could get a promotion, so I volunteered to work with him in the orderly room as a clerk and I was there for about month and I was made chief clerk, and after a couple of more months I was made first sergeant and I was nineteen years old and that's the youngest first sergeant in the [U.S.] Air Force I believe in its history, and I had a lot of older guys there with me and it was interesting. We had some new recruits came in from Ohio and I was asked to pull the troops together as first--my deal as first sergeant (laughter), I went out, "Troops ten hut" (laughter) and one of the little guys Koka Thomas [ph.] was his name, he was nothing but trouble. I knew I was gonna have trouble with him. He said, "You see that tall skinny punk, listen to 'em I believe he's gay." And I said "Aw shit I got a problem with this clown." And sure enough I did have a problem with him. He was, he wanted to go down to the village and he went to the village, he got arrested down there and we had to bring him back up to the, well the MPs [military police] brought him back up to the base. And with me being first sergeant I had to receive him, and he just threatened me and I told him that he had to stay in his barracks until the CO gave him a court martial or (unclear) summary and he threatened to kill me and I was scared all night, 'cause I knew he was half crazy. And that night he got up and went to--got a fifty caliber machine gun and turned it on the village down below and was firing into the village. Story_ID: 227684 Speaker 1: This guy's got a fifty caliber machine gun standing on a hill shooting down in the village, right you said? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: What, what happened? Speaker 2: And fortunately nobody was hurt that night. Speaker 1: Ok, let it go. Speaker 2: Fortunately we didn't have any casualties that night but the [U.S.] military police came up and they arrested him and told me that I had to keep him confined. So we put him in the barracks and locked him up and he--again he threatened me and I was afraid to sleep that night. I kept one eye open all night long until I could get them back up there to take him away, and they took him away, gave--we ended getting him a dishonorable discharge and they got him off the island [Okinawa, Japan], sent him back, but he was dangerous, a really frightening guy. Koka Thomas [ph.] from Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], he was a Philly boy--and see being first sergeant I knew everybody's social security number. Philadelphia was a 19, that first started with 19 something and he had a 14-2 and that's Mississippi, Georgia, or Alabama, the lower southern states. So I said that son-of-a-gun is lying. I said he just passing off as Philly. He might have had a cousin or somebody that lived in Philly and made him think he was bad, but that's what he used. He always talked about he was from Philly and he was tough. Story_ID: 227685 Speaker 1: What else in Korea [Korean War], any, did--what else happened to you? Now, now you're in charge of a BX [base exchange] right or a PX [post exchange]? Speaker 2: PX, BX you're right, that's the post exchange, that's a Walmart-type store, we had everything in there and while I was first sergeant the PX manager was sent home so I had the option to select someone to manage the PX. So the commander who I said was a good Catholic and a good friend of mine, he gave me that job. It paid seventy-five dollars a month and that was equal to my regular monthly salary, you know as a sergeant, buck sergeant that's all I was being paid a month, so I got a chance to add that to my income, and then I could use the PX as I liked. So next opportunity was an opening for a postal service officer to manage a post office, and I could use the PX for the post office and I got that job at seventy-five dollars additional. Then-- Speaker 1: So wait a minute now you got two--you got your regular pay, you got two additional seventy-five dollars a month jobs? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And you're operating the post office out of the PX? Speaker 2: Right (laughter), and then what was funny the next opportunity was Armed Forces Institute. We had two classes that were available up there and, and one was math and one was U.S. history. I took the U.S. history class and I taught that in the PX. I couldn't teach the math, math was the heavy stuff and I got a sergeant that would be there every night drinking beer and buying beer. So he was from MIT, Massachusetts Institute of Technology [Cambridge, Massachusetts], and he loved math so I gave him a job, and I paid him with beer and let him drink the beer, and he did the math course, so I was able to save money, send money home so when I got out I would be able to go back to school--. Speaker 1: So when did you get out? You got out in--? Speaker 2: I got out in January of '53 [1953]. Speaker 1: Okay, so you were there from '49 [1949] to '53 [1953]? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: From July of '49 [1949] to '53 [1953], so I spent almost three and half years in the [U.S.] Air Force. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: On a four-year enlistment. Story_ID: 227686 Speaker 1: Now did you try to get back in school immediately when you got out? Speaker 2: Yeah, well when I got out of the [U.S.] Air Force I went back to Mobile [Alabama] and my dad [Comer Joseph Cottrell, Sr.] set me up a job with Atlanta Life [Insurance Company; Atlanta Life Financial Group, Atlanta, Georgia] and as a special agent and I had to travel the state. So what I did is when I got up to Alabama A&M University [Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical University] in Huntsville, Alabama, I decided I would stay up there and take a job with the company and go to school at Alabama A&M, and that's when this girlfriend that I had out in Oakland, California--. By the way, when I was in Oakland, when I came from overseas [Okinawa Island, Japan] that's where they shipped me to the Oakland Filter Center and I didn't know what it was. I had the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] and the Air Force CIA [Central Intelligence Agency], everybody looking for the Oakland Filter Center. Nobody could relate that to the Air Force and they thought it was something to do with water and we never could--I finally got--found it in the Yellow Pages so I was stationed there and what we did is we worked with the Flying Saucer Project. Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: Operation Blue Book [Project Blue Book]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah and we were looking. Speaker 1: Okay, in, in California. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah and we were looking for flying saucers and they were supposedly seen in California and out in the desert, so I never did see any, but we didn't actually look for 'em ourselves. The [U.S.] military guys didn't, we managed the filter center is where the civilians which were ground observers, and they were all volunteers and they'd be out at night watching the skies to see anything suspicious and they would call it into us at the filter center and we would try to identify it with what we were plotting and if we couldn't we would notify the Air Force over at Hamilton Field [Hamilton Army Airfield; Hamilton Air Force Base, California] where they would send out intercept aircraft, we would intercept unknown flying objects. Speaker 1: So this is serious business? Speaker 2: Hun? Speaker 1: This, this was a serious business in those days trying to identify flying saucers and or--. Speaker 2: Yeah any unidentified flying objects (simultaneous). Speaker 1: Unidentified flying objects. Speaker 2: That's a UFO thing, so. Speaker 1: There was a lot of fear of Russia [Soviet Union] spying on the United States you know. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And a lot military concern. Speaker 2: And I'll tell you what was interesting as--one lady saw a helicopter and we didn't really have helicopters of any significance at that time and the movements it was making were unbelievable (laughter). It could go straight up, across and just stop and hover, it was interesting. Speaker 1: So did you hear some, you heard some strange stories from people? Speaker 2: Yeah, then I remember one night we intercepted--we sent up--something--we just couldn't identify it and we didn't have no tracks leading to it. So we sent up interceptors for it and the interceptors, the jets' fighters they couldn't identify anything up there, but we were still picking up something on the radar and came back--they came back and landed and then they sent a small aircraft observation craft up and it was slow enough and moved slowed enough for the guy to identify it and it was just ice up there. The ice was reflecting particles of ice like hail was in the cloud, and we were picking it up on radar and it would move, you know, slow moving, but we were still picking it up and that's how it was identified. Story_ID: 227687 Speaker 1: 'Kay so how long had you, so when you finished that you came back to Mobile [Alabama]? Speaker 2: Yeah and when I finished that I came--I was dating a girl up there in Oakland [California] because I had to live off the base. We didn't have a base in Oakland so we all had to get quarters and the government would pay our rent and you had--they gave you a living allowance and a food allowance. So I had my own apartment up there and I had a girlfriend. Speaker 1: Okay so this is the one that, that--so did she join you at Alabama State [sic. Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical University, Huntsville, Alabama] when you went up to, to? Speaker 2: No she (simultaneous). Speaker 1: Alabama, what's that, what was it, which one? Speaker 2: A&M. Speaker 1: A&M okay in Huntsville [Alabama]? Speaker 2: No she called me up there. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: And my mom [Helen Smith Cottrell] called me up there, and told me that she--she was from Oakland and she called my mom and told my mom that she was--she thought she was pregnant and she was gonna commit suicide. And my mother got really scared and called me and I told my mother to tell her that I would send for her to come to Mobile and meet me in Mobile, and my mother did that and I came on home and we talked. I hadn't heard from her since I left and I had been writing her wanting to communicate, but she said she didn't want to talk to me because I'd made her pregnant, and I said well that's why you should've talked to me, but anyway she came on down to Mobile and we got married and that's when Renee [Cottrell-Brown], my daughter was born, my oldest child. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I had prayed that I would get a sign that this was truly my baby because she didn't let me know anything until at this very last moment. So I had six fingers on each hand and Renee had six on each hand (laughter), so I said, "God wanted us to be together." Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And matter of fact all of my children had six fingers. Speaker 1: Okay, so all born with a small what is it--an extra little finger? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Sort of--okay, what did they do, they like remove that right when you're a baby? Speaker 2: Yeah, she had it--cut it off. Story_ID: 227688 Speaker 1: Now did you ever get a chance to finish school? Did you? Speaker 2: No, I never did because I started making money and had other little businesses and didn't get back to college. Well I did go back to school when I moved--she [Cottrell's ex-wife] and I moved to Oakland [California] where her family was, then when we got divorced I moved back to Los Angeles [California] with my brother Jim [James Cottrell] and we shared an apartment. We both went to college, went back to school and I ended up making money and had a little business selling advertising novelties and specialties. So--. Speaker 1: Okay, so you sold novelties and. Speaker 2: Advertising novelties and specialties. Speaker 1: Okay, so--. Speaker 2: That's like book matches, these fingernail files, ball point pens. Speaker 1: Okay so was the name of the company on it or the logo that sorta thing? Speaker 2: Yeah you put your, put that logo and stuff on it. Speaker 1: Okay so you're in Los Angeles doing this now. What year is this? Speaker 2: That was in '56 [1956]. Speaker 1: Okay and all right so, well how long did you do that before--now you ended up--how long was it before you ended up in Dallas [Texas]? Speaker 2: I came to Dallas after I moved Pro-Line [Corporation] to Dallas. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: I started Pro-Line in Los Angeles. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In 1970. Story_ID: 227689 Speaker 1: Well there's a big gap between '56 [1956] and '70 [1970], so what did you do between '56 [1956] and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And this, this is '80 [1980]. Speaker 1: Oh okay; what did you do between '56 [1956] and '70 [1970]? Speaker 2: I worked for Sears [Roebuck and Co.], my PX [post exchange] experience related to Sears. It was natural; the PX Army and Air Force Exchange system [Army and Air Force Exchange Service] was formed by a former Sears president, General Loren Wood [sic. Brigadier General Robert E. Wood]. So I knew the techniques for managing a Sears exchange. Speaker 1: Now, when did you start with Sears? Speaker 2: In '64 [1964]. Speaker 1: Sixty-four [1964] okay. Okay, now what did you start off as doing, what position were you in when you started? Speaker 2: In sales. Speaker 1: Okay, now you're like a salesmen in the store? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Then I became a division manager. Story_ID: 227690 Speaker 1: So you went from sales to division manager [at Sears, Roebuck and Co.] and then, when did you start thinking about going into the hair business, hair care business? Speaker 2: I was still at Sears and I'll be honest I never thought about hair care. I knew nothing about hair. I had a salesmen that worked for me at Sears that I had to terminate because he--I would tell him, I said you're writing my report card and I'm not gonna fail because you're not producing, and I let him go and he came back. He could sell me to quit my job and go out here and get started in the hair care business with him. So he could sell very well. Speaker 1: Okay, how was he able to convince you? What argument did he use to convince you to go into the hair care business? Speaker 2: Well I knew that there was a market out there because when I managed the PX [post exchange], I would make requisitions for hair care for the black service members' family and they would tell me that we've got Brylcreem, we've got Vitalis and Wildroot Cream-Oil (laughter). Speaker 1: So black people don't use those products? Speaker 2: No, no they don't, so. Speaker 1: Now what products do black use now, now you have to tell us now what? Speaker 2: They use Pro-Line and they--. Speaker 1: No, in those days, in those days what did they use I mean? Speaker 2: Tuxedo Club [Pomade] and a lot of beeswax products. Speaker 1: Was that like Murray's [Pomade]? Speaker 2: Murray's, that's the name of it yeah. Speaker 1: Murray's greaseless hair pomade, or Royal Crown. Speaker 2: Royal Crown, Tuxedo Club and Murray's. Speaker 1: Blue Magic I think was another one, I think. Speaker 2: Blue Magic was kinda like Vaseline. Speaker 1: Some people use Vaseline. Speaker 2: Yeah, and they would Vaseline for pressing their hair, women mostly used the Vaseline. Speaker 1: I think there was something Posner Coconut Oil too, I think people used that sometime on their hair. Speaker 2: Yeah, that was that blue grease, that's what I called it blue grease, the coconut oil. Speaker 1: Okay, so, so you would have to, you knew what black people used on their hair and would order those products? Speaker 2: Yeah and see at this time the Watts riots was in, black people started wearing their afros and there was a sense of pride in blackness and we wanted to stand separate. So by me managing the PX, I knew that there was an opportunity there so I told him that I would go into the business if we sold to the PXs. Well he and I couldn't get together, he wanted to do like Dudley [Products, Inc.] does, just sell directly to the beauty salons and the barber shops. Well they don't pay properly, they, they get your product and they sell it and use it and then when you go by to get paid, they don't wanna pay. Speaker 1: But the--. Speaker 2: So I didn't want that problem. Speaker 1: But the service will pay you on time right? Speaker 2: Yeah, as a matter-of-fact they give you a quick discount, a special. You give 'em a discount and they pay you within "X" period of days. They give you a speed discount, a fast discount. A minority, for a small business they pay, fast pay, they get you on the fast track for payment so that you don't get stretched out too far. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So I was getting, I was buying my product with ninety day terms and I was getting paid anywhere from between ten and twenty days, so building me the cash flow so I never had to go out and borrow any money for the operation. Story_ID: 227691 Speaker 1: How did you develop your [hair care] product in the beginning? Were you selling your own product then or were you selling another, somebody else's product? Speaker 2: Selling my own, what we did is we went to the chemical company and they made the formulas for us, then we went to a contract packager and he made the product for us and he's the one that gave us the time to pay 'em. Speaker 1: Okay, so, so you got a formula, had a product made and was there a lot of research involved in putting together a product or a lot of time spent trying to figure out what kind of product was needed? Speaker 2: Well, what, what we did is they--it was a big chemical company like DuPont [E.I. du Pont de Nemours and Company, Wilmington, Delaware] or Dow [Chemical Company, Midland, Michigan] and they would assign a chemist to us and a lab and he would make samples and we would just take it out and test market it, and would have focus groups to see how people liked it and what they liked and their dislikes, and using that we would turn around and develop a product. It was a consensus, whatever the consensus product was is what we would take to market. Speaker 1: Okay, all right now what was your first product? What was the name of your first product for Pro-Line [Corporation, Los Angeles, California]? Speaker 2: Pro-Line Oil Sheen, it was a spray for the natural. Speaker 1: Okay, now this is 1970 right? Speaker 2: Yep. Story_ID: 227692 Speaker 1: Now how did you advertise when you started [Pro-Line Corporation, Los Angeles, California]? Speaker 2: I didn't, I taught them--some guys would come by and tell me, you know you've got to put this on TV, and Johnson [Products Company, Chicago, Illinosi] had 'Soul Train' other folks were advertise in Ebony and Jet. You've gotta have some advertising method. Well with my background I knew how, I'd been watching the PX [post exchange] and how stuff moved and you can win the battle at the point of sale, it's how you package it and shelf positioning. So what we did is I'll package them, and [HistoryMaker George] Johnson would be talking about, "Watu Wazuri [use] Afro Sheen" and folks that didn't speak Swahili didn't even know what the hell he was talking about, but he bought 'em to the shelf and they saw our package with that leather, it was wrapped in black leather with a hot gold leaf stamp on it and that gold leaf would flash when you got it, when the light it, it would shine in your face and strike you and people would come in there. He'd bring 'em into the store, but when they saw our product, that's what they would pick up, and they would spray it and smell it and they liked the smell. We had a fruity strawberry smell and they would spray that and take that can, put the top back on it, put it to back of the others and take the one that they hadn't opened, put it he basket and go to the counter, so we were outselling everybody. Speaker 1: Okay, all right at the point of sale, yeah, that's something that--. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's where they make the ultimate final buying decision, right there at the shelf level, your--that's where you wanna beat 'em. Speaker 1: So you had--in those days you were competing against Johnson Products, I guess? Speaker 2: Posner, Magnificent and--. Speaker 1: So when did it, when did you really start taking off with this, immediately or what? Speaker 2: Yeah, we were, we assumed the number one oil sheen. Speaker 1: Okay, so by 1971 you were number one? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, but did being number one change the way you did business at all? Speaker 2: No, I was consistent, matter-of-fact I would not give distributors special deals based on the volume that they wanted to buy, I wanted it to be an even, level playing field out there so, every year we would invite the distributors into Dallas [Texas] and I would lay out $50,000 in the middle of the table, the board room table and if anybody had a price different from the other, all they had to do is show me and take that and walk away with it. There wasn't no hanky-panky about pricing, everybody was on a level playing field with Pro-Line and they would tell us about what other companies were doing for them. That's them, that's not the way we operated. Story_ID: 227693 Speaker 1: So, now when did the Jheri curl--now that hit what in the early '70s [1970s] around '70 [1970]? Speaker 2: We [Pro-Line Corporation, Los Angeles, California] introduced the Curly Kit. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's the one where you do it yourself. Speaker 1: Is that the first? Speaker 2: That was-- Speaker 1: Is that the first Jheri curl product? Speaker 2: Jheri curl was started by a black chemist that worked for Jheri Redding. Speaker 1: Okay so that actually was a product name of an actual product Jheri curl? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But everybody started calling the rest of 'em Jheri curls too, all right. Speaker 2: But mine was a Curly Kit because it cost $150 to $180 to get a curl in a salon and the--whoever did it had paid $500 to learn how to do it and we realized it was no secret to doing it. You got a good chemist to make you a good product that's all you needed and getting instructions on how to do it was the key, so we wrote the instructions and had it, took it over to the high school football field during their practice and let those football players do their own and we took some--the chemist and some professional stylists over there to watch 'em and show 'em how to do it and they had to read the instructions themselves. So when you got high school jocks reading the instructions, you (laughter), we knew we were taking a chance, but damn if they did it all get their curls (unclear) and then I knew from that day on I'd be rich. Speaker 1: So if they could do it anybody can--(unclear). Speaker 2: Yeah, that was our position if these damn jocks can do it anybody can do it. Speaker 1: Well and so it worked, I mean it worked out all fine then right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And you started selling the kit for how much, how much did you sell the kit for? Speaker 2: Seven [dollars] ninety-five [cents, $7.95]. Speaker 1: Now wait a minute, now $7.95 as opposed to taking a course that cost $500 and sitting in a chair and having it done for what $150? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So but you could offer the whole thing for $7.95 and do it yourself? Speaker 2: For less than eight dollars, that was our ad, "Do it yourself for less than eight dollars." Speaker 1: So you had the first kit? Speaker 2: "You can do it, you can do it yourself for less than eight dollars." And do it at home, and matter of fact when we introduced it we invited all the distributors to the Bahamas for an introductory party and they were upset because the price--they say you can get $29.95 for each kit, you can $59.95, $49.95. I said yeah I would get that I damn sure would like to get it, but not you clowns. I said you're not smart enough to benefit from it. I said as greedy as you are the first kind of person that came in and offered you one for $19.95 you would buy it, and mine would be sitting on the shelf overpriced. I said I'm not gonna do that. They begged us to make it for more than $7.95. I said I'm comfortable with that, I make a fair profit and I'm gonna get the volume and sell all that I can make. I won't have any sitting around going bad on the shelves. So they understood it and we introduced it over in the Bahamas and we were building this plant in Dallas [Texas] and when I got back to Dallas that one day I had over $4 million worth of orders sitting on the shelf. Speaker 1: Okay, what do you think it was about the product that made it so appealing to people? Speaker 2: Because everybody was wearing the Afros and their hair was long and (laughter) they could make it look nice by putting that curl in and it gave it a shine and it looked healthy. It was much better looking that the Afro. Well, people thought it did. Speaker 1: And people thought it looked better than the Afro (unclear)? Speaker 2: It was a matter of opinion. Speaker 1: Okay so well I know shortly thereafter--now this is what 1970 what? What are we talking about here? Speaker 2: We introduced that in '79 [1979]. Story_ID: 227694 Speaker 1: Okay, so it seems like it's been out longer than that, but 1979, that's the--okay. Okay, so 1979 and then shortly thereafter I know SoftSheen developed one of 'em and Ultra Sheen got one of 'em and-- Speaker 2: But they were all afraid to do it because they had--everybody was saying that they would get sued because they didn't realize the difference was the way you did your instructions. They didn't understand it, it was about the instructions. As a matter of fact a lot of beauticians got upset because we [Pro-Line Corporation, Los Angeles, California] did it and introduced out there into the market and they could get that $150 but very few beauticians were getting $150, and the only people that could get it were the athletes and the entertainers were the only ones that were getting the curl and the pimps. Speaker 1: Okay so it was like the process used to be in the old days in some ways? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Except it wasn't as hard on your hair or head I guess as the processed hair, so in the old days all the entertainers and the pimps too have. Speaker 2: The conk. Speaker 1: Yeah get the conk, the processed look you know-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So as I said like SoftSheen, Ultra Sheen, Luster [Products, Inc.] got in it, Bronner Bros. [Enterprise] and stuff by the--. Speaker 2: Everybody did. Speaker 1: I guess by the early '80s [1980s] you had a lot of competitors right? Speaker 2: Competition was heavy. Speaker 1: Did they use the same--? Speaker 2: And see that's where I out smarted 'em because I, just like I had predicted they come in, they couldn't get below $7.95. They could come out with a product, but they couldn't get lower than me, not with the quality that we had. They came out with shit that didn't match the quality but it was underpriced, but they didn't last long because they were out of business, they were sued out for damaging hair. Story_ID: 227695 Speaker 1: So did you keep your formula a secret, or did you try to keep--? Speaker 2: Well, no secrets in this business, they can go look at it and go back to the lab. You're required to put the instructions there and you're required to put the formula out there and descend the order of quantity of the ingredients. You got an ingredient list so any chemist worth his salt can go in there and develop from that. Speaker 1: Now so, so what kind of business did you do with the Curl [Curly Kit]? Speaker 2: Over the years that we had it we must have done $50 million worth of business just with the Curl. Speaker 1: That's not counting the other products then right? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: And you were still selling the other products at the same time? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: How many different products did you have (unclear)? Speaker 2: We had a high of twenty-seven. Speaker 1: Were they all hair care products or--? Speaker 2: All hair care. Speaker 1: Okay, so what, and what was the height of sales, what year was the height of sales? Speaker 2: When I sold the company [Pro-Line Corporation, Los Angeles, California] in '80 [1980], no in 2001, I sold it and we had reached our highest sale point that year was $60 million. Speaker 1: Okay, so you weren't plummeting, you weren't going--sales weren't going down when you sold? Speaker 2: No, you sell when it's going up. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 227696 Speaker 1: As a matter of fact I didn't have any intention of selling, I was out--Wall Street getting money to make acquisitions. I had intended this company to be in an institution for a few generations, but it got so competitive and ugly out there. The Koreans had taken over the market and they were--it was a war between them and the traditional, the Jewish distributors and they were fighting each other and discounting stuff and stealing--stealing making claims that merchandise wasn't shipped and taking unauthorized discounts just to be able to compete, but I wanted to buy another company so I could take Pro-Line [Corporation, Los Angeles, California] public, and if I'd had gotten it public, I would have, it would have kicked out enough cash for me just like selling it did. Speaker 2: But you couldn't acquire another company (unclear)? Speaker 1: Well we went out to buy African Pride in New York [New York] and I made a cash offer of $50 million for the company which I knew I was overpaying but we could justify that because I had excess capacity and the new plant I'd built here in Dallas [Texas] and African Pride had distribution in the Caribbean where we were weak in distribution and we could put all of our products into that channel so it made sense for me to offer a premium to him and at the last day the guy said that he was accepting our bid and invited us up to New York. I went up with my banker and sit there in their offices all day and that was Pricewaterhouse [Coopers] was handling the transaction, and the guy came out at about three o'clock and says that they had another offer that they had to look at over the weekend and they'd let us know Monday if we had the deal, and something that they had never heard of before. But my guys accepted that and we had to wait to Monday and I got a call that Revlon [Inc., New York, New York] had bought it. They paid a million dollars more, but they offered a much better deal than I did. They're gonna keep the guy on as president of the company and I didn't have a job for him or any of his people, and they had a contract with his brother-in-law for manufacturing where his brother-in-law had a thirty-three and a third percent markup on all the sales of the products. Well with my capacity I could've easily--that would have been the way I paid for it with that thirty-three percent. So that was a, I was just disgusted with the whole damn industry and I just said if they are gonna pay this kind of money out here for this stuff, I'll be on the other side, I'll just go on and sell. Speaker 2: Now you tried to, you tried to buy Luster [Products, Inc.] at one time too right you were saying? Speaker 1: Well I tried to merge with Luster. Speaker 2: But that didn't work either right? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: Okay so you sold the business in what year was it? Speaker 1: Two thousand one [2001]. Speaker 2: Two thousand one [2001]. Speaker 1: Two thousand one [2001] to Alberto-Culver. Story_ID: 227697 Speaker 1: Were you hurt by the decline in the Jheri curl business, in the curl business? Speaker 2: No, we introduced another product, we introduced Just for Me! for little girls and if you recall every little girl around was singing "Just for Me, Just for Me." I can't sing, I told you I can't sing, I can't dance, and I can't hoop (laughter). Speaker 1: But you can sell products though pretty good. Speaker 2: Oh I did a good job of that. Speaker 1: Okay, so yeah I heard of that, that's a--so that was a kit where kids could get their hair done. Speaker 2: People often ask me what would I contribute my success to and I'd say delayed gratification. I didn't take all the money and spend it every time I got a big check in. I worked for Pro-Line [Corporation, Los Angeles, California] and I looked at it as my employer and I was honest with it and kept the money, kept it reinvesting it. Pro-Line never had any debt, we just kept reinvesting. Story_ID: 227698 Speaker 1: And the other thing that I attribute to my success was my belief in the golden rule, "Do unto others as you would have them do unto to you." Treat your employees as you would be treated and they'll take care of you, they'll look out for you and treat your vendors the way you want to be treated, that means pay 'em, and treat your customers the way you want to be treated, that means give 'em quality and service. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And that's what, that was the key things about Pro-Line [Corporation] that we attributed our success to. Speaker 2: Okay, we live in an age now where a lot of people think that so many people need jobs just work 'em real hard and get some, hire somebody else you know. Speaker 1: No, we had very loyal employees, our employees stayed with us until they messed up. Now I didn't have a problem replacing you if you, if we found you doing something disloyal to the company. Speaker 2: But as long as they were loyal and did their part? Speaker 1: Pardon me? Speaker 2: As long as they were loyal and did their part they were all right. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: All right, okay. Did you have like benefits? Speaker 1: Everybody had to contribute. Speaker 2: Did your employees enjoy benefits that most people you know expected (unclear)? Speaker 1: Oh yeah, when I sold the company I shared the profit of the sale with them, as a matter-of-fact if you look at Pro-line's parking lot today, you'll see nothing but new cars up there, Mercedes [Benz] and BMWs. They didn't listen and protect their money and invest it wisely. Speaker 2: Now did you ever, did you--? Speaker 1: We had seminars to educate them. Speaker 2: About how to deal with? Speaker 1: Yeah, as a matter-of-fact I can look at and see about eight or ten millionaires that came out of Pro-Line because we lent them money if they want--I encouraged them to go in business for yourself. You'll never be rich working for me. I tell 'em the truth, you can't contribute enough to do it. It's just not in the cards guys, you're gonna have to become an entrepreneur and go out and start your own, and we will help you. Speaker 2: Well that's, I mean that sounds pretty honest to me you know, it sounds like a pretty good deal. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Now, anything else about your, about the--now when you sold the business I've read, I believe I read where you tried to make sure that people still retained their jobs right? Speaker 1: Yeah, when I sold the business there were several companies that had made good offers but I took five million dollars less from Alberto-Culver just to get them to agree to keep the company in Dallas [Texas] so that the people would maintain their employment and also keep the building here because that is part of my legacy. Story_ID: 227699 Speaker 1: Now why did you choose Dallas [Texas] in the first place, 'cause you started [Pro-Line Corporation] in Los Angeles [California], how did you end up in Dallas (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Because we had outgrown out of our facilities there and Los Angeles is not very pro-business, not like Dallas was at the time. As a matter of fact Dallas doesn't have a tax, they don't tax you or harass you like Los Angeles. I got awfully angry out there. I was on the board of some of their regulatory agencies like the Water Quality Control Commission [Water Quality Control Board] and you pay taxes for water quality control. It's a taxing agency and enforcement and they can--you paying people to harass you and the noise abatement board is taxing you to come out and harass the hell out of you and so are other agencies. Air quality, all those things harass you in business, but you still have, they can tax you and you pay for them to do that. So I was glad to get out of Los Angeles, and I got closer to my market. See, only 14 percent of my market is in the--I forgot was it 10 percent of my market was in the fourteen western states, 14 percent and ten of the western most states, I forgot it. Speaker 1: Okay, but you had like more a larger share of the market. Speaker 2: But most of our business started Texas and east, up north to Chicago [Illinois] and east to Georgia through Mississippi, Alabama and the Carolinas. That's where the black population of this country is. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So I was looking at that plus Dallas-Fort Worth [Texas] has American Airlines headquartered here. They decided to move at the same time I did and when they decided to move here that gave us access to any part of the country overnight and a matter of fact non-stop to anywhere in the world. Speaker 1: All that, so you really analyzed all this? Speaker 2: Yeah, then I would be getting into daylight, I mean Central Time whereas when you're in California your people are sitting there idle while everything on the East Coast is closed you know and you can't get started. They started earlier than we did and closed long before we did. Speaker 1: So a number of reasons contributed to you moving-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --the business here? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay, well tell me about-- Speaker 2: This was a planned move, and it was studied, but I didn't have a consultant. I'd had figured out, I didn't have a consultant, a relocation consultant on moving this plant. I had to move all those families that relocated with us, plus I had to move all the equipment, all the inventories and that was bigger than I had anticipated. And if I hadn't come down here and had all that business waiting, we would have been in big trouble. I didn't--I underestimated the cost of such a major relocation. Story_ID: 227700 Speaker 1: While you were running Pro-Line [Corporation], you got involved in baseball too right? Speaker 2: That was here in Dallas [Texas]; politically in Los Angeles [California] I was chairman of the black chamber of commerce and which is known as the Black Business Association of L.A. [Los Angeles] and we got to know the politicians and one afternoon we were having a meeting at city hall and [Mayor] Tom Bradley who was the mayor at the time said that what we needed was access and he told us how to get the access and he told me that being the chairman, with the president at the time being Republican, I should become a Republican. Your vice president can, vice chairman can be a Democrat and your president should be a Republican. The vice president a Democrat and this will give you access and they always make contributions and support your party. Speaker 1: So you followed that advice, is that when you first became a Republican? Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And following that advice we had access to the White House [Washington, D.C.], the state house and the courthouse. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Plus city hall because Tom was mayor and he gave us access to city hall. Speaker 1: Okay, now Tom was a Democrat wasn't he? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Yeah, right. Speaker 2: But he was just being practical, he was educating the brothers (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, that's a, there's a long tradition of black people and or certain black pundits advising black folks not to really be a aligned so heavily with any one party or the other and to be flexible you know so-- Speaker 2: Well tomorrow there's going to be a big press conference here and out at the ranch I'm going to come back home as they, come back to the Democratic Party because even though, I like [President] George [Walker] Bush, he's a friend of mine and I do, I might even say I love 'em and his family. They're good people, but this is about not just me, this is about the country and all these people out here without good healthcare and--I see people that are dying because they can't afford to buy medicine and he's hasn't been effective in that area. Then to see how [Vice President] Dick Cheney gets away with the sole source contract to do things that he's never--Halliburton has no experience in feeding troops, they're not in that service. There are other companies that will more qualified I think than Halliburton that should have had an opportunity to bid on that, so--Marriott is a good example, Host [ph.], and others, so I just see so much wrong with this administration. Story_ID: 227701 Speaker 1: Okay let me ask you, off-camera we were talking about the character of George W. Bush [President George Walker Bush] and you were saying that a lot of times you have to defend him from black folks that say that George W. Bush is a racist? Speaker 2: Yeah I oftentimes get into strong arguments with African Americans about the Bush family. They're being accused of being racist when they are very far from that. Are no means are they racist, they're good people. As a matter of fact [First Lady] Barbara Bush served on the board of Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] and George served on the board of Paul Quinn [College, Dallas, Texas] with me and right after I bought the college [Bishop College, Dallas, Texas] then his uncle [sic. brother] Jeb Bush was the [state] chairman of the United Negro College Fund [UNCF] for many years so they've been involved with blacks historically, but they don't make a big issue of it. As a matter of fact, very few people knew that George Bush had a black business partner when he bought the [Texas] Rangers. He and I were partners; he doesn't go around saying "I had a black business partner." I can see a lot of Democrats doing that, they would be highlighted and ask me to walk around and hug and kiss 'em and show that we love black folks, but see George and I had a business relationship, we were friends but had a business relationship. It didn't have to go into politics. Story_ID: 227702 Speaker 1: The Republican Party and [President] George [Walker] Bush included is not necessarily, is definitely not the party that supports poor people. You were saying the policies are not. Speaker 2: No, I was saying, you're right--I was saying that Republican Party is not the party for poor people, white or black and I say I sit here and watch white people probably saying I'm a Republican, but they're ignorant as hell. They don't realize that it's not their party. They're just being tools, and being used and they sit up and talk about Democratic Party owning black folks. Republicans own poor white folks. Speaker 1: They're not getting anything out of it. Speaker 2: They don't. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They just, because during [President Ronald Wilson] Reagan's time--now Reagan I knew him, I worked with him and I was a commissioner under him and--now he was, he is racist, he was. Speaker 1: Can you give us an example of what, why you would say? Speaker 2: Yeah, one night he and I were having dinner when I offered to work for his campaign and (laughter), I told him I said look, he was governor at the time. I said, "Governor I am willing to work with you and help you with your campaign." I said the only thing I can bring to your campaign is money. I said I can't bring you no black votes. I doubt seriously if I can. I said you're not that well-liked. But he said, "Well how are you gonna do the other thing?" I said, "I've got black friends around the country that I can get contributions from." I said, "I can bring twenty-five to, into a room for a meeting with you and collect $25,000." He said, "Well, how we gonna do that?" I said, "I wanna set up a strategy meeting with your scheduling secretary so that I'll know what city you're gonna be in and at what time, and I will call my friends and we'll plan a dinner, a reception for you." And he says, "Where will it be?" I said, "It'll be in their homes, of course." He said, "Hell [HistoryMaker] Comer [Joseph Cottrell], I'm not going out in hostile territory, (laughter)." I'm serious and that's when I told one of my friends that was head of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] at the time. That he wasn't gonna come. Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker Reverend] Benjamin Hooks? Speaker 2: Ben, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I said, Ben told me he had invited him to come speak to the--I said Ben he wouldn't even come over to my friends' houses to receive money for, at a reception. He said he gonna definitely figure all of y'all together is hostile territory (laughter). Story_ID: 227703 Speaker 1: Tell us about Paul Quinn College [Dallas, Texas]. Speaker 2: Well Paul Quinn is a black college [HBCU] that's 117 years old when I bought it back in '90 [1990], '91 [1991], and-- Speaker 1: So you actually bought it? Speaker 2: It was in Waco [Texas], yeah. It was located in Waco. I didn't, I bought Bishop College [Dallas, Texas] out of bankruptcy. Bishop was one of the leading black, historically black colleges in the country. At the time it would compare with Southern [University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] and any of the other black colleges. Bishop was quite a legacy and had some outstanding graduates, but it was run by Baptist ministers who let it go down the tube, and it was totally mismanaged. At the board level, there was little accountability out there. They just didn't know what they were doing and I served on that board and stayed in trouble with the--it was me against the ministers and I lost all of the business community's support that we had because I would've opened up issues that businessmen supported and the ministers opposed it so they didn't want to be caught out here and held liable in some cases. As a good example was the football team. A lot of these guys in the business community, their colleges had had to cancel football because they couldn't afford it and I did, I recommended that we consider dropping football and I was voted down. I had to be a big pool to even suggest that because some of those guys went to Bishop and played football and their sons went there and played football and their grandsons are gonna go there and play football for the good ole' Bishop Blue, but I said it won't be a Bishop Blue around if we keep going like we are. So I did a study of the whole thing and found out that we were actually playing, had a football team without insurance. There was no insurance out there for the team players and when I exposed that all the business executives left the board because they know who would be responsible. I stayed on because I was committed and I tried to get them to do a reorganization and restructure the debt, and they told me I had to be crazy. They couldn't go back to their church and let their church folks know that they were dealing with a bankruptcy. So I lost that one and ultimately I resigned and when after I resigned, the company did go into a Chapter 11 [bankruptcy] and then they ended up in seven liquidation and the campus was auctioned off. I went over there and bought it out of the auction and I put a lot of money into trying to rehab [rehabilitate] it but I didn't have enough money to do that, I needed help. Story_ID: 227704 Speaker 1: So I was able to get the business community to come in and help me like the utility company came in and redid the whole electrical system out there [at Bishop College, Dallas, Texas]. The gas company replaced the piping and made sure that that system was safe, and so we had a lot of work to do and we were able to get some of the big corporations to make contributions like IBM, Xerox, Texas Instruments, BDO Corporation which was The Dallas Morning News, Radio TV Station WFAA, Channel 8 [Dallas-Fort Worth, Texas], I mean they came in strong to support us, but there was nothing I could do with the campus because we had lost, their what do you call it? Speaker 2: Accreditation? Speaker 1: Accreditation, it was lost and the charter had been revoked. So there wouldn't be any chance of getting students back on the campus and then the business community backed off because they said, "[HistoryMaker] Comer [Joseph Cottrell] we like you, but we're not gonna build you a campus for you to sell that you own and you got total control of, and I understood that so I made some contacts with the administration, secretary of HEW [U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare; U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS)] and he talked about--that was Leroy Weeks [sic. HistoryMaker Dr. Louis Sullivan] I believe it was, and I'm not sure but he talked about taking the campus and using it as a facility for rehabbing drug addicts because we had the dorms out there and taking youth and using it as a correctional facility for youth and my wife [Isabell Cottrell] told me not to do that, even though we would've made money on it. She said it's not something that you should do, just think last year you were educating young black people out there, now you're gonna turn around and reincarnating them and that's not right. So she was able to convince me to turn down money which I hated to do and try to get the thing back on track. So I had to go out and find a college that was willing to move onto the campus and bring its accreditation and that's when I found Paul Quinn. As a matter of fact the business community had set up a fund of $50,000 to see if they could get their five black colleges up here in North Texas that they wanted to get 'em to merge and come together as one strong unit, but that's like going out here and starting a tribal war and they were throwing rocks at each other (laughter), and Methodists and the Baptists and the--they were all--as you know most of the private Baptist college--I mean private black colleges are church related so we were getting into church turf war. Speaker 2: Methodist and the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] and the Baptists? Speaker 1: Yeah, UME [ph.], C.M.E. [Christian Methodist Episcopal], Episcopal, all of 'em were at war. Story_ID: 227705 Speaker 1: So how are things working out now with Paul Quinn College [Dallas, Texas] in place, on that campus? Speaker 2: Well, we've just about--they got, had another bishop that came up here who was racist as hell himself and he accused the business community of trying to steal the campus from the church, and the church did nothing to get it, I just gave it to them, they didn't do a damn thing to earn it, but. Speaker 1: This is the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church you're talking about? Speaker 2: Yeah A.M.E., but that bishop came up here and started talking about he was protecting the property for the church and I got so angry I should've set it up into a trust that if it was not used as a college, it would always revert back to my family. That's what I should've done but no, I let them have it clear without any encumbrances like that. So it would keep them motivated to work hard but they got the business community against it now and it's kinda tough trying to raise the money to support it 'cause that's where you have to get your money from the business community. As a matter of fact I always speak to them that it's, it's more than a college, it's a business institution and it's got to operated like a business. You've got a market out there that you've got to provide product for and you got to be able to benefit from the services you provide and that's the source of your financing. Speaker 1: So it's still, still like a struggle now. Speaker 2: Yeah it is. Speaker 1: Still a struggle is taking place now. Speaker 2: Um-hm-- Story_ID: 227706 Speaker 1: What about the Texas youth centers, tell us about that. Speaker 2: Oh, those are--I was--served for a period of time--TYC is Texas Youth Commission. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: And we operate the detention facilities in the state for youth and I was the vice chair and while I was, I was active in making a lot of changes because there was a lot of racism and young black kids didn't understand when they went in there, how some of those racist ass guys were, they'd be walking around there with bib overalls and white shirts and spitting tobacco all over the damn place. I made 'em get outta those. I said to them you don't realize that to these young black kids they look at you like you are Ku Kluxers [Ku Klux Klan, KKK]. I said you can't do this, so I had 'em change and get outta and stop wearing that junk, no smoking and no spitting tobacco around the school, and then to make it equal I installed the man down system so if one of 'em got hurt out there, they, all they had to do is push a button and they could be instantly located and get rescued, because I'm gonna tell you, working with those kids was dangerous, 'cause some of 'em have been murderers, all kinds of things, rapists, and some are actually crazy as hell (laughter), drug addicts. Story_ID: 227707 Speaker 1: Tell me, we always ask this question: what are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today? Speaker 2: Well I hope we start respecting each other and love each other, that's key. Respect and love, I don't mean a physical type love, but I'm talking about a mental acceptance and a brotherhood. We've got to accept each other as brothers because--I tell you what I like to--you know I own the African Heritage Network and looking at some of the stuff that I see on TV especially like the stuff that Viacom has out there as representing black people, it's, it's so demeaning that if there's a lapse of time say twenty-five years between now and all the black folks were gone off the earth and somebody else came down here and only saw black people with what they see on TV today, some of that. They'll say they should've killed all them damn fools. They should've gotten 'em off the earth. That's--. Speaker 1: Now. Speaker 2: That's what we represent out there. Speaker 1: All right, but the African Heritage Network now that is wonderful, I mean I've seen the programming. Speaker 2: Yeah we did 'Showtime at the Apollo' (simultaneous). Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Ossie Davis and--yeah, yeah a couple of shows with Ossie Davis. Speaker 2: Oscar Davis and [HistoryMaker] Ruby Dee. Speaker 1: Ossie Davis and Ruby Dee. Speaker 2: We tried to get the black cultural movies, the black classics, like 'Stormy Weather,' and we did 'Shaft' and we did 'Glory.' We look for the best of the black movies to present. Speaker 1: Right and they usually do a commentary about the historical significance of the movie and that sort of thing you know. Speaker 2: And we leave the shit to BET [Black Entertainment Television]. Speaker 1: So you deserve the right to say whatever you wanna say at this point I guess. Story_ID: 227708 Speaker 1: When you look back at your career at this point--is there anything else you wanna mention that you--? 'Cause I know you've done a whole lot. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: You've done a whole lotta things. Speaker 2: No, that's it. Speaker 1: Okay, when you look back at everything you've done thus far, is there any major thing that you would do differently? Speaker 2: Yeah, I've learned that I wouldn't be so generous with my money trying to help everybody and after I got my money from the sale of Pro-Line [Corporation, Dallas, Texas], I served on the board of a number of banks, major banks and I saw that they couldn't, blacks just couldn't borrow money for businesses and now I took my money and started FCC [Federal Communications Commission] investment and started making loans because I know I earned my money from black folks, that's who brought my products. So that's the least I could do is come back and try to help some of them get started in business, but I now I understand why banks didn't make those loans, because these guys seem to think that if they get a loan, a equity investment, that they, that's all they had to do to get suddenly rich. They don't realize that equity is debt; equity doesn't mean that you've earned it. It just means that you've just had an opportunity to take on more debt, that's what equity is, it's debt. You've got more liability when you get somebody else's money in your business. Speaker 1: So people, so people are seeing the loan as the end of the rainbow instead of the actual? Speaker 2: Yeah, they tend to think that, see me and my business is doing well, I got this much money. I've lost millions of dollars like that. So I'm out of that business now. Speaker 1: Okay, so what are you doing now, I know we're sitting in an office here where you do, are you--you're not? Speaker 2: What I'm trying to do is just trying to collect some of it. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: That's why you see me sitting here with five lawyers in my office and six accountants, that's what my staff is made up of. Speaker 1: Okay, trying to collect some of the debt that's owed to you. Speaker 2: Um-hm, they get the money and next thing you know (laughter), them preachers over at the college didn't understand the restructuring of Chapter 11 [bankruptcy], these damn black businessmen though, first thing they do is "Man I've gotta reorganize, I'm going through an eleven, I'm going through a chapter." Speaker 1: When you? Speaker 2: You didn't see everybody; all those guys here did you? Did you see the? Speaker 1: I saw a couple of 'em, yeah. Speaker 2: You didn't see the chief of staff of the Panthers here, the New Black Panthers [New Black Panther Party]. He does some of the enforcement. Speaker 1: He does some of the collection? Speaker 2: Yeah, not just collections, enforcement. He's not out there to collect; lawyers are out to collect; he's out for enforcement (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 227709 Speaker 1: When you look back at your career, what would you consider at this point to be your legacy? Speaker 2: What I've done for my people. Story_ID: 227710 Speaker 1: Now did your parents [Helen Smith Cottrell and Comer Joseph Cottrell, Sr.] get a chance to see you become a success in business? Speaker 2: Unfortunately no; my mother did, she saw me in the early days and she was very proud in the early days but she didn't see me at the height of the thing. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: There was so much now that I go out and buy folks' houses for their kids and things and I just think if my mother had been around what I could do for her. Speaker 1: Now you have--I know you have the one daughter [Renee Cotrell-Brown], but do you have other children. Speaker 2: Yeah, I've got two sons, one is in New York [New York], one just moved today to Florida. He's in the ticket business, entertainment and sports tickets and the other is producing videos, oh documentaries on music like rap video, comparative music like what he calls independents. Speaker 1: Okay, and-- Speaker 2: And they both have a trust. When I sold the company [Pro-Line Corporation] I set up a trust for all of my kids and when I remarried [to Felisha Cottrell] I had one baby, Lance [Cottrell], who is now eight years old, and I adopted my wife's son who is ten years old. Story_ID: 227711 Speaker 1: The last question we usually ask is this one, it's similar to legacy but how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Hm? Speaker 1: How would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: I'd like to be remembered as a good husband and a good father and a good provider for my family. Speaker 1: Okay well it's been a pleasure talking to you. Speaker 2: Listen, that's probably the most important thing. Speaker 1: Is there more? Speaker 2: No, I mean provider for my family and my kids, and being a good father. Story_ID: 227712 Speaker 1: All right, go ahead and describe this photo for us. Speaker 2: Okay that's a picture taken of me holding an aircraft that we had just had refurbished to look like we painted it colors of perm repair, the pink and white. Perm Repair was a Pro-Line [Corporation] product and my brother [James Cottrell] and I owned a flying school at Red Bird Airport [Dallas Executive Airport] here in Dallas [Texas], and we sold it after we couldn't get enough black kids interested. Speaker 1: About what? Speaker 2: Even though they had scholarships available through the community college district, the only ones that would come out would be the white girls and Orientals [East Asian]. Speaker 1: About what year is this? Speaker 2: This is about ten years ago. Speaker 1: Okay about 1994? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Go ahead sir. Speaker 1: Go ahead. Speaker 2: Okay the first picture there, the baby that's me representing when I was born in Mobile [Alabama] and moved to Detroit [Michigan] to college [University of Detroit; University of Detroit Mercy, Detroit, Michigan] and from there and to the [U.S.] Air Force and to Los Angeles [California] where I attended Cal [California] State University [Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] in Los Angeles. I think earlier we talked about while I was in the Air Force I had attended [The] Ohio State [University] in Columbus, Ohio. Speaker 1: Okay, so this was a storyboard, this was like a--? Speaker 2: Yeah and it shows the many hats that I wore, chairman of the board of Pro-Line Corporation and what's this other one? Speaker 1: It's a member of the board of qualifiers. Speaker 2: Qualified judicial-- Speaker 1: A qualified judiciary member of the advisory council of The University of Texas [at Austin] in Austin [Texas] and a honorary doctorate law degree, Bishop College, Dallas [Texas]. Speaker 2: Now that's me when I was young and had black hair, you can see it's beginning to turn gray at the edges. That must be a picture that's about 1980. Speaker 1: Okay, next top. Speaker 2: Is it the top one and the bottom one or just the bottom one? Speaker 1: The top, all of it is-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Okay, go ahead sir. Speaker 2: The top is a picture of us launching the boat in the Cayman Islands and the rest our residence in Cayman Islands. Speaker 1: Okay, next. Speaker 2: That's a convocation at Paul Quinn College [Dallas, Texas] and to the left are some of the business members that we had on the board at the time and I talked about that had left the board. One is the senior vice president of Texas Instruments; another one is the general electorate. Speaker 1: My person is you middle here? Speaker 2: Yeah, and two women that were representing corporations and at the bottom is me and the president of the college on the right. Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: Yeah, that's Lee [E.] Monroe, he was the president then of Paul Quinn College, and Pettis Norman, he's a black businessman in Dallas. Speaker 1: Is this Pettis Norman? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Didn't he use to play for the [Dallas] Cowboys? Speaker 2: Yeah, former Cowboy, and to the right is Robert Dekker [ph.] who has been a major contributor to Paul Quinn College, but he stopped after the bishop over here in the little black guy on the left created problems of accusing him of trying to steal the campus from the church and Robert Dekker is the chairman of BDO Corporation that owns a number of television and radio stations and to the left of that is Joe [ph.], that's chairman of the UNCF [United Negro College Fund]--former congressman. I can't think of his name right now, and between the two of them is the senior vice president of Texas Instruments. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, next. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICES) Speaker 1: Just tell us from left to right who's who starting from here? Speaker 2: From the left is a senior executive of American Airlines, and then there's [HistoryMaker] Comer [Joseph] Cottrell and [HistoryMaker] Earl [G.] Graves [Sr.] of Black Enterprise and--who serves on the board of American Airlines and the chairman of American Airlines, [Robert] Bob Crandall. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And below that is Maynard Jackson on the right and on the left I don't recall who that is. Speaker 1: Comer Cottrell in the middle right? Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Next. Speaker 1: Now what are you doing here? Speaker 2: That's me and my wife and our regalia for the National Professional[s] Network NPN annual cruise and we were going into--they wear African attire for dinner one night on the cruise and it's sponsored by Dr. [William] Tedford of Howard University [Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And above that is my daughter [Renee Cottrell-Brown] and my--that's a Pro-Line Christmas party picture. Speaker 1: And at the bottom--are you finished Scott [Stearns]? Speaker 2: Let's see that other book over there what's in that? Speaker 1: This is a pictures of Paul Quinn right after I purchased it and we were moving the campus to Dallas from Waco [Texas] and that's the Waco Tribune-Herald and we had--initially there was opposition to the Paul Quinn leaving Waco. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: And. Speaker 2: Okay now is this the new campus here? Speaker 1: No that's, that's the building, that's the [Isabell and] Comer Cottrell Student Union building. Speaker 2: Is that at Paul Quinn College? Speaker 1: Yeah, that's at Paul Quinn, and that's been refurbished and named in my honor. Speaker 2: This is it here? Speaker 1: That's the old campus. Speaker 2: Okay and this is the new. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Building renamed for you? Speaker 1: Okay next. Speaker 2: Okay go ahead I'm just telling (unclear). Speaker 1: Yeah well the top is a truck loaded with supplies from the former Waco campus moving up to Dallas. Speaker 2: The top one's full of glare, I don't know if we need to do all these. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: Can you do--yeah, just describe the second one. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: Describe this one for us? Speaker 1: Okay and that's when we're naming the campus, renaming the campus from Bishop College to Paul Quinn, that's what that is...