 Story_ID: 123555 Speaker 1: I'm Shawn Wilson the interviewer for The HistoryMakers, this is Neculai Burghelea, the videographer for The HistoryMakers and today, I will just have you state your name and spell it out for me. Speaker 2: Troy Duster, T-R-O-Y, D-U-S-T-E-R. Speaker 1: Today's date Speaker 2: December 21, 2005. Speaker 1: Your date of birth? Speaker 2: July 11, 1936. Speaker 1: Place of birth? Speaker 2: Chicago, Illinois. Speaker 1: And your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm an educator. I teach at the, at two universities, my major appointment now is at New York University, where I am a professor of sociology and I also hold a position as Chancellor's Professor at the University of California, Berkeley. Speaker 1: So you're bi-coastal? I read you were bi-coastal, multi-coastal, post-coastal (laughter). Story_ID: 123556 Speaker 1: So, we'll start with sort of five questions to get you warmed up, your favorite color? Speaker 2: Well. Speaker 1: Black? Speaker 2: Nah, I don't have a favorite color. I mean, I suppose depending upon sum--summer or winter, you know, it could be burgundy or blue or green, I don't have a favorite color though. Speaker 1: Your favorite food? Speaker 2: Again, hard to pin me down on a favorite food because, I eat everything. I put it like, there's this thing about the Cantonese in China, if it crawls, or moves, or flies, or, you know, we try it, (laughter) and, and my view about food is the same way and I have a very wide range in taste in food. Speaker 1: Favorite time of year? Speaker 2: That's a little easier, I think it's between spring and fall. Speaker 1: What about favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Don't have one, I mean my, my view of life is that you should try to have your vacation while you're working. (Laughter). Speaker 1: The last one is your favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Favorite phrase, well, it's the idea of trying to pass on something which, which has been given to you. Which is called passing it on, is my favorite phrase. So people often try to reciprocate, you get a gift or give it back, so I tried that with one of my mentors, he said to me, "pass it on," and what he meant, I thought was wonderful. He said don't try to repay me, cause I have more than you have, he said, pass it on to someone who has less than you have, and then he said, that will be my reward. I guess my favorite phrase was just the idea of passing it on. Story_ID: 123557 Speaker 1: Very nice. So, we will start by talking about your family and your mother-- Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: --Mother's side of the family first. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And as much as you know about it, so your mother's name? Speaker 2: Alfreda Marguerita Barnett. Speaker 1: Will you spell that for me? Speaker 2: Alfreda A-L-F-R-E-D-A, Marguerita M-A-R-G-U-E-R-I-T-A, and Barnett B-A-R-N-E-T-T. Speaker 1: Your mother's date of birth? Speaker 2: September 2, 1905, could be '04 [1904], but I think it's '05 [1905]. Speaker 1: What are your earliest memories of your mother? Speaker 2: Again, that's a difficult question because my mother is such a powerful figure in my memory and those memories come from her shaping my understanding of the world. So, it, it doesn't come at an age like three or four, where I still am sort of fledgling trying to figure out the world, it comes a little bit later. So the powerful images of my mother are just her giving me advice, you know, son don't do that, (laughter) or son go over here and be, I mean, beware of this, so the--those memories actually probably are into my, probably into my, be what, not teens, but I'm probably eight, nine or ten, by that, at that time. So the imagery of my mother is the advice-giver and the very supportive, engaging, humorous, warm advice-giver along with the iron fist and the velvet glove. So the other image of my mother is that she's someone who was a strong disciplinarian, didn't really ever brook [ph.] rebellion, her, her view was, she's in charge and if you don't like it, you have to come to her and tell her how you don't like it and why you don't like it. But, that doesn't mean you get to have your way, so she was quite clear about who's in control of the house. Speaker 1: Did your mother talk to you about her own childhood? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: What did she say? To what if some of the stories she told about her own childhood? Speaker 2: She was the daughter of a very public figure, and so her childhood was spent often going around with her mother to public events. So she would sit right there beside her mother at some event or she may even be in the audience in the first row and her image was always of an active public figure and she was the offspring. So, she didn't talk very much about herself in terms of playmates, she talked about herself in terms of being in the audience with lots of adults. Story_ID: 123558 Speaker 1: So let's talk about your mother's [Alfreda Barnett's] mother, because she's so well known. Your mother's mother was? Speaker 2: Ida B. Wells, who married Ferdinand Barnett and therefore sometimes the last name is hyphenated as well as Barnett. Speaker 1: She was born, your grandmother was born in? Speaker 2: She was born in Holly Springs, Mississippi-- Speaker 1: In what-- Speaker 2: --About three or four years before slavery was ended. So-- Speaker 1: (unclear) (simultaneous) 1864 [sic]? Speaker 2: Probably be 1861 or two [1862], somewhere in there, that, that's my guess. So, she was born into slavery and I think for two or three years, was actually in the crawl, I mean, in, in the category of slave. Then, her life is, my--my grandmother's life is very much shaped by the fact that her father had been one of the favorites of the slave owner. Speaker 1: Who, what was his name? Do you know his name? Speaker 2: Wells, I think it was, I think it was Jim Wells. Speaker 1: Jim Wells. Speaker 2: Now, he was the favorite of the owner of the plantation 'cause he was his son, so my mother's book opens up, this is my grandmother's story. My mother wrote the overview and talked about the issues, but my grandmother tells the story about how her father that is my great-grandfather was the son of the plantation owner, which gave him certain privileges and rights. He'd gave him a profession. He taught him many things but especially he gave him a trade, carpentry and some other things, which once slavery ended, permitted my great-grandfather-- Speaker 1: What was your great-grandfather's name? Speaker 2: I think its Jim Wells. Speaker 1: Jim Wells, (unclear) Speaker 2: It's really Wells. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, he (unclear) he's, it's not a thriving, but certainly a stable artisan, he, he knows what he's doing with respect to carpentry and has, has a pretty good living. Speaker 1: So, Ida B. Wells had been born into slavery? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And she then was a slave for a couple of years? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: What do you know about her? What does she know about her, the sl--her--the slave owner? Speaker 2: Um-Hum. Speaker 1: That gentleman, what, what stories have you been able to? Speaker 2: Well, apparently he was relatively benign, that is especially with respect to my great-grandfather. But the story that I hear, although I think it's actually in the book, is that, I'm not sure where I'm getting this from, I think it's actually from my mother. My mother tells the story about how, once my great-grandfather, right, is released from slave--right. Once, once the old, the plantation owner dies, his wife is very angry about the fact that Jim Wells is the son and has anger towards his whole family and has them all brought in and, and then they're whipped apparently. So, I guess the slave owner dies before slavery ends, th--that's I think what the story is, now my grandmother was born into slavery, however the most important part of the story for what's going to happen is that, she grows up during Reconstruction, so although she's born a slave, her, her (unclear) self, her knowledgeable self, at about age seven, eight, nine, ten, emerges in a period in which there's extraordinary hope among black people, slavery's ended, and education is seen as the key to the future. So my grandmother, (unclear) thirsty, and apparently goes after the books, she's very, very thoughtful and she reads and she becomes like the school teacher for her younger siblings. And so she teaches them all how to read and write and Reconstruction is this period of American history which is not very well known, but it was a period which black people, with the Northern troops standing by, took over many political positions, they became governors and senators and went into the [U.S.] Congress and they looked like they was really going to be a transformation of the American political scene. That's the period that my moth--my grandmother cut her te--eye teeth in, so she saw hope, she saw that this was really going to be a sh--shift, which explains, I think a little bit about her tenacity, her stubbornness, her, her view that once Reconstruction is ended, (unclear) exist only gonna be a time before the country comes back to its senses and said she's gonna be a catalyst for that. So, this early period is very, very vital for understanding my grandmother's perspective. Story_ID: 123559 Speaker 1: So your grandmother [Ida B. Wells], during the Reconstruction era has the opportunity or after, once Reconstruction has ended, she not only has the opportunity to go to grade school, high school, but she goes to Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee]. Did they talk about, was she the first in the family to have that opportunity? Speaker 2: I'm sure, there's no doubt about it. She was the oldest person in the family. When like, when her father and mother die-- Speaker 1: Who were they? Did you know them, her father and mother? Speaker 2: Only again-- Speaker 1: Only, I mean, yeah, but do you know of them, I should say. Speaker 2: --I knew mainly about the father, the, the--her mother is a bit obscure, not very much talked about, the father was the person who was the bread winner of the family. Speaker 1: What did he do? Speaker 2: He was a carpenter. This is Jim Wells. Speaker 1: Oh, Jim Wells was her father? Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: Okay, got 'cha, okay. Speaker 2: There's, I th--either yellow fever or cholera, I forget which one, one of the two comes through the area and wipes out the two, a lots of people, but the--but the two parents die, so I-- Speaker 1: Both Jim Wells, and-- Speaker 2: Yes and the mother. Speaker 1: --Mother. Speaker 2: So Ida B. is left as the person whose now, I think, probably around-- Speaker 1: Sixteen? Speaker 2: --Sixteen, seventeen, and she has these many siblings as many as maybe eight, nine, ten, I've--it's, it's in the autobiography, and then she takes a strong stand which is that she'll, she'll raise them. She's not gonna let the family be split up and apparently she was successful in, at least for, for a period. Speaker 1: Any, any knowledge of how she funded her education at Fisk University? Speaker 2: No, no, I don't know, no. Speaker 1: How, how would you ima--I mean, how would you imagine she lived and supported the seven children that she had to raise? Speaker 2: I think by the time she was a student, som--some, some of the children had actually been shipped off to relatives. Speaker 1: And who are the relatives that they were shipped off too? Speaker 2: Some, I think went to California, again, I'm not sure about the actual locations but, by this--by the time Ida B. is probably in her late, her early twenties, she's no longer the sole caregiver for these kids. Speaker 1: What year did she meet [Ferdinand] Barnett? Speaker 2: I'd--I, here I'd have to guess, 'cause we're talking about her having left Memphis [Tennessee], gone to New York [New York] and then she goes to Chicago [Illinois]. This has to be probably in the early 1890s, or maybe the 1880s. Story_ID: 123560 Speaker 1: But before we do that, one story I want to have you talk about is when she [Ida B. Wells] is in Memphis [Tennessee], she becomes, she's an activist-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And there're three-- Speaker 2: She owns, she's, she begins to write, when she fin--she realizes that she's very effective as a writer and she takes on a pen name, and not Ida B. Wells, but, I guess Iola. Speaker 1: Iola, yeah. Speaker 2: And, she writes these fiery opinion pieces and editorials about the black condition and about how Reconstruction has of course, been a failure and how black people are once again being victimized by white supremacists and the right to vote is being eroded and all that and she's writing about these kinds of matters. And there are three close friends of hers who, they get in some trouble with the local authorities because they're in competition and she sees this very clearly, one of them is the owner of a grocery store, a upstanding, righteous citizen whose only crime is that he's in competition with these whites who want this one black business, so, there's a complicated story here but the outcome of it is, is clear. What happens is that, on a particular evening the--there's a lynch mob that comes to take these young men and they lynch them and at that point, my grandmother's career as a journalist really takes off, because that's where she begins to write her first searing analyst of the structural issues behind lynching. And what she says is infuriating to the South, she says, you say lynching is about black men raping white women? She says, no. These three men were lynched not because they raped a white woman, but because they were engaged in competitive behavior with white men, and that their affront was to not be deferential, but they had displayed a kind of attitude which was an attitude of equality and that that was the source and the force of lynching, to try to intimidate a people and then to use the idea of rape as a cover for the actual lynching. Well as you can imagine this produced a lot of anger and she got hate mail and threats, death threats and on one occasion when she was out of town, she was, I think in New York, a lynch mob came and, looking for her and couldn't find her, they burned down the press and said that she had--if, if she ever came back to Memphis, that they would kill her. So that's the Memphis story. Story_ID: 123561 Speaker 1: Now did she [Ida B. Wells], during the time she was in Mississippi, do you know of any stories about her, about any, about Mound Bayou, the thriving, well not that it was necessarily thriving, but the black community that existed in Mississippi, (unclear) Speaker 2: Just to say it was a poor community but stable. There was, in our contemporary term, we think of what I often call the pathologies of crime and drugs and prostitution and those kinds of marginalized activities at the edge of the society, none of that. So this is a community which is stable, lots of nuclear family units or, even family units which are extended. My colleague Andrew Billingsley, writes about this period and he has a book about the black family, what he shows is that in this period the black family is remarkably stable, that is, that the solidity of the family is very strong, that divorce is unusual, and each of this is true for about a hundred years, 1870 to 1970, and not until 1970, that you begin to see the divorce rates, that story that you--I'm sure we will come to later, but the, the--to answer your question, more specifically, this is a period in which blacks are very much trying to model themselves around the whole idea of stability, education, community, aspiration for change after slavery, again there are no remarkable stories here because of the nature of the oppression again, for example, the right to vote is being stripped away, post-Reconstruction, and so the right to certain kinds of employment is not there, but it's a stable community and that's what you pick up from the literature and the period and from the folklore (unclear). Speaker 1: So would it be fair to say that your mother [Alfreda Barnett], your mother, your mother, all of, all of who she was basically was from the teachings of her mother [Ida B. Wells], your grandmother, so your mother having this iron fist with the velvet glove-- Speaker 2: Um-Hum. Speaker 1: --Sort of is the way she'd grown up saying her mother deal with-- Speaker 2: I think that's partly true. The other part of the course is that her father was a powerful figure so that Ida B. Wells marries a man who is himself a remarkably public figure, the owner of the newspaper in Chicago [Illinois], the owner and publisher, this is a person who went to what was to become later on, Northwestern Law School [Northwestern University School of Law, Evanston, Illinois] and become a first African American to graduate from the law school and we're talking about the 1880s here. Now, so my mother grows up in a family, she's the last of four children of that marriage, but the last of six children because Ferdinand Barnett had two children by a previous marriage before he met and married Ida B. Wells. My mother therefore, grows up in a family in which she's the youngest of six and she's learning also from her older siblings and her father, recalling that my grandmother is a public figure and is often out of the house, so part of my mother's understanding of the world comes from these four (unclear), as the daughter of Ida B. Wells going around to these various clubs and that's part of the image I was describing. But part of it is being at home in a situation which seems remarkably contemporary namely a male in the late nineteenth, early twentieth century who decides to be a supporter of a strong woman, now that's unusual in the, that period. But Ferdinand Barnett, who had been editor and publisher of a newspaper, effectively decides to retreat and to give over to his wife much of the control for the publishing and, of the articles and the editing and the writing and he decides he'll spend a lot of time at home. Story_ID: 123562 Speaker 1: Did your mother [Alfreda Barnett] ever talk about what their dail--daily lives were like? Did they, did they have any sort of repetition in their lives? Speaker 2: Not much of that in the folklore, it's mainly the, the folklore that I get from my family, especially from my mother and my aunts and uncles is the, the life of someone who is constantly in the public eye, I don't have much of a feel for the quality and character of the private life except for the idea of a strong familial bond where the siblings are all in some ways in a sequence in charge of the older sibling gets to decide when mother and father are not around, you know, what was going on, which indicates that there was solidity in the family, you know, you, you can't have that when you've got people who are going off in their separate directions, so that just tells you that it must have been a strong bond. Speaker 1: So to shift a little bit, let's talk about your father's side of the family-- Speaker 2: Um-Hum. Speaker 1: --And what you--what was your father's name and his date of, date and place of birth? Speaker 2: Okay, my father's name was Benjamin Cecil Duster, he was born in Terre Haute, Indiana, the, as best I can, de--de, again detect from some of the folklore, his family had been part of, I guess his father's or his father's father, could be grandfather was part of the free blacks who went to Canada, so one part of the story comes at this, they, they came back down from Canada after slavery was ended and another string of the family is that on his mother's side, my father's mother was apparently one half Indian [Native American], so that part of the story is also a little bit vague, but I've heard tales over the years. Speaker 1: Which tribe, do you know which tribe? Speaker 2: Cherokee, I believe. Speaker 1: Cherokee, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, (unclear) Indiana. Speaker 1: And you're saying those stories are vague, but-- Speaker 2: Yeah, they're vague, the, the stories are that, my grandmother on my father's side was either half or quarter Indian, that that wasn't part of the, you know, her conscious--consciousness, she didn't say, okay, I'm, I'm Indian, she identified as black but that was definitely a feature of her, of her biography. Speaker 1: Now, I'm just gonna jump ahead a little bit, because I just wanna hear your comment on that because a lot of, I'm finding that a lot of African Americans have some roots in the Indian, in the Native American world. Why is it do you feel that we identify more so with being black than Indian, even as far back as you were talking about now, you're saying well she identified as being black. Speaker 2: Um-Hum, I, I think the answer comes from the white world, not from the black world. Speaker 1: Even from, even Indian and black the answer still comes from the white world? Speaker 2: I think so and here's why. Because the categories that permitted people to vote or not vote or to have jobs or not have jobs were black and white categories, and so even if someone were half Indian, the one drop rule seemed to overwrite everything else. So you could be half Cherokee and half black, but you were treated as if you were fully black when you went to get a job, when you went to vote. No one said to you, well are you half Cherokee? In which case you get half a vote, (laughter), no they said, you know, you've got the one drop rule and that one drop rule, I think, overwhelms the history of, of the Seminoles or the Cherokees or the, you know, you could name another fifty or seventy tribes in which black people were very much integrated, because they lived around the, the, those Indian tribes and, and intermarried with them. But once the one drop rule is a feature of law actually, there are laws in the country about the one drop rule, that I think shapes peoples access to employment, access to voting and ultimately their identity starts to shift. Speaker 1: So your grandmother was, so, or, I mean, your father's [Benjamin Duster's] sid--side of the family, as far as you know possibly there was some Cherokee Indian? Speaker 2: And, and, the answer is very, very likely. Speaker 1: Very, very likely. Speaker 2: Because it was not just speculation, there was the question whether it was one half, or one quarter, you know, and, then this sort of vague talk and then some, some humor about it, but it, it was never a feature of either, either trying to either celebrate or to hide it, it was just regarded as a fact of my father's life, and that's why I think it's, it's not, it's, it goes beyond speculative, it was, it was just that's the way things are, no one was trying to say, you know, I'm Indian and I'm proud or I'm ashamed, it was (unclear) Indian, or part Indian. Story_ID: 123563 Speaker 1: So what other stories do you, do you know about your father's [Benjamin Duster's] life? Speaker 2: Well he was educated, he went to what was called in those years, State Normal, Indiana State Normal [School, now Indiana State University, Terre Haute, Indiana], so he got his degree and there's actually a picture of him, a family picture of him and about eight other blacks who all go to this state college together and get their teaching degrees and with this training they are entitled, they're licensed to teach high school. Apparently, this did not please my father and he decided at a certain point he wanted to do something else with his life besides be a teacher and he comes to Chicago and meets my mother's brother, Herman [Barnett] and they became very close friends. Now, Herman, had training as a lawyer, he was a lawyer, and my grandfather recalled was, had legal training. Story_ID: 123564 Speaker 1: Continuing on tape two, I want you to just tell me the location of this interview because I forgot to ask before. Speaker 2: Okay, we're at New York University [New York City, New York] and this is the Institute for the History of the Production of Knowledge. Speaker 1: And then later on I want to go back and talk about the, the title, what does, what does that mean? Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Because is it the production of knowledge writing or-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --Okay, but you were telling about your grandfather and your-- Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: --The meeting-- Speaker 2: So this is the meeting-- Speaker 1: --Meeting. Speaker 2: --The way in which my mother [Alfreda Barnett] meets her husband is through the fact that her brother Herman [Barnett], is a lawyer, is the best friend of Benjamin Duster, who is to become my father. And then, because Herman and Ben Duster were friends, my mother meets Ben Duster, I think at the law office of my grandfather. Speaker 1: Your grandfather had his own practice? Speaker 2: I don't know, whether it's his own practice or whether it's a common practice. Story_ID: 123565 Speaker 1: So they [parents Alfreda Barnett and Benjamin Duster] meet through?-- Speaker 2: They meet and again, they have a courtship, get married and the marriage apparently it, it's not one which makes everybody happy. Speaker 1: Who's not happy? Speaker 2: I think Herman [Barnett], (laughter) I think my uncle doesn't really like the fact that his best friend, and his sister are-- Speaker 1: Is it only--is it because his best friend was only a teacher and he wanted his sister to marry a lawyer? Speaker 2: --That part is the story is not clear, but it could well be just the kind of possessive thing that happens with brothers and sisters.-- Speaker 1: Yeah, know one's good enough for my sister. Speaker 2: That's it, you got it, a little bit of that and there was a period in which I think Herman goes off to California and ma--many years go by and then there's finally a reconciliation, but, but he--years go by and they become friends again. But, it, it took some time. Speaker 1: So, he and your mother divorced? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: No, they did not? Speaker 2: No, no, no, Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No, no, no, they stayed married for all the period that my father was alive. My father died in 1954, at the age, no, pardon me, 1945, at the age of 54. Speaker 1: So he was young. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Relatively young. How many siblings do you have? How many children did they have? Speaker 2: Four. Speaker 1: They have four? Speaker 2: And then in what order, give me the order. Speaker 1: Okay,-- Speaker 2: And then how do you-- Speaker 1: The birth order is my oldest brother Benjamin was born in, I think 1927, second brother Charles, 1929, third brother Donald, 1932, my sister, Alfreda, born 1934, and I'm the youngest, 1936, Speaker 2: So they were having all of these children during the [Great] Depression? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: How were they able to survive? Speaker 1: Barely, it was a depression and my father, I think it was handling it sort of, with not great skill. Now my grandfather [Ferdinand Barnett] had been a man of privilege, remember he was the owner and publisher of a newspaper and he owned property in Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 2: But let me just connect this also. And your grandfather's father had, he, his father had been white because he is, is that the same Wells that sp-- Speaker 1: No, no, this is dif--this is the other side of the family. Speaker 2: Oh, this is the other side, okay. Speaker 1: This is my, this is my grandfather. Speaker 2: Okay, your grandfather. Speaker 1: So this is Ferdinand Barnett. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Grandmother is Wells. Speaker 2: Right, okay. Speaker 1: Her father-- Speaker 2: Was Ted Wells. Speaker 1: Was Jam--was Jim Wells, who was the son of the plantation owner, but now we're talking about my grandfather (simultaneous) Speaker 2: Grandfather, right, okay. Speaker 1: On my mother's side. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And I think however, you're discerning something here because Ferdinand Barnett, was very light skinned and one of the family folklores which is that, at least a generation or two back befo--there's a white woman who is the, either the grandmother or the mother of Ferdinand Barnett, he's very light skinned. He almost quote, in those days as they say, "passed" (simultaneous) for white. Speaker 2: Did he? Speaker 1: No. Never did, always identified as black. Speaker 2: Do you have any, any of your ancestors, did any of these people pass for white? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: Are there any folklore about people who did? Speaker 1: There's none. No one in my family, I think most, with the exception of my grandfather, no one could, could've passed for white, so it was--wasn't even an issue, it wasn't a question. Story_ID: 123566 Speaker 1: So your grandfather [Ferdinand Barnett], let's talk about him-- Speaker 2: On my? Speaker 1: Mother's side. Speaker 2: Mother's side? Speaker 1: Right, the one who is very fair skinned. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Light skinned, what, what else do you know about him? Speaker 2: Well, he actually ran for state office, attorney general of Illinois. Speaker 1: What was his name? Speaker 2: Ferdinand. Speaker 1: Ferdinand. Speaker 2: Barnett. (Simultaneous) Speaker 1: Ferdinand Barnett. Speaker 2: And according to the--again, the folklore, he actually won and then they had the Chicago [Illinois] recount of the vote and he lost, I guess 1898, somewhere in there, but this is part of the historical record one can go back and check those things. Yeah. Speaker 1: So that's, that's incredible that you have that history within the family to live up to. Speaker 2: Well, I have not live up to, but it's certainly a feature of all of our consciousness. You know. Speaker 1: And then you kept it hidden for so long. Okay, so continuing to move forward-- Speaker 2: Um-Hum. Speaker 1: --And the siblings, at, at this point, when the sib--you, you're born during the [Great] Depression, has your mother and father living in Chicago? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Now, what part of Chicago are they living? Speaker 2: The near south side, 32nd [Street] and Prairie [Avenue], you know, Chicago, it's about four miles right to the south of the Loop, very close to Lake Michigan, so it's very much the black community. And when I grew up in Chicago, it was by that time an all-black community. I was hit, let's see, my high school was, had one person in it who was not black, Frank Wong, (unclear) my high school, his father owned the restaurant on Cermak Road, Chinese restaurant. So Chicago had become by that point, totally (unclear) segregated by the time I grew up. Speaker 1: So, what are your earliest memories of Chicago growing up before high school? Do you have any? Speaker 2: Oh yes, it was tough. It was, you know, it wasn't, wasn't gangs in the since of contemporary drugs and, but, you know, life on the streets felt dangerous, you know, you--who you were, you left your particular turf, you moved out of your zone after about three or four blocks and, you knew you might run up against another group of people who thought you were on their turf, so, yeah, Chicago, a very tough town to live, to grow up in. Speaker 1: And why is, why is it, why do you think it was so tough? Was it because so many blacks had moved from the South and they were fighting to get wh--what they could for themselves? Why was there so much inter fighting in Chicago during that time? Speaker 2: You know, I don't have a good answer to that question. I just know that young men in their teens and many cultures have this notion of turf and it happens all the time and they grow out of it, but there's a period, you know, when you, when you're growing up, you just know, you don't cross over certain bou--boundaries and you don't enter the other person's area of turf, it happens all over the, all over the country. Story_ID: 123567 Speaker 1: So, that was your experience in Chicago [Illinois] during those years? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: What was some of the other experiences you had in Chicago growing up in the early days, and we're talking about the '40s [1940s] and '50s [1950s]? Speaker 2: Um-Hum. Well, school-- Speaker 1: I mean describe for me this, the, the street, let's start with the st--the neighborhood and the street that you lived on, so your own turf, can you describe that for me? Who were your neighbors, who were your friends, what games did you play? Speaker 2: Um-Hum. Well, it was, it was a relatively stable street life, that is you, you knew all the neighbors. Speaker 1: Were they all, were there mainly two parents in the homes?-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --At this time? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So you grew up in an area, and in a part of Chicago where there are two family, two-parent households? Speaker 2: Yes. Or some-- Speaker 1: And that was the norm? Speaker 2: That was the norm. Speaker 1: Um-Hum. Speaker 2: Right. It's not until 1970, if you remember what I said earlier-- Speaker 1: Sure. Speaker 2: --That, Andy Billingsley documents the dismantlement of the black family. By 1965 even, over, I think two thirds of the blacks are living in families where there's a nuclear unit, a mother and father. By the 1970s, I think '80s [1980s], it falls to about 40 percent, so there is a sharp drop of four hundred years of stability and then the '60s [1969s], and '70s [1970s] hit and the black family is decimated. The story about why that's true is interesting, but I grew up in a situation which was very much prior to the decimation of the black family, where in my neighborhood, if you strayed even too far in terms of certain norms, the cliche is right, people down the street would come and tell your mother, and then of course you would be in trouble because, Mrs. Green, had come over to tell Mrs. Wilson, about what you had done, who, who then te--tell your mother, who knew your mother. It was that kind of thing. And so, there were, really neighborhood controls all around you, that's when you moved outside of your turf, you were, there're more, for--therefore more fraught because no one knew who you were, you see, so when strangers came into our neighborhood, people thought, well these are strangers, you know, we, we knew that. Speaker 1: So describe for me the street you lived on? Speaker 2: A single family dwellings. Almost all of them, we lived in a single family dwelling, and there were four bedrooms, very small cottage, very small rooms, except for the kitchen, which was very large and that was sort of the place where people gathered, also around the card table in the living room and it was remarkably, but coherent life in the sense that we all were good students, we all did our homework around that table. My mother very much, preached and practiced the notion that education was, was assumed, and wasn't something you aspired to, it was assumed. So, we assumed we were all going to college, it was, it's only question is which college you were going to. That was the only question in my household. Now, now each of us, all five of us were good students and each of us earned scholastic scholarships, not, we were not on athletic scholarships, we were all on scholastic scholarships. Speaker 1: And you make that distinction because? Speaker 2: Because when I was, went to Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois], the blacks who were there tended to be on athletic scholarships, people assumed I was on an athletic scholarship, they assumed that I must be a, either a football player or basketball player and when I told them I was on a scholarship they said, oh, what kind? What they meant was, basketball or football, (laughter), I said no, this is a scholastic scholarship and all my siblings had that experience, because we had this training in, in the home, in the home. Story_ID: 123568 Speaker 1: Now, let me tell you a little bit about what dual life was like, because I said the streets were tough and the home was the, what? Haven, a safe place, so we ha--we all had to live it in some ways dual lives and we had to navigate the streets, each of us had the same, the same problem but, each of us had our different skill levels, but, you know, we had to either be at the edge of this kind of life and on the streets and in the school situation and I, I'll tell you a story which is, I think emblematic of the way I've learned the way the world works. Each of my four siblings, before me had been of the same school [Wendell Phillips Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois], each of them, they'd all been good students, for example, my oldest brother was valedictorian of his high school class, second brother, valedictorian, third brother, number two, sal--salutatorian, sister, salutatorian, so there you have four in a row, either number one or number two in their high school class, so the reputation of my family was, we were good students. Okay, so here's the story, I come along and people assume, well one of 'ems gonna be the black sheep, that was the li--that was the line, you know, it's gotta be me 'cause the other four had done, done so well, but, I was a pretty good student but, I was what they call now, a code switcher, that is I could both speak the language of the school and of the streets, I can't anymore, but that, you know, when I was a kid I could code switch and I got pretty good at it so, I could signify, you know, with, with the worst of them, with the best of them, I wasn't that good at it but I knew what the rules were, I knew what to s--what the language games were. So, one day I was in this role called, the head of the class, captain of the boys, I was supposed to, at a certain hour have the boys line up and go to the library and Mrs. Jackson, who was the instructor said, all right Troy, at three o'clock I want you to do this, and I said fine, I do it all the time. She left went around to the library and at a certain hour and a certain point, ten past the hour, I got up and I did my code switch, which was I acted out what would be the equivalent now of some kind of ruckus hip hop. We didn't have hip hop, but there was an equivalent and I knew enough to be able to do some things, and there was a stony silence suddenly, and everyone in the classroom froze because Mrs. Jackson suddenly appeared in the doorway, she said Troy Duster, you are a disgrace, you're a disgrace to your family, the Duster name, you know, you're to go to the back of the class, so I did of course, I mean, I had my punishment. But here's the part of the story that's fascinating, I suddenly became a culture hero. To a certain part of the class, this moment where I was quote, getting my comeuppance by being the one who was cut, cut down, I was celebrated, so the world looked very strange to me, you know, the very thing that had gotten me in trouble was now getting me some credits from the street side, now there's a lesson there somewhere, I'm not sure what it is, there's a metaphor, but I learned about the, the problematic nature of social status at a very early age. That depending upon what group you're in, your status can change based upon the exact same behavior and it happened with me in a moment, a split second, when Mrs. Jackson said, you're a disgrace to your family. Well, I may have been for that moment for her, but for these other people I was, you know, bad boy, that bad boy's a good boy. (Laughter). Now that story, people have said to me well that maybe why you became a sociologist, I don't wanna be reductionist, well, I, I do think there's something to it. And there's some--there's something about the world being fluid, you know, not solid-- Speaker 2: What year did this happen? I just want to put that in. Speaker 1: Let's see, I'm probably, let's see, six, seven, I'm in the sixth grade-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --Which just means I'm probably around eleven or twelve (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --Twelve, yeah. Speaker 1: --Twelve years old. Speaker 2: So, that's like 1948? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 123569 Speaker 1: So, at that time, I mean, and now I'm speaking to you as a sociologist, did they have such thing as acting white? Now were-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --Were the smart kids-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --Considered white? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Because it, so, so no. So you're-- Speaker 2: No, but I wa--I was regarded as, as were my siblings as brainy, so that th-this was, this was both a term of grudging respect and a li--little bit of distancing, but it wasn't acting white, it was--at no point were we ever accused of acting white-- Speaker 1: Which is what it is today. Speaker 2: --For many kids. Speaker 1: For many kids. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: But that story was a turning point for you because-- Speaker 2: A turning point of my understanding. I--It, it didn't turn me around in terms of being more, either deviant or, you know, headed toward the streets. Speaker 1: But it showed you that you could, that you--what did it show you? Speaker 2: That social status is very much a feature of combinations of chance and circumstance and what groups you're in. And while you could theorize that, it's something different to experience it. Speaker 1: Well one thing you said that I wanna go back to, you said that your, your mother's house, you said the kitchen was big and around that table people gathered and-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: What? I wanna know who gathered-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --And what did they do at that table? Speaker 2: Yes, kids from the neighborhood would come to, to play and to study. I had, I had three or four close friends and the rules were all about studying. So, my mother had the notion that you can come and spend time here but, you do your homework here around this table, so these friends would come and study. We would have test, quizzes around the table and these were the same ones, who on the streets would be, you know, doing some things at the edge (laughter) but at, in my house, in my mother's house, you studied. Speaker 1: What sorts of things did you see your mother [Alfreda Barnett] doing around that table? Speaker 2: She was often the one who gave us the advice and she'd, she would sometimes interpret the readings for us, she was after all herself, college-educated. Speaker 1: Did your mother bring the outside community into that table? Was it a meeting place for the community events, like--? Speaker 2: Not very much. Speaker 1: Not very much. Speaker 2: My mother did a lot of work for people in the community, but it was on a one by one basis. She often, for example, would do peoples taxes at tax time or she would mimeograph the sermons for the local preachers. So, she was a very much, she was a community person, but not community in the sense that people gathered at the house, they came one, one by one. Story_ID: 123570 Speaker 1: Well, what was your sense of race in 1948, in the country and going to an all-black school [Wendell Phillips Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] and having, I mean, at this point, I guess you didn't know much about your grandmother's [Ida B. Wells'] history, or, or what it meant? Speaker 2: I, I, I knew a little, but not much, it was part of the folklore early on. Speaker 1: What was your concept of race? Speaker 2: Race was that, just the way life is. Black people here on the South Side, they lived together and you occasionally came across a white person who owned a grocery store down the street or who owned the shoe store, Mr. Dubie [ph.], owned the shoe store, and my brother Donald worked for him, later on I would get the job as a shoe boy right there in Mr. Dubie's shop and that's just the way the world was. Some people had owned they own shops and they, they were white, the school teachers, they were, and my high school, and my--also my grammar school, there were some white school teachers and that was regarded as normal to have a white school teacher, that wasn't regarded as abnormal. And, and race was just, it wasn't part of the notion, we all new about race, in that you knew there're certain parts of town you shouldn't go to like Cicero, every black person in Chicago knew not to go to Cicero. Speaker 1: Why would you not go to Cicero? Speaker 2: Well because it was known to be a place where, that was like the Klu Klux Klan, that's where you get, you got, got caught there, you get beaten up by this, this gang of white toughs and that was part of the folklore, so you knew that there was--Chicago was turf, certain part of the town was Polish town, Greek town, (unclear) where the Italians lived, and where the blacks lived and that was just normal. Speaker 1: Now when you were a kid, did you ever go back to Mississippi to visit during the summers? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: You never spent any time in Mississippi Speaker 2: Never went to Mississippi until I was a full adult. Speaker 1: What did you hear about Mississippi? Because your grandmother had--your mother's mother had been born a slave in Mississippi. Speaker 2: Well, what I heard was what happened to mit--Emmett Till [murdered 1955]. Speaker 1: So you did, (unclear) when, when Emmett Till happened you were a teenager? Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right. It's very much a feature of my consciousness, the Emmett Till story. I was right there in Chicago when it happened and talk about the way in which this both mesmerized and mobilized people around the issue of race that was it, because Emmett Till had been right there in the community-- Speaker 1: He lived on the South Side? Speaker 2: Yeah. You bet, and what he had done of course is now part of the understanding of the culture, he'd gone down to Mississippi, to the South and done this thing which got him killed, which was that he whistled at a white woman, well there are historians who say that this was one of the great moments in the transformation of consciousness of-- Speaker 1: For the country. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Certainly for you. Speaker 2: Certainly for me because Life magazine had this spread out cover, oh, not the cover the centerfold, and the centerfold was these twelve white jurors who were laughing and guffawing and scratching themselves like this and it said, not guilty, so that they had put the--they accused people of having done this, committed this murder, but here was the story said that, you, you don't go to prison for killing a black kid for whistling at a white woman, that's okay. Story_ID: 123571 Speaker 1: What do you remember hap--what do you remember, like you're the first eyewitness, or not eyewitness but first person I've ever talked to who lived in Chicago [Illinois], who, you know, from that part of time, Emmett Till, what do you remember Chicago being like, your neighborhood when pictures of Emmett Till came back? Speaker 2: Barbershop conversations, st--street corner conversations, it was the buzz that this had happened. Again, that he, that he was killed-- Speaker 1: But it, it'd happened that he was killed, but I also wanted to know what were you guys talking about, what were you gonna do about it? Speaker 2: It was mainly not that he was killed (unclear) but people got agitated. The agitation came over the verdict, in some ways it was like the flip side of the [1994] O.J. [Simpson] verdict, you know, when, when, Nicole [Simpson] is killed, that's not the story, yes, for the country. The story is when O.J. is on trial and when the verdict comes down, well, the same with Emmett Till. His death was what happens, you know, you're in the South, you do this kind of thing, you--you're killed. What was transformative, what mobilized people, what got people thinking in new ways was the verdict, that not guilty after only a few hours of deliberation and then the, the Life magazine centerfold of these twelve white guys laughing at the idea that one could be brought to justice for killing a black kid. That's what was the source of anger, anguish, mobilization, you know, barbershop stuff, again people get killed all the time, so it wasn't the killing of Nicole, it was the verdict (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Verdict. Speaker 2: --That when O.J. is let off, whew, or when Rodney King's [1992] beating, right? People got angry at the beating but think about the sequence of Rodney King and O.J., that anger erupts at the moment that the system of justice is seen as corrupted. That's when you get people really going and it happened with Emmett Till. Story_ID: 123572 Speaker 1: So, in '55 [1955], was Emmett Till and '54 [1954], Brown versus the Board of Ed [Brown v. the Board of Education of Topeka]. What--were you in high school at this time or in co--what were you? Speaker 2: No, it's a great, it's a great story about where I was at the time of Brown v. Board. All five of our, all five of my siblings, all four of my siblings and, and me as the fifth, had gone to school and a situation in which we were very good students and in our--in grade school, we were ca--called jumped, and jumped twice. So we were always the youngest person in our class, so I was twelve when I finished grade school, sixteen when I finished high school and it was true for all of my siblings, okay? Now, that's important for the story because when we get to 1954, I'm in my second year, May 17, I'm at the end of my first year of college, I'm just, you know, seventeen, I'm standing in the cafeteria line and some-- Speaker 1: At Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois]? Speaker 2: --At Northwestern, and so-- Speaker 1: Which was, which was a white school? Speaker 2: --7,300 students of whom seven were black. So, I'm standing in line and one of my white friends taps me on the shoulder and says, have you heard the news today, I said, no, what's the news? He said, Supreme Court just ruled segregation is illegal, and he said, must be a great day for you and your people. Flash forward forty years, I'm by this time, I'm a professor, University of California, Berkeley, and I'm invited back to Kansas [sic], Kansas City, Missouri, to do what? To study the school system which is not yet desegregated, there's a court order, the federal court has taken over the Kansas City schools, put it in their receivership, has a court master and they're gonna study the system, they're putting in, into the sys--Kansas City school system hundreds of millions of dollars because the intercity is totally black, they're trying to attract whites from the suburbs in the city to quote "integrate it". This is forty years post '54[1954], it is 1994. I wanna tell the story because two years later, I'm sitting in my office in Berkeley and I get a memo, it's right after Prop 209, the end of affirmative action, and the memo says, on November morning the next day after the election when Prop 209 is passed ending affirmative action, it says from the president's office, we are in full compliance with 209, University of California has just ended affirmative action. So, I tell those three stories in sequence. Why? All deliberate speed was Brown v Board of Education, '54 [1954], and someone says to me, must be a great day for your people, he doesn't think of that it might be a great day for white people, that they get the opportunity to have an education, that's much more full, rounded, holistic in a society which has been remarkably segregated, (unclear) my people, all deliberate speed? No. But forty years go by, Kansas City is still segregated to the point where they have to do a study of it, and put it in receivership, and then in 1996, when California's Prop 209 passes, within twenty-four hours we are in full compliance. That's not all deliberate speed, that's blinding speed. Story_ID: 123573 Speaker 1: Yeah, so in 1954, when I'm, I'm first told about the Supreme Court decision, the language is, we're going to desegregate with all deliberate speed. Forty years go by and '94 [1994], I'm invited to look at a situation in Kansas [sic, Kansas City, Missouri] in which there's still no desegregation, there is now the Federal Judiciary has taken over the school system, put it into receivership as a court master, why? Because they can't get school integration, two years later, 1996, California passes Prop 209, to end Affirmative Action and rather than taking deliberate speed, within twenty-four hours, I get a memo from the president saying, we are in full compliance with 209, California has just ended Affirmative Action, in the period right after that, my colleagues sent in notes to the Chancellor's office saying it's about time, about time we get rid of this thing called Affirmative Action, these were department chairs and these notes which are, were reviewed by my friend and colleague who was vice chancellor, he said were quite striking, you know, people were, had been sitting on this anger for fifteen, twenty, thirty years, post Affirmative Action, are now feeling entitled. Well, let's go back to my Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois] experience, because that's where I learned a lot about American society, that's where I learned for example, that coming out of Wendell Phillips High School [Chicago, Illinois] which had been 99.9 percent African American, I crossed that summer and I crossed into a whole new world of 99.9 percent white. So I go from May '53 [1953], all-black high school on the all-black Chicago South Side, I cross over to the North Side and I'm one of seven black students on a campus of 7,300 whites, now ordinarily one--one would call that culture shock, but because of my experience on the streets of Chicago, remember my code switching? That came in handy, I mean, I was able to do both, I was able to both be a student at Northwestern and then come back on the weekends or sometimes for a period to the South Side of Chicago and I didn't have any trouble with that, I mean, I, I, I didn't see it as schizophrenic, I didn't see it as schizo, and I just thought, well that's the way life is, sometimes you're in an all-white world, sometimes you're in an all-black world and I didn't regard it as abnormal. And the same way code switching for me had not been a real problem on the streets of Chicago and, and in high school and in my grammar school, when I get to Northwestern, however, I learned things which are going to really turn me around, my purpose had been to go and become a journalist-- Story_ID: 123574 Speaker 1: And I spent the first few years doing news editorial work, then I went in the, the what was called television and radio news and what that meant was rewriting the news copy for those who were gonna be in front of a camera, because in those years, it was not even considered possible that an African American would be in front of a camera. This was (unclear) as 1956, '57 [1957], and the only people you saw in front of the TV cameras were white. Speaker 2: Period. Speaker 1: Period. I mean, even, you, if you, if you were in Brazil or Mexico now, you have the same phenomenon, you, you're, you have people in Salvador and Bahia, the, the actual society maybe 50 percent black, but on television there're only white newscasters or white soap opera stars and so on. That was Chicago [Illinois] in 1955, so there I was in news editorial work and then television work but I was always gonna be in the person in the back room writing the, the script and I had all these lessons that I'd learned, you know, not, not from books but from the, from my colleagues, from my friends, from my, my peers, one of the first things I learned was about differentiation among what I thought were just white people. So my first year, someone comes up to me and says, you know, you, you and I are on the same page, I really appreciate the fact that, you know, we--you, you and I have to share these things in common, and I think now, what's this person talking about? And he said, I, I'm Jewish he said, and then he gave me a social history of Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois], he said over here are the all-Jewish fraternities, you see Jews can't go into the gentile fraternities, he gave me a quick historiography and a, a geography of the map of the social world of Northwestern in which working-class kids were over in these kinds of scenes, the upper middle class kids were over here, the what do you call the, WASP, White Anglo-Saxon Protestants were in certain fraternities and I just thought people were in these categories called white and black, (laughter). And in a very short period I understand that there is visceral anger amongst certain people, towards Irish, Italians, towards Jews, towards Poles, towards working-class white people at the, at this, you know, what I thought in my world in Chicago was a black-white world, was now a much more heterogeneous, richly, variegated and diverse scene. And I think that was why I begin to do well in sociology, 'cause that was a discipline that begin to talk about these things, about the ways in which societies are stratified. Story_ID: 123575 Speaker 1: So, if we take a few steps back to, before you get to Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois] who, and I know you attribute a lot to your mom [Alfreda Barnett]-- Speaker 2: Uh-hum. Speaker 1: --At that round table at home, but who were the teachers that may have inspired you in elementary school, in high school, who were the teachers that you looked up too, who were the role models? Speaker 2: The answer is about three or four, my mother, my mother, my mother, and my mother. She was a teacher, role model, she was extraordinary supportive, let me back up a little bit, and tell you a little bit about my mother, because I didn't talk about her in terms of her education. Now, she was the last child of this rather famous couple [Ida B. Wells and Ferdinand Barnett] and she was a good student and she went to the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] where she got a degree in philosophy, she was one of four black students in the 1920s, in an otherwise all white University of Chicago. Speaker 1: I'm sorry, can you just go back and say that again because I missed it, it was four students-- Speaker 2: There were only-- Speaker 1: --Four? Speaker 2: --My mother was only one of about four black students-- Speaker 1: --At the University (simultaneous) Speaker 2: --University of Chicago back in the early 1920s, and she would tell the story about how she could not play tennis except on one day of the week because that's when blacks were allowed to play tennis, was not allowed to go into the swimming pool at the University of Chicago because she was black, and all these rules. Speaker 1: At all? Speaker 2: At all. She later on became a member of the Alumni Association at the Uni--University of Chicago and she would love to tell them, year--years later about what it was like back in the, the '20s [1920s]. So, my mother knew all these things, you know, she had be--she was college educated and this is why again, I was saying it was assumed that we would all go to college, it, it wasn't the question of you do or you don't, you just-- Speaker 1: Went. Speaker 2: --Pick your college-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --Pick your college. So by the time, you know, we're talking about emphasizes on my life in terms of school teachers, no one school teacher comes even close to the force of the trajectory of my life into college, as my mother. Because we would do homework at my home with, neighborhood kids and my mother and she was the one, it wasn't so much the school teachers. Story_ID: 123576 Speaker 1: So, when you were in elementary school or in high school [Wendell Phillips Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois], you, I read that you were the editor of the high school newspaper? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So you always had a, a zest for writing and-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --Becoming a journalist. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: And where did that come from? Speaker 2: Well, you know, I wouldn't want to argue it's in the DNA, I think if that were true then all my siblings would've headed toward journalism, I'm the only one who did. My oldest brother became an attorney, second brother became an architect, third brother became an executive in Commonwealth Edison [power company] in Chicago, my sister became a special educator in the school system of Los Angeles [California]. So there you have four examples of people who didn't become journalist, so when people hear that I was becoming a journalist, they say well it must be because of, with the genes, I say well wait a minute, you're talking to a sociologist here, something about the nature about my experience, and here I do think birth order does matter, I mean, I think I did become much more of the observer of my situation, you know, when you're the fifth of five children, you grew up in a family where other things are happening around you and before you and you have to make sense of it. If you're the first born, you know, the world revolves around you and so you just have taken it for granted, by the time you're the, the, the fifth born, you're trying to figure out all these different actors in the world, there are all these sick people, so I think there's maybe more there in me becoming a journalist or the observer and the, the attempt to make sense of the world is the sociologist in me so that, and there're two, two parts here, the observer, the analyst, the journalist, and sociologist that come I think, out of this family experience. Speaker 1: So you graduated Phillips, was it Phillips High School? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Number one in your class? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And do you remember graduation? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Being valedictorian-- Speaker 2: I remember it all. Speaker 1: --Do you remember your speech? Speaker 2: I remember it all. Speaker 1: What did you talk about? Speaker 2: (Laughter), You know, nothing memorable, there, there, when, when you're valedictorian you're, you, you sort of want to get through the night, you know, just get, just get to the point where it's all over and I, I talked about the future and the ways which obviously, would now seem to me like cliches, -- Speaker 1: But tell me, what was, what, what did, did you talk about race?-- Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: And dreams, what did you talk about? Speaker 2: I talked about how our, our years at Phillips, our year, years at the high school would, would be valued, that we didn't appreciate it at the time but I, I, I said to the class that in, you know, in fifteen, twenty years you'll look back on this experience much like, let's say if you had been forced to learn the piano when you're, you know, eight or ten , you hated it at the time, but you can appreciate it when you're, you know, thirty-five. I said at the time, you know, a lot of us were going through this experience of reading these books and we didn't think it was gonna be valuable and I said, what we'll find is that this educational foundation is the basis of that which will provide a remarkably good trajectory in the future. So, it--I was simply, you know, doing what you supposed to at graduation, which is to provide a little idea of a lift. Speaker 1: So was Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois] your first choice?-- Speaker 2: Yes.-- Speaker 1: --Or did you have-- Speaker 2: No.-- Speaker 1: --Scholarships from other universities as well? Speaker 2: --I had other scholarships but Northwestern wa--was my first choice. I, because of journalism, it was regarded as one of the four top schools in the country in journalism, still is. Story_ID: 123577 Speaker 1: Now did you have a sense of what you would write about after you came [to Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois]-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --Okay, tell me. Speaker 2: I, my, my ear--early hope is that I think every teenager's dream, I was gonna be a sports writer, (laughter). Speaker 1: A sports writer (laughter) Speaker 2: You know, get to all the games for free and write about them. Speaker 1: Okay, now, now--let me, let's talk about that for a minute, so here it was you, had to, to differentiate yourself from people who were at Northwestern on a sports scholarship, but you wanted to write about sports, did that come across as being black or? Speaker 2: It came across for me as being an opportunity, you know, I always saw writing, especially writing with skill as something which would be valued which I, I can do, and so unlike news editorial wor--pardon me, television work, which I felt I was prohibited from doing, I felt I could write and get some kind of good job and affirmation for good writing while, what they called talent, you know, the, I, I heard the term talent for the first time used this way. Talent was someone that was sort of in front of the camera, Dan Rather is talent. Speaker 1: Talent, yeah. Speaker 2: And the people who are behind, writing all that stuff that he's reading, that, that, those were the actual workers of, in the vineyards, right? Speaker 1: The reporters? Speaker 2: Yeah, right. So, I knew that I wasn't going to be talent, but I could write and I felt that as the years went by at Northwestern, it became clearer and clearer to me, I wanted to write for a larger audience than simply a sports audience and the question was, well, what kind of thing would I be writing? And that's where my educational training in sociology as--it was my, it was my minor field, I was a jour--journalist mayor, but a sociology minor and then in my last year at Northwestern, some events happened which would reshape my life. Speaker 1: What events? Speaker 2: Well, in particular Speaker 1: there was a crash, an elevated train crash in Chicago, and the, the motorman was pinned into the cabin, there were a few people who were seriously injured and he was pinned into the cabin in such a way that the metal was pinned into his thigh and, and they couldn't just cut the metal out because, as you know, metal conducts heat, so they had to find a certain kind of a tool to go way back and then bend the metal out and come (unclear) that took about an hour. So while he was pinned into the cabin, the reporters arrived and most of the reporters three out of the four put a cam--put a little microphone in front of him and said, you know, what does it feel like to be in, or whatever they ask you these silly questions, the NBC reporter refused, he felt it was unethical to do this. The next day, in my journalism class, the professor who was an NBC program person came to class and told the story and he was livid with anger about this NBC reporter who chose to not go in with this microphone and do the interview. And he said things like it was professionally irresponsible, you know, he should have done it. Well, almost all the class, (unclear) thirty-thirty-five students didn't challenge the professor, but I did along with my two buddies. Speaker 2: Now, I, I--just give me a perspective. Everyone's white but you? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Or your two buddies are black and? Speaker 1: No, everyone's white but me, even, even, even my, even my two friends. Speaker 2: (laughter) Okay. Speaker 1: Jack Doyle [ph.] and Richard Detrost [ph.], are, are white. We're, we're roommates. Speaker 2: And I'm assuming all the reporters are white that showed up-- Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: --At the train, okay. Speaker 1: That's right. This was 1956, right. They would all have been white. So, the instructor says what he says about this as being un--unprofessional activity, and the three of us get into this argument with him and we're saying no, maybe there're other values besides getting the news, maybe the--this person was in pain and he saw that and didn't wanna, you know, he felt it was, un--un--unfair, he was pinned in, he couldn't move, and it didn't matter we--whether we were right or wrong, the point is the escalation of anger on both sides, he--this professor got angrier and angrier with the, with the three of us. At a certain point, we got contentious because we were, you know, smart-ass college students and we said things like, where you're talking about professional ethics, you know, he used the analogy to a surgeon whose cutting into a body, you have to be professional and we said well, at least surgeons are cutting into a body 'cause they wanna produce health, you know, this--this was not about health, this was about, you know, yellow journalism. This is about simply sensationalism, he got angry and angrier until finally he said to us, if that's the way you feel, get out of the profession, get out of it now. And that was a turning point, all three of us left the profession within about three months, all three of us. Jack Doyle went and became a--he went into economics and became actually--and, and investment banking, Doyle--Richard Detrost became an expert on health and medicine and as an analyst for the government and I left and became a sociologist-- Story_ID: 123578 Speaker 1: Why a sociologist? Speaker 2: I was actually, here's where men--mentorship and professors do matter a lot, because I told the story to a couple of my professors in sociology. Speaker 1: About the fight. Speaker 2: About what happened. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: And, one of them, my mentor, Raymond Mack [ph.] said, come to the sociology, we have a little spot for you, and he introduced me to Wendell [ph.] Bell, who's about to go to UCLA [University of California - Los Angeles], on some kind of a, like a player deal, and Wendell Bell had, had me in a class and he knew me and he said, well, come with me to UCLA, I said what? He said yeah, you know, you can b--have a graduate assistantship just like that. I got a letter from UCLA, I was invited to come to graduate school to study for a PhD, all because Raymond Mack and Wendell Bell, two professors who had both had me in class said, we think you have so--potential and talent in sociology, come to g--get a PhD. Now, I knew what a PhD was, but I didn't have any idea that it was gonna happen to me, I mean I felt like okay, I'll be a writer, I mean, I'll get, I'll go--ma--maybe I'll go to grad school, maybe I won't, but I didn't have a clue about what, what it meant to go on and get a PhD. And certainly the--all the years of training, you know, seemed like they were, you know, endless and intimidating, but here were these two people who were both convinced this would be something which I could and would and should do, and they turned out to be right. You know, I went to UCLA-- Speaker 1: What year did you graduate Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois]? Speaker 2: '57 [1957], went to UCLA in the fall of '57 [1957]. So my life has been this series of, you know, dramatic moments, where I go from the all black high school to the all-white college in '53 [1953], overnight and then in '57 [1957], I leave Chicago [Illinois] for the first time and come out to Los Angeles [California] to go to school at UCLA, leaving a rather, rather kind of secure, sinecure of a private [as in secluded] small [public] university for this large urban scene of Los Angeles and UCLA, you know, two thousand miles from anything that I've known that, and it certainly was not like home. But that really was, I mean, it--if I would've characterized any one period in my life in which it was trema--transformative, it was those two years at UCLA. Speaker 1: And they were because? Speaker 2: I was suddenly around people who were intellectuals, who-- Speaker 1: African American intellectuals? Speaker 2: --Some of them. Speaker 1: Or just in general? Speaker 2: In general. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, I was not, I h--had been playing with these ideas about writing, but I didn't know, I'd be in these seminars, in my first year, and people be talking about (unclear) and, you know, [Fyodor] Dostoevsky, and they would go back and forth between great thinkers and great ideas and contemporary developments and I was like, watching a ping pong match, I didn't kno--I didn't have a clue, but I was impressed with their agility, their facility, their intellectual breath, I didn't find it offensive, I found it interesting, I found it fascinating, but I was the observer again. And I wanted to know more about what they knew and so they would bring me along, why? Because I was the young kid, remember I got my-- Speaker 1: You were the youngest because you'd been skipped so many-- Speaker 2: Yeah, right, I was twenty years old when I left, got to UCLA and my first, I was a graduate student at twenty-one, as a teaching assistant and my quote students, were also twenty and twenty-one (laughter), you know. And there's a funny story there about my meeting, who later on become a lifelong friend, Russ Ellis, who is a great track star, African American track star, he was in the same class with me, he was the same age, but I was the graduate student, he was the undergraduate and I, I would not let him forget it. (Laughter) Story_ID: 123579 Speaker 1: But yeah, that was a period in which I would say the greatest shift in my consciousness occurred about the nature and character of social life in America, understanding for the first time race and racism from a perspective that made sense to me. Speaker 2: And what perspective was it that made it make sense to you? Like how did it make sense to you then, had it, and in ways that it had not before? Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Good. Remember before UCLA [University of California - Los Angeles], I'm, I'm living a normal life in the sense that, first sixteen years are in Chicago [Illinois], all-black community, but it's a sinecure it's home, it's family, it's taken for granted, next four years I'm in an all-white community [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois], but it's a sinecure it's a small scene, I--I'm, I'm, I'm almost in a bubble, the thing about UCLA was, I was outside the bubble and for--I crossed the country in an old 1949 Mercury and I learned firsthand about motels and where you can and can't stay-- Speaker 2: Did your encounter-- Speaker 1: --And I'm being told all over the country, I'm tired of being told, no, no, there's no room at this motel, when obviously there was and three or four of those occasions I simply would sleep by the side of the road and in my car and in Missouri the cops would tell me, you--now you, you, you can't sleep by the side of the road, you have to find a motel. So, I would tell them, I, I just tried three motels and they all said no, they said that's not our problem, you can't sleep here. And so the cops would keep me going, okay, so my cocoon had been sheltered. I get to UCLA, I'm looking for housing, for the first month and a half, I'm assuming I can find an apartment somewhere and I finally find, of course, in the black community, but not near UCLA, where I'm going to school. So, I've gotta commute way from a certain part of Los Angeles [California], which is about fifteen miles away, to get to UCLA, so this is what I mean by, I--I'm suddenly in a world in which the reality of segregation in housing, the reality of exclusion from public accommodations as it's called in those days, you know, this is before the Civil Rights Movement, it's in 1957, '58 [1958], it's before the sit-in's of '61 [1961], '62 [1962], the Montgomery [Bus] Boycott is happening, but it's happening in a way which is very much in the South, it's not affecting the West and the North. Speaker 2: Wer--were there, were there--and did you see the West being like the South? Did you encounter problems in the West that perhaps people would have in the South, which is something people don't often-- Speaker 1: That's precisely my insight, I mean, others knew it, I just didn't that, although the South had big signs up, colored only or, you know, whites only, the West didn't have those signs up but they had the practices and that was the beginning of an understanding, that you don't need to have the signs up if you've got the practices. Story_ID: 123580 Speaker 1: So getting to, to UCLA [University of California - Los Angeles] and learning this now in sociological language, it all began to make sense to me, they actually had concepts for this, they had ideas that made sense of formal, informal structures of discrimination, they had actual taxonomic systems that put it all into place, that's right, that's exactly right, that's what happened to me (laughter), and so, sociology began to explain my experiences. Speaker 2: Through those explanations were you becoming angrier and you wanted to do something about it or did you--what did the--what wer--what were you doing with this knowledge you were being armed with? Speaker 1: Um-hum, I think for those first two years at UCLA, I was simply absorbing the knowledge, I was active in some student, what should we call them, clubs that were in, involved, but in no sense did I think this was gonna be transformative, it was more like, I was more absorbing knowledge, I, I wouldn't become an activist until years later. Speaker 2: How many years later? When do you-- Speaker 1: Oh prob--oh probably-- Speaker 2: When do you consider yourself to be an actis--activist? Speaker 1: When I was involved more with anti-war movement, and with the Civil Rights Movement. The Civil Rights Movement in the-ninet--in well in '57 [1957], '58 [1958], when I was at UCLA-- Speaker 2: Did not exist. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Right. I mean I--it did but you had to, you had to know, you had to, I mean, I now know that, that-- Speaker 2: Well, what did it exist? Yeah. Speaker 1: The Congress of Racial Equality existed. Speaker 2: What, what-- Speaker 1: CORE. Speaker 2: CORE? Okay. Speaker 1: The Congress of Racial Equality, it existed, but you had to know where it exist, you had to know where in Chicago [Illinois], or where in Los Angeles [California] these little chapters existed. NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] existed all over the country, but unless you were again, a much more actively involved then, then the movement than I had been, you wouldn't gravitate towards the NAACP. Story_ID: 123581 Speaker 1: So we're running out of time for this session but one thing I do want to ask is about and have you just comment on is, what was your, what were mother's [Alfreda Barnett's] perceptions of you now at this time you're becoming a man-- Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: --Finding your own ideas, does she still give advice to you? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Does she-- Speaker 2: Yes, yes. My mother had this ability to shift from being parent to being a colleague and friend and she did it imperceptibly, she didn't do it overnight, it didn't happen, you know, but it happened in ways that I, I still marvel, because she would give advice, nev--never stopped giving advice, but it had--sh--the tone shifted. By the time I was in college, it was more friendly and cautionary advice as opposed to parental, it was not here's what I think you have to do, but here's what I think might think about doing, if you look at it this way, and we'd have a conversation and we, we came out of this as colleagues, you know, she was senior colleague (laughter) let's be clear, and I was junior colleague, but nonetheless, she would actually listen to me and after all I was learning things that she didn't know about. Speaker 1: So, we're gonna stop here but we're gonna pickup with you graduating from UCLA and taking your first-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --Job, and that was 19? Speaker 2: '62 [1962], Speaker 1: '62 [1962], and what was the, where did you go in '62 [1962]? Speaker 2: I, to the post-doctoral fellowship-- Speaker 1: In Berkeley [University of California - Berkeley], was that in Berkeley? Speaker 2: Sweden. Speaker 1: Sweden? Speaker 2: Uppsala University [Uppsala, Sweden]...