 Story_ID: 6274 Speaker 1: My name is Julieanna Richardson. I'm the interviewer and Scott Stearns is the videographer, and I'd like you to state your name, and spell it for us, and give us your birthdate, and today's date. Speaker 2: Okay, I'm Belva Davis Moore. B-E-L "V" as in victory "A" Davis, D-A-V-I-S, M-O-O-R-E. I was born on October 13, 1932, and today is March the 27th, I think, 2002. Speaker 1: And can we have the address? Speaker 2: We're at 1255 California Street in San Francisco [California]. Speaker 1: And your profession? Speaker 2: I guess I'm a television journalist. Story_ID: 6275 Speaker 1: I'd like to know what your favorite food is. Speaker 2: Oh my Lord, my favorite food. What do I like? The reason my secret is not gaining too much weight is because I'm not in love with a lot, but I guess I love fish. I love southern greens. Great tomato eater, I love tomatoes. Those are some of the things that I like, yes. Speaker 1: Favorite color? Speaker 2: If you look around my house you'll know one of them is yellow. I love yellow. I love sunshiny bright colors. Speaker 1: Favorite time of year? Speaker 2: I like the summer because I love the warmth. I love the sun. I travel to follow it. Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Islands all over the world. I love islands, everyplace, starting with the Caribbean. You know, done every island and recently discovered Indonesia and Bali and those kinds of islands. I guess our very favorite place to go, though, is Italy. That's my simpatico place. It's sort of like--some people say they go to some places in Africa, and they really feel like they're home. There's something about Italy and me that--and I don't speak any Italian at all--that really works, refreshes my soul. Speaker 1: And favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: There's one that I wrote for myself when I was a very young girl with big dreams and didn't know how I was going to get where I wanted to go, especially when I decided I wanted to work in television. And I wrote a little line that I used to repeat like a mantra, and it was, "Don't be afraid of the space between your dreams and reality. If you can dream it, you can make it so." Story_ID: 6276 Speaker 1: I want to first ask you about your mother and what you know about her family and her background and her growing up. Speaker 2: Don't know a lot. Like many, you know, African American children, I was sort of a child of the family. I was born to my mom just before her sixteenth birthday, and so I was placed with her sisters, and she and my dad were married at that age, too. But they sort of lived at home that--not sort of--they lived at home with my mom's mother, and I lived with various aunts--her two sisters--growing up. So I guess my clearest memories of my mom is the fact that I took care of her a lot throughout her life. Speaker 1: How did she get to this area. Do you know the family got here? Speaker 2: Yes. My uncle--my family's from Monroe, Louisiana, and we all lived communally together, and my uncle--this feisty little guy, not much taller than I am, maybe 5 [feet] 4 [inches] I guess--and he got injured in an accident at the Armour Meat Packing Company, hurt his back. And for some reason my uncle convinced a white citizen of Louisiana to represent him in a lawsuit over his back injuries and he won the lawsuit, and he was the first person of his color to sue a major company over a workplace accident. So what little I know about it, and it's very foggy, but there were people who came to the house where we all live and told my uncle that he better leave town because they were going to come and get him, and he was going to be killed. And the family sort of disintegrated at that point because the men left, the women stayed, and my dad and my uncle eventually--not that night--but eventually left for California because they knew some other people from our town who had also migrated to San Francisco. They ended up not getting as far as San Francisco. They ended up in Oakland [California], and then eventually the whole family--we all ended up here in West Oakland, eleven of us, again, in two rooms 'til everybody could find their way. Speaker 1: Belva you were born in-- Speaker 2: In Louisiana. Speaker 1: In Louisiana, okay. Your father, can you just give his name and tell us what you know about his background and growing up. Speaker 2: My father's name is John Melton, Sr. My father was always considered an exceptional guy, extremely--only went to the fourth grade, but extremely well read, very interested in world affairs, very interested in politics, and always filled with a sense of outrage about everything, so if I inherited anything from him, it was this outrage about equality-inequality, inequities. His family was very close. They still live in--a lot of them still live in Louisiana, whereas my mother's family sort of disintegrated. But he was a carpenter, a very good one, which allowed him to get away with a lot of things. When he was in Louisiana he was a supervisor for the sawmill where he worked, so he had this kinship with wood, and later when he got to California he really became a carpenter and spent his whole life working as a carpenter. But he used to drill my brother and I over naming the capitals of every state, and river in every state, and identifying the one river that ran upstream, and I mean these nightly quizzes. So he had a love of knowledge, and his family is very close knit. A lot of them--I don't know all of my--I think there were like six girls and two boys in my dad's family, and they've all passed away. Speaker 1: And do you know how your parents met? Do you--? Speaker 2: No I don't. Speaker 1: Okay, but they met in-- Speaker 2: In Louisiana. Speaker 1: --Louisiana. Speaker 2: Right. Story_ID: 6277 Speaker 1: Can you go over your siblings name and their, you know, birth order. Where do you fit in? Speaker 2: I'm the oldest. Speaker 1: That's what I thought. Speaker 2: Yes I'm the oldest, yes. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: And the reason I seem so distant because once we left Louisiana when we were small, I only went back once in all these years 'til I guess I was in my forties before I really went back to visit. So I never--other than people who came out to see me, I did not get a chance to really know them well. Speaker 1: How old were you when you came here? Speaker 2: When we left, I think I was eight, seven or eight years old, yes, because I was still in grammar school. I was in the second grade I think. How ever old you are in the second grade, that's what I was. So I have one brother where we have the same mom and dad, my brother John Melton, Jr. and then later my mother remarried, and I have a stepbrother and sister, Althea Alex now and my brother, Gregory Sanders. Speaker 1: And then who are the eleven. Speaker 2: Those are my-- Speaker 1: Oh the family. Speaker 2: The family roots--this was--those children were not even born then. In that family, it was my mother's sister, my mother's cousin, you know, the extended family (laughs). Speaker 1: I gotcha. Story_ID: 6278 Speaker 1: What is your earliest memory of, you know, of growing up, your earliest memory? Speaker 2: Well I don't know if it's my earliest one but it's the one that has stayed with me more vividly. As I told you, my mother [Florence Melton Mays] was very young when I was born and so, she had one sister who could not have children and adored children, so I was sent to live with her sister, Ophelia. And unfortunately Ophelia died at a very young age, and I remember that, that she died, and I have a sadness from that. I was a toddler, really, but I remember that. Speaker 1: Do you know how old you possibly were? Speaker 2: I wasn't in school, so it's before five I guess, yes. Speaker 1: What about life? Do you remember much about life in Louisiana? Because you actually started school there, but I was just wondering if you--? Speaker 2: Right, I started at Miss Brook's something school. It was a little private school that a few kids, you know, went to--one room schoolhouse. Good things I remember about Louisiana was the sense of family, you know, we were all so together, and everything was centered around the church. And my brother and I, when we were small, had pretty good voices and so, you know--we were a year apart, my brother John and I. So as little kids we would sing at the church, and the big payoff was that at--I don't know how they figured this out in Southern Baptist Church, but if you were good they would throw pennies on the stage to you. So of course this was a big deal, of course I remember that because we would get the Sunday afternoon pennies if we sang well enough. But a lot about Louisiana is sad memories. Story_ID: 6279 Speaker 1: When you moved to San Francisco [California] do you remember that? Because it would seem to me--you know when you go to a new city and you're young, a lot of times that, you know, you have very vivid memories. Speaker 2: Right, yes like many people from the south we came out on the train with my dad, because they'd left us behind at my grandparents, and then my dad came back to pick us up. By then World War II had started and trains were very crowded and segregated, but I was so excited about being reunited with our family. I don't remember a lot about it but I just know it took us days on a train to get here, and that often we sat on our suitcases. Speaker 1: But even the physical look of San Francisco is so different. Speaker 2: Oh totally different, yes. We didn't have all these high-rise buildings, not at all. It was a small-scale town, very proper. I remember as I started to grow up, maybe by the time I was in junior high school, a big excursion would be to take a ferry from--my mother worked for the S. P. [Southern Pacific] Railroad--to take a ferry from the pier by the S. P. station and come over to San Francisco and get a street car to come down to Union Square. And I remember we didn't have great clothes, but because it was Union Square my aunt would give us a little pair of white gloves, and a little hat to wear, so we could be properly dressed. Norma Barnes, my dear friend in Chicago [Illinois], can definitely relate to that. Speaker 1: So now tell me and, you know, just take yourself back to your childhood here in San Francisco [California], which is where we are, and I'm wondering what sights, smells, and sounds remind you of your childhood? Speaker 2: Union Square, just the place of it, because that was the heart and center of the San Francisco to where you could go and look at a whole new world, a whole different way of living with big hotels around it, and huge department stores with beautiful clothes like you've never seen before. And after that is the streetcar ride out to the ocean to a place called "Playland at the Beach," where there rides and the fat lady in the window, and candy canes, and always the cold breezes from the Pacific. You'd come over to go to the beach but it wasn't a beach like what people think of the beach. You got your sweaters and your coats to go to the beach over here, except for those few days when it was really nice and we really, really enjoyed that. Story_ID: 6280 Speaker 1: I know in Louisiana you went to Mrs. Brooks's school, but when you came here to San Francisco [California] what school were you in? Speaker 2: Prescott Elementary School in West Oakland [California], yes. We moved to Eighth and Peraltas Street in West Oakland, and started school there, and it was a big change. It's where my name got changed and my mother's name got changed, because the California teachers just decided that--my mother's name was Fluorine [Melton Mays] and they decided there was no such name as Fluorine, it must be Florence. So my mother's name was changed to Florence, and my mother allowed this to happen, and I was born with--I'm so glad they changed this, though. My name was Belva Gene with like--my grandfather's name was Eugene--but it was all one word, G-E-N-E, and they decided that was a masculine--either I was going to change it to the feminine or I was going to drop it, so I dropped it. Speaker 1: And this was the teachers? Speaker 2: Teachers did this, you know. They were very--they had ways of dealing with the--you know, from the south. We were made to feel pretty stupid. Speaker 1: What we're your teachers--were they, you know, were they white teachers? Speaker 2: Oh yes. There were no black teachers. Speaker 1: No black teachers, okay. But this was different from the environment you had come from. Speaker 2: Oh Lord yes. From that little small all black school. Speaker 1: We're the teachers nurturing. Did you feel that or were they--I'm just trying to get a sense of-- Speaker 2: They were more challenging than nurturing, yes. They were challenging. Sort of like throwing down the gauntlet, you know--made you perform, because you certainly didn't want to live up to their image of you. Story_ID: 6281 Speaker 1: Now were you a typical younger, I mean oldest child. We're you, you know, that sense of responsibility that oldest children get. Speaker 2: Oh yes, definitely very. Speaker 1: And what was expected of you within the household? Speaker 2: Well as I got older I did the food shopping, I paid the bills, did those kinds of things. I didn't live with my mom that much, but when I did I always took care of things for her, yes. Speaker 1: And I remember also reading that you were a very--that you consider that time sort of a lonely period. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And you were a child that lived, you know, inside yourself, and I related to that a lot because it sort of reminded me of my childhood. And I was just wondering what was the young Belva Davis, what was she thinking? What was she feeling, you know? And you were also a voracious reader. Speaker 2: Oh yes. Actually I filled a void. I filled it with books, and so, you know when you really read a book, you get into it, it can take over your world, and you sort of live to get back to rejoin that creative world that somebody else has, you know, fashioned for you. So I spent a lot of time--I can't say I was a deep thinker about loneliness or anything of that sort. Some of that set in when I got older and really could understand the differences in lifestyle in some of the people I went to school with and my own life. Speaker 1: There was a sense of growing up feeling or belonging in the environment. Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Story_ID: 6282 Speaker 1: Tell me, were there any teachers at--was it you said Pres--? Speaker 2: Prescott [Elementary School, West Oakland, California]. Speaker 1: Prescott, okay that's right. Were there any teachers that, you know, influenced you in a positive way or, Speaker 2: You know, any experiences that you would like to recount--whether positive or negative--that you had in elementary school there? Speaker 1: Not in elementary school, but later on I have to say, some of my teachers in high school made up for any lack of interest and or direction and or affection, because they were very--several of my teachers were very prominent in shaping my concept of what I could do with my life. Speaker 2: Now you had a friend, Rosemary [Woods]. Speaker 1: Still do. Speaker 2: Okay, still, okay. Speaker 1: Fine, that's fine. Speaker 2: Still do. Speaker 1: No it's nice to have friends for that long. Speaker 2: Yes, right. Speaker 1: When did you meet her first? Speaker 2: I met her at the beginning of the seventh grade. Our one commonality was that we both wore glasses, and for little girls that was a big deal, so we sort of sought each other out the first day of school and we've been friends ever since. Speaker 1: And that was where you at--was it [Herbert] Hoover Junior High [San Francisco, California] then? Speaker 2: Yes, right. Speaker 1: Okay, and so what do you think attracted besides the glasses? What attracted you to each other? Speaker 2: We were just the opposite. I could never stop talking and she was very quiet, and I think we were both--she's an only child and I think we were both just two lonely little girls. Neither one of us had a best friend; so neither one of us could remember ever having a real close friend until we became friends. Speaker 1: And so what things would you talk about or discuss or--? Speaker 2: I wish I knew, but our favorite thing was to--at the end of the day we'd say we were doing our homework together, and then I would walk her home, and then she'd walk me home, and then I'd walk her home, and would go on like this till it got dark. Speaker 1: And you would talk. Speaker 2: And so we would talk. I had no idea what we could--at that age--could have found to talk about that would have been interesting after having seen each other all day at school, but I really must ask her one of these days if she can remember what we talked about. Speaker 1: Now what--I know that it also said that her mother was also very nurturing and a positive influence, and I'm wondering--it was a different household than what you had, right? Her household and could you just describe that? Speaker 2: Well I think the difference was is that she is an only child and her mother, and her mother's universe revolved around her. Her mother was a single mother, single parent, and I guess I just got included in the world that she was weaving for her own daughter, and it was different from what was going on in my own family. I mean her mom would take us to the movies or take us to things that we wanted to do, but other parents would have said--you know, like if there was a concert or something, and maybe it was an evening and it was going to be over after dark, and she would take us there or takes us and drop us, and pick us all up. It made it possible for us to do a lot of things that we might not have done otherwise. Speaker 1: And so what things did you get exposed to in that time period? Speaker 2: Well I don't know if it was the things that I was exposed to or just the inclusion, the routine, being involved in a unit that was doing something, because I was pretty much on my own. Speaker 1: You were on your own between your aunt and mother Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 6283 Speaker 1: And your mother [Florence Melton Mays], what was--was she sickly or what was the, no? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: She just had other things--life was hard for her. Speaker 2: My aunt didn't work, my mom did, and so that was just the way it was. Speaker 1: Did your mother travel with the railroad, no. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So funny, in fact, she could travel free. I doubt if she even took two long journeys in all the years that she worked for Southern Pacific. Speaker 1: What messaging were you getting, though, at that age as sort of--as a young person? That's what I'm just trying to, you know, figure out. What your world--I know you're reading a lot. I just ask these questions to see what forms a person, you know. But you're reading a lot, you have this relationship with Rosemary. You are--I'm just wondering what else is forming you, you know. Speaker 2: I wish I knew. I don't know, I can't tell you. I think, you know, it was just a combination of--I always had a curious mind--a combination of wanting to know things, and I was a pretty good listener, too. Can't really tell you. Speaker 1: And you say that when you got to high school that things, you know, that there, teachers made up for whatever, you know, other experiences you had, but I'm just wondering, who were those positive teachers and how did they influence you? Speaker 2: There were number of them but one in particular that stands out was our gym teacher, actually, she was head of the gym department of Berkeley High [School, Berkeley, California], and I liked to join. So I decided I was going to bowl with the Berkeley High Bowling Girls bowling team, and so I did, and what I didn't know was that the Berkeley Bowl was a segregated place. So I joined the team and I would come down on team day, you know, game day, and I'd bowl, and then I guess about two or three weeks into it, I decided to go at a time when the team wasn't there--when Berkeley High wasn't there--and I found out I couldn't bowl there. Black people were not allowed to rent an alley, and so I decided I was not going to give up on the bowling, so this was a funny thing. So where I lived was on Ashby Avenue, it's in Berkeley. It's the main road that people take to get to the University of California [Berkeley], or used to--one of the main routes to the University of California. So I would practice with canned goods in my driveway, and my teacher just happened to drive by one day, and was asking--saw me doing this--and later she asked me about it, and of course after complementing me for finding this ingenious way to practice and so forth. You know she finally got to the root cause of it and she told the bowl that if I couldn't practice--that Berkeley High could have no other activities at that bowling alley. She was going to pull the whole bowling program, so they changed their policy, and I was always impressed that she took that, you know, kind of interest. And my drama teacher there people, you know trying to learn Shakespeare, it's so foreign from anything, but she was patient. So there were just a number of teachers along the way that were supportive, because I was--I didn't know what my future was going to be. So I took a double major in high school and I learned to type--did a whole business program--then I did college prep, went to summer school every summer, so that I could be sure to have enough credits, and actually ended up with too many and they tried to make me graduate ahead of my class, which I wouldn't do. That was a big fight. So all in all I got a good thing, you know, a fairly good start. Story_ID: 6284 Speaker 1: Berkeley High School [Berkeley, California]--wasn't it a preferred student going to--? Speaker 2: It's the cat's meow. Speaker 1: And you talk about how all that happened was that where you were located--that you were--? Speaker 2: Berkeley has only one high school, and it's a large school--big student body, but in the liberal tone of Berkeley it was decided that one school would bring all of the cities, then very segregated, not by design--well some places still had the--what is that thing called? The some kind of covenant, you know--? Speaker 1: Restricted. Speaker 2: Restricted covenant, but anyway, but the one high school would bring all the kids together, they thought. So every time there was some kind of proposition to create a hill school and, you know, one down there in the flatlands it was defeated. But anyway, it was a good school. It was a theater school at the University of California [Berkeley, California]. Lots was expected of you if you went there. Generally, if you said you graduated from Berkeley High and you were looking for a job, you could get one, because the school had that kind of a reputation. And it did not have--at that time--very many African-Americans in that school, so it's-- Speaker 1: How many do you think there were at that time? Speaker 2: My Goodess. Less than 100 out of a school of 3,000. Story_ID: 6285 Speaker 1: I just would like you to share, you know, what Berkeley [California] was like in those days. Speaker 2: It was the ideal small town, you know, the town with a major university [University of California-Berkeley], with a creek that ran through it. It was postage stamp, upper income, white community, very sure of itself, Town and Gown Club was a big deal. Girls who were in my class at Berkeley always went to dance lessons at Town and Gown. We couldn't go to Town and Gown, but they did. I mean, so it was, you know, people did things properly in Berkeley, and you were courteous in Berkeley. Just was a town that prided itself on, you know, its intellectual prowessness, and while all of that was true, was also a very segregated town in terms of the communities that the people either divided themselves or they were divided by the real estate practices, but the community where I grew up in South Berkeley was very close knit on that. I could go on any given day on Sacramento Street and I could visit Mr. Byron Rumford's drug store before he became an elected official. His drug store was there and another big pioneer, a man named Tom Berkley who started the 'Post' newspapers. His law office was in a storefront there and I knew all of these people who were good at what they did, who were prideful and proud men and women, and that was my world, the South Berkeley community. And I'm sure that had a lot to do with how I began to think about my possibilities. Speaker 1: Do you know how your mother had come to live there? Because it was a step up wasn't it. Speaker 2: Yes. What happened was my aunt, really, and my aunt and my uncle. Remember I told you about the lawsuit and the settlement and my uncle got, you know, money out of that. And sadly, because I felt bad about it for a very long time--came World War II and the Japanese were made to leave their homes, so this had been their neighborhood. And those homes were sold rapidly by people to get whatever they could get before they were taken off to these camps. And my uncle, having a little money, was one of those who bought a house on Ashby Avenue, and that's how we ended up in Berkeley. So once they bought the house, the migratory family--because it was a three-bedroom house--sort of started to, you know, move in. Nobody stayed long, though. People just sort of--these were new cousins coming up from Louisiana--moved in for a while and they were out, but I was there. I stayed with them because they had no children so I stayed with them. Story_ID: 6286 Speaker 1: I'd like to spend a little more time about San Francisco [California] under seeing its racial makeup, because people understand New York, the understand Atlanta [Georgia], they understand Chicago [Illinois]. I think less is known about the black community and even sort of the racial makeup of someplace like San Francisco. Especially in the period that you're talking about, you know, in the '50s [1950s]. And I'm just wondering what was, you know, what was--because you know in Chicago we have Polish and, you know--and so I'm just wondering, what was the makeup? And when this area started turning black, was there friction or anything, you know, you think? Speaker 2: I think the black community, again, was formed in a neighborhood where the Japanese had been, because of the real estate being available, because see coming out of World War II, housing was a premium. That's why they built all these, you know, housing projects to put, you know, the wartime workers. Remember we were at a seaport where there's a lot of shipping of goods going out, and military bases to support the action in the Pacific. So there was a need for labor and blacks came out from the south and then it was, "Where do you live?" and so after the Japanese were, you know, picked up and taken away, again, there was this real estate. So in San Francisco blacks settled in the Fillmore district, which had been the Japanese community, and again, it was a thriving black community because that's where everybody came. And so you had the traditional things, you know, the black newspaper, the restaurants, the barber shops, all of those things along Fillmore--grew up again and it was really a very thriving, and happy, and, you know, really wonderful community, very, very vibrant. And it was really by design destroyed through the re-development process. Speaker 1: That was more of what--in the '60s [1960s] (inaudible)? Speaker 2: I guess so. It was probably about in the early '60s [1960s]. Speaker 1: But it was a striving, sort of, community that was. Speaker 2: Very, yes. Many churches and lots of activity, lots of nightlife, and all of that. It centered around the Fillmore district. Story_ID: 6287 Speaker 1: And where there other people when you were in high school that you--because you said, you know, they were excellent role models, you know, and I'm wondering who some of those were that you started to see, you know, in your neighborhood or between, you know, home and school? Speaker 2: Well I mentioned the Rumford family. They were a very prominent family, not only, you know, Mr. Rumford but Elsie, his wife, was just a grand lady, and, you know, somebody that you were proud to know. But there were just various people. I had a neighbor who lived down the corner, a lady named Mrs. Williams, you know, who just became the watchful eye of my aunt and over any kids who lived on that block. She was a lady who didn't work and could stay home, and man, she reported on you like the FBI [Federal bureau of Investigation], but you remember things like that because you know then that it's a sense of caring. There was another family that I thought was pretty neat, the Bartlows family--Bartlows. There just a number of people who were accomplished that just set an example without broadcasting it as an example, just by the way they conducted themselves. Story_ID: 6288 Speaker 1: The other thing that's striking to me is how hard you and how single- minded you were and, you know, in [Berkeley] high school [Berkeley, California], and I'm just wondering, where did that come from? Was it a desire to get out of your situation, or was it just that you--because I mean going to summer school and working--I mean all the things you did--very directed. I'm just wondering where that came from. Speaker 2: I don't know, except that I guess I knew early on I had to be responsible for myself, and maybe that's where it came from, because I did work, too. I started working when I was fourteen, so I was working and, you know, doing these other things, too. So I guess it just came out of a sense that I had to be responsible for myself. That's all I can think of, but I've always felt I had to be responsible for myself. Speaker 1: Did anyone tell you, you should take the business and the academic at the same time? Speaker 2: Yes my teachers at Berkeley High. I can't tell you the names of the teachers that actually counseled me, but I was told that at--and you know in a way it was sort a little racist thing. They used to tell all the black kids that because that was the world, and indeed, when I did graduate, you know, at the top of my class and a double major, I couldn't get a job, you know. I tried to get a job at the telephone company they'll tell you that the word was then--I mean every other girl not of color who wanted to go from high school--and there weren't that many any way--from high school to work, got a job, and nobody could understand why I couldn't get a job. But either you go to the Metropolitan Insurance Company and they'd tell you, you were overqualified or you'd go to the telephone company and they'd tell you, you were under-qualified. So I ended up getting a government job because that's what you could do. Story_ID: 6289 Speaker 1: Now you said you were involved in drama [at BErkeley High School, Berkeley,California], you know, and what other--? Speaker 2: Sports, all kinds of sports. Speaker 1: All kinds of sports. Speaker 2: Yes all kinds of sports, yes. It was just something-- Speaker 1: Did you run track or--? Speaker 2: No just girl's basketball, volleyball, bowling. The soft sports. Not any real competitive stuff. Quit basketball after I broke my finger, too. Speaker 1: What subjects did you gravitate to, though? Speaker 2: Math, I loved math. Took as much English as I could because it was always my hardest subject, and that's why I took every English class I could take. I still can't spell, but I probably have a learning disability there or something, I don't know. I just kept taking, you know, every English class that was offered, both summer school as well as the regular school, but I did well in math. Speaker 1: That's interesting, you know, because one, women don't always do well in math, you know, and then at that age, I mean at that time, sorry. Women didn't do (laughs)-- Speaker 2: I know, I know. I mean I even, you know, got to advanced algebra and did okay, so-- Speaker 1: And you never--had you thought about ever becoming a math teacher or anything like that? Speaker 2: No just becoming a teacher. That was my goal. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: To become a teacher. Speaker 1: Okay, so this was something that was also an esteemed position too, in a way. Speaker 2: Oh boy yes. Speaker 1: Because this is what? This is 1951? Speaker 2: Mm-hm. Story_ID: 6290 Speaker 1: When you come out [of Berkeley High School, Berkeley, California], what is your desire at that point? Speaker 2: Go to college. That was it. All my friends were going to college and I was going to go to college, too. And, you know, I had the grades and I applied at San Francisco State [University, San Francisco, California], you know, it was the nearest state supported school, not university bound but, you know, state college. There was no point in my even thinking about money for the university. And at that time to go to the state--I don't know but it was something under $500 you needed for student fees, books, blah, blah, blah, and I just couldn't raise the money--didn't have the money. I got accepted but didn't have the means to do it. Speaker 1: It must have been deflating at that point. Speaker 2: Oh my goodness, yes because all my friends, everybody, all went to--I was the only one in my little group that wasn't in college and I, you know, took a job to save the money. You know how that goes. Then you go other routes. Speaker 1: And did you--so you felt really, you know, sort of kept behind in some respects. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And Rosemary [Towns], did she go to coll--? Speaker 2: Oh yes--became a librarian. Speaker 1: She's too busy too, I'm sure. Anyway what did you end up doing? Speaker 2: I go to work for Uncle Sam. I get a job, you know, the good old GS-2, the Naval supply center in Oakland, and started working there, and I was bored to death. So, what do girls do when they get bored? They get married (laughs). Story_ID: 6291 Speaker 1: So you got married, and who did you marry? Speaker 2: The guy next door [Frank Davis Jr.]. You know, I mean, just did it, I mean. He had just graduated from State [poss. ref. to California State University] and gone in the Air Force and was stationed in Washington, D.C. and that seemed like a great thing to do, to go off to Washington, D.C. so we got married and moved to Washington, D.C.. Speaker 1: So how did you find that whole experience in Washington and, you know, newly married and--? Speaker 2: Frightening. Remember, Washington was barely out of its totally segregated days. They hadn't even taken down the colored and white signs at Union Station at that time. I don't know if the laws were--I don't know if they went off the books about then, but that was just about the time, maybe, when the courts decided the transportation system would be desegregated. Speaker 1: And so did you find--this is your first time really, you know, out east. Did you find the whole environment a little--? Speaker 2: Strange. Very strange, yes, and I went to work for a--got a job and went to work for the Wage Stabilization, the Wages and Price Stabilization or something, and it was, you know, my first experience in that kind of a sophisticated environment. Oh boy, was that hard. Speaker 1: Did you like it? Speaker 2: Not at first. Then I started thinking of it as a learning experience and it got better. Then I also--if you can believe it, this was in the 50's, yes you can believe it, it was in the '50s [1950s]--and I was working for this agency, you know, setting prices and so forth and so. There were a lot of famous people in history who came to our office and so forth, but the big thing going on were [Sen. Joseph] McCarthy hearings, and they were happening on Capitol Hill. So many of the people--the supervisors and the elevated ones in our office were scared to death that they were going to be called before this commission of McCarthy. In fact, I think the woman who ran our office was Jewish and she was absolutely terrified that she, somehow, was going to get, you know, subpoenaed to come to the McCarthy hearings on Capitol Hill and-- Speaker 1: So, you said it was hard in terms of just the responsibility and the type of-- Speaker 2: Socially. Speaker 1: Socially it was hard. Speaker 2: Oh yes. Speaker 1: You mean with the people in (inaudible). Speaker 2: I didn't know anybody, so the only people I really got to know were those people where I worked, and they were--the blacks were, you know, lawyers and researchers and they were all people of a different ilk. Very Eastern in their ways, and I remembered when I--California habit, we referred to boys and girls as 'guys', and I would say things like, "Hey you guys," you know, which was a general term and they just thought that was just so funny, and they could never understand why I would do it. "Why--where did you get it from? Why do you all say that?" Speaker 1: So you didn't really take to D.C. so well. Speaker 2: I learned then I began to see that this was a whole different world and how much I could--had not been exposed to, I mean, there was Howard University [Washington, D.C.], there was--I don't remember. There was one street where--the big theater where you could see all kinds of entertainers, you know. I took my first trip to Harlem from there, you know, to New York. It just was a whole different world opening up. Speaker 1: And you got married, I mean not married, but you had children, also, right? Your-- Speaker 2: My son was born there, yes. Speaker 1: Right okay. And so here you are. You're a young, you know, young newly married having children. Did you stop working at that--no not at that time when you had your son, it was when you had your daughter, right? Speaker 2: No I had to quit when my son was born because that's what you did, and, you know, because we lived in Washington, you know, my mother [Florence Melton Mays] came for a week and his mother came for a week, and that was it, and I didn't go back to work. Well we soon left there anyway. Speaker 1: And you went where? Speaker 2: Well I came back home for a while then he was transferred to Hawaii, so this was really great. Speaker 1: And that's where your daughter was born. Speaker 2: No, then we were there for a while, and then it was back home again, and my daughter was born in Oakland [California]. Speaker 1: Okay, and that was a time when your marriage was sort of breaking up, right? Speaker 2: It was. It had gone asunder before then, yes. Story_ID: 6292 Speaker 1: What is Belva Davis like at this point? I mean are you, you know, you--what are you like? Speaker 2: My goodness that's a really interesting question because somebody else was emerging, but I'm not sure who. I met a lot of interesting people. I don't know--through some fluke when they started 'Jet' magazine, I got a call from a guy named Horace Clayton. Why? I don't know. I can't even tell you the connection. I think by then maybe I had just started to write a couple of things or had written a couple of things in the [San Francisco] 'Sun-Reporter' newspaper. Just because, you know, reader, writer, write. Anyway I was asked to become the stringer for 'Jet' magazine, so the launch of 'Jet', I was the West Coast contact in San Francisco. And there was a woman named Gerri Majors, she wrote all the social news, basically most of what I would send in would be in Gerri Majors [gossip] column in 'Jet' magazine. And the other thing, the great part about it, is that what I learned from it. I would write articles and send them back to Chicago, and then this kind gentleman would get on the phone. They didn't pay anything, but boy, his telephone bill must have been really something. He would just spend I don't know how long going over the structure and why and how and why didn't I ask about this, and in other words, it was my training. It's where I learned about reporting is from that experience, so then I continued to write in local papers. Speaker 1: You know here I find most surprising. Here's a math major, and you said you always been horrible at spelling, and then you write and so it just seems like a jump. Speaker 2: I know. Speaker 1: So I'm wondering how--where did the writing come out? Speaker 2: I think probably all the time I wanted to--you know words were more important to me than numbers, but I was afraid of them because, as I said, I had this deficit, and I was a person who liked--I mean I enjoyed being good at whatever I did. So therefore, I wouldn't have consciously chosen to do something that I didn't feel I was really good at. But I guess there was, you know, whatever it was inside kept propelling me in that direction, and even so, when I started all of that, I was really submitting copy to be edited and re-written, that's why the 'Jet' experience was so good for me. Speaker 1: I think it's important for people for even to understand what the contex of then, because this was nineteen, what, 1950s? Speaker 2: Yes probably about 1957 to '9 [1959], something around there. Speaker 1: And this is a whole different time than we have now, I mean, and so even to be part--you don't know how they contacted you? Speaker 2: I can't recall now. I really don't know how it happened, but because--I mean they didn't have any money. They didn't have any money to pay. So, you know, they were looking for free--somebody who would do things free and I had lots of friends and I'm very social, and a lot of 'Jet''s success was built upon what they reported socially about us because that was--black people didn't have any reflective mirror. This was the big one nationally, where we could exchange information about each other, and they needed resources, they needed to know people. Speaker 1: And how long did you do this for? Speaker 2: Oh my goodness, a long time, into the '60s [1960s] I think, yes, I think so. Because I would do the best-dressed list and line up the ladies, the bachelor of the year line up the ladies. I mean any outstanding first one to do anything, you know, make sure they got those stories from this area. Speaker 1: And so you're still working at the Naval-- Speaker 2: Yes. Because remember, I'm not getting paid for this other work. Speaker 1: Right, right, right. Well were you finding you like about it? Why was it exciting? Was it because it got you out and about in the community? Was it because you--I mean were you enjoying hob-nobbing? Was it because you enjoyed the writing and report--I mean what was it? Speaker 2: I really enjoyed meeting the people that I got to know. You know what license you have as a reporter. You can talk to people about anything, and it was a great opportunity, a great door opener, and I got to meet a lot of university trained black people who excelled far beyond the status that they had achieved in their various fields because of what I was doing. Speaker 1: Now were you surprised when you looked back on it, on the success at 'Ebony' and 'Jet', eventually, you know, in terms of the--? Speaker 2: Yes, yes, because you just--more than surprised, proud of what they took this nugget and grew it into the giant that it became. Story_ID: 6293 Speaker 1: Now so you're doing this [writing for 'Jet' magazine]--are you doing any other freelancing around town? Are you, I mean your next step is radio, but I'm just wondering how-- Speaker 2: No, I went to newspapers after this. Speaker 1: Oh that's right you did I'm sorry, that's right, the Bay Area Independent (simultaneous). Speaker 2: Yes, yes, 'Bay Area Independent', yes that's why I'm not sure if maybe they picked up something that I had written in the 'Independent', because I used to just write things and submit them to anybody, you know. I'd just mail off copies to people to see if they would print it, and so anyway, I then became the woman's editor for the 'Bay Area Independent' if you could call it that, and I'd just write social news. But it lead to an opportunity to work with a guy from the Associated Press who was really a good journalist who just let alcohol get in the way of his success, and worked this way--worked the Associated Press out in the Far East--China and Japan for years and just couldn't control it and ended up back here, and ended up the editor of this newspaper--this black newspaper. Speaker 1: Now what did he teach you? What was good about that experience? Speaker 2: I guess, you know, really how to put the five W's [who, what, why, when, where] in action for real. You know, the structure of a good story, the art of listening and then absorbing, isolating, selecting the things that--at least in your opinion--would be interesting to other people. He's very good at that, and he would take the time to go over my copy, dissect it, you know, the scratch up paper. I mean that's one on one experience, you know, it's better than anything you can get in school, because we had to put out a paper every week, and not only that, you know, layout, design. I did everything on that paper, because maybe he was sober a couple of days a week and the rest of it, you know, I would do proof reading, deliver the copy to the printers, pick up tear sheets and then whatever. Speaker 1: So with this experience were you starting to feel that it's okay that you hadn't you know, gone to San Francisco State [University, San Francisco, California] or is that--? Speaker 2: No, I've never felt that wasn't okay. Speaker 1: Okay. I understand. But this is giving you a feeling of place. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Let me put it another way. Okay-- Speaker 2: But you know it was a place where you knew you were doing something--I felt I was doing something that was interesting and important, but it wasn't looking for a physical place. I don't know if you can separate those two things. You got a real feeling of inner accomplishment that was not important to me that I personally be recognized for everything I wrote. Speaker 1: What were some of the things that you learned--you think in those early years that have served you well, you know, when you started. What was going to be along very long? Speaker 2: Perseverance. I really learned that. You know to get a good story you can't just take the first no and go about your way. You have to think things out, figure out how you're going to get to where you want to go and who can help you get there, and, you know, that whole process of getting to where you want to be. You learn that as a reporter. Speaker 1: Did you find that was that Darryl Lewis that you were talking about? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Darryl Lewis, wonderful guy. Used to have to go and wake him up in the mornings, get him his coffee, get him out. My husband and I--got him into the office so he could make those deadlines. Speaker 1: And this was--I mean the newspaper was all of what size? And what was its circulation? Speaker 2: I don't really have a good idea what our circulation was, but there were two newspapers in town, the [San Francisco] 'Sun Reporter' and the [Bay Area] 'Independent', and the 'Independent' was the second. We were number two. We were a better paper, but we were number two. We were a very small staff, you know, it was Darryl and myself and I think one other person, the sales person--the person who sold space--and the publisher, and that was the newspaper. Story_ID: 6294 Speaker 1: How did you and your husband meet? Speaker 2: In my, quote unquote, reporting, I didn't know even enough to call myself a reporter back then. But anyway, I was doing this column--this social column--and I covered social events, and of course, every social event has to have a photographer, and my husband [Bill Moore] worked with the leading guy around town named Chuck Willis--well one of the leading guys anyway--and so my husband did most of the lab work back then. And I would come in with my demands and, you know, to get the photos from whatever the weekend's parties were, so that I could meet the deadlines and so forth, and we just became friends. He just became my best friend, really my best friend, and I was still married [to Frank Davis Jr.] at that time. We were not at all romantically inclined, we were just good friends, we just had a lot in common--both loved jazz music and so forth, and that's how we met. And then after my divorce I really needed a friend, you know, just to help me out--help out. He would pick up my, you know, my son and play with him, things like that, you know. Speaker 1: Now, what is sort of curious--I find curious about your--were you guys the only two, sort of, doing this or was the whole community? Speaker 2: What? In terms of-- Speaker 1: Well you didn't start out to--I mean when he was doing his photojournalism he was freelancing. Speaker 2: He was freelancing. Speaker 1: But were there other people around freelance--that's what I'm saying. Speaker 2: He was it. Speaker 1: So were you?-- Speaker 2: We were weird. I don't know what boat we were on, but we were certainly out there--I don't know, we were just had our own sense of direction. I'm not sure where it came from because--I'll tell you--I think know how he got to the Associated Press. His job--he worked at a thing called the Berkeley-I can't--Berkeley Photo Lab. I think that was the name of it, but I'm not sure. But what his job was, he worked in the darkroom. He developed pictures for all of the--not all--but a number of the very top photographers who wanted, you know, special prints. That's what he did, so he got to know quite a few very well known photographers, and some of them he was their best friend because, you know, their work depended on his work. And I think through that contact he got the opportunity at least to submit some things to the Associated Press and to become a stringer. Speaker 1: Had he talked about why he was interested in photography at that time or--? Speaker 2: He's never been interested in anything else but photography. Music and photography are his life, always. That's the only thing he's ever done in his life. Story_ID: 6295 Speaker 1: Here you're working, your--well you were married when you first met him--you're doing this. You're enjoying this, you know, the social--are you sort of--you know most people who do the social calendar, they're the thing around town. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: I mean, you know, they're people like, you know, you get people's names in the paper, you know, that type of thing. You know what's going on and so it's sort of a different thing than what you became, but it's, you know, do you sort of--? Speaker 2: One of the peculiarities was that I was married to my first husband [Frank Davis Jr.] who did not think this was a great idea, did not like socializing, and did not like me socializing, did not like me dancing, did not like any of these things which, of course, is one of the reasons why I'm sure I'm divorced from that person. And so that was the strange part about it--is that my private life sort of demanded that I stay in the background while still doing this other, you know, being around--being what a good reporter's supposed to be, sort of invisible. Speaker 1: Had your husband--you talked at all in your marriage about what role or--I mean people didn't really do that in those days. There were things that were assumed I bet. Speaker 2: Right. And I got married six months out of high school to the guy that lived next door to me, and I mean I hadn't even thought about my life at all. I wish I could say it was something I thought about, but I'd never even thought about it. Speaker 1: But you were changing into something. Speaker 2: I was growing up. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And what were you sort of finding out about yourself? Speaker 2: That my goals and interests were different from the person I was married to, and that's why people need to wait to get married, you know, till they mature. I mean I'm grateful that I had the courage to change my life, because there are a lot of women who just stay--even after discovering that their interests are somewhere else--they stay in these situations, and it was difficult for me because of the way I grew up. I had said that I would never get a divorce. My children would have a stable two-parent household, and so it was difficult decision. Speaker 1: But you came to that decision. Tell the story about what happened at that point. Speaker 2: Well it was dramatic to a degree, I mean. You know my past history is that men and women don't part friendly all the time, so I just came up with a very elaborate plan for the separation, and it must have come out of some of my books I guess, but I just had this whole plan. I just had a moving team come and clear out my house in one day and I got in my car, and I left. He went to work that morning and I was there, and he came back, I was gone, and that was it. Speaker 1: He was furious with you. Speaker 2: Oh boy, yes. But I didn't think that we could part without acrimony, and I didn't want to go through it. Speaker 1: And so you successfully make it out of that. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Right. With your kids intact. Speaker 2: Yes, right. Speaker 1: And so what are you thinking now? You now are supporting--you are the sole support, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: For these two children--so what are your thoughts at this point? You're still working at the-- Speaker 2: No, no I quit, because I had to quit. I had to disappear, which I did, but luckily, you know, I worked for the Navy, and I don't know. At that time you had these little accounts of--I don't know, I guess maybe it was vacation, savings, retirement, whatever it was, but it was a nice nest egg there that I got. And I, you know, had made arrangements to get that and get it deposited where I could have access to it, and knew that I had enough money to get by for a while, and so that's how I got along. And then when I thought things were better I returned home, got an apartment with my children--because when I left my--I don't think my daughter was even two months old, she was a little baby. Speaker 1: You know that shows some strength there, so you have two kids, one that's two months old and you're-- Speaker 2: I tell you, reading books can obviously do a lot for you, because for some reason I figured it out to go to the University of California [ Berkeley, California] and I got a student who moved in with me, and helped me with the children in exchange for room and board, and that's how we got through the first months, which was good. Speaker 1: Because really this is a time, a different time, I mean--you hear these stories today sometimes with women--are trying to leave abusive relationships and they have, you know, it's hard to, sort of, cut the tie, but, you know, this was a--you were coming out of a culture that still encouraged marriage in many ways. Story_ID: 6296 Speaker 1: Talk about how you got started with radio then. Speaker 2: Oh yes. I had a couple of good friends who worked at the radio station here in San Francisco [California]. This was a big deal that it was in San Francisco, and, you know, black program stations. None of the two stations that were here, neither were owned by blacks, but they were programmed to blacks, and that's the kind of music they played and personalities. And so this one friend of mine, Herb Campbell, was the newsperson there. He was the newsperson without having access to wire services or wire copy, and so Herb had this great thing at that time. This really was a great newspaper town. We actually had four newspapers in our town, so, you know, Herb would get the newspapers hot off--I mean right on Market Street where a number of the papers were all in a very compact little area. I always get the first edition and you'd go inside and you'd clip those suckers as fast as you could, paste them together on a piece of paper, and you'd just really read right out of the newspaper on the air for the newscast. So I started out helping him clip in order to read, and so then he invited me to read the lighter side of the news, which I did, and he eventually encouraged me to read things from the columns that I was writing, and that's how it got started. He was very, you know, wonderful black man who helped me out. We tried to figure out, "Now, how do I do this? How do you learn this skill at this point?" I never asked him (inaudible) but they had this great routine. What I was supposed to do was go home at night, go to my bathroom, take my copy, and read as best I could from memory as I looked up into a mirror, and watch myself, how the words formed, how clearly I heard them. This was to help me with my enunciation, and that's how I learned to read copy, by going home at night and reading, closing the door, and, you know, taking copy and reading it and watching myself read. I don't know, John Hardy came up with that as a system, and it's really still a system I tell young people about today, because you learn a lot about yourself. You learn about how much you're giving away, and the expression, you know, how your expression--if you're reading something that's happy it's good to smile because you'll sound happier if you do. It's hard to sound happy when you're, you know, looking flat, so I learned a lot from them in that regard. And from Herb I learned, you know, my first lessons in choosing what would be important to an African-American audience. Speaker 1: And what were those? Speaker 2: Just items that he thought would have a bearing on their lives, government things that might be taking place, things that maybe have happened far away but has something to do with human rights, civil rights, or whatever happened, and we always included the top news, the front page stories, too. Story_ID: 6297 Speaker 1: You're enjoying this [being a newscaster]. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Great fun. Speaker 1: I mean you are motivated, you know, you're going home, you're practicing, you are on there, and so what was the type of show that you developed? And this was at W--? I'm sorry. KSAN [FM 107.7]? Speaker 2: Yes at KSAN I was a newsreader. I just read the news, and later on I landed a job at KDIA [AM-1310] radio in Oakland [California], which was at that time the number one, you know, station. It was a powerhouse in terms of signal as well as personalities and so forth, and so I got that job through a funny fluke. A woman who was working there who's husband later became--if not the first, certainly one of the first Supreme Court justices in the state--Allen [E.] Broussard's wife, Odessa, said she was going to have a baby and he didn't want her to work anymore and could I come in and take her desk job, and hang onto it till after the child was born and so forth. And I didn't know anything about being a traffic manager, but she taught me, so I took the job in that station, but I took it only on the conditions that they would help me develop my own radio program. They were desperate for somebody to do this job, and I wanted very--I was very ambitious about getting my own show. And, you know, once in-house you can convince the sales staff to sell you if you keep threatening them about not giving them the avails at the time of day they want on the air for the spots they're selling, especially, so I soon got my own show. Speaker 1: And how did you decide what format you were going to use for the show? Speaker 2: My husband [Bill Moore]. My husband chose almost all of my music. He, as I told you, photography and music are his love. I mean I had my own preferences, too, but he had really helped me. You could, in those days, just pick your own music, the cuts that you wanted to play, who you wanted to play. To introduce new articles you could do all kinds of--you really could do creative things. I used to have on Saturday sometimes--because I loved doing--I'd go out with Bill, my husband, and we would interview people with the Jazz Workshop or where ever they were appearing in town, because all you needed was a little tape recorder, you know. You'd get a corner and you do an interview and I'd run it in my Saturday show. Sometimes I did live programs, I mean, I have Horace Silver in, you know, and his whole trio. They'd come and play and my sponsor was this company Foster Farms Chickens, and they would supply the chickens and some of my church lady friends would fry them, and we'd have these great studio parties, you know, with big chicken dinners to follow, artists, autographs. It was romantic radio. It was really great. Story_ID: 6298 Speaker 1: And what did you go on--because radio can be sort of isolated to talk to the--you know, because I've always thought of them being social and that's why I'm saying. Here you are, you know, you've been out doing your, you know, society thing and now you're behind, really, the mic, and it's a different feel to it isn't it. Speaker 2: Actually, I became more social after I was on radio than I was when I was writing, which I know is odd but it's true. Because to do the kind of radio I was trying to do, where I went out, really, and interviewed people with a tape recorder, you know, and they could hear themselves on the air that became kind of special to me. Because people, you know, radio was there, but not many people went to the community to gather their thoughts, so that's what I was doing that was different, and so it kind of made me stand out. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So you said you start really coming out and people were listening and you're building your own audience. Speaker 2: Yes, and there was one other factor, another man--important--our news director and religious programmer, but more he prided himself on being our news director. He was a man named Louis Freeman, and when you're the traffic manager, you're sort of at the hub of everything in your station. A traffic manager is a person who actually schedules the programs, the commercials that go into it, organizes the copy that the disc jockeys read once they're on the air. Now in many stations two or three people do this, but at this little station I did it all, so it became kind of central to what everybody was doing, and so he was another intellectual who read a lot. I remember one of his big things, he'd had Gunnar Myrdal who'd just won the Nobel Prize, who came into this black, you know, rock and roll station to do this extended interview with Louis Freeman, but he was the kind of guy that, you know, warranted that kind of intellectual challenge people went along with it.. But anyway, he decided he'd teach me a little bit about news, particularly starting with politics. I was free labor. That's been the one thing, I've worked a lot for free in my life, but, you know, it's the best thing I could have ever done and that's how--that was the way educated myself by offering to do the jobs that I for people who I wanted to learn if they were willing to take the time to teach me. So anyway, he taught me a lot about newsgathering, particularly about political newsgathering, covering elections, and all kinds of other things. I covered the 1964 Democratic Convention with him at the Cow Palace here [San Francisco, California]. That was my introduction to hard-knocks politics. That was the year the Republicans-[Barry] Goldwater year when they threw, you know, all the leading journalists out, and you can imagine what they did to us. Speaker 1: Now this was--you said 1964. Speaker 2: '64 [1964], yes. Speaker 1: This is Goldwater? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Is [Richard] Nixon anywhere around? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: That must've been later but this is really--okay, because I was thinking Jewel Lafontant had made a presentation. That was probably, you know, somewhere in (inaudible). So he taught you a lot you were saying, okay. And this whole exposure to politics was a new thing. Okay and how do you feel it opened you up in ways that you had not? I mean you have been doing your society. Speaker 2: My music and fun and, you know, just oh boy. I just finally, you know, realized that so much was going on in the world that people needed to know about. And in particular, you know, that was the beginning of the rise--we're coming out of the '50s [1950s] but now it's really getting to be front page, the whole civil rights struggle, the free speech movement in Berkeley, the integration of schools, busing, all of these things were churning and happening at that time. And the budding of the Vietnam War came not too long after that and all that came with that. But at this particular time, the big battle was over education and bussing and making sure schools were integrated. Berkeley had its huge bussing battle just about this time. So anyway I learned a lot from Louis and it was also a time when it was a normal thing. You know, when [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] was in town--never came to town without visiting with us, but so did James Brown. So it was just a great place to be, and I learned so much. Story_ID: 6299 Speaker 1: Talk about how you ended up going to TV, how that those things, you know, happened. Speaker 2: Well you know the world was opening up and at that time, if you were a person--you were black person in this country--you really thought the sky was the limits. That, you know, the walls were coming down, segregation was crumbling. The government at every level was behind a program to make at least some token integration of society, and so Vic Cushier from the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and those kinds of groups was to integrate all levels of society, and television was becoming very, very powerful. And so they, were looking around to get people to hire somebody, and because I'd worked on radio and I had written a bit--no one--remember very few people had any experience reporting on television. This was at the beginning of the television news game. The station I eventually went to work for was running fiteen minutes of news a day. That was their newscast. Even after I got hired, the total staff was five reporters, so news was a new game. But anyway, there were these pushes and these demands, and there was a push from the government through the FCC [Federal Communications Commission] to integrate staffs, and so I started applying, but that didn't mean it was going to happen overnight. It took me several years of applying and applying and applying to finally get a job. Speaker 1: And talk about how you got that job, too. How it came about, yes? Speaker 2: Really strange, you know, I told you about reading. So why do you say that a black single mother with two kids living over in Berkeley [California], working temp jobs, would be reading the social society column in the newspaper, but I was. And I read this article about Nancy Reynolds, a woman who was anchor at Channel five [KPIX], very good friend of Ronald Reagan's. In this column, they said she's rumored to want this job as [then California Governor] Ronald Reagan's press secretary, and if she did, two and two, she couldn't be Ronald Reagan's press secretary and stay in that job. So that day I called the station to ask them about the job. They hadn't even read the paper yet. So anyway, you know, of course there was nothing then but they said I could call back. Well, I don't know if they said I could call back, but of course I did call back. Eventually, and along with sixty-four people, I got interviewed for that job, and so it was touch and go, but I got it. Speaker 1: And what made you stand out? Did they ever tell you about that afterwards? Speaker 2: (nodding head no) Speaker 1: No? Speaker 2: No, I still--because as I said, because this station had been the first to hire a black, you know, west of the Mississippi, really. Because Ben got hired, I guess, in '65 [1965] and nobody--I don't know, maybe people were just beginning to--Ray got hired in '65 [1965]. He had to be really early anyway. I don't know what year, so back off that. But in any case I just thought, "Well they're not going to hire me, too." You know. Nobody in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] has hired anybody black. Nobody else in this town's hiring anybody black, so they're not going to hire me. So when I got the phone call that said they were, I couldn't believe it. I could not believe it. I was, you know, limping along at that point in life. I mean I truly was working, you know, doing all my stuff that looked like I was doing a lot, but nothing that really made money so I was working secretarial temp, and I remember--well, I guess I told you this story. When I got the job, then I didn't--oh, then I got the job and they were very proud of what they had done, so they wanted me to have this lunch to meet all these press people, so they could get to know me. And I remember I didn't have anything appropriate to wear to the Fairmont Hotel for a noonday lunch, and my whole little community of people pulled together and we got it all worked out. So it was a great moment. Speaker 1: You know the thing that--you know, you were talking about before was the fact that there was Ben Williams there, and that the fact that this was done at time. Talk about what you think were the dynamics that brought it together, because other markets didn't open up doing things like that for years. Speaker 2: I think it's, again, it's when I say when good men get together, good things can sometimes happen. I think that number one that there was this man named [Donald H.] Don McGannon who was president of Westinghouse Company which owned that station at that time. He's always been a person who had talked and walked the game in terms that he hired--can't remember his name now, but--a black guy who he gave a vice presidential title to in the very early days to help cultivate Westinghouse's image within, you know, within the black community. And anyway, I think McGannon's signal was this was the right thing to do, and the person who was the station manager at that time was a man named Lou Simon who'd been one of the original founders of this station, and also another man of goodwill, and the guy who was a news director, you know. These were all of the people who would make a bold step where in the places they should have been for this to happen (inaudible). Speaker 1: Now what was the reaction of the public? Speaker 2: More than overwhelmingly well received, but a lot of racism, too. A lot of racism still, you know, a lot of "go back to Africa" letters, things like that, and my hardest job, though, was working with my colleagues. It was winning their confidence and their trust, and I worked very hard at that, but it was difficult. It was particularly hard with the photographers. That was my real Waterloo because--and, you know, being--I'm a Libra, and I can always see a balance to everything. So I'd come home and tell my husband [Bill Moore], "Well, I understand what it is," you know. These were not the times like today. When we'd go out, we're in a car together, and it's just us. We're a mixed race couple, and some of the guys just couldn't handle that, and it was difficult for them. Speaker 1: And they were--But I mean really, this was a time when women weren't still working-- Speaker 2: No, and they were not working--the hard news beat at all. I was it. So that was difficult, too. They were used to going out and doing the Rhodedendron [flower] Show with Wanda Ray (unclear) who was there before me. Doing, you know, the softer side of the news, and with Nancy, with doing some politics, because that was a big deal when Nancy started going out and doing interviews, politcal interviews. But, you know, here I was put on the crime beat and whatever else they could throw my way, and so they were just uncomfortable, and, you know, in a way you understand how the system is set up. If you're used to covering the police department, you know, what police departments are like, and you show up and you're a reporter that's female and black, you don't think you're going to get the breaks you used to get, so there was some concerns. Story_ID: 6300 Speaker 1: You didn't really have role models, so I'm just wondering who else was on the air, even? Speaker 2: Nobody. Remember, the reason you can do this is because the business was not solidified at that time. It was a growing opportunity and there really was a sense of empowerment, and I think there was a sense of community with African Americans--with black people at that time--that this was a moment when we needed to help one another. Not all of us did it, but there was this feeling that, you know, the example set by the people in the south, the example set by Rosa Parks, those people who pulled together for an objective to break down barriers and walls, and I think that sort of feeling was communal. I mean the people who picketed in front of the station where I didn't get the job, were just out to get somebody hired, and they didn't ask me. They just designated me as the person, and you wouldn't have thought of saying, 'no', and certainly you wouldn't think of letting them down, and so you would do the very best you could. I think that was the way it was with Ben and I. We both were protective of each other. We really wanted to see--both of us wanted to see the other succeed a lot, and we fought for each other. Speaker 1: So anyway here--this would never happen in Chicago [Illinois], I can tell you that much. Okay, but anyway, so you're being tested, you know. Ben [Williams] is good to you but everyone else is testing you and you're rising above the fray, more or less. As best you can. Speaker 2: But not everyone was testing me, otherwise I would have made it, but some people were challenging me. There were several things going against me. Number one, we were a five-person newsroom. Not too long after I was there, I'd say within the first year, they had expanded the news hour to a half hour, and a later show. But then, I guess the money didn't roll in right or something. But whatever happened, there had to be a layoff, and I was the last hired and should have been fired, but the decision was made in the company it would not be me. It would be one of the white guys, and that's what happened, so that certainly was grounds right there for me to become the outsider, it didn't happen. And why it didn't happen, it might probably have more to do with the caliber of people that I worked with than anything else, because some of those people I worked with then are still some of my best friends today. In other words, they didn't hold it against me. It was just clear what was happening--that they couldn't have just hired me and then fired me right away without having really good reasons, and I guess economics in those days were not considered good enough reasons. Speaker 1: Now what were some of the important lessons that you felt you learned in those early, you know, days. I know you had said, you had already learned persistence, but were there--I mean, was that what you were sort of exercising persistence now, or what were you--? Speaker 2: I think I learned the comfort of belonging to a community that cared about you, too. I really learned that. I mean I felt that the black community was there for me, and in a way, some of my white colleagues didn't have that kind of comfort. But you know, the Links showed up at my station. They decided to give me an award, of course, and they decided to do it in the lobby of the television station, and Lois Toll-Caesar (ph.) was at that time, chair of this thing. And you know, well-known name for black women of her era, and she arranged the ceremony where they came to the station to let--and that was their way of letting them know that they were there, and they were watching. And that kind of an exercise, you know, was extremely good, and everyone helped me. If there was anyone, you know, any black person of importance that the news happened to be interested in, everybody pulled to help me get that interview with that person. It was really a great experience. I cannot describe the feeling of having that kind of support behind you. It made you feel good, but it put a heck of a lot of pressure on you so you were constantly--I mean I definitely was constantly motivated to do the best I could do given my limited education and lack of knowledge of the field. Now preceding this I had done a little TV incidentally. I don't know if I mentioned that. It was just a fluke of a program, some community program that I was doing where I got a nice write up about having done that. But otherwise, I know I didn't really know anything about the business, and I learned it on the job. Story_ID: 6301 Speaker 1: When did the interview happen with Malcolm X? Speaker 2: That was when I was in my newspaper days . Speaker 1: Oh that was in newspaper. Speaker 2: Newspaper days. That was a totally different environment. That was at the beginning of when the black Muslims [or Nation of Islam] would--the "mystery group"--you know the really powerful kind of half-feared group. And it was when Malcolm was going--it didn't last very long. It was a matter of months, but they had just established a mosque in San Francisco [California], and they were really getting a footing in the community, and beginning to grow in San Francisco. And they had their own paper, but there was I guess--I'm not sure why--a realization that they had to reach out past, you know, their own paper that they were producing. So they wanted news about what the Muslims were doing in the local press, but at that particular point in his life, Malcolm was not speaking directly to white people. Why? I don't know. And I thought that part of it was really drama, because he would come with several other people that could have spoken to Darryl [Lewis] had they wanted to, but he decided on this little routine which went on for several months--that he would come and he'd ask--somebody would ask for the publisher or the editor. Darryl would come out and then the process would start, and then I would be called from the office, and we'd go through this charades, you know, where he would say something and then I would repeat it to Darryl, and Darryl would say something. Now all of us are standing at the counter together, and then I would repeat what Darryl had said as though we were speaking a foreign language, and it was just one of those little interludes in my life that I will never forget. And why it happened to--I don't know, but it certainly got the point across, and of course, we wrote a story about how Malcolm wasn't speaking to white people. Speaker 1: Were you impressed with him when you met him? Speaker 2: Oh, my goodness yes, yes. You couldn't not be impressed with him, you know. Just sort of one of those people--there are certain individuals that come here on earth that have bearings, character, charisma, was unexplainable, you know, one of those people. Story_ID: 6302 Speaker 1: Tell us what are some of the stories that you did, or things that, you know, occurred that you're really proud of. In those-- Speaker 2: Early days. I was proud of--I mean one of the things they said to, you know--the story was that I would last until I saw my first dead body. I was proud of the fact I didn't faint, and then I had another test, you know, that I was--these are all things that nobody else would care about, but I knew about it. But I had a real jockey of a photographer that I'd go out with that really loved the police beat, and, you know, really almost considered himself a cop. And I went out with him one day and the police were involved in a chase with actual bullets being fired from the car they were chasing, and I don't know whether they were shooting back or not. I'm not too sure about that, but I remember being with Lou Calderon and we were in this hot chase, and this guy was shooting. And he is driving along and I'm sitting beside him, and he's got his 16mm Bell and Howell [camera] that he is holding out the window, and I'm holding the steering wheel while he's pressing down on the pedal, and the other guy is shooting. I actually got through that without fainting. I mean it was one of the things that helped me, though. It really did help me that I was able to hold it together through that, and I was proud of myself for doing that. And I was proud of myself in--after Nancy Reynolds went to Sacramento to work with [then California governor] Ronald Reagan. You know I was the person and, you know, would get invited up to the Reagans and get a chance to speak with both he and Nancy Reagan, and get invited into their home, and it didn't embarrass myself or them, or Nancy for, you know, having me come along. Those were all new things that seemed like nothing today, but they were new things. It was new for them to have a person of color in their home and it was new for me to be in the governor's house. Speaker 1: So this is what year now? Speaker 2: This would be about '67 [1967], yes, about '67 [1967], '68 [1968], round about then. Story_ID: 6303 Speaker 1: San Francisco [California] is changing, too, around that time [late 1960s] because that's around the time of the, you know, Stokely Carmichael, Black Power movement, you know, the South, things really were moving, shifting to the, you know, to the war, and I'm just wondering how that affected the news reporting and everything. You know the things that you were covering because weren't you doing--you were doing crime and--okay. Speaker 2: Because now the Black Panther Party becomes a factor and that's big news nationally. The late '60s [1960s] at that time, Robert Kennedy was shot. I was very involved--oh the [American] Indians had taken over Alcatraz Island. I was very involved in covering Native American stories. I did a lot of reservation stories, you know, dirty water and exploitation, things of that sort. So I was very much into doing, you know, the group that was being treated worse than black people in this country--Native Americans. So I was doing lots of stories about Native Americans. I then became really interested in schools. I did things about school busing, basically, was the big story in and around the suburban communities in the city. My first series I remember doing a story out in the suburbs of Oakland--a town called Richmond [California]--and going out there with a white photographer and getting caught on a cul de sac with some guys with a rifle and, you know, and told to get out of the town. So those were some pretty hot days. Lots of stuff going on. Speaker 1: And when did you decided--were you finding your voice at that point. Were you, you know, building your confidence level, you know, feeling maybe you were deserving of, you know, the opportunity. Were all those things happening? Speaker 2: I don't know if I ever got that far because there was always a new challenge. You know I started out as a reporter, then they started me on a very early morning anchor job, then I was on a 6:00 news anchor job. I mean it was always another plateau, you know, the skills level that you needed, and so I was always reaching. I don't know if I had time to get traction anywhere. What I did feel good about was that I was learning to be a good reporter, and I felt good about that. Speaker 1: And what do you consider a good reporter because, you know, a lot has changed in the industry, but what would you define as a good reporter? Speaker 2: Well, I was able to find stories about communities that had been neglected that people found interesting, but nobody had found a way to get them on the air before. That was good and I felt proud about that. I could interviews on with people that maybe had not had the opportunity to get their views expressed before. I thought that was good, but I think it was just my area of interest. You know being interested in Native Americans, being interested in the The rancheros, and the lack of clean water, you know. The story that I went on just before Robert Kennedy died was, you know, up in Eureka [California], up with the Pomo Indians where a developer had come up--had a built a track of homes supposedly put in. They had put electric stoves and refrigerators in them because you could bill the government for them where there were no power lines, no gas, and no electric lines into the reservation. So there they were, cooking on hibachis on top of brand new stoves because they had--so it was exposing those kinds of stories and that's how I ended up in the helicopter with Robert Kennedy. I had been working on these stories and he was going up there to see for himself. So it's, you know, it was those big moments like that that I really liked, and I mean it was just--you know, covering [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.], covering some of the peace rallies, demonstrations, riots, those were--sometimes they got singular stories out of that, made friends with people. Speaker 1: You know the newsroom had--he did not stop, he didn't--you know, because sometimes they can be barriers or so that--there was not that happening there. Speaker 2: But see the idea was to hire you so that you would open new doors, so you just--that was not--I mean that came later in life, but back in those times the reason they brought us into the newsroom supposedly was that we would help them cover a broader, bigger community, and both Ben and I worked very hard at that. Speaker 1: Now you stayed at W--, Speaker 2: KPIX [Channel 5]. Speaker 1: KPI--until when? Speaker 2: 'Til '77 [1977]. Story_ID: 6304 Speaker 1: Tell the story of you leaving [KPIX] and going--? Speaker 2: Well they, you know, the whole business was starting to change then. When I first started out I can remember--I love telling this story that my news director at that time--I had just been socializing with somebody from the sales department, and I remember my news director coming up to him and saying, "Don't you ever come on this floor, and ever, ever, again talk to one of my reporters." Because they didn't want the business and the journalism to in anyway mix, and I've just never forgot that. So by the time I left it was a whole new regime that was running the station. So I did what all good people do and think they're being good people. I ran off to public television. I just took a job goodness with the local public television station, and it was a big opportunity. There was a program on the air called "News Room" that is Peabody Award-winning program that grew out--that's the birth of 'happy talk' today--was the first time that reporters had ever sat around a desk and just told stories, and not depend the visuals and TV to tell the story. And so anyway, they were going through some changes because they lost the funding starting a new show that paid less, et cetera, et cetera, and I was asked if I wanted to anchor that new venture, so I left KPIX to do that. But being one that has always somehow had been blessed. I still remained at KPIX even after I went to KQED [public television station] I had pioneered what was called the first prime-time multi-ethnic show according to 'Look' magazine anyway at that time, one of the first in the country. And there were black shows in the east, but our show had, you know, an Asian sub-anchor, a Hispanic anchor, and, you know, and myself and we all took turns having the lead story. I was the chair anchor but other people came in as a co-anchor each week, and so we were covering all of the communities, and we were on in prime time and that was considered different. So anyway, that show I started, so even when I left it was still a successful show, and it was a precursor to 'Evening Magazine' by then. It had evolved into a pattern that the person who started 'Evening Magazine' took our format, changed the color of it, and did the first prototype for the new magazine, and his career went like that. Evening magazine went--and we sort of stayed there doing what we were doing, but we did it for a very long time and we did it very well. Story_ID: 6305 Speaker 1: Back before you went to PBS, I want to ask you; you had also done some important international reporting, right. Can you talk about that? Speaker 2: Well, my big story was that I went to Cuba at the time when Cuba was first opening, and when we thought relationships were going to be normalized. And I went on a trip with [U.S.] Congressman Ron Dellums and a delegation--Alvin Poussaint, I mean it was a top notch group, you know, to look at a number of topics, and that won me a lot of awards. It was a good series called, "Yankee Come Back", that was my first big story I still take a lot of pride in. I pulled out the tape and played it the other day and it's still fun. Speaker 1: And what did you find about-were you intrigued with Cuba and what you found there? Speaker 2: Yes of course, I mean, this was different from anything, and because they were just opening up, I mean, you know, Raul [Castro], Fidel's [Castro] brother, spent lots of time with us, and, you know. We went out to the milk dairy, the dairy farms. We went to Santiago, to Cuba, you know, where to later we get the Buena Vista Social Club. We went over there for the music and dancing, and one day after taking a plane at 3:00 in the morning in a rainstorm to fly over there, I said, "This had better be good." And it was, but it was really great. The Soviets were still there. The missiles were still there, and Fidel was Fidel, and I had a couple of opportunities to see him while I was there and to do a very long interview that some--and this was distributed nationally, so it was a big deal. Speaker 1: And did you also have dealings with Anwar Sadat wasn't it? Speaker 2: I went to Israel just right after--yes, went to Israel right after or right at about the time, right after the signing of the treaty, and the visit from Sadat--and did a series of stories then called "Israel Between The Lines." It seems so naive by today's standards, I mean, you know, we were actually driving around the West Bank in our car, and able to go and visit the settlements, you know, the river Jordan. I mean very innocent days and that, too, was one of the most memorable stories that I've ever done. It was well received and used for a very long time in and around our northern California community for people to get a glimpse of what life was like on the cliffs, Bay Area people who had moved there. I interviewed them--all part of it, as well as the political part of it. Story_ID: 6306 Speaker 1: When did things start opening up for women more? Speaker 2: Oh almost immediately. Speaker 1: Almost immediately? Speaker 2: Not quite for black women but almost immediately because--I'd say within a year the ABC [American Broadcasting Corp.] station had hired a woman--general assignment reporter--and in fact, that woman became very famous named Christine Lund who went on to become an anchor in Los Angeles [California] for many years. She was the Scandinavian and blonde and tall, and I was African American and short. We were the gals. We're famous for a quote from her news director. When--I don't know--some national service asked him about hiring her and he said, "If they told me I had to hire a puppy dog to keep my license I would." So that quote sort of followed us around. Guys would bark when we came in the room (laughs). Story_ID: 6307 Speaker 1: You're husband [Bill Moore] is working also, you know, he is working in tandem with his career, and that's what impresses me is--at how the two of you. I mean you had a failed marriage to begin, but this has been such a long and really productive partnership. Speaker 2: I married a jewel. But we, you know, it's good to have similar interests, similar friends. I must say that helped a lot. I mean we all knew the same people. We were a very small community of both photographers and reporters back then. TV did not resemble what it does today. People actually welcomed us when we showed up, happy to have us, tried to call up to get us to come to places and do things, you know, instead of now pushing away, you know, the cameras. They really wanted us around and it was a different era. Anyway, my husband started in one job and stayed in it for twenty-eight years--started at channel two [KTVU] here in town and retired as their chief photographer. Yes, and we take great pride in helping to facilitate the long term number one anchor at his station who's an African American man named Dennis Richmond who is still there today. We were the sponsors for Dennis to go to the Columbia University [New York, New York] Journalism School--that summer program they had where they were training journalists. Because that's what happened, you know, they finally started this school at Columbia to help minority journalists to find their way into the business, and Dennis was in that first class. Story_ID: 6308 Speaker 1: Are there other things about, you know, from 1963. Speaker 2: When I started TV? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: I actually started on the air in '67 [1967]. I got hired in '66 [1966]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But, you know-- Speaker 1: So that's a 10-year period. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Are there other things that you think were important or reflected of, you know, your time and efforts? Speaker 2: I became a very good conduit for the Black Panther party during that time. I didn't mention on Cuba trip that one of the things that happened was that I became the conduit for Huey P. Newton negotiating his way back to this country. I taped him--he told what needed to happen for him to surrender. I played it on the air. Somebody called somebody and anyway it all got worked out. I had already done this for Eldridge Cleaver before, so I know all these guys, these young men. As I say, you have to realize that, but when Eldridge came back, his--the one condition I knew about was that he would come back if he could be guaranteed that we would get an opportunity to speak to people through an interview process that we would do, which we did. So anyway, I covered a lot of that stuff, and within that same period, we had the [Patricia] Patty Hearst kidnapping, and I really got involved in that, in more than one way. My co-anchor on the show that I did, Dave Fowler, was a very good friend of the Hearst family, so we got access. We got the first interview with Ms. Hearst over this, and so we were on cutting edge on that story. And then there followed the bad part of it in which, you know, the Hells Angels [motorcycle gang] threatened my children, and we had to move, actually had to move. Had to move our children, put them in a different school where security could be better. So those were some very edgy years, and there's probably lots more that I've just pushed in the background, but those were turbulent years. Story_ID: 6309 Speaker 1: Of the people that you've interviewed, any others that stand out? Speaker 2: Goodness gracious. Walter Cronkite. Boy, I tell you that was a hell's day. Can you imagine at the pinnacle of Cronkite's success, I'm sent to interview Cronkite (laughs). It turned out all right, but for me that was a real test because here, you know, you have the king expert interviewing some of Presidents--was interesting and good. Who else have I met? You know the problem with having years go by, everything sort of blends together. I have interviewed so many people in film, I'm trying to think about what era, what walk of life. [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.]. I was privileged to have been able to do that. I loved I just recently had a chance, on my scorecard not on hers, to pay a debt to Rosa Parks. I had the opportunity to go to Montgomery [Alabama] when they dedicated her library and do a really nice long two-part piece about her and all of the people who paid the debt for me. I did it because these are the people that made it possible for me to do what I did. Had they not, you know, walked across that bridge in Selma [Alabama] and walked those streets, I would have never done what I did. I wouldn't have had the privileged life that I had. And I just thought somebody needed to do that and say it. Because television was so integral to the success of that movement, that somebody from this business to say that I thought was important. So, I had the chance to do that. I appreciated my opportunities to go to Africa and report. Only twice, but for me that was a big deal. Story_ID: 6310 Speaker 1: You were mentored a lot when you first got started. Would you just comment about some of the other people that you helped mentor, names that people might recognize that you helped bring along? Speaker 2: Wish I could, but I can't. I can't. Speaker 1: Okay, no problem Speaker 2: No, but I can just tell you this. That there's many a reporter who has said to me, "I looked up there and I saw you and I said, 'I can do that.' " And these are some women who've really become nationally prominent. Speaker 1: Talk about some of the other things that you are involved with, like the hall of fame. Speaker 2: Black Filmmaker's Hall of Fame? Speaker 1: Can you talk about how that got started and what the motivation was behind it and why you felt it important? Speaker 2: It grew out of conflict with the Oakland Museum [Oakland, California] when people were talking about history and the recording of history and there was a black committee, or I'd guess you'd call it, the museum arm that put on a program to honor some early film pioneers. And they, the first year, they did a program at the Oakland Paramount Theater that was a total program was in front of the curtain where they invited people out, but they just had them come and walk in front of the curtain and hand them a plaque and go. And I was sitting in the audience and I said, "This is too precious to leave it like this. This should be a real program." So I volunteered to become the producer of the next program. And, not that year, but the following year was the turn-key year form the program. The other night when I saw Sidney Poitier come on the stage, it was so wonderful to sit there and say to my husband, "He said almost those same words when he came for Black Filmmakers." But anyway, it's a thrill to think that times were so innocent that I could call Sidney Poitier on a Sunday afternoon and say, "We've written you, we've talked to you, somebody gave me your home number. I know you're just getting off the tennis court, but we need you in Oakland and would you think about it?" And to plead with him until he actually went and got and a plane and came that day. I mean it was just amazing to me that that happened. So I guess I have many blessings in my life, but that was certainly was one of them. And the opportunity to say to somebody you know Butterfly McQueen [from film 'Gone With the Wind'], but to call her finally after--not to really call her, because you don't call her, she didn't have a phone, but to get her to a place where there was a phone where you could talk to her and tell her there was going to be this honor and invite her to come and to hear the tears in her voice to know that somebody had remembered her. And then to meet her, because we could never reach her again, we couldn't give her a plane ticket. So to meet her at the Greyhound bus station and welcome her to Oakland and give her a hotel room and give her a plane ticket back to New York, I mean it was just fabulous to say, "We understand why you did what you did." To remember all of the greats who sacrificed so much in film was one of the best things that I've ever done and I had some distant cousins, the Nicholas Brothers [Harold and Fayard], and we were instrumental in bringing them back before the public again. And they came to Oakland and danced on our stage and kept dancing for the next fifty years again. So anyways, that I think is one of the most rewarding volunteer efforts that I've ever been involved with. And I can't thank the people who were, are and became major film stars who helped us by coming to Oakland and participating in this program. Speaker 1: And the motivation behind it was to--you talked about how it got started, but once it got started, it took a life of its own. And I just want you to sort of address that, because it was filling a niche. Speaker 2: It started with--to honor those early pioneers. Then we saw, this was a great lobbying effort, to say to Hollywood, "These images are wrong. They had to do that then, but you don't have to do this now." So, we began to use the bully pulpit to talk about images in films and then we provided, through two women, Mary Smith and Margo Sutter (ph.), we provided a vehicle where these people could come together. For them the best part was we didn't realize that they had no venue in which to meet and talk to each other. And so they would come to Oakland where we would have these little parties, they'd never show up because they'd get a new suite of rooms and they could exchange information and talk to each other. And the deals that were cut between the [Robert] Townsend and Spike Lee and the [Warrington and Reginald] Hudlin brothers and all of these behind-the-scenes people who somehow saw their mutual interests who came to Oakland. One year I remember we had six of the top--the six blacks who had made films were all in the city, all here for our program. And, so we provided this kind of vehicle. And then we would call studio heads, write letters, talk about images and honor those films that we thought portrayed African Americans in a light where we could be proud of them and Denzel [Washington] came with what his film, the war film, the Civil War film ["Glory"] that he did, the first one? I can't recall. The one he got the Academy Award for. I'm so sorry I cannot recall it, but the entire top of the line cast of that film came to Oakland and filled the stage of the Paramount Theater that year. The studio was behind it. I mean, it was just amazing. It was like nobody had thought of doing this. And it made the entertainment newspapers, it got into 'Variety' and we really did drum up a little bit of attention there. Speaker 1: So how did you feel the other night as you were watching, given the work that you-- Speaker 2: Cried. And I called Mary Smith, the woman who was one of the original founders, and I said, "Mary, isn't it so good that we lived long enough to see this?" Because we never thought it could happen. We never thought it could happen. We were just so proud the year that Denzel had come and that was a big, big year. The year of "Roots". That cast of "Roots" came to Oakland. Anyway, just to say, the nurturing meant something and to hear her speech. One of our themes one year was all about standing on shoulders. And to hear her remember that and remember the women who'd come before her, that was what made the night for us, because we had preached that so much to the young Halle Berry and all of the other young beautiful women who came here. We tried to give them a sense of context of where they stood in the evolution of this business that is so important in American society. And that is filmmaking. It's a big thing. It's where we learn about each other. It's where our history lessons are taught. So much happens in terms of people's real impressions of life what they see in film and on TV, which is why we consider it so important to try to bend these areas so that they were more fair in representing black people. Story_ID: 6311 Speaker 1: What strikes me from your interview, is that you still have such a humbleness about you. I mean, for someone who's done so much and you've talked about very little of it, but you've done so much and you're still working. And I want you to address a couple things. One, at the beginning, you were very aware of your deficiencies in many ways. So I'm wondering at what point--that you said you still hadn't, but what point did you find your center that everything was sort of okay. I mean it's okay to have an edge and not get too lazy. You know what I mean or too full of oneself. But there's at some point you became sort of comfortable and the Belva, the child who was looking for their place sort of found her place. And I'm wondering if there was a defined moment of that happening. Speaker 2: I'd say it was very recent. And I think it maybe started, you know, when I was thinking about going away and the honors that came that I didn't think would come my way. I mean it was important to me to get the Lifetime Achievement Award from the [National] Black Journalists Association. That was a very important thing for me. It was important when the 100 Black Women recognized me for, sort of having stayed the course. I mean it was when these kinds of things started to come forward that I--I'm just beginning, that's why I'm just looking on the Internet to find out about my life--that I'm just beginning to understand that I didn't mess it up, that things have worked out pretty good. But I don't think prior to that--some of my friends would say to me, I mean I've only interviewed not that many presidents, but "When you sit down with one, don't you feel challenged?" And I said, "Well, you know, yeah you feel challenged but that's in a different way. These are politicians. It's their job to accommodate you. So that's not the hardest road you've got to travel. So you can't use that as a measuring rod. I think for me, it's been always to not let down the community of people who made it possible for me to lead a wonderful life. And I just have kept working at that. And so it's not a matter of reaching a comfort point, it's a matter of reaching a point where you feel that you're giving instead of receiving. And I'm sort of at that point. Not that I ever did not give, but I'm beginning to feel comfortable about it, that maybe there's a balance here now. Speaker 1: And did you--was there any real disappointments in your almost 40-year career? Speaker 2: Of course there's been disappointments. I talked about my leaving Channel 5 where I had done very well there. I mean all the way from being the new girl reporter that hardly got accepted, to being the six o'clock news anchor. And it was tough on the exit because a new group came in who wanted me to go, but didn't want to fire me. They didn't want the publicity that went with that, so they had other ways, pecking away at my dignity and pecking away at my confidence and it was tough getting through that. And so that was a big disappointment because it didn't have a lot to do with me. I realize these were just people of bad taste. You know, if you work for a producer who walks around the newsroom with a police whistle on and blows it to get attention from people, it's nobody you should judge your own worth by. But it was hard. So that was a big disappointment for me. I guess my last one is that I never got my interview with Bill Clinton as President. That was a big disappointment for me 'cause I interviewed him, but either as a candidate or in that capacity, but I really wanted to do that 'cause it was his last year and my last year. So I worked hard at it, didn't happen. Speaker 1: And are you still looking for your next story? Speaker 2: Always. Always. I mean, Friday nights I'm still on the air. I spend most of the week skimming the news, trying to figure out what those top four stories of the week are going to be, how we can tell them, how they relate, you know my interest is so broad, how I can make them relate to Northern California, and then finding a good reporter that can help tell that story on our air. So, I mean the producing staff, we spend a lot of time going over lists and honing down the selection. And I spend a lot of time gathering my own little list of things that I want to talk about. So, I'm still reading. The computer's made my life possible without having to run around collecting ten newspapers a day. But I still read a lot of news and try to keep up with things. And some of it now it's just to challenge is Gary Retton, it's my young staff. I think sometimes they put stories on the list just to see if I know about them (laughs). Story_ID: 6312 Speaker 1: For young people, for those who are coming behind you on an industry that has changed so much, one, would you advise them to go into this industry, one that has given you a great career? That's one question. And, if the answer is, "Yes." what advice do you have for them? Speaker 2: Don't go into it longing for stardom. You'll never be a good journalist. They just don't mix. You have to go into it because you want to do a service. I mean I'm one of the old-fashioned people that believes that democracy cannot survive without a free press, and that's a free and open press in terms of topics, discussion and so on. So if you go into it looking for your personal gain in terms of celebrity, it's going to be hard to take those stories that won't bring celebrity to you and be really interested in it and work hard and fight for them. And, yeah, it's still a business worth going into. It's harder now for people going in to succeed at doing what I quote "serious journalism" than it was for my era, because I'm not so sure--our public has been weaned into this sort of infotainment news so much so that I don't know if people even know what they should be receiving anymore. And it's going to be a more difficult road. My last battlefront right now is on the battlefront of working to try to save some sort of federal rules about diversity of employment. Also to try to fight as hard as I can against consolidation of the business. Now my friends say to me anyway, "How on earth do you stay on the air being so active and political about these two issues?" I tell them because I've never not been active and political about those two issues. But I think they're a primary importance. Story_ID: 6313 Speaker 1: If you look at the last ten years, are there any events that you think have severely damaged the news industry? Speaker 2: Yes. The abandonment of regulatory guidelines for a business that will consume itself with greed unless somebody stops it. And that's what it is. There's so much money to be made that if your only criteria is the economics of the business, there's no reason to do what the government should be requiring of you in exchange for the free license that you receive to make the money. So, it just doesn't work. And any capitalist endeavor, as Enron has taught us, there has to be some balance. And the way we're going now is to say the only thing that counts is what you deliver to your stockholders. That's wrong. Speaker 1: Things like the O.J. Simpson trial and the Clarence Thomas [U.S. Supreme Court] nomination, do you have viewpoints about those two events and how they effected the news? Speaker 2: Well, let's just start with the O.J. Simpson trial. I think it turned a corner for the news business as a whole and I think we can never go back and that it became a moneymaker. It became an entertainment vehicle instead of a trial where a man was trial for his life. It was the sidebar story, the gossip around, the speculation, it got so confused with fact--even though it was on live, because there was so much analysis, feedback, talk back, expert opinions, that people didn't know, even with all of that coverage, what the facts were. So anyway, it turned the news machine into a money making exploiting machine. And it worked. I mean it out did the soap operas in the ratings. So I think that was very pivotal then what we consider the right thing to do. And then it's led to that same kind of feeding frenzy with other stories. The last one, of course, being the [U.S. Congressman] Gary Condit story. The Clarence Thomas trial, what did that do? It's hard for me to put this kindly, but my exposure had always been to African American men and women who recognized our history, coming up from slavery and realize that was wrong and needed to be readdressed. And this was the first black man who seemed to not be aware of any of that in his heart, I don't mean in his mind, but in his heart. And that was very disappointing to me. Speaker 1: Especially when the community supported him. Almost unwavering. Speaker 2: Yes. Yes. So that was very bad. Speaker 1: Like they supported you. Speaker 2: Yes. Because we want each other to succeed. Story_ID: 6314 Speaker 1: What things haven't you done that you still want to do with your life? Speaker 2: I'm forever on the road, mentally in here, thinking of things to do. I started another phase of my career. I've done some voice works on some documentaries for Channel 4. I was trying to say that I've always worked two jobs. I either worked at KPIX [Channel 5] and KQED [public television station] or KRON [Channel 4] and KQED, but I have hardly let go of the public TV arm. So I'm still working for KRON. So I'm doing some new documentaries for them. I'm finding that's a lot of fun. Not to get out and do the work myself, but I work with a good producer who produces good programs and I get to narrate, so I'm doing that. As to what I want to do? I still love politics. I think I could probably, if there were an opportunity, there were no shows like this, I could probably do a political talk show until they carried me out feet first. I enjoy it so much. I love politics and it was a great run. I had one political program that lasted eighteen years. Can't ask for much more than that. I would still be doing that if I could. I love speaking to decision makers first hand. Speaker 1: And why do you like that a lot of times? I mean the thing is that even that field has changed a lot over the last years. Speaker 2: Yes, it has. Speaker 1: And people are sort of turned off, tuned out in some respects. But what did it for you? What have you liked about that? Speaker 2: Separating, it's not fact from fiction, but I think giving people who are going to vote on things that really mattered in my life an opportunity to explain why they were doing what they were doing, what their reasoning was. And sometimes exposing it for being a false reason and sometimes solidifying and the understanding of why they were going and supporting an issue the way they were. I loved hearing that first-hand and I thought my audience deserved that much from people who they'd sent up to Sacramento or to Washington to represent them. And there really are very few venues in which any politician can really talk about what they think about anything, which is why they're so vulnerable to rumors and innuendoes. I mean, think about how many times in your town, maybe in Chicago [Illinois] you're different, but my good friend there, Dick Kay [NBC-Channel 5 ,WMAQ], who had a program for years and just lost that program, how many opportunities are they in this country where you can invite anybody in and they could spend more than five minutes talking to you about complex issues? It's not happening. Story_ID: 6315 Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be? Speaker 2: Oh boy, I think it would be that my job was my job and I tried to incorporate my life into that job even though it was on television. That I never stopped being a volunteer, that I really tried to be a good mom to my kids and I worked sometimes while doing that fifteen hours a day and made it work. I guess my legacy would just be that I would like to be thought of as having done an credible job while still remaining an integral part of my community. And I don't mean just the black community, I mean now my broader community. I think that would be it. Story_ID: 6316 Speaker 1: What are your hopes and concerns for the black community? Speaker 2: My concern is that, at least in the Bay Area [California], we're losing a sense of community. And my hopes are that enough of us old codgers will stay around long enough to romanticize it enough so that the young successful Silicon Valley banking investment person, you know, will get the idea that they can also be part of this community and still be successful in their business lives. Because so many of them just have separated themselves from the people who look like them because their work world looks different. Where my work world sure did look nothing like me and I think you can do both...