 Story_ID: 95280 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Ma'am, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Okay, my formal name is Leola, L-E-O-L-A, middle initial M., maiden name Higgs, H-I-G-G-S, last name Dellums, D-E-L-L-U-M-S. And nickname that everyone calls me, Roscoe, R-O-S-C-O-E. Speaker 1: Now, how did you get that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--(laughter). Okay. I love the story. I'm one (laughter), I am one of six girls born to my, to my parents, and I'm the number two daughter. I was born--I hate to tell my age--but five days after Pearl Harbor, in a blackout in California, and that was December 12th, and that was when they thought the Japanese were gonna come to the mainland and bomb. My mother was seven months pregnant with me, carrying me; during that blackout, she slipped, fell, or something, and I came early--as they say, like a fast pistol. And if you know anything about the gangster movies of the '30's [1930s], you know, Edward G. Robinson, or any of the tough guys, they would always say, "Are you packin' your roscoe?" And that's a nickname for a fast pistol; so, that's how I got the name. Speaker 1: Okay. (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--I'm my dad's--I'm my parents' fast pistol, let's put it that way (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now, where were you born? Speaker 2: I was born in Berkeley, California. Speaker 1: Berkeley, California. And what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm an attorney-slash--I, I actually do some acting now; I've been doing some performance work--slash writer-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and you can continue--I guess just slash me all the way (CLICKING SOUND AND DEMONSTRATION), but-- Speaker 1: All right, okay; and what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Huhh, okay, do I get--how many guesses? (Laughter). Well, let's see; it's June 12th (laughter), 1903--June 12th, 2003. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? And you don't have to give your address. Speaker 2: Okay; you're at my home in Washington, D.C. Story_ID: 95281 Speaker 1: Good; okay. All right now, before we go into depth-- Speaker 2: Emm-hmm. Speaker 1: --there are five light-weight People Magazine-ish type questions that we always ask. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I don't know why, but we always ask 'em. And they just require a short answer. The first one is what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: My very favorite food--whoa!--quick, quick, quick. My junk food would be like pistachio nuts, my fruit would be like watermelon, my favorite vegetable is spinach, and--let's see, I love barbeque spare ribs; don't tell anyone (laughter). Speaker 1: We won't (laughter) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--And pound cake if I make it. I prefer to do my own baking, so I, I bake a lot of delicious goodies. Speaker 1: Okay, so you have a lot of favorite foods. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Oh, my favorite color; I'm wearing it now, as you can see. This is my birthstone, and its turquoise, and I love it, and that's actually my favorite color now--my birthstone. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: I love the Christmas holidays. Actually, I love the holidays starting from Thanksgiving, and then Christmas and New Year's, and any days with celebration--my birthday, the birthdays of my loved ones; I think that just about--you know, Mother's Day, Father's Day if--as long--it's the date of celebrate--Easter. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: I love Martha's Vineyard and--usually if someone says, "You wanna go anywhere?" If I wanna go, I--Martha's Vineyard or Sausalito in California; I love that. I would say those are--would be--and I love to go to Europe, so you can take me to Paris if you'd like, anytime. And I love Italy--love Rome, and Postatona (ph.) in the--which is an island in Italy. I love England--a lot of the European countries that I've traveled to when my former husband was a member of NATO [North Atlantic Treaty Organization]; I just love Europe. Speaker 1: Okay. And do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Hmm. What is my favorite phrase or saying? Actually, I don't--I'm not really too good with, with those. What can I say? Oh, I, I don't wanna repeat it (laughter). I know what it is, now; I know what it is, now. My girlfriends and I--my girlfriends and I have a little sound we make that people always know it's us; I don't care if--if I--wherever I am in the world and I run across some girls that I grew up with in Berkeley--we developed a little squeal and, and it's just like going Terry! Terry (SPOKEN WITH SQUEELING SOUND); is it--am I clear? Speaker 1: Emm-hmm (ph.). Speaker 2: And that's just sort of a--to acknowledge that I'm somewhere in the room, and we can hear ourselves across any hall, at an airport, train station; and these are my Berkeley--my little Berkeley sisters, the ones I grew up with. And we've been--we've kept that, and I can't tell you how old that little sound is now; I would say it's a good--over fifty years old. Story_ID: 95282 Speaker 1: Now, let me ask you about your family history, and I'm--how--first of all, how far back can you trace your history? Speaker 2: I can trace it back to the Revolutionary War. I had--there was a member of--on my paternal [sic maternal] side of my family--my grandmother kept rather accurate information and data about her family and, and it was actually because her family were free, and so--and they arrived here on what was called an Allen (ph.) Grant--the Allen Grant; and you know the--King George would give certain land grants, and people would come to the colonies for various reasons, and they came, my side of the family, to raise tobacco, and they went to the Virginias to the Shenandoah Valley of Virginia. Speaker 1: Now, are these black people we're talking about? Speaker 2: We're talking about a white seaman and we're talking about an East African woman that was his, his woman. And we're talking about the off-spring of that Allen--of that family; and there were the Holcomb's (ph.), and there was an Officer Holcomb who fought in the Revolutionary War, and he fought--what was it? In the American--I think it was called the American--I won't say cavalry, but right I'm a little uncertain. And that makes my family part of the Black Patriot Society, and so this--are you familiar with the Black Patriots? Speaker 1: No, (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Okay. Black patriots are people who are trying to get others to recognize the contribution of blacks during the Revolutionary War, and to have--they're trying to also raise the monies to put up a memorial to acknowledge those persons who were actually here who made this country free from England. Speaker 1: Now, is this the memorial that's being planned for the Mall? Speaker 2: No, it isn't that; now, that's not to say that these people will not be mentioned; this is a separate memorial, not unlike the recent--the Civil War memorial that's been recently erected; I think it's been maybe two years now. They have that, and that's for blacks who fought in the Civil War, in which there are three members of my grandmother's family in that one as well. So, there's the Officer Holcomb and my family from the Holcomb's, the Wanzers, W-A-N-Z-E-R. And the Wanzers took up residence--they were in the Shenandoah Valley and had--and were farmers. And my maternal grandmother's mother is a Wanzer, and they have a very interesting history; they were involved in the Underground Railroad from the Virginias through Canada, they had family that died at Harpers Ferry-- Speaker 1: Who was it? Do you remember who it was? Speaker 2: No, I just know it was members of--someone in the family--was--died at Harpers Ferry. Now, what other--I have different accounts. My grandmother has written most of this out; she used to talk to us as little kids, and always tell us about--give us these stories. Story_ID: 95283 Speaker 1: And I think the Underground Railroad was the most impressive, I mean it's because, you know, when, you know, the train station--you're thinking there's a train and it's running underground. I guess some--something like a subway is what I used to envision, but she would tell us the story of how slaves were put on this train (laughter), and were--escaped to freedom. And in my family--we had family that was involved in that, and some that ended up in Canada as well. And the--my--my--okay, that was my--the maternal side, the Wanzers. My grandmother's mother married Reverend Jones--Reverend J.W. Jones, and he was a minister--American Baptist, and they moved to Berkeley, California, and he is the first minister--first pastor of what is known as McGee Avenue Baptist Church. When my--when he was there, it was called--first called Mt. Pleasant; so that's a very significant church in Berkeley--very well-known (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Now, they did they move from--they moved from where to-- Speaker 1: From--they went from--Reverend Jones was--they went to--they lived in Ann Arbor--they lived in Michigan. My grandmother, my maternal grandmother, was born in Ann Arbor, Michigan. So the family went around like this. Speaker 2: Were they part of--I mean their underground--I mean the Underground Railroad activity (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Was that like through Detroit [Michigan], or through Buffalo [New York] and that other part of Canada? 'Cause there's two streams that come up (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Well, what I know it's whatever--I think the Michigan part, whatever was around (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yes, Michigan route is the route through Detroit to Chatham [Canada] and Buxton [Canada] and all that, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, it was interesting because my grandmother actually married someone from Canada, and I used to think, 'Well, was that someone that was deposited there?' I didn't get it, but turns out that he was--my grandfather was what we call West Indian? And you forget--I mean I forgot, or didn't know at the time, that there were Africans just everywhere; the African diasporas just sort of spread everywhere; so, that was my father's father. Okay, getting back to the Wanzers and the Joneses, my grandmother was born in Ann Arbor, Michigan, and the Joneses were--some of the family was--it's Chicago, but they were in someplace before Chicago [Illinois] was called Chicago; it was like some kinda Mohawk--some Indian [Native American] area. Speaker 2: Potawatomi--the Potawatomis were there, but could be Evanston, Illinois or (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--And--but it was--but it's near what is now Chicago, that sorta thing. And my grandfa--someone in--who was it--was the very first African American to--what was it? He was the gun--gun potter (ph.) inspector, and it was like the very first African American to have a--I can't call that a position, but it was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, probably a government (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Like a government-type of position, and--let's see--in their--my, my--and their friends were the very prominent educators and ministers of, of that time, including like Frederick Douglass and that sort of thing. My--I, I gave you a rather detailed list in the material that I gave you, and I--my memory--I don't wanna--it fails me sometimes for all the specifics 'cause most of this is written down. I was very fortunate to have my grandmother document a lot of this. This was also part of a school assignment when we were little, and they used to ask us to--about our family tree. And they used to be very surprised that some African Americans were able to trace that tree and, and I could not do that same kind of tracing on my father's [Leo Higgs] side; I could do so far, but--in fact, I got to the--my--when we get to my father's side, which is another interesting thing, I'll tell you. But that was the side that had--was--my father's side, there were slaves. Story_ID: 95284 Speaker 1: My grandmother [Esther Jones Lee]--my, my grandmother married Lee--George Lee, and he worked for the railroad, and my grandmother--I'm trying to remember all of this. They had three children (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Now, this is in Berkeley [California], right? Speaker 1: No, I mean--when they married? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: No. They (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--to George Lee (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--They were married--my grandmother came to Berkeley around 1903; she came around 1903 following her father, but--and my mother--my--she and George were--let me see--when they married, and I believe they married in the Bay Area--in Oakland, but he got there on--through--on a railroad--through the--working for the railroad. And they had three children and which my mother was the only surviving child, and she was born in 1914; she was born in Oakland, California. My grandmother was an educator; she was a teacher, and she taught in Chillicothe, Missouri before coming to the Bay Area. And--so she was well-educated, so that was--let me see--what else can I say? So she was actually like the historian for our family and tried to make it a point that we would understand that history, and then I realized that not only that, she came with her own involvement--her own social involvement--her own club involvement, and she was very, very active in the--it was called the Federation of Colored Women's Clubs, and she founded like the Phillis Wheatley clubs on the West Coast. She was the founder of the Linden Branch YWCA, which was the first YWCA in the nation to integrate, as I--as the story was told to me and the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--There's something about that name; I'm just--sorry, I didn't wanna interject but there's something about that name Linden (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, Linden, L-I-N-D-E-N (ph.) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--that has to do--did you know who Linden is or--'cause there's a Linden Center in my home town (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--So the Linden was--yeah. (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, there was something about that name. All right, well, we do keep (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Well, we will find it; it's a name that we should know, and I was--I have a friend who is the dir--executive director of the YWCAs and she told me that was like their most important YWCA, which my grandmo--because it was the first one to, to integrate. And I was like very surprised about a lot of this because I didn't know that something like a YWCA was--was segregated and that black children, and black girls and boys could not--were not welcome there at that time. And she and a group called Mother's Charities they did a lot of these wonderful things, and they, they also founded the Fannie Wall; so there's another name for us to know, the Fannie Wall Children's Home, and that was the first home for children who were orphaned and foster care children. And so these were like significant institutions in the Bay Area. Story_ID: 95285 Speaker 1: My grandmother [Esther Jones Lee] also headed up the Anti-Lynch Campaign for--she was--for the State of California; she was very close to Earl Warren and she had to deliver all this--votes and different--she had to do the lobbying before [President Herbert] Hoover, and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Just to be clear for those who are watching us, who don't understand who Earl Warren was, Earl Warren was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Earl Warren was our governor, and he also became the chief (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Chief justice of (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--of the Supreme Court. But I mean I used to know--he was--I knew him personally; I mean I--my grandmother was very--actually, they were--they were good friends. And (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--There's another question on--in terms of the Anti-Lynching Campaign-- Speaker 1: Emm-hmm. Speaker 2: --was, was lynching an issue--well, was it--was she involved as a--with lynching as a national issue, or was there concern in California (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Well, the--it, it was, it was--there were concerns of lynchings in California, but it was a national issue because it had to have been like a referen--you had to take it the--just the same way--just like statehood; we're tryin' to get statehood here, and we need to get so many senators and, you know, members of Congress to, to make a, a bill; to, to legislate either for or against something. Speaker 2: I think that people would be surprised that it would be a California issue; that's just a (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Ab--absolutely; but California, remember, was a very--it's like--it was one of the new states; very rural, attracted a lot of people from the south and all around, attracted a lot of new immigrants 'cause they had all that land. Remember, it was devastating to the indigenous population--California--the west. There were issues around the Chinese--the ones that build the railroads; then, 'course, we had the Japanese--we had anyone around the Pacific Rim issues; it was not just this, you know, real progressive liberal place. The Bay Area was unique in that because of the University of California and people it attracted. Also, I mean I grew up, you know, during the [Joseph] McCarthy era, in the '40s [1940s] and the '50's [1950s], and many of our teachers--one of the reasons we have so many--had so many well-educated teachers were people who were red-listed, or is it black-listed? (Laughter). Black--they were labeled reds--black-listed; so they were able to practice in their own professions. So, say, they were going to be scientists or whatever, and they couldn't get those positions this way, so they taught science in our schools; or they were our--they were our elementary school teachers in (unclear), so we had this incredibly bright group of teachers. We benefited--our schools benefited from that kind of disgraceful period, but there--California--the northern part was full of--it's the largest agricultural state in the nation, and so you know, there were the farms and all of that, so there were little areas. I mean blacks--if they--could be so isolated. The migration of blacks really didn't--they came during the war economy--during the time when there was war, and my family had already been there, but they started to migrate there, like in the '50's [1950s] and during that period, and they settled in Richmond and Oakland. Most--my father--and here we're skipping around, but my father was the first black realtor; he was the first black realtor in Northern California. Speaker 2: We're gonna get to him (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Right. So--so, you know, he--it was like a boom town at one point and, and believe me we had--it was--as friendly as, as the Bay Area was in Berkeley, it was segregated pretty much--how can I put it? There were certain areas that would seem like they were all-white, even though I lived in the integrated area; so I mean people had the choice of living anywhere but--except in those other areas, and that was through the, the redlining and the--that sort of thing. There wasn't open housing, and that's one of the things that my father was involved in, and we can--we'll talk about him later. Story_ID: 95286 Speaker 1: And then--again, back to my grandmother [Esther Jones Lee]-- Speaker 2: Emm-hmm. Speaker 1: My grandmother's mother, Mary Wanzer--there were three brothers, and their father took them out of the, the Shenandoah Valley home when the war came, when the Civil War came, when they realized that even freed men, free people, were not going be protected by the federal government. And so the land--the home was--homes were being burned and they were being taken and that sort of thing and he took the boys out especially; they wanted to get the boys outta the house, and they all went and they joined different--one joined the 54th Mass., one joined the Ohio Volunteers, and one joined the First Michigan, so that, that was--they all fought in the Civil War. And--what was I getting ready to say? Oh, I had a great time with my son Eric, having to go and get the, the war pap--get the papers and military records, so that everything could be documented so the names could be engraved on the Civil War memorial, and in reading that it's just interesting, and that's how we also found out some--there were sort of repeats of what my grandmother had told us in just reading. I had a--one of them, Amos Wanzer, was fighting for his pension and he had been wounded, and he was having to go, you know, to a Tribunal and, and--to fight for it, so he had to give all his family background and the history, and he had to bring witnesses. So, even in his testimony--and I have that; that'll be fun for you to see all of the old records; we have the old Census records, too, that shows you where the family was at different times. Speaker 2: You know, it seemed to be a theme; I've heard this so many times now, that black soldiers had to fight for those pensions-- Speaker 1: Oh! Fight! Speaker 2: --they couldn't even get 'em; they had to fight for 'em. Speaker 1: Had to fight for 'em. And what was interesting is that he was wounded; he was shot in the head, and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Was he the one with the fifth--do you know what (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--He was with the 54th. Speaker 2: Fifty-Fourth? Speaker 1: Right, he was with the 54th. And what was interesting is that he ended up--he had another ill--he had a illness; he had Syphilis, but they called it the Pox. He didn't know that he had Syphilis. And we're reading all this and we're,--"A little too much information for us now, right?" But it was interesting because the federal government said he was--the debilitation was more from the Syphilis than it was from the, the head injury, and that's what they had to fight over, you know, and it was just so--it was very sad. But what was interesting is when you--I'll be able to show you the papers--is to hear how articulate and, and, and they wrote beautifully, and that sort of thing--he was in stating his case and, and also how we were able to gather our history through war records. I thought that was very interesting, so he could say, "Well, my father did this, this is where we lived, this is where he took us, this is"--and so some of this is--I tracked it just through his testimony 'cause the--he has to do exactly what I'm doing right now, answer a lot of questions, you know. Story_ID: 95287 Speaker 1: And--but it was kind of a very--it was sort of a sad tale, and--but my family was very proud of my grandmother [Esther Jones Lee] because of her history--was one of the first blacks to apply for DAR and, you know, that's the Daughters of the American Revolution; she had all the cri--she met all the criteria, and--but, of course, she was African American and it raised such a storm. And, and there were other--others that did it--some after, so I don't know; she was one of the first that I ever heard of. And it was an embarrass--it's--you know, she was really trying to embarrass DAR, and they had to openly say, "Well, we're not talkin' about any--all daughters" (laughter) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Talkin' about the white daughters. Speaker 1: Yeah, the white daughters. And again, that's why the Black Patriots are so intent on getting their story told. I mean everyone knows that--was it Crispus Attucks? Speaker 2: Crispus Attucks, yeah. Speaker 1: We knew, we knew he was there, but somehow in our minds, maybe we think only one person was there, but there were definitely others. And, and my grandmother took a lotta pride in saying that, in her family, someone fought in every war in which America was engaged. And so I think that was, you know--I mean I--I mean I could be a flag waver, you know. I don't care who came to Ellis Island; I mean we were there to make sure that they were comin' to America, you know. So, anyway--my grandmother--again, I, I tend to focus a lot on her because recently she was so distinguished by--Congresswoman Barbara Lee [HM] of California put into the Congressional Record during Black History Month a lot about my grandmother. Speaker 2: Okay, now, what is your grandmother's full name, and can you spell it for us? Speaker 1: Her name is Esther, E-S-T-H-E-R Jones, J-O-N-E-S. So it's Esther Jones Lee, L-E-E was her married name. Her--Jones is her father, Reverend Jones, and her mother was Mary Wanzer Jones. Story_ID: 95288 Speaker 1: What can I say? Now, my mother was the only living child of the, the Lees; my mother was Esther Lee, and my mother was a Berkeley [California] native, and part of the--what they call the California Native Daughters. And they have a--the, the African American Natives Daughters took pride in gathering history about the Californians, and so there was a--there's an historical society in which they would make these contributions about these different stories. So they were there to talk about what blacks did in California, and the natives--they would get together and they would, you know, assemble things, and they would keep the record straight, and the made sure that our history was accurate on the West Coast. My mother excelled at the piano; she was a pianist, and she was--she, she studied at Julliard, and when she graduated from Berk-UC [University of California] Berkeley, and she would play--also played at her, you know, grad--at the church, my grandfather's church, at Mrs. McGee, and she did weddings and recitals and all that sort of thing, but she married my father, who is name's Leo, L-E-O--Leola (laughter)--Leo C. Higgs. And my father was the first black realtor in our--first black realtor in Berkeley and northern California. Story_ID: 95130 Speaker 1: The, the Jones--the Reverend [J.W.] Jones that your grandmother is talking about, that's her father, right? Speaker 2: Right. Reverend Jones is my, my mother's father. Speaker 1: All right, okay. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Now, I, I mentioned (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Illinois; did you mention Illinois? (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--John Jones, the businessman--the tailor from Chicago, who was a prominent abolitionist and a businessman who owned buildings in the loop that had to be purchased by the city; there's large tracts of land that John Jones owned; he was one of the richest men in Chicago at one point. Speaker 2: Well, it's so interesting because I have pic--I have a--I can--I have--my grandmother had pictures of him, and they were (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--He's related to the Reverend Jones? Speaker 2: To Reverend Jones. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's my grandfather. I didn't really know much about how significant until this book came out that I--there was a book out, and it was about Jack Londen, the famous writer and adventurer, who was from Oakland [California], and he--his nanny was a black woman who was friends of my--with my grandmother, and there's all this story of--in--there's a whole book on their relationship, and my grandmother and mother and Jones--this Jones that you're talking about, all of them are mentioned in this book. And my grandmother had been giving pictures and different things to the Negro Historical Society--Mr. Losartomey (ph.), who was the, the head of that historical society; I'll make sure you have that, and they have pictures of the person that you're speaking of, the Jones, and they talk about him as being a wealthy--what did they call him? Businessman-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --and, and they thank my grandmother for giving them this picture on loan or whatever, of him; and he and Reverend J.W. Jones, they're related. That's my grand--that's my mother's--that's my, my mother's father, so he was like a grand-uncle or someone down (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Just for the sake of somebody that's watching this, Lloyd Wheeler [HM] of Chicago, is the great-great-grandson of John Jones that we interviewed last year; he's 97 years now, but it is interesting. Speaker 2: But what's interesting is that you start to find your family-- Speaker 1: Emm-hmm (ph.). Speaker 2: --that's another thing; you start to find your family. I--when I started doing just the research for the Civil War Memorial, I began to find my family, and someone else called up and they were saying, "I'm a Wanzer; I have Wanzers in my family." And they, they would say, "But my family was involved in"--and they'd said, you know, "The Underground"--I said, "And?" "And then they went up to Canada"--"And?" And you know, and so it's that sorta thing. My grandmother talks about--I mean--Chicago, and I have newspaper articles, I have all these different things, and I am so tickled to find out the other relationship; I mean I knew it was there but I--there wasn't too--we didn't really focus on it as I should have, especially now when I can ask somebody for a loan (laughter); that is great, that's good--yeah. So they're, they're, they are related. (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--That might be the, the John Brown connection with the person (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Oh, wherever I said Harpers Ferry--absolutely. Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause John Brown was in Chicago and he went up into Michigan--had his major meeting before Harpers Ferry; his major meetings were in Michigan and Detroit--I mean in Detroit and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Detroit (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--and in Chatham, Ontario--1858, '59' [1859]. Speaker 2: Well, I have all, all these wonderful articles and pictures, and with Reverend Jones and them calling different meetings in Illinois, in Detroit and all when--'cause that's where he was before he came to California, to talk about what they would call the race problem. And then they would let you know who was coming to speak, and it would be people--I mean they had things that said, "Langston Hughes will be here, and so-and-so will be here," and they named all the different names, and "Reverend J.W. Jones will be officiating," you know--whatever, and that's my family. Speaker 1: Well, that's important history. Speaker 2: Oh--and, and it, it really is. And what was so wonderful, I mean what's so exciting about it now, I'm tryin' to put it into context. It tells you a lot about what--the kind of values that were being instilled in us, you know, to be well-educated, to feel good about ourselves, to appreciate our history, to research and to embrace that history, to keep it alive, to share it, you know, with our generations, to fight for accuracy. Story_ID: 95131 Speaker 1: My grandmother [Esther Jones Lee] used to say--I remember when she was president of, of the--I said the Federation of (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--of Colored Women's (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Colored Women's Clubs, and the Federation was before, you know, the National Council of Negro Women; they were all part of that federation before it became like the National Council; I believe that's how it was. But my grandmother was the--a club woman with Mary McLeod Bethune, and my grandmother--I mean they would--they had these meetings; they met just like the Congress, and they all had assignments and they all--you know, they would assemble, and they had a--very important agendas, and it would art--there was different--they went through all the parliamentary procedures, and they had a real--I mean it was unbelievable, and my grandmother was given certain assignments, and she was like the emissary often for Mary McLeod Bethune. And Mary McLeod used to speak highly of my grandmother, and I remember being a little girl and my grandmother always kept us underwing, you know; she would, she would take us to expose us to all these different things as little girls. I mean we were like in the--they had the NAACP girls (laughter), just like they had, you know--we had all these little--but anyway, she took me to one of the big conference--conventions, and it was in Los Angeles, and first thing they would say is, "We wanna make sure you go down to the Golden State Insurance Company and visit that building." You know, we stayed in a black hotel on Adams, you know; wonderful businesses, and here's this insurance company. Then, there would be this group assembly of all these women from all over the country, and Mary Church Terrell came to this one when I was nine, and I was her page. And she was this elderly woman, and I was the one that was to pass the little notes between--you know, and everyone--they revered her. And I knew she was someone important because everyone was saying, "Mary"--and then she told her story; she told the story when she was a young mother and she had a baby, and the baby needed some milk, and she couldn't get milk. She couldn't go to wherever, because they weren't gonna let her go in there to get milk, and it was something that was just so--it stunned me as a child, you know, as a young girl, to hear this, and how, you know, things that sort of motivated these women to fight, you know, to desegregate these facilities and to do these things. Then my grandmother's--well, no, there I was, and Mary Church Terrell, being kissed by her, holding her hand, you know, her petting my face and telling me--you know, looking me in the eye and inspiring me as a little girl. And I mean--I mean--it could have been--I couldn't have been happier if it were Eleanor Roosevelt, you know. And these were women who also, you know, conversed with Eleanor Roosevelt. But you know what I mean; it was like--it was just wonderful. And I take my kids now with me; I was taking them, we would go into a, you know, maybe a museum or someplace where they would have pictures that were taken of people like Mary Church Terrell, and I'd say, "I know her," and I would tell them the story and--you know; I mean she's like--real, you know, like Madame C.[J.] Walker is real, you know; these are real people. Story_ID: 95132 Speaker 1: But my grandmother's [Esther Jones Lee] mission also--she was called the one woman picket--they used to say this about her because she would go and picket--walk--you know, walk back and forth in front of these places that refused to serve us around the State Capitol in Sacramento [California], and then she would just get on the phone--like one time she had us--sometimes, she would have two of us--two of my sisters--sisters and I--maybe two or three of us, and we would go in and we were always, always dressed up, and we'd go in like, to one of these restaurants, and we would sit down and they would not serve us. She would go the phone and she would call the governor, and he would come in his car, and come and get us. And it was like, "Oh, there's the governor." But I mean it was like--she was trying to make a point, and she would--so he appointed her to sit on the Central Republican Committee for one of those committees to discuss--you know, with my grandmother (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--This is Earl Warren? Speaker 1: Earl Warren. So there was my grandmother all in the mix of what was going on in California politics, what was going on in national politics, being part of a, a national organization, being part of--in fact they had a Esther Jones Lee charitable club named after my grandmother, after she died, because of her charitable work in this sort of thing. But it's--then she got involved as an educator, making a point that we needed black teachers in these schools, you know. We were like--I mean I went through school and there were, you know--and so she was considered a big force around integrating the, the personnel--making sure that there were some black teachers, so that was her voice; she was doing that sort of thing. Speaker 2: At the time, did you have a sense of your grandmother's (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--I knew she--my grandmother was important, I knew she was important. I knew that she was--she was our--she was a disciplinarian, she was very serious, she was very smart, and she would tell us--I knew she was important because important--so-called important people would always come to see her, and she was like a senior; she was senior to people at that time. And she used to travel a lot at first; and as she got older, she wasn't traveling, but there was a lot of letter-writings and there were, you know, those sorts of things, and she was a, a beautiful orator and a, a, a beautiful writer. And people would, you know, call us the Higgs girls because of my father, but they would say, "That's, that's Big Esther's granddaughter," or "Little Esther's daughter," and everyone would just be in awe, you know. I mean it's--and--but I think we were not--we were well-centered and well-grounded; we were not elitists in that sense. My grandmother--she wasn't real--it, it was--she was a Zeta [Phi Beta Sorority], and she may have been one of the first Zetas; my mother was a Delta [Sigma Theta Sorority], and we are all--all my sisters and I are AKAs [Alpha Kappa Alpha]; we're in the sororities. So we did the sorority thing; it was attached to going to college, but if anything else was like some social club, they were not a part of any--just, you know, we're just gonna have a club for fun? You know, one of those kinda just social clubs; they were around organizations and clubs that were doing something. What was I going to say? My grandmother--there were club meetings and things that were still held in our home; she just wasn't going out as much, and so I learned also that I knew when it was gonna be a club meeting and how important it was and all the beautiful way--ways of preparing the, the food and the flowers and all of this and, and the women were so respectful to one another, and they were--they all--they had a mission outside of just their families. Story_ID: 95133 Speaker 1: My grandmother [Esther Jones Lee] would tutor; if I had friends that were struggling in school or anything--or other people, she could tutor. She and my mother spoke about three different languages, so they were fluent in German and, and French and Spanish, you know, they--and I knew that our family was a little different in this--around the cultural aspects because we all had to dance and play an instrument; I played the cello. My sisters and I played--two of us played the cello, one played the viola, two played the violin. My youngest sister, Otto (ph.) Six (ph.)--she died when she was 4, when I was 10, in a tragic accident, but all of us had to do music. We all had to do well--we all did well in school; that was very important to our family. We were very--we competed in a healthy kind of way, we ran for office; most of us held all the top school offices, but we also were in sports. Our summers were filled with either music--music workshops, you know, for theory, always had to do bible school; church was always close to us. We had seasons tickets to the symphony, and we did--I mean I remember going to see Josephine Baker and being brought up on the stage and, you know, and she brought my sisters and I on the stage and I, you know, we were like these little, little things; she said, "I'm your Aunt Josephine," and I told everybody from then on, "Josephine Baker was my aunt" (laughter), that sorta thing. My father (simultaneous)- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Now, let's--let me just interject. You talked about your mother's side of the family and their way-back history and brought us kinda up to--almost up-to-date 'cause we didn't talk about your mother in detail. Speaker 1: Right. Story_ID: 95134 Speaker 1: Can, can you tell us about your, your father's [Leo Higgs] side--the slave side of the family? Speaker 2: Well, you know, it's really interesting; my, my cousins, which are Higgses, found a lot of information for me about my--my father was a--my father never talked much about his family as much; I met his mo--his--I met his mother, or my grandmother; she lived in Marysville, California, and she was part Blackfoot Indian [Native American] and African American, and her mother was on a reservation. It was kind of a sad story how they moved from Oklahoma--they were part of a--what was that movement--the migration of Indians (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Trail of Tears? Speaker 2: Trail of Tears--that was part of our family. My father was born in Des Moines, Iowa and his mother went back to a reservation at one time, and then (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--They're Blackfoot, you said? Speaker 2: Blackfoot. And they--I'm trying--how did they get to Marysville, California? I can't--I don't know was Oklahoma, California; I forgot how all that--but she was, at one time, the oldest living resident of Marysville, California, and Earl Warren did the party thing--sort of like Willard Scott, you know, they do that--recognize oldest residents--resident. My father was an only child of the union between his father and this woman, but there were other siblings that were--had the same father; he had other wives, and his father was a minister and his mother was a teacher. And my father was educated, undergraduate school, at Bishop-- Speaker 1: Bishop College in [Marshall] Texas (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--in Texas. Speaker 1: --that's now defunct. Speaker 2: That's now de--and he did something at school called Wiley; I don't know these colleges. Are you familiar with these? Speaker 1: I've heard of that school. Speaker 2: And then he went into business and he went to Stanford [University]; worked on his master's at Stanford. Speaker 1: Now, can you give us your father's full name? Speaker 2: It's Leo Cicero Higgs-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--When was he born, and where? Speaker 2: My father was born in 1892, and he was born in Des Moines, Iowa. Speaker 1: Okay. (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--and remember, my mother was born in 1914, so you see the difference in age. Story_ID: 95135 Speaker 1: And you said he [her father, Leo Higgs] could, he could trace his family back to slavery? Speaker 2: Well, I knew there was slavery on that side of the family--not so much for having conversations with my father, but for the--from the, the cousins on the, on the Higgs side; and they do reunions and stuff, and what they did for me was also brought me, and I'll show it to you, the, the white Higgs's--the slave-owners, the ones that my family's named after, and shows the lot, the plo--there was some big family, and there were different plots of land that the father gave to his--and I'm part of one--our family's part of one of the Higgs plots. And so the Higgs name comes from the slave-owner, Higgs, and I have a picture of the, the first--I have a picture of my father and I have a picture of his father, and I have a picture of--and I have all this history where you see the, the Zachary Higgs, which is the white Higgs, and I've been in contact with white Higgs's; it, it was this kind of a weird thing, but once I realized that was going on, and they gave me the names and my cousins and I decided, "Well, let's see what's goin' on here;" I mean I--it wasn't so much that--what was it? You know what--was it the President [Thomas] Jefferson--it's not so much that kind of interest, but it was--because it was something--a different kind of story, and it was a little--it was a little more limited; you have to kinda like pick at it. Then, my grandmother's which was so--just this profuse history and information, but through the family reunions that the Higgs's gave, they were able--they kept piecing and piecing, and giving me a much more composite picture of that--of the family. Story_ID: 95136 Speaker 1: My father [Leo Higgs]--I know that he was a war hero in World War I, and he was heavily decorated, and he saved a commanding officer; I can re--I learned all this, I mean he lo--he used to love the war stories. And he was also--because, as you can see the age difference, he fought in the Spanish-American (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--He was born in-- Speaker 1: Eighteen Ninety-Two [1892]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Is that right? Speaker 2: Yeah, I think he would have probably been a little bit too young to fight in the Spanish-American War, but he may have--maybe he may have served in a (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--served in one of those (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--In the, in the 25th Infantry, or the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--I wanna say Spanish-American--the--I have the name--of the army? Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--He was in the army; yeah, 25th or something (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, it would have been (unclear) 25th Infantry-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --down in Texas; he went to Bishop College down there and seemed like (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--so that may have been--that may have been; I just can remember him saying the Spanish (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah; the Spanish-American War was in 1890, so he would have been a kid (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Okay, okay. I can, I can hear--remember him saying--but my sister Mary talks about him being--how was it? World War I; she talks about Teddy. What is--now, what was Teddy? Speaker 2: Teddy Roosevelt [President Theodore Roosevelt] was in the Spanish-American War-- Speaker 1: See? Speaker 2: --and he was alive during World War II--we won, in fact. I think he ran for office around that time; he didn't win. I think he had already been pres--he was president twice; he bracketed somebody else; I can't remember exactly who it-- Speaker 1: What--they talk about that in part of my history, my sister that was putting some of that together. I'm saying, "Oh, Daddy's thing is so confusing." But I have his (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--but that unit did fight in Cuba with--the 25th Infantry (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--I, I believe that and, and I (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--so if he was in the 25th Infantry, maybe they, they got that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--and I can show it to you because I have--also took a very accurate picture one time of the gravesite at San Bruno, you know, 'cause it was a military place, and it let you know private so-and-so in the, in the infantry. Story_ID: 95137 Speaker 1: But he [Leo Higgs] was known as the father of--the pioneer of black real estate; that's what they would call him. And he was a architect of the California Fair Housing Legislation, and that was what opened housing. And it was a bill that was carried by Assemblyman Byron Rumford and that's one of the families I think you would have a lot of--I think he was our first assemblyman--black assemblyman. Speaker 2: When did they--when was the Fair Housing-- Speaker 1: Well, the Fair Housing Legislation didn't take place until the '60's [1960s], and my father died in '59' [1959]. Speaker 2: Okay. So he set the stage for (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Right, 'cause, he was--you know, real estate was--they needed--he was the one that helped them with--well, number one, he understood what that meant in terms of a businessman, and he had to--this is very interesting story I heard, and I was talking to--and I'll make--I'm gonna--this is another name--one of the--my father's protege's who went to Berkeley and decided to, you know, go to real estate, so my father mentored him; his name is C.J. Patterson and that's someone I think you'd be of interest to talk to as well. But anyway, I was talkin' to Mr. Patterson 'cause I was trying to, to, to get some more history about my father and wanting to know was there like a black realtor's union or something, and I was just trying to pull together--I've got some pictures of my dad, but I really wanted him to tell me some specifics, and he said, "Well, your father had a monopoly on real estate in the Bay Area and in other places in California, but he had to pay a really big price and he had to pay protection money, at least they had to pay the Italians protection money." I said, "Ooh, what is"--you know; and I never thought about how--we have a large Italian population but I just never thought about any of that. And there used to be like a regular basis--on a regular basis, someone that he had to pay. And he was taxed--what was it? My father--he said, "Your father sold the first homes--integrated the first areas," and they told me the different places in--but they made him pay a higher tax--I mean--I don't know what means, but they have to pay for it. And, and they let him know how far he could go; he could only go to--like a certain street that was almost like our own Mason Dixon Line; maybe Shaddock (ph.) Avenue, or one of those streets in northern--but the area was full of a lot of businesses, lot of Asians, Hispan--some Hispanics, and we were like South Berkeley, close to--like we could--you know--close to Berkeley High-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --that sort of thing. But it was a--my father also had--did loans, he did fire insurance, he did--my mother was a notary; I mean they all--they did all the things, you know, everyone--anybody wanted--my father--it was my father. And most people, if they bought a home or leased or rented, it was my--through my father. Speaker 2: Now, let's link this up if we can. Now, your mother is the daughter of an activist, basically-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Oh, yes, very much an activist. Speaker 2: --highly-educated daughter of an activist, and here's your father in real estate, he has his military background and of accomplishment (unclear). He went to--you said he went to school in California to--after Bishop College, he went to-- Speaker 1: He went to Stanford (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Stanford? (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--for his, for his--to work on his graduate degree--in business. Speaker 2: Now, now-- Story_ID: 95138 Speaker 1: Is this when your mother [Esther Lee] and father [Leo Higgs] meet? Do they have a story about how they met? Speaker 2: Oh, you know something? Yes. It's a love--I guess it's a love story. Actually, my father had married two or three times, that's what we were told, and my mother--I mean--so he was this eligible bachelor at some point, and my--everyone knew Mr. Higgs, and they said that my mother used to pick roses in front of his house--pick his roses; and I guess he just sorta liked her, and she was--you know; even though (laughter), even though there was that kind of age difference, but it was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--not unusual (laughter). (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--(laughter). What is that? Speaker 1: Men don't seem to have a problem with younger (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, I mean really; but my mother didn't seem to have a problem with an older man. They say that she was actually very--found him very--very interesting, and she--and the funny thing was--so they had that kind--it was just one of those kinds of meetings and she caught him in-between wives. But they said that my mother had envisioned herself as someone who was not going to marry, but travel and have many lovers (laughter). You know, she was very romantic, you know, music and the films, and all the--the arts just made her feel--she wanted to go Europe and she wanted to travel. Story_ID: 95139 Speaker 1: And so she said what was so funny is that when she [Esther Lee Higgs] got married, she started having children, and she had--like a child almost every year; I mean one of us a girl, a girl, a girl. And my father [Leo Higgs] and Eddie Cantor were friends, and they used to--Eddie Cantor kept having these girls, and they would--they used to--my father (laughter) had one of those, like a diary, or whatever he wrote in, and he would say, "I'm going to the hospital, pick Esther--another girl, darn it!" (Laughter); that kinda thing (laughter). And so (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, Eddie Cantor, for those who don't know, who's watching this, was an American-Jewish comedian who was popular in Vaudeville, and then on television (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Right, right, and, and had five girls or something and--and it was so funny because my father used to have Eddie Cantor's picture in his office, and they would, they were communi--I don't know how they met, they communicated, but my father, you know, through his travels it meant a lot; I mean he gave us a party with-- and Sugar Chile Robinson was the entertainment. Do you remember Sugar Chile Robinson? He was like this young--he was a, a protege; played the piano, they used to have him on television. You better put that down--Sugar Chile Robinson; he was like a biggie. So my father gave us a a party and that was the--and had Sugar Chile Robinson. My father also sold Earl Father (ph.) Hines' home in Oakland. Speaker 2: Oh; he was a famous piano player. Speaker 1: Yeah, Earl Fatha had his own band--Fatha--Fatha Hines-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --but--oh, what can I say? My father was--being a Higgs girl was like a big deal--being a Higgs girl. Being my grandmother's granddaughter had a different kind of significance, but in the small city of Berkeley, being both Higgs and also Esther Jones Lee's granddaughter, it made us--we were like a celebrity family so to speak, you know. And we were looked after, and spoiled and, and protected; we were protected by those hand-full of black teachers that finally into the school system. The other people of significance--I grew up--like the custodian at the school would be like a big deal 'cause usually, that would be a position that a black man would hold, but it was a professional position they can--and that sorta thing. People that were involved on the railroad, so we knew all those people; we knew all the other business people. My sister's--one of my sisters, her godfather was the first black barrister in, in our area--George Vaughan (ph.), and that's--so that's someone else you should know. And all of the other first, you know, we would know--all the first. We would know--the--including--let's see; well, Berkeley only had one high school, and it had three junior highs, and we had the little satellite elementary schools. And so, even--by the time we got to Berkeley High, you know, everyone would, "Oh, that's a Higgs girl," you know, that sorta thing, and that's the way it was all the way through school. Story_ID: 95140 Speaker 1: Now, you've got the general outline of what's goin' on, so I want you to reflect back on your own personal recollections of some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up-- Speaker 2: Emm-hmm. Speaker 1: --and--yeah, that's basically it, yeah. Speaker 2: Good. I'm glad you said that. My cousin, [Antoinette] Toni Broussard just, just authored a book last year, and it was called African Americans' Holidays and Traditions, so she has a lot in there I contributed--a lotta recipes and all these sorta things that come from my family, and--the sights and sounds; okay, I grew up in a family of music, and I--in fact, upstairs I have a white Baby Grand piano which was a wedding gift that my father gave to my mother, so that's--you know, when I see the piano, it's like I've seen my mother. And we grew up where the piano was the alarm clock in the morning; my mother would get up and she would play, and we would--we knew it was time to get up; we did a lotta things around that. We--the other sounds were the sounds of our string instruments; there was always a lot of sound. There were sounds of laughter and applause because we always had to perform. We danced--my sister Mary was in the--danced with the San Francisco Ballet, and she was like the star of the Nutcracker, so here's more like, you know, a little black ballerina. And so I grew up around lots of music; Berkeley [California] was one of those special places, and they encouraged--our recreational systems and school systems encouraged the arts. Academia--we were considered--when--at--when I was going to school, Berkeley High was one of the top public high schools in the nation. We grew up with the--with a lot of diversity, and so it would not be unusual to see, in our home, running in and out, people of all ethnicities, people of all different religions. So we, we grew up feeling very much global in our view of the world. Story_ID: 95141 Speaker 1: We grew up, grew up during a time of great change; all the wars that I can think of--I mean I'm a, I'm a--post-war--World War II. I was born in 1941, so that war was still going on. Then, there was Pearl Harbor, there was the Korean conflict; there were all the wars; in fact--and the [Joseph] McCarthy era, as I mentioned, so we grew up with--in a lotta debate. You know, the first television, the--so we knew all about--you know, things were being brought to us in many ways, and because my family was political. I mean there would be--people would come and they would talk about who you're gonna support, who your--and I can remember hearing people saying, "Well"--my grandmother would say, "Well, how does Harry Truman--how does he treat the people that work for him?"--you know, things like that; those were the discussions. We would know little intimate kind of details about these people, as oppo--and we would find out that there was this kind of really large black community, and they relied on each other for information, and they made decisions based on what was best--what was in our best interest, even down to how does this president, or how does this candidate treat the people who work in his homes?--that kind of thing. And I grew up around religion, and I grew up having--you know, my spiritual growth was as important as any other area of growth. And I really--what was really interesting is to grow up and never really feeling inferior; I didn't know what that meant. I mean I remember one time I had gone to--on a snow trip with the orchestra; I played the cello, and someone saw me and they called me a nigger and they threw a--they threw a snowball at me. Well, I was there with my classmates and stuff, and so this snowball--I mean my classmates threw snowballs back, and I knew I was--at first, I felt really odd; that was a odd thing, you know. I knew I had been singled out, and I went home and I told my grandmother, you know--my grandmother lived with me; and I said, "Do you know someone actually--someone called me a nigger." So my grandmother, she sat me down and she just said, "Well, you know, that was someone who just wasn't very well-educated; it was someone--"--she would give me this sorta thing. And then she said, "So when--next time someone says that, you call them an ignorant Caucasian." (Laughter). So, when this--another occasion happened and I--someone called me a nigger, and I said, "You're an ignorant Caucasian" and they said, "No I'm not, you are" (laughter), and then we started this, "No I'm not, you are," and it sorta makes a lotta sense, right? It's just--but we kind of--we grew up outside of the southern Jim Crow system, and--but we grew up having to be aware of what was happening in the world around us, and I--and I think that I grew up perhaps the best time; I mean I'm so glad that I grew up through the decade of the '40s [1940s]; the '50s [1950s] which I thought were just--enormous change was going on in the '50s [1950s], and then of course I was a young woman. In the '60s [1960s] I started--I started college in 1959. Story_ID: 95142 Speaker 1: In the--when I was in high school--in my ninth year in high school, my teacher was taken out of the school; he was labeled a communist, and here--I was one of the students had to go before a Committee of Un-American Activities; I went on his behalf, and this was a--you know, he was a teacher who posed a question to the class. And I mention this because we grew up, as I said, part of the debate--being really not sheltered but, you know, here I am; I'm--now I'm involved with the, the, the McCarthy era as a student, and the question posed was, "What would you rather be, a slave or someone working in a factory during the industrial revolution? Go home, talk to your parents, come back." So, we went home and 'course I went home and I talked to my fam--my parents, and my grandmother said, "You never wanna be a slave, you know; you just never wanna be a slave; I mean the factory workers, you know--whatever." She says, "You just--you never wanna be a slave." So, I went back to school and my grandmother--you know; and we had such little information about this and, you know, for some reason, the white kids thought slavery was this kind of neat place, you know, you--someone's takin' care of you and you eat watermelon, you dance, you sing, you're happy. And so we were saying, you know, that's--our parents--so they took a vote. "Who wants to be a slave?" You know, and all the white kids' hands went up. "Who wants to work in the factories?" And the (unclear)--our hands went up. And so finally, our professor--I mean the teacher said--I love this teacher, Mr. Tadesko (ph.), by the way. Everyone knows that he was the most loved teacher at Berkeley High; he, he passed not too long ago, but also got reinstated obviously, but at the time, he said, "That's incorrect; you don't wanna be either." He said--and he told us about the conditions of working in these factories and how horrendous they were. And he said, "Both of these are economic systems--slavery and the--and what was going on during the industrial revolution." It was so heavy, so--you know; so we got really into this. What happened? One of the parents felt that he was being critical of America and America's--and he was teaching us these terrible things, and that is how he got labeled and how he got--became a suspect of being a communist, and that's--and they took him out, and--we've got--I mean these are wonderful arti--news articles and stuff about all of us--the few members of the class who had to go and explain the assignment and, and the different people that wrote petitions, and the parents that stood up for him. But I realized that was part of history, and I, and I--you know, you know; I mean it was like--I lived through that. So my life was charmed in that way, coming out of that era. Story_ID: 95143 Speaker 1: Now, I wanted to ask you--I want to go back to grade school for a minute. What grade school did you go to? Speaker 2: I went to Longfellow Elementary School. Speaker 1: Longfellow. And (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--And that was in Berkeley [California], and this was a school that had, when I went, maybe three black teachers, and had one male black teacher that--I had never seen a male--saw a male prin--we had a principal, but it was funny because what happened, he came during a time of the war, and most of the men were gone--had gone to war, and apparently he must have been deferred for some reason, and it's--Mr. McGregor, one of the popular ones. But Ruth Actee (ph.), who was one of the--was our first black teacher in their school system, Miss Young who be--who--and that's another--these are all--I mention these families 'cause they were all significant in the Bay Area--Miss Fran--Frances France. And then maybe one other. And I--anyway, I went there and I went to--then I got little honors and things; I have all my--I have to show those to you. Then I went to junior high--it was called Burbank Junior High, and that was also in Berkeley, and I--it was the most integrated high school--junior high school in the city, and it was located in West Berkeley, and that meant I was able to then go to school--most of the Hispanic kids lived in West Berkeley, so I got a chance to go to school with Japanese, Chinese, Hispanics, Whites and African Americans; we were all there. And there I did very well; I mean I ran for office, I, you know, was in the orchestra, I was voted the most popular in my class, I did--excelled in sports, got my first kiss. I mean everything happened in junior high; it was just wonderful. So, my esteem was like really growing; you know, I was getting prepared for the things that were important, you know, good citizenship, doing well in--you know, doing well in school. My father used to always say, "Oh, that's great! So, look at this; you got a--that B? They weren't giving A's in this class" (laughter). It would be that sort of thing. Then I'd say, "Oh, so important." My parents made it important; it was important to do well because they got such a charge out of it, you know. I'd say, "Oh, Dad, I got a--now I gotta get a A." And my sister Mary was getting straight A's in the, you know, and that sort of thing. So we realized that bringing home good grades and bringing home--being recognized for citizenship and the things that we did were important. Story_ID: 95144 Speaker 1: My grandmother--again, the whole charitable thing. We had to give up time to go to Fannie Wall Children's Home to play with those orphaned kids, so we had to give--and that was the thing that we had to do also on our weekends. And so it was pleasing--you know, and then we had to be active in our church; like to do something in the church (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--And what was the name of your church? Speaker 1: That's McGee Avenue Baptist, the one that my--I mentioned earlier. And then my mother wanted us to visit all the other churches around, and she knew all the ministers 'cause you know how it is; when your father is a businessman, every--you know, every--there's a public relations thing I learned from my parents, that's why I was--I--I'm--was good in politics, you know. It's, it's--before it was over, I mean I knew all the--I'm--before it was over--I mean we went to--visited all the churches, we knew all the ministers. My mother said, "You are not confined to this church; this is gonna be your faith, whatever--it's gonna be your faith, you have to choose it." When we grew up--when we were little, we went to McGee, but as we got older, she said, "I want you to spread around and get to meet other--and see other faiths and stuff." So, anyway--and, and, church was a very social thing; you go with your buddies to whatever their churches were; I mean I was like Catholic when I wanted to be and, and then I was Baptist and, and I was, you know, whatever the other Protestant denominations where my friends went. Junior--and the church was an integral part of our lives; I mean a lot of our social lives were structured--was in the--was around the church. Story_ID: 95145 Speaker 1: Now, did you have a full social life at Berkeley High School [Berkeley, California]? I mean did you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Oh, yes. Speaker 1: --attend the prom and all that sorta thing? (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Well, I was, I was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--and was it fully--'cause a lotta schools that integrated in those days did not have that, so I just wondered if (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Oh, yeah, we were an integrated social club-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and we started the very first black social club for girls; it was called the Bathenians (ph.), and Berkeley had social clubs and they were like structured like fraternities and sororities, so when kids graduated--when we graduated from Berkeley High and went off to like University of California or what have you, these were like their sister sororities being built, and there were no black ones. So, we decided we were gonna have--we were like the Y--Y Girls--Y Team, and so we had one--a meeting; my sister was a year older, and she looked up some Greek names and came up with the name Bathenians; we wrote a little symbol and we organized and we (unclear) am, a--someone that would act as our senior advise--you know, like our advisors, like chaperones and all that sort of thing. And then we went--and our parents went to find out how these other social clubs got chartered; I mean how did that happen? And it got to be a big--it was a big (unclear); now, that was a big thing in Berkeley, and it was like news--"Berkeley High girls trying to start social club," you know--"Negro girls trying to start a social club." And they had to go before the city council, and parents were saying, "Well, they're gonna have dances; if they have dances there'll be black boys, and then the black boys are gonna wanna dance with the white girls, and"--we were goin'--we were already--it was so funny 'cause those were--those worries--we were like a generation that sort of had our own blinders on, and we had, you know--we had white boyfriends, green boyfriends--we did everything those parents thought we weren't doing, you know; we just did it, and so I, I found Berk--it, it worked much better in Berkeley, I hear, than maybe in some of the other neighboring communities, this sort of--this social experiment. In, in both Berkeley High and in my junior high, I held office--my sisters and I always held office; whatever the highest office a girl could run for, we ran for it, and we beat everybody. And, and we did--what can I say? I mean I was in all the--I was in the school plays and the school productions, I was a pom-pom girl, you know. I mean, you know, I (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--So you had a full--pretty much a full experience (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--A full (simultaneous)-- Story_ID: 95146 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Now, what were your favorite subjects in school? Speaker 2: Well, I did very well--I did very well as a public speaker, and I was in the--you know, we had what we called a--they had clubs, like Public Speaking Club, Spanish Club, what have you. I did well in--I loved--I was a writer, you know. I started writing poetry when I was about 9, so I was encouraged to write, so that falls in under English, right? But my very favorite things were mainly dance, theater, the writing, the speaking, and I used to represent Berkeley High in speaking, you know, speaking--like we had debate teams and speaking outside; I, I would do that. And there was also--there's a comedian named Paul Mooney that you may know, and he's quite controversial. And Paul went to Berkeley High with me and he and I used to be on a dance show when we were in high school, that's like American Bandstand. So, I--we would get off--we were like the little celebrities; we'd get off and it was called Dance Party, and it aired in San Francisco, and would beat American Bandstand in the same time slot, and--it's called Dance Party, and so we were like the only blacks on--in that, and I did that for a while with Mooney, and then he--and then he would have other partners, but--so--yeah, we had a (unclear). And then I also represented--I was selected by my theater teacher; I'm a, I'm a national thespian, by the way. I was inducted into the National Thespian Society, and that was quite an honor. Florence Schwimley was my drama teacher, and the theater's named--if you go to--the Berkeley Community Theatre is the Schwimley Theatre. And she kinda hand-picked me and I was one of her proteges and they have a statewide theater workshop, and someone gets selected from all the--from the high schools to go represent their school, and I was selected to represent Berkeley High, and I went to it and it was--they held it at San Francisco State University [San Francisco, California]; that's how I ended up going to State. Story_ID: 95147 Speaker 1: I, I was supposed to go to Mills [College, Oakland, Califronia]; I was one of the first blacks--I was one of--admitted to Mills College; that's an all-girls college. And my mother [Esther Lee] wanted me to go there because Pia Lindstrom was there, and that's Ingrid Bergman, the actress, her daughter Pia was there, and my mother says, "That's where you're gonna go." 'Cause we used to go up--go to Mills and--for horseback riding, for archery, or for whatever those kinds of things that these little finishing schools offer. And my mother says, "We gotta get some black girls up at that school." And so that's where I was supposed to go until I went to this theater workshop, and I went there during the summer, and then my father died that same summer in '59' [1959] and--but the theater department there seemed like--I thought, 'Oh, I could do this.' And I thought about going into--majoring in theater arts at first, very briefly, and--but I--I ended up, you know, getting a degree in sociology and I got, you know, my whole attitude change, and I (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--So you went to Mills College? (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--No, I end up going to San Francisco State University-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and it was cool because I went there to continue also their theater, and then when I was there, I was their--the first black pom-pom girl; I was the head one, and that seems like--here I was from Berkeley High, to San Francisco State, and you know, I was very--those are very competitive things to be. They ran me for Homecoming Queen--and this is a white college; and the black students ran me--the handful, and it was large competition, and they kept narrowing it down, and this was one--it was city-wide, we were on television, the--whoever wins was the hostess to the City of San Francisco, and I--and then we have a student vote. So, the black students organized rallies so they'd have like Johnny Mathis or Willie Mays or, you know, whoever it was--a, a, a celebrity, to come, and that's how they would introduce me at, at a rally. "Come hear" you know, "Handy play," or, you know, "Come"--so a lot of the, the local celebrities--'cause Johnny Mathis went to San Francisco State, and a lot of the local celeb--the jazz--Handy was jazz, we had--the Giants was our baseball team, so we--they were able to get some of those athletes to come because there was this black girl vying for this position. So, I got on the court, I, I won the popular vote at school, but the, the city fathers of San Francisco did not wanna have a black (laughter) hostess, and that was like 1961. Speaker 2: Hmm. Speaker 1: It was a little--you know; but it, but, but--the, the kids--we took it to court. I mean it, it was like a big deal at that time, and it was like--I was very impressed by the tenacity and the support, and the fact that we knew how to challenge those kinds of things, and that was, that was a, a very significant thing that happened to me. Story_ID: 95148 Speaker 1: What else can I say? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Were there any teachers that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--That's where I met my first hus--my first--my only husband--huhh? Speaker 2: Okay, that's where you met Ron Dellums [HM]? (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Well, really met him there; he was at State, and Willie Brown and some of these folks were all at San Francisco State. Speaker 2: Tell us some of 'em; I mean Ron Dellums was there? Speaker 1: Emm-hmm. Speaker 2: Willie Brown was there (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Willie Brown was there (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--He would be the mayor of San Francisco. Speaker 1: He's the mayor of San Francisco now. Speaker 2: Emm-hmm. Speaker 1: Let me see (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Anybody else? Who else was there? Speaker 1: That--Oh, goodness; and I know there's some--there were other people there; I'm just--my sorority sisters are gonna kill me and so are the Alphas and the Kappas and--anyway, those are probably the, the two that I--that stand out in my mind right now. Willie was a senior, and Ron was in the class maybe right behind Willie; they were both Alpha brothers and--when I came as a freshman. But because I was doing so many things, I heard what Ron--the story Ron tells is that his father made a bet to see if he could get a date with me because I was, you know, he--his father saw me on television, and I guess the rest was history 'cause he did get that date, but (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Did he see you on television as the queen of (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--When I was running for homecoming queen; and--so--and then our sororities and, you know, we did a lotta things, you know, together, the sororities and paternities, because there were so few blacks on any campus; the only way you could get a sorority going is that like--my (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--You had a city-wide chapter? Speaker 1: City-wide. You'd have the charters, like my--Ron's charter's San Jose State. So--okay, Ray Norton--you remember Ray Norton? He was a track star? He's the one that Wil--Wilma Rudolph took off her medal and gave to him in the--that famous Olympic thing, and he was considered at one time the fastest man alive. I mean there were all these kinda guys, you know. And--oh, I told you Johnny Mathis went to State, so--he was ahead of us--ahead of us, but he was, he was a track star at our--as well. Speaker 2: Well, earlier was--as early as Ron (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Oh, I'll tell you who else (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Bill Russell was there a long time (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Well, Bill Russell is from--yeah--Danny Glover, he was a--younger--about two or three years younger, and--now they're all coming back to me but--but there weren't--you know, it was, it was not--there was not that many blacks. Story_ID: 95149 Speaker 1: It was a time that Africa was becoming decolonized, so it was very interesting; and we had a lot of African students. There was the war in the Congo at that time; there was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)-- You got Congo in crisis with (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--and they came in (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)-- Patrice Lumumba (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Exactly, and they removed all those students. There was the Biafran (ph.) Nigerian War-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and they re--and we were--the Biafrans were at school and it would--I mean--we were like in the middle of so much of that. The African--the Afro-American Society formed, and we were like--tryin' to be Pan-Africans. Speaker 2: Was ASA (ph.) (unclear) a part of that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Well, let's see--Ron Karenga. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, this is when we--we were all involved in the beginning of Kwanzaa-- Speaker 2: Emm-hmm. Speaker 1: --that was our endeavor (ph.). (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--That's in '66 [1966] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--That's a little later on-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --but it was in the '60s [1960s], but Ron Karenga was at UCLA-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--and Ronald Everett (ph.) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--and he was majoring--I--we knew him because he was majoring also in other languages--Swahili--and knew all that sort of thing, as I can recall. I mean I used to know--see Ron all the time; I mean I knew him when he was wearing a suit and--and my brother-in-law, Bill Hollowman (ph.), was also one of the founders of the Afro-American Society, and--but my city was--I mean I grew up with Huey Newton; Huey was in my class. Speaker 2: (Unclear)--yeah. Speaker 1: He's Berkeley-- Speaker 2: Berkeley, okay. Speaker 1: --and--in fact, he and Paul Mooney were best friends. Speaker 2: I didn't know he was ASA (ph.); so he grew up in Berkeley. Speaker 1: Yeah, he was in Berkeley, but he got--you know, he went to a lot of schools, but he was--I knew him from Berkeley. In fact, he married--he married a girl who, who I held in my arms when she was born, who lived up the street from me--Slaughter was her last name. Her mother was the realtor with--Huey's mother-in-law was a Jewish realtor who kept pushing to integrate housing; her name was Arlene Slaughter-- Speaker 2: Hmm. Speaker 1: --and Huey married her daughter. Her father was black and the mother was Jewish, and they lived up the street from me. But she was very, very active in forcing--you know, getting rid of that red-lining. She was, she was fabulous woman. And--let's see, who else was from my era, from my district? I mean it's just the most politicized area--era--era? Area--and area. So, I mean--so the Panthers grew up there; I mean they were all around there and I mention Huey and them. (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Nathan (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Oh, I know Nathan Harold (ph.) Docker (ph.), yes, Nathan Hare (ph.). Speaker 2: Was Opa (ph.) Dashoka (ph.) there at that time? (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Bishop Roy Nichols was the minister of one of our churches; he was one of the first bishops of the--what church is that? I guess it was an AME--Bishop Nichols; he just died last year. Let's see--Oh, my God, there was just so much going on. We ran the Free Angela Davis Campaign out of our house in Berkeley; that was a little later on--Angela Davis (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--But--okay (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--But I'm just saying, it was--ju--and, and we were--all the free speech movement stuff and all the--that was a little later, but-- Story_ID: 159670 Speaker 1: Well, tell us about escorting Rafer Johnson-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --now, he's from that area and he won the decathlon in 1960 Olympics (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--He won the decathlon, exactly, and the frats and sororities had a big par--we all got together up at Strawberry Canyon, University of California Berkeley, for a big party, and so I was the designated person to be his escort and--which, you know, I was very flattered, and he was this very quiet-spoken, very elegant person; that's how, that's how I recall him. And he was quite a hero to us, and was--we know he was a hero in terms of what he did, but he was ours, and he was very-- Speaker 1: And other athletes like, as I've said off-camera, like Frank Robinson, Vada Pinson; all those people are from that area (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--All, all from our--well, O.J. Simpson; I mean they're all--and I mean I remember meeting just about--I mean I--the guys that used to come to my house--'cause there were all girls at my house, right? We were always laughing about this. I, I wanna say Bernie Casey [HM], what's the movie star--what's the guy--the movie star-- Speaker 1: I'm talkin' about the early '60's [1960s] now, so (unclear) get too far away from it (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Well, I was just (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--but we're talking about when you were in college right now (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--We were--yeah--oh, yeah, the college thing. But--I mean I was trying to remem--Jim Brown and those--all of those guys, you know; they, they were--throughout the--and the Bask (ph.) brothers and--I mean there was track because of Ray (ph.) Norton, and then we're doing track, and I was trying to remember the names of those tracks. We used to follow the track meets where--that was our favorite. (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Oh, yeah, you could talk about John Carlos [HM], Tommy Smith from San Jose State (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, the San--yeah, San Jose State, I think, had most of the runners; they were known for their--because that was one of the colleges that offered scholarships; San Francisco State did not offer athletic scholarships and Berkeley, I don't think, offered athletic scholarships. So you would--could find these brothers that were coming out of, out of Bakersfield and Stockton, you know, from those farms, and they'd come to play football and do all those kind of things and it was, you know, it was a lot of fun 'cause we got to--they used to put us in cars so that we could go to these colleges to party 'cause there would be these black boys and no black girls and, you know, they were tryin' to discourage social integration still even though, of course, it was happening. So, there was nothing like being one of six girls in--of five girls now--in one family, so all my sorors and--we just did all of the circuit; we did the--all the state track meets, the Fresno, Modesto--anytime University of California was involved in something and, and we just went everywhere. And my father would even take us to some of these meets, and we knew most of the guys; and the ones that were pro--because we had the Giants and what was--we--the 49ers-- Speaker 1: Emm-hmm. Speaker 2: --and then, of course, the Raiders (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Later on, yeah (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--later on. (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, Oakland Raiders start--they were startin' in the American Football League then, right? They were--1960 they started Oakland Raiders--yeah. Speaker 2: And it was--so we got to know all of them and they, of course, they got to know us. Speaker 1: They had the Warriors (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: The Warriors (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Basketball Team. Speaker 2: Well, when you speak about the Warriors, Little Phil Shaneer (ph.) grew up in Berkeley with me, and I used to have to walk him to school, and he was this darling little thing that used to walk on his toes and he was just like growing taller--tall as a weed; and we laugh about all that now, you know, he's my homey, as they say. Speaker 1: He was a great basketball player with the Washington Bullets (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yes, yes, and now he's a commentator; he's, he's a commentator now. And there was--it was funny because different people start to pop up in your life and you realize, "Oh, yeah, that's where it was." Speaker 1: Wilt Chamberlain played with the Warriors when they moved to San Francisco--yeah. Speaker 2: Well, and you know Ron's [Dellums HM] cousin is Curt Flood-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --so he was--I mean probably one of the most significant athletes of our time, and he's the one that through Curt, free agency and, you know, he fought and went to court (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--and she opened up Major League Baseball for (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Absolutely, absolutely; so he's just revered in--so that's-- Story_ID: 159671 Speaker 1: Now, how did you--now, you said you met Ron [Dellums HM] in college--I mean be--a little bit before college-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --but you didn't start datin' 'til after college. Speaker 2: Actually, the first time we dated, I was 17; we went to the movies-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and then when I was 19 when we were in col--when I was in college. And part of this was I had a boyfriend; Ron had a girlfriend but I, I had a boyfriend--he was a little older and--anyway, we ended--we--col--San Francisco State was sort of a turning point, and then when Ron graduated from State and started working on his MSW at [University of California] Berkeley, we used to meet--run into each other at the library, and the AKA's [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority]--I was a pledge--an AKA pledge, and we had to study--meet the big sisters always in the library (laughter). We had to show up, and they wanted to make sure we were, we were doing well academically, and that sort of thing which was, I thought was a wonderful thing. And then I would run into Ron and we'd go have some cappuccino and talk, and that sort of thing. So that was-- Speaker 1: Okay. Now, how long was it before you all got married? Speaker 2: We got married in 1962. Speaker 1: Okay, so it wasn't long (laughter). Speaker 2: It wan't long (laughter); it wan't long, and--in fact, I used to look up, you know, and--you know, there he would be; I was this pom-pom girl and he would--look up and there he would be in the, in the stands--sort of following the team. Story_ID: 159672 Speaker 1: So, so--now, all the while you're growing up--you're in your teenage years, the Civil Rights Movement is going on; I think you alluded earlier that all the--everything from Emmett Till to Brown versus the Board [of Education], you know, the Birmingham (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Well--exactly. Speaker 1: All that stuff is in the news and you're (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--And I'm in the same age. Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--your people and family are talkin' about that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--they're talking about that. (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--and your grandmother and other people (ph.). Speaker 2: Well, I think the very first civil rights kind of thing, if I can call it such, really was around the Japanese in my family, and we grew in a--and a lotta Ja--and my friends were born--many of--some of them--in those camps. And it was a time, with my father being a realtor, when the Alien Land Act was imposed on Japanese, and they were unable to buy property; many of them lost their beautiful homes, and it was like a very, very sad time, and my father sponsored a realtor by the name of Nokamora (ph.), who was perhaps one of the biggest--became one of the biggest realtors in our area--sponsored him before the Realtors' Board, and--again, as I mentioned, that--my father did that and also was an architect of, as I said, worked on the California Legislation--the Fair Housing Legislation that eventually won after--he didn't live to see it pass. But that was one of our first; and then at the--simultaneously as I was recalling--because we weren't getting a lot of information. We didn't travel south, and now I know why we didn't travel, and that was because our parents were protecting us, I think, and shielding us. And if you didn't have family in the south, or someplace to go, I found that out, well, you just didn't go. And when I was about 13--Emmett Till and I are the same age, and that very tragic story about Emmett Till also being a fish out of water, from Chicago, and he goes to Mississippi and, you know, woooo! I mean--as Nina Simone said, you know, "Mississippi Goddamn!" Well, excuse my--and I understand that. And I understand--I mean we talk about Billie Holliday when she sings Strange Fruit. Well, these--this Emmett Till thing really, really got to me. I mean the school integration thing is one thing, but to kill a child was another. And, and for some reason that no one seemed to understand, and the word was that he whistled at a white woman. Well, none of that made sense to me; I thought that was just sorta tale; so I used to say, "I don't believe it." We didn't see it on the news, it wasn't front-page on a--in the Chronicle or the, the Berkeley Gazette, or the Tribune, you know; and so I, I--for some--"Where did you see it?" "We saw it in the Jet Magazine." And the stories were, were told in the black press, and my grandmother read the black press religiously. Story_ID: 159673 Speaker 1: Did these stories seem somehow distant to you, being from a north--or a state that really wasn't in the South? I mean did they seem kinda like a--you say you didn't really believe what--the Emmett Till thing (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--At first I--it was just, it was just too shocking; I mean I had no--it didn't compute. I had no frame of reference for, for, for this. The, the, the business with the school integr-Berkeley [California] schools were the first integrated schools in the nation so, you know, I mean this business of--in fact, we--if you look at my Yearbook, one of the things in the Forward in the Year Book, by the--our principal, is to say how fortunate we are that we could go--our kids could come to school without having the National Guard. I mean we took a lot of pride in being the America America said it was; you know, we took a lotta pride in that. Speaker 1: Yeah, certainly, the Bay Area--well, San Francisco, cosmopolitan (ph.) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--and anytime we came up with someone who had a different attitude than the progressive attitude that was being promoted, we would win; it was just like the, the, the school social club. Well, people were saying, "We didn't want"--but we got that social club. And we also had a integrated social club, and there were more black kids being adopted by white families than any other place in the nation. In fact, it was so many that the black social workers were the ones that were upset about--they raised--made issue of this. I mean I went to school--I mean my friends were, were--you know, I lived next--Peter Percy is like my brother; his mother was white, his father was black. I mean we had all these, these integra--there were many people who were--had--there were Asian mothers and black fathers, and the kids were all of our friends; we never even thought about it. (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--It's not like racism didn't exist there, but it was different from lookin' at a (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Well, it was--but it wasn't like when I went--first went to New York or if you would go these other cities and they said they were integrated--well, they weren't; there was the --there was that community, and that community, and that community, and people never went to the other communities. I'm saying my neighbors were these people, you know; these were the kids. I mean it wasn't something that--you know, it wasn't artificial integration, and many of the people ended up and they got married. Our mini--we had white ministers, you know. The, the, our, our school board president--I mean South Berkeley Community Church, he was white. The one--and, you know, we had the very first socialist mayor. The--what can I say? It, it--in fact, even when I married and had kids and moved to Washington [D.C.], my kids could see the difference all those years later. They said, "Well, where are the people, Mom?" And I said, "What's this?"--well, they didn't see any Asians, they didn't see any Hispanics at that--in 1970 when we came. People were living in--you know, the blacks lived here, the--some whites lived here and, you know, they weren't used to seeing that kind of disparity so, so blatant. Story_ID: 159674 Speaker 1: So when we were--I had a friend whose cousin is Ernie Green [HM], and Ernie Green was one of the Little Rock (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Nine? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--No--was one of the nine; I'm sorry. And--and actually, one of the most prominent ones; I mean we hear about him all the time. And he would come--his family--and his family lived in--his relatives lived, not in Berkeley [California], but they lived in Alameda [California], and they were like the only black family, and that's--you would see a lot of that, the only black family in Wonacrete (ph.), the only black family in San Leandro, the only black family--you know. And it was so funny because I would know them; either my father sold them their homes, or we would be, as I said, we would--they would gather us up to have a party, and we'd go to--now, their lives were different once they moved outside of Berkeley, and these kids were taunted, you know; they were having a hard time. I have a friend, the--Lalita Tademy [HM]; have you interviewed her? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: She's the author of a book that made Oprah's Best List, and it's called Cane River; it was a best seller, it was on the New York Times List for a long--anyway, her family is--you know, she was born in Berkeley, and her family--her father was one of the first major contractors--built beautiful homes, and they moved out to a suburb of Oakland--Castro Valley, and she said they were called nigger every day, and they were taunted every day. They left Berkeley; they lived--they went McGee Avenue Baptist Church and (unclear). And she said it was Joan Tademy who is--I'm very close to, and was telling me this--how sad it was for them, and they had this beautiful home and they were beautiful children. And she said it was--it just--and there was another black family that moved out there, and this--what was so interesting is this--the, the, the, the kid in this family that we grew up with, he could pass for white, so rather--you know, he realized like day two, he couldn't talk to the Tademy's (laughter), and it was very frightening. And that was the same experience that my friends had in, in San Lorenzo, and they were taunted every single day. And these are things that I--now--and I wasn't even witnessing these, I was hearing these. Story_ID: 159675 Speaker 1: Berkeley [California] was different, and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Berkeley was different. Speaker 1: So, I guess what I was trying to get at is--so you, you're developin' like a--did you--did you get active in--well, there weren't any civil rights activities for you to really get involved in (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Well, actually there were because--it was interesting; we were, I think, a little more complacent than some. In fact, the free speech movement was going on, and these were a lotta white activists; they were gettin' on those buses and going (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Mario Savio. Speaker 2: Mario, yes. And someone came to San Francisco State [Universtiy], I'll never forget that, and we had like a--we got together, had like a rally or something, and they wanted to talk to us and they were tryin' to let us know, "Hey, you know, like come on, wake up." I mean, I mean I still had a press and curl; I didn't even know the afros and all that stuff. Well, the Afro-American Society--and we started--you know, there were these debates going on. Malcolm X would come and debate someone up at Berkeley like--who was he debating? What's his name? Oh, I can't recall that. Anyway, Malcolm would come and he would debate, and we'd be there listening to these debates, and eventually, there would be Stokely [Carmichael]later on, and all these, and Rap Brown and all these guys, you know. And Ron [Dellums HM] was in the middle of all of this, and I got into--you know, I was part of this because, you know, we were all like this (DEMONSRATION) at the foot of all these people, hearing what was going on and what their--what the so-called--they were always coming up with what the black agenda was going to be. And we felt a commitment to the blacks that were fighting the War in Vietnam then, and we were designing--we had--my son, Eric, one of his godfathers who went to Berkeley designed a black Christmas card, and we used to do--and my girlfriends and I would create care packages. And I was good friends then with Sonia--with a--with a--poet--poetress. Speaker 1: Nikki Giovanni [HM]? Speaker 2: Not Nik--I love Nikki, but this was someone from (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Sonia Sanchez [HM]--not Sonia 'cause she was on the East Coast. Speaker 2: Sonia Sanchez. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She was on our coast, too. She would--and I think her husband was at Berkeley or something. But Sonia--I used to write poetry; not that good, though, unfortunately. I thought it was great; it was okay, but it wasn't out of the pro--it was--part of the protest was in poetry, so I was hangin' with these guys and they were like, you know, really expressing the times through their poetry. And I came from--you know, I was still--everything was sugar-coated with me, you know, that sort of thing. But yes, we were--we would hold marches and demonstrations and, you know, (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Just like mid to late-'60's [1960s] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--That was later, that was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Black Power movement (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Black Power (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--that hits in '65' [1965] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--And you know, when, when [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther] King was killed; let's see, when King was killed, when, when the president was killed--assassinated, all those--and I was a married woman with, with children, but during our college--during that college time, we were seeing--I was a debutante in 1959; it was a Links Debutante, so we were still imitating (laughter) another culture, you know. But yet and still, there would be maybe the grumblings in the inner-cities, you know, something was about to happen. But, you know, I was--my life was pretty much--just that last little breath of the '50s [1950s], you know, where I could--almost could be Doris Day if, if it had extended a couple of more years (laughter), you know what I mean; it's that kind of thing. Story_ID: 159676 Speaker 1: But the (simultaneous)- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Did you--did you watch the March on Washington on television in '63 [1963]? Speaker 1: Oh, yes, in '63 [1963]; see, but I'm saying, when that happened in the '60s [1960s], I would say the '63 [1963] March on Washington (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, the March on Washington (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)-[Reverend Dr. Martin Luther] King was still (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--John Kennedy gets killed that November. Speaker 1: Yes, and the--our lives--I mean--and I was back in college; I went back to college. I, I got married, I had a baby, I go back to college, but--and every time I would go back, our--you could start to hear these voices, and there were more people coming, and for some reason, they picked the University of California for one of the places to come and speak and debate. And so I knew Form, I was meeting all these (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--James Forman? Speaker 1: James Forman--but I knew all--some of the other significant voices from the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--James Lawson who's actually out in California now, I don't know if he's originally from there, but he was an organizer (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--I'm, I'm trying to think--who was it that just died not too long ago? In fact, he ended up--he had to start wearing a patch on his eye; he had been-- Speaker 2: Oh, that's James Farmer. Speaker 1: James-now, that's who Malcolm debated. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But I tell you who I was really listening to was Baldwin--James Baldwin (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--James Baldwin (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--I was--he was one of the significant people for me because he wrote, one, and it's the first time I really got into black writers, and so I would read him and Richard Wright, and--and, and even though I was in theater, you know, I mean--how much, you know--the, the NEC was in New York but, you know--Raisin' in the Sun, and these kinds of--the same group of plays. But Baldwin, he just stood out, and he was on television a lot, and he was carrying--he was the intellect carrying the debate. I--Harry Belafonte [HM], when he was dealing with the musicians, that was--wow! You know. And then you could see what was going on, you know, Miriam Makeba, etcetera. But even when I was--even Nina Simone, as I mentioned. Some of my education about this world and what was happening to us specifically, as people, came from these people--from the writers and the musicians and, and, and, you would look--and, and--you know, Say it Loud, I'm Black and I'm Proud, or what have you. We started--and it--and, and somehow, I don't know, that black pride just--you know, that whole thing that we are sort of unique and special, our circumstance here, and began to really start to identify, you know--really began to identify and didn't know some of the harshness of Jim Crow; some of the incredible stories of, of people traveling and not being able to, to use the bathroom, and the men having to go into the woods, and all the different indignities. I'd learned--I think it--when we started doing PBS--thank God for PBS films and documentaries. What happened in Oak--Tulsa, Oklahoma; some of the other really kinda major events--the real--the big race riots in, in some of the other--and the real indig--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)-Chicago [Illinios], Springfield [Illinios],, (unclear), Atlanta [Georgia] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Oh! And I, and I said--I would have been a real bitter person because I was--I would have been very much upset with myself, too, because I would have felt a little--and my family a little bit, because I would have felt a need to, to do something, to be more involved, to correct that. Story_ID: 159677 Speaker 1: I mean that's--but, you know, I, I have developed a--such a--as, as much as I love my family and I'm so proud of being from that family, I'm so proud of being part of the larger family of blacks because I--for a while there, I had--I, I really did not know the depth of that, and I never am ever gonna understand this man's humani--inhumanity to man; I'm not gonna--you know, I told someone, do you know I knew more about Anne Frank than I did about anybody in our community; I really did. And I'm saying--and that was so shocking to me but, I mean, I could not tell you about the Middle Passage in, in, in vivid terms; I, I couldn't tell you about individual fam--I mean I could tell--we were just talking about Emmett Till, but think of how many families and how many people have suffered all sorts of indignities in--how many lives have been lost; I mean there just--it's numerous, and no one's taken account because it was like we were that insignificant. And there has been that kind of silence, that tacit silence about the black experience. Speaker 2: Now, when was it--can, can you remember when you may have first been introduced to any black history course, or anybody talk or lecturing about black history as such, you know? Speaker 1: Well, I think the--it was probably--the first discussions I believe came from my grandmother [Esther Jones Lee], really, because she would always say to me, "Oh, look! Look at Walter White." And she would tell us about, you know, something, and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--and she knew Mary [Terrell] Church (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Oh, she knew--yes, and she would know all these different figures and she was--tried to tell us who they were. Let's see, the--'cause they were life members of my father (unclear) of the NAACP, for example. So they knew they could talk about Ralph Bunch, they could talk about--I can't even begin to--a lot of those names-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --I mean that we--so that came out of the fam--it's not in the schools; it was not, it was not in the literature that I read. Speaker 2: But in the mid or late '60's [1960's], would you--were you like a part of the Black Power Movement (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Well, we saw ourselves, I mean, as definitely that; in fact, my kids--that was one of them; they will tell you. We always--they were always given the Black Power sign; they thought the Panthers were the police (laugher). "Here come the police!" they would say 'cause they'd have their guns and their little--their walkie-talkies, and they would always come to talk to Ron [Dellums HM] about something, and--"The police are here." (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--They thought they were actually (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--the police, and if we--one time when Ron's life was threatened, they threatened--all of--my life until--you know, we--the Panthers and different people would take up watch around our homes. Speaker 2: Now, now, we're gettin' toward the late '60's [1960s]. Now, when did Ron Dellums run for Congress? Speaker 1: Nineteen--he, he won in 1970-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --so it was that race. Speaker 2: Okay, so--but before that, he (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--and then before then, he was city council--Berkeley City Council for a few years-- Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: I would say '60' [1960]-what? My daughter was born in '65' [1965]; maybe '67' [1967], '68' [1968]--that, that period. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But the other thing is that I learned about what was going on in Africa--in college; and I learned about South Africa in college--took a course. And that was something else I couldn't believe (laughter). It's amazing what you can't believe. But then, there was the parallel of the apartheid system in the United States, and that's what--that's when it began to, you know, 'course we didn't wear--walking around with identification cards. But in that course, I began to see how restrictive Jim Crow was, and how arbitrary and all of that, and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Now-- Story_ID: 159678 Speaker 1: Tell me if--correct me if I'm wrong, but I think one of the first venues for the South African exiled musician, Hugh Masekela, was from the Bay Area. Speaker 2: Oh, Hugh Masa--yes, I believe, I (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--(unclear) Monterey Pop (ph.), where he shows up on his album called Promise of a Future; he's in a club in San Francisco (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--San Francisco, uhh-huhh-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: That's right, that's right. The--and then also, the--there was a lot of jazz and stuff, you know. We had that whole San Francisco jazz scene, and so--at that time, when I was growing up, we were well-integrated with Latin, Cuba--Latin music was integrated, so we did all those Latin dances and so we really felt the Cuba crises as well 'cause, you now, sorta like the music stops? Sorta like, you know--it was really interesting, we had the Copa Cabana, and Sheila E.--they talk about her father Pete, the Escovedo's, I mean they're from Oakland. So, you know, so they grew up--and, and her, her mother's, her mother's African American and her father--they're, they're--I think they're, they're Hispanics--Escovedo's. But, (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, they are, yeah. (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--they play the--you know, they're drummers (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--(inaudible response). Speaker 2: Right. So, our world also was, you know, our cul--mixed cultures, that sorta thing, through the music and it's--and Latin music. So we had--so we actually began to feel--began--'cause one of the very first jobs that I had after college was at the East Bay Skill Center, and that was an adult education center, and it was from the, the--part of the model city's money, and it was in--my students--I was part of--I helped to develop curriculum for the English Second Language Program, so I had Cuban students, I had students from Puerto Rico, I had students from Mexico, I had--that's the first time I really got a sense of all the diversity, and there was this hierarchy; I mean the Cubans were like, you know, they were the--I mean it was amazing. And this was in the '60's [1960s], so you know where Cubans were--these were the Cubans that were the, the nationals that were here. And I was their teacher; I taught and I developed curriculum. I became very, very close with some--my Puerto Rican counterparts at that, at that school--at the East Bay Skill Center. And--anyway, so I got to learn what was happening there, and this was a, as I said, an adult education center, so you had a large black population that was unemployed, and I began to see the difference in the types of unemployment. We had some that were, like men that had been incarcerated, not too unlike the kind of young men that we see now that caught up in the drug culture and what have you. But then you also had uneducated--those had been migrant workers--gentle, wonderful, soft-spoken men. You had the little machismo men over here, and these little soft-spoken; they were in our older population. And their sisters had gone to school; they were nurses and school--[teachers]. Story_ID: 95159 Speaker 1: ...and the Black Panther Party started. Now, you said you were part of the first Kwanzaa? Speaker 2: Oh, yes; well, that is the--Ron Karenga [Maulana Karenga, HM] was a--he--the--we had a gr--there was an organization called the Afro, A-F-R-O hyphen, Afro-American Society, and these were (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Who founded that? Speaker 2: Well, I know Don Warden was one of the founders, and he's--he has a different name now, but he was a very prominent black attorney, and there was--some of the early persons on--Bill Holloman (ph.), who is--was a prosecutor--prosecuting attorney in, in--Los--he lives in Los Angeles, Bill Holloman. Don Warden is still in, I think, the San Francisco Bay Area, but his, his name is--he now has, has a Arab name (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--An Af--Arab name, okay. Speaker 2: --but he was the lawyer--he was, he was James Brown's lawyer, he was--what's his name? Otis Redding--Sitting on the Dock of the Bay Otis Redding? Speaker 1: Emm-hmm. Speaker 2: And he--and--but--he was a student at--he went to Howard University, and he went to law school, I think, in the--California--in our area. So all these lawyers got together--Bill, and all--all these guys in law school, and different guys in college, these grad schools, and they became nat--well, they started sort of a nationalist--a focus on nationalism and PanAfricanism, and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--These are mostly professionals and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Well, it's like Ron Karenga, he was a college student; yeah, they were--they--they were in grad school. And what it is--as I said, that was a time when Africa was becoming decolonized, and I guess they began--and they were--so there was this identification with our African brothers and sisters, and also there was the intellectual thing because they were beginning to figure out that if we--you know, the kinds of cooperative things that we could do; I mean it wasn't--again, that whole notion of going to Africa, going back to Africa, popped up. Not only that, about what our role was to what was happening in our--the urban areas of our country. And so, I mean it was just sort of--it was this wonderful feeling that we owe--that we owed something to those who had less opportunity to have the experiences that we were having, you know, where we were being, you know, well-educated and, and being able to--rather than just say, "I'm gonna be a doctor or a lawyer," and just go off and make a lotta money; now, we're gonna use that knowledge, we're gonna help brothers and sisters, you know and, and--who are having, you know, whatever the conflicts are in our community; we're gonna change laws, we're gonna do this, we're gonna do that. And that was what the commitment was, and Ron Karenga, as I can re--recall, he was, was known for knowing different languages--Swahili was--and I, I think because of that, some of these principles that you hear about in Kwanza, you know, Ron was able to connect these different symbols and, and these different meanings toward what our--what the African--Afro-American Society's objectives were for unity, for love of family, you know, all those kinds of--so--and what would happen is, Ron would come and, you know, one day he was in a suit, and next thing I know, he was in a buba, and next thing I know, he had a bald head, I mean it was just this transformation, so I've seen him go through all of, all of those transformations. And at the very same time, when we were focusing on our relationship to Africa, and trying to build--I think it was, it was where we felt our culture had been severed, you know, through--I guess, through the slave experience and, and our--always a need for us to have something to celebrate as we celebrated everybody else's something. And I'm sure that was--it was the time, it was the same time of the Muslims where people were beginning to say, you know, "Who am I?" This slave name, you know, this is--I'm gonna embrace something outside of Christianity, you know, which--those things were very--I mean that was--those were like, you know, those kind of ideas were--they were--but they were happening in our community, Story_ID: 95160 Speaker 1: And everybody else was fearful of it. And you know, [J. Edgar] Hoover was still around and he was snoopin' and still thinking that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--J. Edgar Hoover of the FBI. Speaker 1: Yes, absolutely. And they were putting different people into these organizations to see if they were really, you know, what were they--did they--do they wanna overthrow the government, you know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yes, this is well-documented now (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Oh, yes, but that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--At the time, people used to talk about it (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Exactly. Speaker 2: --and you didn't know if it was really--you know--is--"Are they really doin' that, or what?" But now, it's well-documented (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--We used to have our--we used to have a lotta suspicions about some people, whose names I won't mention. Speaker 2: There's a pro--the program's called COINTELPRO-- Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: --the FBI program--books written about it now. (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Well, it was--well, that's exactly what was going on. And the--but it was a time of, of a special sense of pride, and we were not--we weren't fearful; that's the part that--now, I don't know, again, if we were--we weren't doing what John Lewis and them were doing; when I see what John Lewis and them were doing, that scared the hell outta me. They're gonna--you know, they're gonna--they're marchin' and they're gettin' their heads bashed in and, you know, they're gettin' locked up and, you know. I, I, I was amazed at--when someone's operating in a system where they have no protection, where the police, and the sheriff, and everybody either may be wearing sheets one night, you know; that's a scary deal. Speaker 2: Did, did you have a sense that you could do that, to go out and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--I absolutely--that was the most fright--I mean just the thought of it. I think those are the real--I mean those are real heroes to me; those are really--and the women and men, and those that even took those buses and went there- Story_ID: 95161 Speaker 1: You know, I, I am involved with, and have been involved with the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] Legal Defense Fund. I was development director here for the--that's a little further on, for the ACLU [American Civil Liberties Union], so all the free speech people; I mean that means we were the organization--I was--Muhammad Ali--when he didn't wanna go to war, he defied, you know, and didn't go to war--Jane Fonda; any of those. But everyone that had issues about their associations, about the things that they said, about their religious--you know, their First Amendment rights. The same--so I was involved in the--in--I was the development director for the National Capital Area, and I was a publicist for the National, so I really got to--got a sense of some of the things that were going on and would--and I met these wonderful attorneys. I was the honorary chairperson of the NAACP Legal Defense Fund's Annual Fundraising Dinner--the big--that's here. (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Now, is this--is this (unclear) to you goin' to law school or at (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Yes, because I didn't decide to go to law school except when I was trying to raise money for the ACLU, and Skokie, Illinois was going on, and the Klan wanted to march in Mississippi and our membership fell. Speaker 2: The Klan wanted to march in Sko--the Nazis wanted to march (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Skokie--the Nazis wanted to march in Skokie-- Speaker 2: Skokie, Illinois. Speaker 1: --and the Klan wanted to march in Mississippi, all at the same time, and our lawyers were defending them (laughter). And I said, "I don't understand." You know, I could not understand that. And we were losing money and all kinds of stuff. Membership people were (unclear). And so I realized that I needed a different sense of knowledge to understand and appreciate that First Amendment. Eleanor Holmes Norton was our staff attorney; she was in New York at the time, then she came here to work in the [Jimmy] Carter Administration, and so I said, "Oh, God, there's this"--you know, okay--women attorneys. And there were different women that I started noticing who had this legal background-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --who could debate these issues and understand them better than I. Speaker 2: Now, this is over time from the '60s [1960s] when you were involved in (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Yeah; now, in the '60s [1960s]--well, no, I was involved--not until the--no, that's the '70s [1970s], the ACLU; that was when I came to Washington [D.C.]. Story_ID: 95162 Speaker 1: But in the '60s [1960s]--well, you know, the--you know, people like the Fannie Lou Hamers are those kinds of people that we would hear about and we're like, "Ohh." That's like the feeling of Mary Church Terrell (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Did you get a chance to meet (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Oh, I met Fannie, ohh! Loved her to death. I met her, but I'm saying that the people that were fighting and doing all those very courageous things in this same south that had killed that little boy in Chicago, you know, that's--that was very--I, I, I, I didn't know if I could meet those people eye-to-eye. I could do this thing in the Bay Area; we did whatever our thing was, you know, and, you know, support things like local police (laughter), you know--you know what--that was what the--the first thing the Panthers were talking about, you know, make--making sure that your police come from your community, those kinds of things, you know; making sure we have black police--fighting things on that, on that front. Again, open housing, jobs-- Speaker 2: Emm-hmm. Speaker 1: --'cause there was a lotta job discrimination. In fact, Ron's [Dellums HM] uncle was commissioner--was one of the--Edmond Brown, I think, appointed him for the FEPC, Fair Employment Practices Commission. And so what I used to do in different--some of us would go out and we--they'd--we'd go out and we apply for jobs and pass the tests, you know; they always give you these tests--pass 'em with flying colors, then they would say, "We think you're overly-qualified." So we start documenting all the ways we did not get hired when we had met all the requirements, and even did better than all the other applicants. And this is to help the commission see what some of the games--you know, what--what was--what they were up against in trying to create this fair employment pract--so we were doing that kind of thing as well. Well, I mean, I'm not gonna--it's not the same thing as having to face, you know, the Klan; it's not the same--I mean there--it was a--there's a civil rights--there's some rights involved in this fair employment. But I was in a much safer haven than had I been--and in my heart, you know, you feel like you're, you're doin' your part (laughter), I mean if it makes any sense. But if some--going south, I just, you know, I could hard--I didn't even go to get my land in Shenandoah (ph.) Valley, you know (laughter), but it's--but the, the, the meeting--meeting these people later on, and your--and Jesse--I could see--they used to call Jesse (unclear); Jesse Jackson [HM]and I are the same age, and--you know, and he was, was wearing like overalls then and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, the country preacher (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--The country preacher (laughter), exactly. And, you know, and of course I, I met--you know, Julian Bond [HM]--his family; Julian Bond's sister and Howard Moore [HM], her husband-attorney, he--Julian Bond's brother-in-law was Angela Davis' [HM] attorney during that period when Angela Davis was--had been arrested and stuff. Meeting these--these are kinda like stars out of, out of the civil rights movement, you know. And, of course, I met Coretta [Scott] King, and this was a little later on when Ron started running for Congress; Coretta--these are people that came to campaign, but they were already big names to us, and they, they had a different--it was like when I met [Nelson] Mandela; and what I mean by that is they were bigger than life, and the people that had to go eye-to-eye with O'Con--Bull Connor, you know, with (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Jim Clark, the other (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Oh, you know exactly them; George Wallace. I mean, I felt those were exceptional people. Story_ID: 95163 Speaker 1: Now, 1970, Ron Dellums [HM] wins--does he win the race in '70 [1970]? Is that (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Well, Ron runs in the prim--he runs in the primary and, you know, our primary was--is, is November--the even years, and he comes in (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--in office in '71 [1971] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--January of '71 [1971] is when we became (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Okay, all right. Now, this is a big deal bec--you know, it would be a big deal for anybody; and I'm not just tryin' to paint you as the wife of a congressman, but when somebody's elected to Congress in a family, it's a big deal. Speaker 2: Ohh. Speaker 1: There aren't that many black congressmen (laughter) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, and he was the first black; he was the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--How did you feel about that role as a (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--It was interesting. Again, you know, as I said, politics sort of like a way of life. I actually felt that, that I played a major role in that, and that my friends and family played a major role in that. I mean we were already--he ran from Berkeley, and--we were well-entrenched in Berkeley, and we had--I mean there were just--all of our friends and family were there to, to, to be a part of the so-called machine-- Speaker 1: Emm-hmm. Speaker 2: --and so it was a--it was a real collaborative effort of our--the people that we knew from college and family and stuff, and then--again, as I said, what my extended--you know, my--the--my grandmother, for example, was involved with getting the absentee ballads and stuff for the senior citizens; that's the same grandmother I was talking about, Esther Jones Lee, and trying to convince some of the more conservative people who thought Ron was a little too radical and--because Ron was running against an incumbent who everyone liked; in fact, (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Now, who did he run against? Speaker 2: His name was Jeffrey Cohelan, and his daughter and I grew up together and we were all friends; we all went to Berke--we gradu--we were--you know, Berk--we went to Berkeley High together. And she lives around the corner from me--by the--Pam, by the way; and he was a good guy. And it was the war. He was one of Johnson's very close guys; I mean he was an al--you know. And they all got hurt; I mean he had impeccable records in terms of civil rights, in terms of--I mean he was a--Jeffrey Cohelan was a congressman when I was in high school, I don't know how many years. He may have been--I wanna say how many years? "Cause Pam le--Pammy left in like '58' [1958] to move back here (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--But the point is he stayed, he stayed with the war too long (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah. Well, the war became (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--He stayed on the war thing too long. Speaker 2: Well, the free speech movement and the war (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Democrats start to dissent-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and, you know, Eugene McCarthy, Wayne Morris (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Exactly. McCarthy--well, we, we ran--we worked on Senator Kennedy's--not Senator, Bobby Kennedy's (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Bobby Kennedy, yeah. Speaker 2: We worked on Bobby Kenne--for Bobby (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--He was the senator then, yeah. Speaker 2: --Yes, for his campaign. So, of course, when he got shot in LA, it was like--we had just finished--we were sitting down waiting for the vote. (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Dr. [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther] King was killed and--yeah (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--All the people--all the campaign people. Speaker 1: Yeah. Dr. King was killed in April and Bobby in June. Speaker 2: Right. And so, you know, that was--that's where we were, and that's (unclear); and we had a choice at that time between him and McCarthy, but we--it was Bob--Bobby we, we had chosen. Story_ID: 95164 Speaker 1: So it was--I mean--again, us being these--you know, we saw ourselves as the radicals making--we're the reason, unfortunately I must say this, I really think our efforts helped to elect Ronald Reagan governor; we helped to defeat Pat Brown and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--How so? Speaker 1: Well, it was the--remember the Peace and Freedom Party? Speaker 2: (Inaudible Response). Speaker 1: The Peace and Freedom Party--in fact, that's where Eldridge Cleaver went--the Peace and Freedom Party; that was the party against the war. These were the radicals; the radicals created this party, like they had the Green Party, and it was to give a choice between the Democrats and the Republicans, and we mobilized--and the students mobilized. Well, what happen is we defeat our Democratic (laughter) governor, and we end up with Republican Ronald Reagan. And we believe, you know--and from there, you know, just a little kick right into the White House. And it was--we had not seen--we didn't see it through. Sometimes, all of that, you know, what's the difference, you know, all that little chanting--they're both the same; well, they're never both--it's not the same. But that was part of the naivete and part of the euphoria of being radicals at that time, and we were being led then by white radicals, you know. And where we may have appeared to have a similar agenda, sometimes the war is one agenda, but we may have had another agenda as well. And our agenda was, you know, we--you know, the civil rights movement was still in its infancy, and there we were out there being, you know--and white radicals that wasn't their--they didn't have to deal with some of the economic prob--issues and the social issues that we had to deal with. And that was a kind of a rude wakening for us and, you know, we had to be very careful in the Coalitions Reform, and we have to be the ones to dictate from a position of strength, you know, and that was- Story_ID: 95165 Speaker 1: And there were a couple of movements that we, I felt, were a little naive about. The women's movement started back there; and again, we weren't in forefront of it, and which women are the most abused women in this society--they're gonna be minority women. And we were led--being led again by intellectual white women, and they were in the forefront so that was their agenda, and what did they do? They start, you know, breakin' down glass ceilings in places we hadn't even--we were still tryin' to deal with, you know, other real issues--feeding children and health issues and all sorts of things. And they were trying to find ways to open up, you know, all these other postilions (ph.) of discriminations--sexual discrimination in terms of jobs, and that's not--that wasn't our agenda. It's--so (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--It's a good thing, but it, it was a--you (unclear) more basics--things first; I mean (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--I mean I--the women's movement is an important movement, but we should have been the leadership, just like this peace and freedom movement. What happens is, you know, your, your--you know, next thing, we turned around everyone was singin' We Shall Overcome, and our voices were being muted around what our self-interest was because, you know, all the other movements followed, you know. I mean there was the gay movement; there were all these other--there were a lot of other movements--there were--additional, and they were all important and valuable. But the black agenda, which was like a very basic if we're talking about the history of our country; there were so many things that had never been addressed, so that we could, you now, start to talk about, "Okay, now we've done this, now let's talk about, you know, our other issues of choice, and these other things." So--and--so what happens is the--even though we came out of an enlightened community, we didn't quite understand--what, what is that principle called? I don't wanna get tired, but you know, the principle of--the strength, the back of (unclear)--what's the--Machiavellian (ph.); is that what I'm trying to say? You know, where a--the, the, the, the lion and the mouse, you know, in terms of negotiation? You have to negotiate from positions of strength about what you're going to do, what you're gonna agree upon, and what happened is, you know, we, I think, in a very naive way, built those coalitions, and when you coalesce, as I said--if you're not coalescing from strength, then you get (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--You get taken along with 'em for the ride (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--You get taken--exactly. Speaker 2: --but you don't get the (unclear) out of it. (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Exactly. And, and we found out--you know, we have since felt it; we felt it years later when we were debating affirmative action, for example, you know. We look around and where are our allies on that? So we find people ally with us sometimes, and then they're not there. Do you know what I mean? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And so--become some people are saying, "Oh, well, quotas--that's--you know, we're against, you know quotas. We're against quotas." And we're saying, "Hey, well, listen, this is still part of--that's that old agenda that we have not completed; what happens to African Americans when we start to look at these, these few spaces, this, that, and the other, you know?" And then someone else is saying, "Well, that's gonna hurt us." We're saying, "Well, hey--hey, guys, you know, you only come along for this part of the ride and then you, you, you jump off and leave us here." And so that, that's the thing, and that's the--probably one of the hardest things about being a, a minority in this so-called--a minority in this--in our society. And as the different so-called minority groups become majority, because look, we turned around, and now if you look at the Census count, you have this very large, you know, Hispanic, and we have not, you know, really learned to build the kind of coalition that we, we need in terms of numbers with this group; we're gonna find ourselves fighting. Story_ID: 95166 Speaker 1: Now, how did you adjust to life in Washington [D.C.]? Now, you never, you never lived in Washington, D.C., so (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--No, I had a sister who was here, by the way, 'cause I had--needed to talk to you a little bit more about them. My, my sister Beth, who is a year younger then I, she came to Washington, D.C. and she was assistant dean of women at Howard [University], and she had a doctorate in clinical psychology, and she went to Berkeley and came here because she went to Catholic University to work on her doctorate, so she was already here in Washington. And she used to organize fundraisers and, and things here when we had the campaign going, and--did you meet Cliff and Adele (ph.) Alexander? Have you done them? Speaker 1: (Inaudible Response). Speaker 2: Well, they're--Adele is Dr. Logan's daughter, by the way--a very prominent doctor in New York--was Adam Clayton Powell's doctor, and all that. And these are two very important people, I mean, for your purpose. But anyway--so, we had people here who were already working on our behalf in the campaign; I had to fly in to Washington for fundraisers. There was this time period when Ron can't--couldn't leave the district; they said he had to stay in the district, so I had to go out and do all the speaking and stuff. Speaker 1: When he ran again, so subsequently, I guess. Speaker 2: No, no; that's the first race. Speaker 1: First race? Speaker 2: That's the first race. And that's the most significant race 'cause that's the race where you're tryin' to get your money, and we're running against a popular incumbent, so we gotta try to bring the radicals along if we can--I mean not radicals, we're trying to get some Democratic money 'cause this is a Democrat--but the Dem--you know, during a primary, they're not gonna be forthcoming, so there were different people that were trying to help us, and that's how we ended up with people like Coretta [Scott] King, and we ended up with--people that I love--Andy Young [HM]. You know, Andy Young ran--was running the same time in that very first race; that's the one that he lost--Julian Bond--all of these people came to campaign for us. And when Barry Goldwater and--who was the vice president? Who was Nixon's vice president? Speaker 1: Oh, Agnew--Spiro Agnew. Speaker 2: Spiro Agnew--they are the ones that came out and started campaigning against Ron. Oh, and so did--are you--hold onto your seat--Roy Wilkins. Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: Interesting, right? And there were--so, all of a sudden these people were campaigning; they were saying he's too radical, that he was a danger, blah, blah, and it went on and on and on, you know, this kind of thing. And the money start coming in; I mean this was just like this--this race in the, in the Bay Area that no one cared about, and all of a sudden it's on the map. Speaker 1: This gives a national focus (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--It's a national--becomes a national focus. You got the vice president of the United States saying, you know--campaigning against this upstart? I mean no one knows, you know, what--two or three years on Berkeley City Council? And all of a sudden they're like getting really worried; and that, that made the difference. And then Coretta--when Coretta comes into town and she says, "Well, I'm a radical," and everyone's coming in saying they're radicals, and they started defining what, what--being radical about what. And they started talking hard about the war and talking hard about other kinds of--these other issues. And--anyway, so when we win this primary, then the other, you know, it's just fighting the--running against the Republican candidate whose name I can't even remember 'cause we were--you know, by then it just looked like we were gonna--I can't remember his name--on purpose, I think (laughter), 'cause that was a very ugly race. Story_ID: 95167 Speaker 1: Anyway, so when I came, there were these wonderful Washingtonians and they were everywhere, and they had raised money, and they were there to greet me and Charlie Rangel and Alma, all of us, we didn't even have a house; we all stayed at a hotel together; we all lived in a hotel where my kids practiced saying, "Room service, room service," you know. And--because it was--there was that kind of uncertainty; we didn't know what to do. And we looked first on Capitol Hill, and I put my kids into a little elementary school--public school, and realized all this--we were the only elected family, you know, in the--had kids in public school-- Speaker 2: Hmm. Speaker 1: --and that was another one of those carry-overs from the Berkeley Public School System, being advocates and this sort of thing. So then, what happened, people start seeing us like--as if we were different, and I got involved in--that's how I got involved in all that--community things; I was asked to be on--"Can you come here and speak to us?" We--they didn't have anyone to be an advocate of the public school system. And then I was involved with Friendship House, which is a settlement house, and they put me--they didn't have a--never had a congressional spouse on, on, on that, on a board--on that board. And then I started speaking for the DC ARC--DC ARC, and that's the Association of--for, for Retarded Citizens. Everyone said they needed a voice, and people depended so much on congressional--people were like--it was like in, in LA [Los Angeles, California], Hollywood; it was--movie stars. Washington, the stars are the political people, so the--you get a political person on your board or do something, all of a sudden, that board's getting media, that board's getting--you know, that cause is getting noticed, and I started to use my energies in that way. Story_ID: 95289 Speaker 1: So, even though--you know I--you know I am a Californian to my--in my heart, this is when I started to become a Washingtonian. I started to see [Washington] D.C. differently because it was different; it was this, this place crying out for statehood and for recognition, it was a place that people sort of, at times, did not take seriously; why? Because it was a black-populated state--district. And it was sort of, you know, like an inconvenience to have all these black people around the federal enclave--I began to sense that; there was that (unclear)--and it was a southern town; it had so much--it had so much working against it for all the incredible things that it really was also, because it was filled with black doctors and lawyers and educators and, you know, Howard University had been one of the preeminent insti--black institutions. So here I was--here--this, this girl from Berkeley, you know, with--finally meeting all these black people that had just done all these tremendous things who started--who treated me like family, but also gave me--start to fill in the gaps at the other part of my life, educating me in a way, about their experience--very different, and I began to appre--and realizing that I had a real role, and I started exercising my individuality, and my efforts started going toward, you know, whatever it is that they wanted me to do. And they would sort of spin me around and say, "Well, look we, we want a black theater here." And, you know, I love the arts, so Bobby Hooks was--came on and he started the DC Black Rep (ph.), and I was on the advisory board. Well, the--got the oldest black ballet company--"What do you need?" "We need money, we need, you know, people that can, you know, write--we need--the National Endowment of the Arts to consider us, we need this, we need that, so you also need some visibility." So I got on there--I was on their board. Then, Rap, Incorporated, which was a--it's a drug rehabilitation program based upon--was it Onanon (ph.)? What was that? The drug, the drug program (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Al-Anon? (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, you know--in, in California; and it was headed up by someone from California. What do you need? Well, we need--you know, we gotta lobby Congress, we gotta do this, we gotta find a way to decriminalize some of this--these drugs, the--we want people to feel safe to come here and not be followed by the police when they want to be rehabilitated, when they wanna cold-turkey, you know, whatever--. Story_ID: 95290 Speaker 1: So I got on the--I was on the--and I was just on everything, you know and, and I started winning awards, and I was on television, and I was doing--speaking out and being extremely vocal; sometimes I put my foot in it then (laughter) but, but (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Can you tell me--tell us about a time you put your foot in? Speaker 1: Okay. The con--the--what is it? The WNC, the Women's National Democratic Committee--I mean the Women's National Democratic Club is an organization of women who belong to the Democratic Party, and these were like the old Democrats, you know; I mean this--it was a beautiful building, kind of plantation-style building in Washington. I went there, and when you first walk in, you know, there's somebody black that greets you at the door, and they took--you know, take your coat and stuff, and all the blacks are waiting on you and, you know, they were--and I kinda looked around and I, I began to feel the Old South in this-- Speaker 2: Emm-hmm. Speaker 1: --and I was interviewed about the club one time and I--you know, I--and I decided to get on member--on the membership committee because it wasn't well-integrated, and I kept thinking I'm--you know it was a lot of southern, you know, the--I forgot about the south being Dixiecrats -- Speaker 2: Emm-hmm. Speaker 1: A lot of that was there. Anyway, I was on tel--I was being interviewed on television and they were saying something, and I commented about the, the Women's National Democratic Club. Well, when I went to the Club for--the next time I went to the Club, I was asked to, to make a formal apology; they wanted to (unclear)--they had the press there; I mean it shocked me. They were coming at me, you know, and they were very hostile, and all I did was really comment from my--I had no idea that what--that I--what I said was offensive; I was just talking about my impression. And Sala Burton stood up for me, and her husband Phil Burton was one of the biggest le--he was like the whip or something; he was really big, and I was a little freshman. You know, I was this little freshman spouse, but he--Sala Burton's husband was one of the biggest forces of the Democratic Party; she stood up and she said, "I"--she said that I did not owe them an apology, and she said--she let them know that she knew me, she stood by my comments, you know, that those were my observations coming--'cause they were San Franciscans [California] and, you know, I'm from Berkeley, and there was a lot of, you know, the character of the Old South operating in that, and when Sala stood up, and she was so important, others started to say, you know, "Oh, Roscoe, that was a"--you know, and then it--but it was--that was one of those moments; and had it not been for Sala, I most likely would never have felt welcomed to go back, and to also do the kinda changes I really would have wanted to do. And I--then I became very popular with the club; I got involved and did some other things with the club, but that was one time. Story_ID: 95291 Speaker 1: There were other times. There was a time that I was on the Phil Donahue Show-- Speaker 2: Hmm. Speaker 1: --and I talked about being upset with one of the--the way the news was covering something negative about Ron [Dellums, HM] and, and I spelled out the, the news (laughter); I spelled out what--who the--who the--the news--the reporter was and everything. And I said, "And I'm never gonna watch this station again." And then I realized it was--Phil Donahue's show was on the station (laughter); it was his station. And Phil Donahue goes, "Well, just a minute, just a minute!" (laughter) and then he says to me, "You know what--this network (ph.)--this station is" (laughter), and everyone just laughed, but it was so funny 'cause I was like--and then there was the time I talked about--oh, I had a congressional check--they're very special checks, they look different, and I had gone to one of the big chain stores, which I won't mention, and they asked me how I got the check, and they treated me as if I had a stolen check-- Speaker 2: Hmm. Speaker 1: --and they kinda set me aside and they went through all this to--and they found out that, you know--and so I mentioned that also on this Phil Donahue Show, and next thing I knew, I was getting, you know, anything I wanted from the store and--but at the time, I had embarrassed this chain store. And then they turned around, of course, and wanted--"What can we do to, to make it right?" But it was--there were always moments like that; going up to Capitol Hill where thee--they have all the security, and I would go up--you know, and I didn't (unclear), and I would be with my friends, and these would be spouses and they would be white spouses, and the security would say, "Oh, come on in," and then they would stop me. And then I'd say--they'd say, "May we see your ID?" And I'd say, "You didn't ask them for their ID." We (ph.) said, "Well, we know who they are, so who are you?" So I said, "I'm"--and they said, "These are members--these spouse's wives." And I said, "I'm a spouse's--I'm a wife of--my husband is a member of Congress." He looked at me, I had to pull out my ID, and then I said, "Do you know there's about--how many?--five of us now." I forgot how many spouses; there were very--you know, maybe five members of Con--I don't know, five or six. "Then you tell me that you know a white spouse in the body of what? 300 or so people." Speaker 2: Yeah, 435 (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--435; and there are only five of us, and you don't know who we are? (Laughter). I said, "Don't you think it oughta be a little around"--you know. I said, "Well, you better start to learn who we are, and there are gonna be more of us coming." Well, of course, that went all the way through the ranks, and everyone had heard about this outspoken spouse making that noise. Speaker 2: That's not really putting your foot in your mouth; that's, that's agitatin' people a little bit, I think. Speaker 1: Well, you know, kind of a--you know, "Can I have your badge?" kinda thing, but it's--it was being out-spoken in that they would say--the spouses would say--then they would make me have to speak on issues like, "Our husbands really want the pay-raise but, you know, they can't say it; can you say anything about it?" You know, that kinda thing (laughter). So I found myself always being miked-up and saying, you know--taking on those hard issues. Story_ID: 95292 Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: Well, it seems as if you were--I don't know about the rest, but would you have--would you say--you certainly seem be prepared for the role on some level; and being a congressman's wife is--I guess some people are not quite as prepared as you might have been, having come--not coming from that kinda back--kinda background that you came from, the politics and the cosmopolitan atmosphere and all the other stuff--the high level of education and all that. I don't know, you know, it's just-- Speaker 1: Well, one thing that I really wasn't prepared for, and I could hear this through the members themselves, especially the caucus, that a lot of their colleagues did not regard them and respect them at times; maybe that--you know, some of that may have changed, but it--when we first came, it was--and I know Ron [Dellums HM] was not treated sometimes very well, and that would be--because--the ole' boys school kind of thing, you know. I, I remember watching a film on, on Adam Clayton Powell and, you know, how--the fact that he was arrogant and self-assured--how that worked against him, and here--you know, and Ron's pretty much like that; I mean he came feeling--you know, he knew that he had his support and he--and his voice, and that sort of thing. But thee, the members were--they--some, some of them did not treat him well and--in the leadership, and they always wanted him to know, you know, that we make decisions about whose committee and what this, that and the other, so he had some slights. And one thing that I knew when people used to talk--interview me or talk to my counterparts, is that this was a different experience for us; they said we have to come and we have to represent all--our constituency is larger than just the 7th congressional and the 8th congressional 'cause the numbers kept changing, you know, in the--and what we say and what Ron does, it affects--he has to think about all the blacks in this country--those are his constituents, those are whose voice; he's got to speak out for them. We're in a district that's 18 percent black. Do you see what I mean? Speaker 2: (Inaudible response). Speaker 1: But he's got to be the one--his voice. Speaker 2: He's a national voice (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--He's a national voice (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--He was in the, in the '70's [1970s] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--But our constituency did not reflect the other--these other (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah. Speaker 1: --and sometimes it was really interesting because I love--I can remember Charlie Rangel and Ron having a debate one time--you know, friendly debate, about what was important to the community, and Charlie says, "We gotta get drugs out of our community; we gotta get drugs out; drugs, that's the--that's the number one thing." And Ron was saying, "We gotta end this War in Vietnam, we gotta end the War in Vietnam" (laughter). And that used to be like their little--it was so funny because both of them were right because, you know, our priorities--our spending priorities were wrapped--tied up to this war, and spending has a lot to do with the programs, etcetera--the welfare of our communities. And Charlie was ex--really right because, you know, he was absolutely right (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--He's in Harlem. Speaker 1: He's in Harlem. And then the--all these other little Harlem's were everywhere; and we turned around one day, Oakland was Harlem, you know--and drugs, I mean, they were so pervasive and, and, and they have--their, their toll is, is un--it's still going on; it's moved into AIDS, you know, and, and, and beyond; it's just--it's something. So, there were those kinds of things. So sometimes there would even be friendly tension amongst the caucus because Ron's view of the world was based upon having come out of the Bay Area, and there would be other views based upon where these members came from and, you know--and we could not--sometimes, I would almost be a little--I don't wanna--not envious, but again, we talk about the experiences, you know; 'cause if we were gonna start celebrating Black History Month or doing some of those things, well, you know, John Lewis was always--his name was--someone like a John Lewis, you know; someone that had lived the civil rights; Ron was not one of the persons that could say, "I walked with King," and that seemed--that was very important, you know, and--because people came from everywhere and walked with King; they didn't just come out of the South, you know. Story_ID: 95293 Speaker 1: There were also was the other side of this; it's a--northern urban voices that were influenced by Malcolm X and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Oh, yes. Speaker 1: --and--primarily, and who sort of agreed that they couldn't have--I mean they were--I guess not having to live in that southern reality and not wanting to, they couldn't understand how black people could take the abuse (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Oh, yes. Speaker 1: --and they were very critical of that and, and very militant in the north in terms of that; I mean people would (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Well, Stokely [Carmichael, Kwame Toure] was like--we understood Stokely-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --and, and I--I used to think--I mean Stokely, to me, was so electrifying; and when my sister was at, at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], she said, "You know, we're havin' a hard time; Stokely wants to come speak here and they don't want him to speak here." At Howard, you know, at that time. And that was a big deal, trying to get Stokely on those campuses. Speaker 1: He could get to UC-Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley] anytime he wanted, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, but I didn't realize about the land grant colleges--that they get their money from Congress; I mean these colleges are strapped, based upon things like that, and in terms of their own independence. That was, that was interesting to me. Speaker 1: To find black colleges more conservative than (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--More conser--that blew my mind, absolutely blew my mind. And also, to find those colleges not really--I don't think really preparing blacks to live in a--in, in, in this--in the real world of economics, to be really global, to, to be capitalists, you know. The doctor isn't a capitalist (laughter), you know--and the lawyer--we're not capitalists. I mean capitalism--I mean we're not produce--we weren't producing the--I mean you turn around right now and I said, "Dogonit, these Puff Daddy's and the, you know, the mu--the ba--the athletes, thee, thee entertainers--look where our economic base (unclear), and you turn around and you look at this, this young white guy that owns Microsoft, you know, and you say, "Well, we don't have any of those," you know, "We don't have enough of those." And it's not like--as if we didn't have the intellect, it's just that the focus was always on, you know, somewhere else. Even in the Jewish community when they would say, "My son the doctor," but there was also, "My son the accountant, my son a"-- Speaker 1: When it was somebody's son the grocer, they sent the doctor to school (ph.) (unclear). Speaker 2: Yes. So there's that, that kinda thing. So I was a little--and I was a little surprised because I was--had sort of a romantic notion about what--how it was gonna feel like and look like and where it was gonna be located and that sort of thing. So that was a little--it was disappointing but it was a little heart-breaker because it seems as if I missed the heyday when the communities were really vibrant before the burnings--you know, before King's death, so, so many of the areas that I had heard about--I mean I went over to Harlem and almost cried. I went to the Apollo and I went, "Wow!" I mean I couldn't wait, I couldn't wait to get off the train and, and run through Harlem 'cause it was some other place I had viewed in my head; it was going to be, it was gonna look different and feel different, smell different, but it was decaying, and that was very sad to me. I missed that, you know; I had not--I had missed that, but-- Story_ID: 95294 Speaker 1: So Washington, D.C., yes, I think what I was not prepared for is not--I didn't go home a lot, you know. We didn't do a lotta the traditional family things that the other members did; the members would just--the session would end, the members would go home, and we didn't keep a home to go to. We leased our home to Howard Moore [HM] and Jane Moore, who were running the Free Angela Davis [HM] Campaign, and then we, you know, our res--see, we didn't have the, the feeling of residency as--for our kids and for myself, and we--I started building--spending a lotta time here in Washington, and that was a different thing. So I think--and Ron was chair of the DC Committee, but he sat on the committee before becoming chair. So we did have an interest in, in what was happening in Washington, a real direct interest. But my kids have spent the majority of their lives, you know, as Washingtonians and, and thee--their, their choices their--in their personal lives were sorta reflective of the early--the Berkeley stuff, and the things I mean--I had. Both my daughter and my eldest son--my eldest son married a, a--not--they took partners who were not black-- Speaker 2: Hmm. Speaker 1: --and my son Eric, my actor, he isn't married now, but if you look at--he went to Brown University and if--and if you look at his--who my kids socialize with, they really live in world very much like the world I grew up in, in terms of their friends and stuff. And when they were here, they were Jack and Jillers which, you know, people may know what that is, and it's a special club that was--a mothers' club for their children, and it kept black kids together to do social things and to get to know each other, and it was all--these were the ways I learned these organizations were ways of insulating and protecting blacks from some of the harsh realities around them. And I'm a Link, and as I mentioned, I was a Link debutante, but these were organizations that came from the, from the south; I mean these were not or--or from someone else--maybe the East Philadelphia, and places like that. But these were not organizations that were started in the Bay Area, and when I--when we moved here, I--my kids end up joining these groups. But I stayed close to people like the Billingsley's. I don't know if you know--you remember Dr. Andrew Billingsley (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yes, I remember. Speaker 1: --you know, and I knew them from California. And (unclear), I am the godmother of Alvin Poussaint's son, Alan Poussaint, Dr. Alvin Poussaint, whom you may (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--He's a psychiatrist from Harvard. (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Right, so that's someone that maybe you should--you would love to interview. (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Right, right. He's advisor for the Bill Cosby Show (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Exactly. I'm the god (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Famous--most famous black psychiatrist in the country. (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Exactly. Well, my son is graduate--my godson just graduated from Princeton, and he is working on Wall Street now; he's going to be a big, a big broker or something, you know, in the world of high finance. But I--but what attracted me also; I mean what's interesting about Dr. Poussaint and all of those--they have a real strong black conscience, and what I learned about thee, the Links and the Jack and Jillers, these are black people who like each other; it is the least integrated social life I've ever endured. And these are the most prominent blacks I've ever met, and they are happy being with each other, and they want their kids to marry black, you know, and--and we know--we all--you know, we know it because we talk to each other and, and you find two or three generations of doctors, and two and three generations of, of lawyers, you know, and educators; it's really interesting because my family was like, you know--I'm a third-generation college grad, but these are, you know, the mother's the doctor, the kids are the doctors, you know, and the grandpar--and whatever. I have--it's, it's pretty overwhelming, and in one family alone, my neighbor--thee--Dr. Epps--I was so impressed by these families; every one of the kids is a doctor and, and the one that isn't is an engineer, and the mother's a doctor and the father's a doctor--Dr. Betty Cato (ph.) and (unclear)--same thing. Their daughter's a lawyer, the two boys are doctors, and sometimes they have double degrees, you know. So, you get to meet a Karen Hasties (ph.) Williams--that's the one I thought maybe you'd want to talk to, Judge Hasties? His daugh--his daughter and I are in the same LINKS Chapter; and there are all these wonderful people whose names now, they catch up with me; she was Thurgood Marshall's law clerk and I'm--you know, I meet--you know, I'm on friendly basis with Mrs. Thurgood Marshall; and at one times, those were just names. Marjorie Parker--when I pledged AKA, she was the National Basalis (ph.); when I came here, she's married to Judge Barrington Parker and, you know--and he's now deceased, but these were like real people (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--and real, yeah. Speaker 1: --in, in their own right, and they have this--these, these incredible histories and legacies. Story_ID: 95295 Speaker 1: Now, you went to law school here? Speaker 2: I went to Georgetown [Law School, Washington, D.C.] Speaker 1: Georgetown, okay. Speaker 2: Nineteen Seventy-Nine [1979]--Whuu! My kids were scattering then--off to college and stuff. And, as I said, in the '70s [1970s], I had worked for the ACLU and had been involved in civil rights organizations--the legal end of them, met a lot of lawyers, and realized that, you know, that I was--you're never too old to do this. I may--you know, I may not be able to do like, you know, go to law--medical school--like Bakke (laughter), but--you know, in terms of years, but law school--and I had a lotta support, and people that really encouraged me and had a lot of people I mentored with. And I got accepted into just about every law school I applied to in Georgetown; I accepted Georgetown, and it's sort of the little Harvard here. And I went in the day program with all the young people that were--my classmates were about 15 years younger than I; I was older than some of my professors. I had the best time. Father Drynan (ph.), who was a member of Congress, came with--the year that Ron and Bella Abzug and Charlie and all them came, now was a professor at the law school. So, I took one of his classes and he--we just had the best time. And he wanted to (unclear); he wanted to remain in Congress but at that time, I think the church dictates that--dictates that he could not hold that public office. But anyway--so, there I was in law school, thinking that I was going to be a--going to entertainment law, sports law 'cause I could--I got a sense that--well, my love of the arts, you know, and I am the world's biggest groupie, and I love, you know, artistic people, and I thought, 'Gee, I could do this.' And I looked around and there were not enough prominent black lawyers doing some of these things; they weren't really the--you know, they weren't running the show in Hollywood or in the--they weren't doing any of that. But there were all the enter--they weren't running the--they weren't the attorneys of choice for many of the athletes but we were the athletes. Speaker 1: But did you do (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Well, that was what I thought I was going to, to major in--not major in, but focus on; but I ended up--often, decisions were made for me because I had to do practical things. Ron was--you know, our--we were never a wealthy family, and the congressional salary was really kinda modest when you look around and see what other people were, you know, were making in the private sector. So I was always sort of like, 'Okay, I'll go where the money will take me,' and, and I joined a law firm that kind of courted me, and what they really wanted me to do was rain-make, bring in clients, rather than--so I never really was able to, to--at first I clerked for Chief Judge Carl Moultrie, and he was over the Superior Court, and if you go see the DC Superior Court, it's named after him; and he's an alum of George Washington, and he, you know, called me up and told me, "I want you to come down here." I had felt a little depressed; I hadn't passed the bar that year, and I'd missed it by a point and a-half, and I said, "That's it; I'm never gonna, I'm never gonna be a--I, I'll be a--you know, someone that went to law school and have JD degree," but I wanted to be an attorney. And he knew I was depressed and so he called me up and this is the beautiful thing about this connection that we have with one another. He, he said, "I want--I want you in my chambers," you know, "tomorrow morning, or what have you." And, and it was because that he reached out and, and grabbed me that I was able to go on and go furth--you know and, and get involved and, and take--and pass the bar, and also have the esteem of, of being one of his law clerks, which was absolutely remarkable. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 95175 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, did you really ever get really involved in the practice of law as a, as a lawyer or anything, or did you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Well, I, I spent six years lobbying. Speaker 1: Emm-hmm. Speaker 2: I was--when Willie Brown, Mayor Brown--San Francisco Mayor Brown--when he was Speaker of the California State Assembly, I went to work for them, and I was their ears and eyes in Washington, and I was--headed up their--the Assembly Office of Research here, and I was, at first, lobbying on their behalf, but it became the political conflict; the Republican side said, "She can't lobby, she's married to a Democratic member of Congress, she"--you know, this sort of thing. And so I was more of a--what was it--like a facilitator; they gave me all these other little safe titles; but that was for six years--I did that. And then after--when I left there, I went to a--I, I went to a law firm and--which means I had--so I gained the Hill experience, and instead of being a--like a litigator, which I thought I would love to be--I love to talk, as you can--and I thought I could do the little Perry Mason bit, you know, and be persuasive before a jury. I ended up doing federal relations--government relations, and that was the law firm. I had, I had, had clients who were international clients; they represented countries and--some African countries, and had city clients and mayors and things of that nature, so I was able to, to service these type of client--that type of client, and--so that was really what my--and once in a while--oh, then the firm opened up and brought in an entertainment component, and so I was able then--that was one of the things that I really wanted to do, so I was able to, to work in that division at the law firm and--which I liked, and I was involved in--you know, we did contracts and we did developmental--artist development and that sort of thing. Story_ID: 95176 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, you've been involved in the arts, too, and we were talkin' off-camera about--I don't know if it's, chronologically, if it's time to talk about this or not; is it? I mean (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Oh, the Color of Friendship? Speaker 1: Yeah, the Color of Friendship. Speaker 2: Well, it was interesting; in the--when we first came to Washington--again, remember I told you, I kinda immersed myself. Well, when I was--I had a friend who was with the American Field Service, and she was one of the placement persons, and--for this National Capital area, and she said, "You know, I really would like you to consider having an--one of--having a student--foreign student coming to stay with you. We've been trying to place some of these students in black homes. We thought that"--you know, they wanted the students to--and what had been happening traditionally was that the students were--would come, and they would say--it's a Washington, D.C.--it's a Washington placement, but it would be Maryland and Virginia for fear that they would get placed in a--like Anacostia, or someplace that they did--they would not have any control over, so they were abso--they were not really reaching out to black families in Washington, and--so here she was, and she was African American and she had brought in a--a student; she had an Australian, and this was one of the little radical Australians, and they were trying to then fight to be classified as blacks; it was a really interesting young man. And she said to me, "Well, what do you think?" And I said, "Well, you know, Ron [Dellums HM] likes his privacy, etcetera." But my friend--my--I lived next door to the ambassador of, of Tanzania, and my friend--my--I have friends, George Haley [HM] and, and his, his wife, and their children are friends with my kids, and we'd met Alex, and Alex has written this--you know, Alex wrote Roots. So that was a really big deal; and so there were a lot of questions coming out of my--from my kids about Africa, so I said, "If you can get me an African student, we'll go for it." And I said--'cause my kids have a feeling--because the im--the ambassador's family they have maids and cars; they think the Africans are really much better off than they are, you know, and they would--'cause all the Africans they met are diplomats--the, the diplomatic corps--their kids. So--and then she said, "Okay, we'll, we'll, we'll sign you--we'll--someone from Afri--I'll make sure--I'll put your request in." And I had a girlfriend who--her name is Patricia Eaton (ph.), and that's one of the families who--David Eaton, All Souls Church. Oh, I'm glad that I said that 'cause I wanted to remember--Glide Memorial was my church in the Bay Area. Cecil Williams, I love you! (Laughter). But anyway, so--what happened? My friend from, from--who was an establishment person for Africare (ph.)--all these things were taking place in the '70's [1970s], said, "Well, I'll come over and I'll talk to your guests." "Come over and talk to my kids about Africa, and let's prepare for--we're gonna end up with an African student." So, my kids were learning--I mean someone did my daughter's hair, you know, put it in the cornrow, the African hair, and the kids had their little bubas and they had the--you know, they're gonna do a big party and it's gonna be African music and, you know, maps; you know, you were here and now you're here, kind of--you know, that kind of thing, and the drum was very (unclear), African drum. Oh, just everything. And they were getting--had their friends and everyone, "We're gonna get a student from Africa." And when I went down to--I got the call that I got my, you know, I had my student, and I had to come--I had to go to a school and--to, to pick her up, so the film that was based on this story, it wasn't totally accurate; I mean there were some liberties they take in the creative process. And I know because I, I wrote the--I did the treatment for this story. Story_ID: 95177 Speaker 1: But, anyway, I get down to this school and, you know, everyone's sorta lining up alphabetically, had these, you know, people, and they're saying--and the, the, thee--there all these different kids and then the room starts getting thinner and thinner and thinner, and I'm lookin' for my--who's gonna be my, my student--who's gonna be my African student. (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Your African student, yeah; and, and it should be obvious to spot her, right? Speaker 1: Well, yeah, it should be, and she's lookin' for--you know, she--and it was so funny because what it turns out to be is I end up with an Afrikaner (ph.), and I end up with--she was from Swaziland, and she was as shocked as I was and she was extremely unhappy about this. And it was, it was--I'm tellin' you this was at the time that Africa was in such tur--I mean South African was in great turmoil, had become sort of a pariah at this point. The games and different things were being suspended; they were not being asked to participate. This was, this was--Soweto; it was, it was a really horrible period. So anyway, I end up with this Afrikaner, and I'm going, "What am I gonna tell Ron [Dellums HM]?" You know, Ron's been putting in this Anti-Apartheid Act Bill, he and [John] Conyers [HM] and all these guys, forever and--anyway, when they brought us together, she assumed that I worked for this family--that I wasn't hardly the congressman's wife (laughter); she thought I was like, you know, come to pick her up, you know, like the maid. And so, I mean, this very quiet trip back to my home; she's like in the back seat and I'm like--and I said--oh, before I take her home, I'm gonna go, go to Capitol Hill. So I took her up to Capitol Hill and Ron was hosting a--it was a reception, and it was a reception in which he was like the only black, and it was like one of the committees he was on. So, if you saw this film that--the film had me going up to Capitol Hill and--but it was like the Black Caucus but it wasn't; in the real story it was a reception on the Hill in the Capitol, in which Ron was like the only black in this reception. So I walk through this room and I have this girl, and she's at first tellin' me not--"Don't be afraid of the elevator, don't be afraid of the escalator"-- Speaker 2: Tellin' you? Speaker 1: Yes (laughter), because where she's from, blacks--I mean they're like--Swaziland is like being in a--like migrant farm workers or somethin'; they don't even go to the city (laughter) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, they have the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--so the blacks she's around have--they have never even been like to the big buildings (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, Swaziland's a small country just above South Africa with a king, and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Oh, yeah, 'cause she was--she made fun (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--it's, it's ruled by a casino, right? Speaker 1: Well (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--It's the travel--I mean people are (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--But, but the real, the real rules that affect everyone are--were the Apartheid rules-- Speaker 2: Sure, and a casino is the attraction for the South Africans who go to the parties (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Oh, okay. Well, she was trying to tell me about the (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--(Unclear) so they go there and party. Speaker 1: Yeah, she was trying to tell me about the tribes and all that kinda thing. But at first, I mean, it was like, you know, if I reached for her, "Come on," you know (DEMONSTRATION OF PULLING BACK)--"Don't touch me" (laughter), you know; it was almost like, you know, the Queen of England, you're not supposed to touch 'em (laughter). But it was so funny, and I--she said--when we get to this thing and Ron is like, "What are you doing here?" and all that kinda stuff. He says, "Didn't you go to get the--did you go pick up the American Field Service student?" And I said, "This is she." Ron said, "What?" I said, "Yes, she's from Swaziland" (laughter). I was tryin' to tell him about this, and every--people were sort of waiting to see who our student was--who's gonna be our student. And she was saying to me, "Well, who is he?" 'Cause she had never seen a black man surrounded by all these white men and people kept--you know--receptions--they keep, "Oh, Ron, good vote, man!" You know; all this, that. She was like--and I said, "I want you to meet your dad. This is Ron Dellums--Congressman Dellums, and I'm gonna be your Washington mother, and I'm Roscoe Dellums." She was so flabbergasted; she thought it was a joke, you know, the whole thing. Story_ID: 95178 Speaker 1: And so, the big thing now was getting her home where the party was all being planned--the welcoming party, and all the kids and stuff; it was really something. And I walked her into that house with all that, you know, drums and (laughter), you know, and everyone running around in their little bubas (laughter)--even the white kids, you know. Everyone was like real excited, you know. And Piper was gonna have--my daughter Piper, she was really excited. "I'm gonna have a sister, I'm gonna have a sister." And here was this girl who was like--she said to me, "That's not your house." And I said, "This is my house." She said, "Oh, you can't live in a house like that, you gotta be kidding." She kept thinking I'm still pulling her leg, kind of thing. So she walks into all of that and then, as they depict in the, in the film, the music sort of stops--the drums, everything. Speaker 2: Mouths open up. Speaker 1: They do. And they said, "Well, where's the African? I thought you were gonna get us a African" (laughter); that's what they said. "I thought you were gonna get us an African; where's my--" and I said, "Well, she's a Afrikaner; she's from Africa." And no one--and they could not conceptualize that this was an Af--you know, that was--so the whole time was the learning experience; she had to learn. At first, she wanted to leave and I said, "You know, well, we'll just get--pack you on up and we'll get you outta here but, you know, you--we'd love you to stay"--that kind of thing. And she kind of--I gave her, her the little guest room and stuff, and she slammed that door and didn't wanna come out, and we just kinda went about our little lives and we said, "Okay, we're just"--and talked to the American Field Service person and she said, "We'll try to find an--someplace else to, to put her." And they said that was a real error. In fact, it caused a lot of controversy, but the (simultaneous)- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Were her parents--how did her parents feel about it in Swaziland? Speaker 1: Well, you know something? The interesting thing is I don't really know, at that time, during this period, what her parents felt because I don't think--what happened is--because she did not leave the home; she didn't leave the home--that--everyone assumed that a congressional family was a white family; now that was the assumption being made, and the other thing is that they didn't realize that placing someone at this time, even from South Africa, was a very hard thing to do; it was a much harder thing to do at the (unclear). It wasn't like, you know--I hate to tell you--she was either gonna be here, or she was getting ready--they're gonna take her out of here and take her somewhere else; she was gonna come out of our area. And it's because of all the hoopla around it, and the American Field Service wanted this to be--you know, they couldn't really get involved with it on that level; they did not want this to be sort of a--the whole idea was a real exchange, and Americans are all lovely and friendly and these people--you know, they did not want this to turn into a political nightmare. And I think the, the way my kids sort of approached her, and also--I think that had a lot to do with her kind of breaking down a little bit of that wall. And before it was over, it was like a love story; we couldn't get her--we could not get her out of it; we couldn't get her on the bus to go back to where the next stop was. When they had to leave and they go--before they return to their homes, she wanted to stay. And when that student got back to South Africa, she was radicalized; she joined a student movement. Oh, we got--I mean--you thought we were in trouble here; I mean it was a mess there, and they wouldn't let us stay in contact with her, you know, and she's (unclear). Part of that is--when you're dealing with minors and, and it's a way to protect children, too. Sometimes, they don't want--there may have been some experiences, you know, where they did not want people to, to like locate these students. Just say if something else had happened, had transpired, these children have a--it's like a--I don't wanna call it a privacy issue, but it's a issue of minors. Speaker 2: Hmm. Speaker 1: Now, she wrote me, and I could--and we--I could write her back. I never heard from her parents; I know that they were disappointed because she had become politicized, they thought. She had never questioned the movement before, what was going on, and she saw the ANC and all these were like bad guys. And, and she actually thought of us as coloreds (laughter); that helped (laughter), you know, and--I mean we were like the coloreds; we weren't like really black, you know. You're not really black, you know what I mean?--kinda thing. And then I took her around to meet other Africans, and she got to see--like my kids, the Africans were--the black Africans were really living well (laughter); that was a real shock, meeting the African Diplomats and their--'cause I--we took them to parties and fest--her to parties and festivals. Story_ID: 95179 Speaker 1: And--but it, it was a, a story that Jack Valenti heard, and he called Warner Brothers and Disney and--Interscope, I believe was the name of the other one. (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Now, this is a classic fish out of water story (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Yes. Speaker 2: --this is not one of the genres that they have in (laughter)--this is a classic (simultaneous)- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Oh, it was classic in so many ways; it was so--oh, my kids--and then Disney decide to--Paris Qualles did the screenwriting; I, I wrote the treatment. Paris Qualles is a African American award-winning writer (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--How you spell his-- Speaker 1: P-A-R-I-S, and then Qualles like Q-U-A-L-L-E-S. He did the Rosa Parks, the, the Tuskegee Airmen; he's done major, major pieces, and he wrote this screen--Disney hired him to write the--and it was so funny 'cause he came and did research; he also went to South African so he could do that part of it. And what part was so funny was that they decided, Disney, that they didn't want--you know, this was the high school student; my kids were older than the kids they were depicting, but because my boys were the eldest and closer to her age, and my daughter's the youngest, they didn't want to have the sexual dynamics or any of the things that kids go through in high school; they wanted to keep it kinda the sweet little--the two little sisters and the two little boys, but the boys are the old-- were really the eldest. And what was going on was what, you know, parties and dancing and kids getting to know each other and having crushes, and that really was what was going on but, you know--and I wrote all of that. But they said, "Oh" (laughter), "we wanna stay away from that part of it" (laughter). I mean it's a sweet story the way they tell it, but it's not, it's not--I mean that part is inaccurate. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 95180 Speaker 1: Now, your son was in the, the movie, right? Speaker 2: My--my son Eric is an actor, and he was--had kind of a minor role as a member of Congress, a little cameo, let's put it that way. And anybody watching this that--who's a agent, my son wants an agent and needs an agent to further his career, and he's extremely talented. And he's done some wonderful, interesting work. If you saw recently the HBO movie Boycott, it was about the young Martin Luther King; my son played Bayard Rustin in that, and he actually learned a lot about who Bayard Rustin was from people who actually knew Bayard Rustin, or Bayard Rustin (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Is that the one with Jeffrey Wright? Speaker 2: Yes. My son played Bayard Rustin--had the mustache and, and I learned--I mean here's another very interesting story, and--I mean a very important part of history, who's Bayard Rustin, right? Speaker 1: Emm-hmm. Speaker 2: And that's why I'm so glad I'm being interviewed because we're gonna--we're finding out, slowly but surely, that there are so many--so many people that have been missed in our--looking at our very rich heritage and, and Bayard Rustin was one of those persons. In fact, I recently saw a documentary on him, but it's been many years. And I don't wanna like get off into a discussion about Bayard Rustin, but that is the role that Eric played, and he played it very well, as I said. Joyce Ladner [HM]--do you know who Joyce is? Speaker 1: (Inaudible responses). Speaker 2: She's another one of my Link sisters. Joyce helped Eric 'cause she worked for, for Bayard, and she would be a lovely person for you to interview. And--so he was the, the, the, the, the only one of my kids who was in the film itself. My eldest son Brandon actually wanted to be an actor first; he was in Lee Strasberg's Last Class, and he went up to New York after graduating from high school here, and he--his little best friend was Jane Alexander's son. His real--we--his name is Jason Alexander, but we call him Jay--Jayce--because there's that very prominent comedian-actor (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Jason Alexander, yeah. Speaker 2: Right, and they can't share the same names. But my son Brandon, who is living in Sherman Oaks, California, and has been doing a variety of things in the film industry, you know--casting, he's--he did the sets for Lady in a Blue Dress; what is that? Speaker 1: Devil in a Blue Dress? Speaker 2: Devil in a Blue Dress; I--I'm awful, I can't remember. But they--and I--he is the father, my eldest son, of my youngest granddaughter, Olivia, who is 5, and he's married to a darling--Elizabeth Abernathy, and Elizabeth Abernathy and my daughter Piper were best friends and very close when they were little girls, and here's my son, he marries her. And my daughter Piper went to UC-Berkeley, and she was a pre-med major, but she was also the star of the Shakespearean Festival, and she played--was in the War of the--they call it the War of the Roses-- Speaker 1: Emm-hmm. Speaker 2: --and she played the Queen--did the Queen Mar--six hours of Shakespeare. And the World Shakespearean Company came to see her because she was just so fantastic. And so she ends up, after she graduates from Berkeley, being--going to NYU; they wanted to put her in a very special program there called drama therapy, so she was able to combine being a doctor, you know, pediatrics, what she was focusing on, and her theater arts, 'cause she was so good, and she was part of the creative arts team there. And drama therapy is--well, what it is--through acting and performance, you help people--people act out certain kinds of things, especially like little kids may be victims of rape or any--of things that are very hard for people. So the, the drama therapist is able to do it through performance; it's a very--it's only seven people in that, in that--that they--a very small class that they accept to do that. And then she got married and has two daughters; my eldest granddaughter is 11--Sydney, and Dylan is 5, and they are incredible--what can--as grandmothers would say, they're incredible. And Piper went on to perfor--she did some other work, and then now she's teaching theater arts, and she's in the Bay Area. Speaker 1: Okay. Are those all the children? Speaker 2: Those are my three children, and my three granddaughters. Story_ID: 95181 Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today? Speaker 2: Well, since I have invested so much of my time and life and--because of my mother especially, in the arts, one of my concerns is that thee commercialism around the arts has, has become a disincentive for African Americans to be the creative source that they once were, and here we were in--living a very oppressive life often, and out of that came a lot of creativity (ph.) and innovation, so we had our Louie Armstrong's, we had innovators, people that took an instrument and found different notes and did--that's what jazz was, and we had--at one time, we were inspiring people to write and to perform and to do things, and now that's gone, and we are living--we're not creating the Stevie Wonder's and we're not--you turn on the radio and it's very disappointing to hear what they're calling music; it's very sad to hear what we're calling (unclear)--what the lyrics--what we're saying on lyrics. it is very sad to hear that--and to hear and see that perhaps the most highly-rewarded people in our--in the arts are the least talented, in my estimation. I mean you can have people who can't play an instrument, who can't sing, who can't read or write music, who are the moguls and, and, you know, they're making all the money around--in, in that industry, and thee, thee other thing is that we are not hearing whoever--the other voices anymore, and what was once the subculture of our culture is now the dominant culture, and the kind of environment I grew up in, which was considered the dominant culture, you know, is now the subculture; it's the small culture. It's not being emulated in terms of values and, and it's very sad to me to have--to see--I don't see my daddy--my daddy, this father who, you know, who did the things that he did; I don't see the grandfather I mentioned to you, you know. I see children growing up without fathers, and I--that's very sad to me. And I don't see a community that's loving and caring, and protective; I see one that people are held hostage in, and it's a very frightening place. And the worst--the last street I wanna be on is on a Martin Luther King anywhere, where it should be the most peaceful street, you know. So I see--even though now, when you were asking me, "What do you know about black history?" I'm saying with all the knowledge and the information, it seems like those generations, they know nothing; they don't know how to live it, how to appreciate it, how to imitate it, how to protect it; it's very sad to me, and it's very sad to me that we have not learned to--as our parents did, who grew up with many in poverty--so-called poverty but not the poverty of the spirit, but grew up during, you know, in the years of the depression. We have not learned--and re--re-define (ph.) what success was, and they, they defined success in a way that gave them dignity and respect. And I used to tell people--when I walk down the street and someone walk, walks up to me and asks me--they're panhandling and asking me for something, and I said, "You know, can you imagine, I grew up where I never saw a black man beg." I--you know, I'm talking about a period where I never saw a black--I--black men knocked on the door and would say, "Is there any work? Do you want me to do something?" People learned to barter; they did whatever; but I never saw able-bodied black men beg, and it was just not something that I ever witnessed, and I'm seeing that now. And so it's very sad to me that I'm living in a, in a--we're living in a world that is not really reflective of what our best is. Story_ID: 94758 Speaker 1: Now, you've been involved in a tremendous number of civic activities and causes, both local and in a national scope, and yet people sometimes think of someone who is a wife of a congressman [HM Ron Dellums] or, you know, or--as, as not--as just being somebody's wife, you know, and not--but, but what--and when you look back on all of it, what would you see as your legacy? Speaker 2: Well, it's funny; I, I--my legacy, I believe, stems from--comes from my family--my family--of being--I'm, I'm truly--am a Higgs girl, I truly am Esther Jones' granddaughter, I truly am Mary Wanzer's great-granddaughter, I truly am Reverend J.W. Jones' grand-grand--great-granddaughter, I truly am George Lee's granddaughter, and I am related to all those wonderful people--the ones that were in the Revolutionary War and were in the Civil War, and did all those early things to try to make this a better world for so many other people. And so those are the legacies, and those are the things and the values that were instilled in me. Friendship (unclear)--service, you know--I'm very thankful for the life that I've been able to live, and I've lived a life with a lot of comfort and a lot of joy. And even when there was a lot of sadness with the early deaths, I had a lot--a strong support system, and I--you know, and I understand the whole notion now of family that's extended beyond just blood, and I understand what the real values and what the real treasures in life are, and it's not money or things; they come from friendship. And, also, I've had people stop me at different points in my--in different places, and thank me for things--things I didn't realize that I had done; they said, "You know, you helped me here," or "You taught me that," or "You gave to this," and "It was because of you," and they go on and on; sometimes it was just in modeling. Someone would say, "I did not know--if it hadn't been for you going back to school and going to law school, I never would have thought of that." You--think--you know, you never know how you impact on people. I've had people come to me and they said, "You know, you taught me to speak English and let me sho--this is what I'm doing; this is my"--you know, and then they enter--introduce me to their--one of their children, and they'd say, "This was my teacher." And, and just sort of in their eyes and, and in their body language, people sort of thanking you for doing whatever it is; sometimes it was things that, that I did--I, I wasn't being compensated for. So that's who I am. And then I can be, hopefully, that same kinda model to my daughter and granddaughters that my mother--and bless her soul--if my mother was still alive--my mother died before any of us married, before any of us graduated from college or anything, and my father died a, a year--they died a year and a-half apart, my father when I was 17, my mother when I was 19. I'm number two of these six girls. The first loss in our lives was, was my young sister--was my sister. But if--it's like I feel that they did whatever they came to do with us because we were able to still flower and flourish, you know, as if there was--they were always there. And so I think that what's important is that I began--and I do know and understand what some of the things are that made our lives so special and made us--and made me able to make certain kinds of choices and do certain kinds of things. And I think that if I don't share that kind of information in some kind of way, or give back in a certain kind of way, then I would have dishonored them. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 94759 Speaker 1: And one final question. How would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Well, I actually would like to be remembered--it's so funny. I go back to my class reunions in high school, and I'm still--my very closest friends are the friends that I met when I was in nursery school and, and, and in elementary school, and we're still really tight, and a lot of my friends from junior high and high school, and they always say I--you know, "We're--you're just the same." So I wanna--and when they say that, I know that they love me, and they love something about me. So I always wanna be remembered as Roscoe, that person that everyone says, you know, wants to run up and hug, the person that people feel that they can trust, the person that they, that they feel brought them some joy and happiness. I wanna be remembered as someone who did make a difference, and that's not too--as a cliche, but a, a, a difference means that, that I lived my life in such a way that when I left, I left the world a better place--that kind of a person. Speaker 1: Well, thank you very much. Speaker 2: Oh, you're very welcome, you're very welcome. Story_ID: 94760 Speaker 1: I attended, as I mentioned, Georgetown Law School [Washington, D.C.]. The black students have an organization called BALSA [Black American Law Students Association] and we put on different--we have a festival in honor of black--the law students. This is a picture of Professor Gordon catching me as I faint in a drama called (laughter)--it's one of the school plays. There is one of my classmates; that's Joan Fonseca (ph.)--Joan Parrot (ph.) Fonseca in the back--background. Speaker 2: About what year is this? Speaker 1: This would be like 1982, I guess; 1982? Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Oh, there's a earlier picture. This is a picture of a, a gathering of people by Calvin Rolark who is now deceased, and Calvin Rolark is to your far--my far left, and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, this would be left, so if you could describe from left to right (unclear). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You don't have to point 'em out; if you can just (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Okay. There's Calvin Rolark, and next to Calvin Rolark is Gerald--I can't think of his last name; Carol Kirkendahl (ph.), and if we--if you skip over to the gentleman in the suit, he was a member of the DC City Council, whose name I can't recall right now; Wilhelmina Rolark, who was married to Calvin Rolark who was a member of the City Council. I'm way to your right, over here. The man holding the platen, 1977, is a mem--this is Earth, Wind and Fire--the, the performing group Earth, Wind and Fire, and they (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--That's Maurice White. Speaker 1: That's Maurice holding--right-- Speaker 2: Emm-hmm. Speaker 1: --and you can see all the rest of--the other members of his group. The guy with the big afro is Darryl Brooks, and they belong to an organization, at the time, was called Compared to What, and they used to do all the arts programs in the cities, and Human Kindness Day was one of their big things. When I came, I was asked to participate, and I used to write poetry; I was like what they called the poet in residence, and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Okay; that's 1970? Speaker 1: That was like 1977. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: That's great. Speaker 2: Okay, here I am looking a little chubby, but it's really the dress. I, at this point, am working for the ACLU [American Civil Liberties Union] as their development director. This is the Edgerton Dinner, which we honor every year some person that is recognized for their legal work on making some contribution in that sense. In this picture, we are honoring the wonderful Wiley Branton who is to--way to the right; he was a former--Wiley Branton was the lead attorney in the Little Rock, Arkansas case, and that was the school desegregation case. He and Thurgood Marshall did quite a few cases together throughout--during that period. He was a, a prominent civil rights attorney, and he became dean of Howard's law school. Andrew Young [HM] is the person standing next to me, and Andrew Young is there because he is going to introduce Wiley, who is receiving this award. And Bertha Thompkins is the woman that is standing between the two of them, and she is just an invitee. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Emm-hmm. Okay. Speaker 2: Here, we have a picture of--in the center is Congresswoman Maxine Waters of California, and next to her is Laura Murphy, and Laura is the Executive Director of the ACLU [American Civil Liberties Union], and this is an event at the, the NAACP Legal Defense Fund where we were honoring--I want--we don't have his picture; we were honoring--who's the--the, the musician? Speaker 1: (Inaudible response). Speaker 2: Anyway, it was--the big one. Oh, what's my mind? Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes, you know; you know, you know--the conductor, musician, composer (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--I think that's Quincy Jones [HM](simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yes, Quincy Jones, right, and which, and which I should have had his picture down here. Okay. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): All right. And we do these sideways 'cause we capture 'em on computer from the video anyways, so we can just turn it there. Speaker 2: This is a picture of Murphy Marobe, the South African activist, President Mandela's right-hand man when they were in the ANC; he was the Minister of Communication, and he is the prisoner of conscience who escaped heroically from the South African prison and took refuge in the--at the American Consulate. Speaker 1: About what year is this? Speaker 2: Let's see; that would be in--that would be in the '80's [1980s]. Am I correct? Speaker 1: I think so. Speaker 2: It would be after the--yeah, it would be in the '80's [1980s] because it--the Anti-Apartheid--he's outta South Africa in that one, right? (Laughter). (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--(Inaudible response). Speaker 2: Okay, here is a picture--I was on the Advisory Board of the, the Black Repertory Theatre, and Bobby Hooks [Robert Hooks HM] is the founder of that theatre, and he is to my far left. Next to him is Vantar (ph.) Whitfield who--we call him Little (ph.) Geeco (ph.); he was the creative person for this; he taught all the acting and theatre (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--and the National Endowment for the Arts. Speaker 2: National endowment and he has quite a little history; he was--when he was back in LA. And there's-Ron [Dellums HM] is standing next to me, and that's Isaac Hayes, and Isaac Hayes--we are premiering Isaac Hayes'--a film by Isaac Hayes, and that film is a fundraiser for the theatre. Speaker 1: Okay, this is when I worked, again, for the ACLU, and I am giving a--we are honoring Roger Baldwin, who is the founder of the American Civil Liberties Union; this is he and this is at his like--he was like 98 years old in this picture; feisty as he could be. And what a privilege to meet the founder of the ACLU, and to, to host something for him. Speaker 2: This is a picture of my--I'm at the Kennedy Center, everyone, and we're raising money for the Capital Ballet Company, which is the first ballet--black ballet company in the nation and, and here I am standing at the mic, and I have put Ron on program here; he's waiting for his lines (laughter). Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): The ballet company is--their home's not too far from here, right? Speaker 2: Right, the Capital Ballet Company is right here in Washington [D.C.], not too far; they are home. (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--(Unclear) over here ridin' around. Speaker 2: Again, here's another picture of us. This is at a reception Bobby Hooks [HM] and them were giving, and this actually is for a reception to meet Billy Dee Williams, which is on another one of the pictures. And there we are. Speaker 1: So the late '70s [1970s], I guess. Speaker 2: Yes. You can always tell by the Afro. Speaker 1: And there is a picture of my daddy and his secretary, Mrs. Bailey, and this was like 1940--I can't see it--'41' [1941] or--no, 1940-something. Speaker 2: Yeah, (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--'47' [1947], I think, '47' [1947], and this is a picture of my father, as I mentioned, the first black realtor in Berkeley, and there he is at his desk--at work. And this is in Berkeley, California. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: Oh, you took that one. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): (Laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. The Women's National Democratic Club--what--these are some of the people that I met there; these are my friends, and we are putting on a dance number, again, raising money for Democrats, and this is a performance that took place at the Arena Stage, and there--I'm way in the back, and (simultaneous)-- (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): (Simultaneous)--So you did end up making friends there. Speaker 2: Oh, yes, I did. Oh, goodness, Donna, Michelle, and--gee, I'm tryin' to remember everyone's name, and--these were all friends. Speaker 1: Again, here I am. The--a Cloth-A-Thon, the DC--there's a DC council for clothing for kids when I came here. We raised money to get--for clothes for, for the kids of Washington, DC. I got Greg Morris to come in to bring his celebrity to help us with this telethon and, and there we are commiserating (ph.). I (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--He was the actor on Mission Impossible (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Mission Impossible (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--the original series. Speaker 1: Mission Impossible--and I know Greg because he came in and did Mission Possible in our campaign. Speaker 2: Mission Possible, okay. Speaker 1: Here, again, is a picture of the Cloth-A-Thon, and people are busy on their phones. I'm talking to Barbara Lett-Simmons, who is a president of the DC School Board, I think, or a member of the DC School Board at that time, or she may have been on the council-at-large; she's very political person. Sugar Ray Leonard is standing right there next to me, and he is also one of the celebrities that we were fortunate enough to have to help work the phones and, and to be a part of this effort. Speaker 2: These are the ones that go upstairs, so I'm keepin' a--in a separate stack so I don't (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Aren't you something. Speaker 2: Ahh, this was a proud day for me; this was graduation day at Georgetown Law School, and I'm with my three--sisters is what--we all became very close. That's Evette Caesar, who is related to the actor Caesar (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Adolph Caesar? Speaker 2: Adolph Caesar's niece, uhh-huhh. Renee Devene (ph.) White, and to my right is Sonia Childs. Speaker 1: Hmm. Adolph Caesar; he had a, he had a distinctive voice. (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Oh, yes, and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--He was the narrator in I Remember Harlem, a William Miles (ph.) movie. Speaker 2: Here was my dear friend the, the late Betty Shabazz; that was a very happy time. My son Eric is standing behind me and we run into each other--it was after one of the Congressional Black Caucus dinners, and I got my hug; and I miss her dearly. Speaker 1: Yes, indeed. I remember sittin' with her with her shoes off at Peg Leg Bates Resort in New York. Speaker 2: This is a picture that was actually sent to me by First Lady Hillary Rodham Clinton, and this picture was taken at the Democratic--one of the Democ--the Democratic Convention that was held in New York; I believe it was this one, and as you know, we run to these conventions, so this was a, a reception for her and the--I was one of the people invited to this reception. Speaker 1: Ahh, here is another--this was a Congressional Black Caucus dinner also--another one; that was Congressman Savage. Was that Chicago? Speaker 2: Yeah, Gus Savage [HM]. Speaker 1: Gus Savage that is standing over here to--on my left, Spike Lee is standing on my, my right--the filmmaker, Spike Lee, and Barbara Lee [HM] who, at this time, was either a California Assemblywoman or a senator, who was once AA--my husband's--former husband's AA [Administrative Assistant], and is now--has taken his seat; she's a (unclear) member of Congress. Speaker 2: Okay. I'll just set it up here 'cause (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Okay, and there's Paul Mooney, who is my darling and one of my best friends. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: Paul Mooney is, is one of those important voices in social conscience; he's a comedian, and his humor is very biting and very--he's not only satirical, but he's a social--makes social comments in his humor. And Mooney and I, as I call him affectionately, met in the seventh grade; we have been friends ever since. We danced with each other on Dance Party in San Francisco, as I mentioned, and I wrote his very first comedy album, which was called Black Power, and that was--those were the jokes that I put together when he traveled with Jane Fonda. Speaker 1: You, you wrote the jokes? Speaker 2: I--yeah, I was--used to do some comedy writing. And he traveled with Jane Fonda during--sort of the answer to the Bob Hope (laughter)--when Bob Hope was doing, you know, meeting the soldiers. Well, Jane Fonda also pulled together her anti-war (unclear), and Mooney traveled with them and wrote some of those jokes. And I still contribute to him. Speaker 1: Yeah, he played Delacroix's father in Bamboozled (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter)--Which was such a horrible review (ph.). Don't say it 'cause Spike Lee is the--I favored (unclear), and I'm sorry I failed to mention how important this issue is. This is handgun control, and for many years, I sat on their, their board--their national board, and I--for a while there, I was like the only black, but there is Sarah Brady with the scarfing; there's--she's going through chemotherapy and she's fighting a wonderful, courageous battle against cancer. Jim Brady is seated right there and, as you remember, he was the press secretary to Reagan who was shot, and had sort of epiphany and now is--they're the voices behind common sense laws with guns. And Courtney is the young lady that's sitting in front of them and she was a staff person at Handgun Control, and my son Eric is standing to the--shaking hands with Mr. Brady--Brady. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): You cashed some of my checks while you were there. Speaker 2: Oh, thank you, thank you. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: Here I am with Doctor Dorothy Height [HM], National Council of Negro Women, and just a darling. When I first came to Washington, because of my grandmother who was close to Mary McLeod Bethune, I used to, to go around with Miss Height, Dr. Height, in helping to raise memberships for--to get memberships and raise money for the National Council. Speaker 1: I don't know if you can do much with this, but George Lee is one of her ancestors, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: It's so faint. Speaker 2: It is fate (ph.). That's actually my mother's father, George Lee, and I think this was--as you can see, down--that's one of his--it's either like a, a fraternity organization, you know, I don't know which one. Can you see that? But he was the one that came on the railroad; he worked for the railroad and he was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--I think it was the Masonic (ph.) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--That may be his--Mason, okay, 'cause they were all Masons--oh, I should have just given you my father's. But--so that's my grandfather, my mother's father. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Somebody thought I was the babysitter, but this turns out to be me and my three children (laughter). And that's Brandy, Piper in the middle, and Eric over to my right. And this was when they were little ones, as you can tell, and I would imagine on this--Oh, goodness, how old could they have been? They were very young and so was I, obviously. I can't remember what year this was, but looks like Piper's no more than about 2 or 3 years old. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: Oh, and there's a picture of my sisters, one of the pictures. It's my sister Emma to the left; she's the baby now 'cause the--there were six of us, as you probably will see in another picture. There I am, and then my sister Beth, this is her going- out party--her Cotillion. My sister Mary, who I mentioned, who's an educator at Emeryville--in Emeryville, and also has a law degree. And Beth is the PhD I mentioned; she's a clinical psychologist. She also named the--Hurricane David and the Susie B. Anthony Coin; she was President Carter's Advisor on Women's Affairs and Education. Speaker 1: Emm-Hmm. Speaker 2: My sister--baby sister Emma, has a doctorate in education, my sister Mary a law degree, and my sister Rosa has a master's. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay? Speaker 2: Beautiful Mother. This is my mother, Esther Lee Higgs, and she's the, the lady I mentioned who played the piano, graduate of University of California at Berkley, attended Julliard, and the Baptist Divinity School--that's where she also went, and--that's my mother--California native. Speaker 1: About what year was that shot, do you know? Speaker 2: I would say that was probably around 1942 or something. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It's a picture of my father--what year? This is like '49' [1949], is that what that is? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And this is a picture he actually gave to my mother, and look what is says, "To the lady I married" (laughter). And that's a picture of my father sitting at his desk and, again, he was also a--he's a 32-Degree man; is that what we call it? Thirty-Two? Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Sounds like that would be a Mason. Speaker 2: Yeah, he's a Mason--he's a Shriner. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. All right. Speaker 2: That's the highest Order. Second Lieu--that's my grand--what is it--from Okla-- Speaker 1: Oklahoma, 1920. Speaker 2: Anyway, this is a picture of--this is the very first formal picture that he took. My cousin gave this to me, and he is--look at him; they called him Camouth (ph.) Higgs. He is the son of the, the slave--what, what do you call it? The slave-owner? Speaker 1: Yeah, master. Speaker 2: The master--I can't even remember--oh, that's terrible. Speaker 1: Slavemaster or (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, so that's on--that's--yeah. And this picture was taken, I believe, in Oklahoma; I can't remember all the details, but that's my grandfather. Handsome, isn't he? Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Emm-hmm. Speaker 2: I don't know how well this'll show up; you can see it, I guess, but (unclear). Speaker 1: Yeah, and I was looking for- Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: See--can you see--which one did you want? Of the real estate office? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And if you get really close here, this says Higgs Realty, and the interesting thing--my father's slogan was, "We've got it, we'll get it, or we'll build it" (laughter), and you can see part of that on there. Can you see that--some of that? "We've got it, we'll get it, or we'll, we'll build it." Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: And that's a picture on--that's Sacramento Street in Berkeley. Speaker 2: This one came out pretty good, I think. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: But, you know, that's a very recent photo. They had all these animals, they call party animals, all around Washington, DC (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Elephants and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Elephants and donkeys, and there I am, and they asked me to pose next to this one, and this appeared in the Afro Newspaper. And this was actually a, a--the photographer is Micki Thompson, whose--her husband was the late Judge Turk Thompson, and she is taking pictures like this and she's gonna put together a big book and do fundraising under his name for scholarships--appears in the book the--a second march on Washington. Have you seen that one? Speaker 1: (Inaudible response). Speaker 2: They had an anniversary--25 years after the March on Washington, they went back and marched again-- Speaker 1: I remember when they did that. Speaker 2: --and I have the book; it's--I think it was 20--25 years. Speaker 1: And this is a picture of me and my--a picture of my girlfriend Cynthia Batey (ph.) Beard, and we're all out there on that very hot monument and, and here we are. And what happened was, the author of the book--and I'll show you this book (unclear); he came by on Mother's Day and surprised me that I was in his book-- Speaker 2: Hmm. Speaker 1: --and--so that's a--that's the, the shot they took, and this was one of those where I had on a Re-elect Ron Dellums [HM] t-shirt (laughter)--always the political. Story_ID: 94761 Speaker 1: Here's the Quincy Jones one I was telling you; this is what that was for--and that's Quincy. Speaker 2: Okay. What, what is the portrait we're looking at now? What was that for? Speaker 1: Oh, well there's--it's just kinda look like a glam shot, doesn't it? This is a picture that was taken when I was inducted into the Berkeley High School Hall of Fame, and that was around--what was that? I guess it was in the '90s [1990s]; it was in the '90s [1990s], huh? It was in the '90s [1990s]. Speaker 2: Okay, if you say (laughter)--I don't--I know I don't know. Speaker 1: Yeah. Is it the '90--[1990]--well, yeah. Speaker 2: All right, Matthew? Speaker 1: Next? Speaker 2: Okay, there a couple of pictures here; which one you want? Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: Wait a minute. Speaker 1: This was honored at the, the Legal Defense Fund, and that's a picture of, of my--congratulating him. I usually have served for years as the honorary chairperson of that event. And the picture--the bottom picture is just a picture of--over to the left is Joyce Ross; Joyce was my daughter's mother-in-law, and the grandmother of my--the two--my two granddaughters Sydney and Dylan, and this was a party that Sheila Frazier--do you know who Sheila is? Actress Sheila Frazier (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--She was in Super Fly. Speaker 1: Yes--my dear; she's like a play sister; they threw for me in LA, and it was at, at a restaurant there, and there's--Sinbad was walking by and we grabbed him. Art Evans, who I grew up with, is there with his son. And Art is an actor of-- Speaker 2: At a reception for--at the White--that's a reception at the Whitehouse, and there's the president of the United States, Bill Clinton at the time, and we're having a, a good time talking. Speaker 1: And here is a picture--this picture--this event took place at Rockefeller's home up in the hills here in Washington--one of his homes, I should say. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: And, again with--this is another kick-off for Hillary Clinton's--this is for the Clinton Campaign, and a few of us were invited there. Jay Stokes, the wife of Congressman (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Louis Stokes (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--former Congressman Louis Stokes is in the photo with us, and the picture below is Tipper Gore and I; and we've been friends for a long time, Tipper. Speaker 2: This was in 1979; Patrick Hayes is being roasted on his--I forgot which birthday it was, and it was the Wash--it was a benefit for the Washington Performing Arts Society, and I was very flattered to be asked to roast. Also, it's a very, very prominent people; Willard Scott was the Master of Ceremonies, for example, of this event. And as you can see, one of the roasters is Mark Russell--yes, it was great. Speaker 1: Political comedian (ph.). Speaker 2: Political commentator who does--plays the piano and, and, and does the Capitol (ph.). Speaker 1: Oh, this was a White House event--a ball, and this was when the president was--Ford--this is Betty Ford and--First Lady Betty Ford and President--Ford (laughter). Speaker 2: Gerald. Speaker 1: (Laughter)--Gerald Ford (laughter). President Ford, how about that? Okay. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Oh, my goodness. Here we are. And you can see, my little award, Longfellow Elementary School too, right? There I am standing in front of the fireplace at our home in Berkeley. And if you could see in the background, there are other pictures. My father used to line us up, and every year we had to take pictures to go on his calendars that he sent out (laughter) to--you know, Higgs Realty calendars, and the people really looked forward to getting those calendars. And you could just about see us grow; here are all six of us here--so there's the six, and that's my little baby sister; the one that died is being held by my sister Mary. So there's Mary, there's Penny, there I am standing erect, my sister Beth who we call Elizabeth--who we call Sticky, my sister Rosa and my baby sister--I mean--and my other sister Emma who's now the baby. And you see I got an award here; that's 1953, "Has given service to the school as Service Club member," which was a big honor; I mean we were like the (unclear) of the Traffic Boys Service Club, but we were the girls with the big badges (laughter). Speaker 2: My daughter is in one (unclear). Speaker 1: Okay, that's my--okay, my--what do I read? Oh, I have to read it this way. My Longfellow Ele--that was elementary school, too--Longfellow Elementary School in Berkeley, and that's the graduating class of 1953, and I'm--the arrow is pointing to where I am. Can you imagine at that time I was one of the tallest kids? Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: And I never grew. Okay. See the arrow? I'm in the second row there. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Then, I graduate from elementary school and I go to junior high. Here's some pictures from the junior high school. Here I am; I am president of the Leaders' Club here, and--can you see me? The little mark that's showing me? Do I need a marker? Here I am (POINTING). Here, the arrow is pointing there, and here I am; there's a little check right there (POINTING), and Miss White's assistant, and that was the--she was like the, the, the dean of the girls, or--Okay? Speaker 2: That's my--graduating from--that's my picture from Berkeley High School, and I was Girls' Association president, hand--stood on the stage, handed out diplomas, and I was also inducted into the National Thespian Society; as you can see, there's that induction. So that's 1959, Berkeley High School. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The Youth Citizenship Award at Burbank Junior High School, and here I am way over to the left, playing the cello; this is the orchestra, and there I am right here (POINTING). Can you see me there? Speaker 1: Emm-hmm. Speaker 2: Playing my beloved cello. I started playing the cello in the ninth grade--I mean, I mean at 9, when I was in the what?--fourth grade. Speaker 1: Did you play cello in the marching band? Speaker 2: No!--a cello in a band? No, that's a orchestra. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: This'll give you a picture. This is right in front of my house in Berkeley, but it's kind of--and this is also Cotillion, so you could get a sense of Berkeley. But, anyway--there I am; this--I was a LINKS Debutante, and this is the Cotillion in 1959. It says the LINKS, Inc., and I'm a LINK now, myself; so there I am in my--my father died that year. Speaker 1: Again, there's the LINKS--oh, uhh-uhh, on the other side-- Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: --I think that's important. (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Sure (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--And this was out in front of my, my home in Berkeley. Speaker 2: What is this one here? It's the Girls' Association; that was the highest office a girl could hold. We were not allowed to run for president of the school in those days-- Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: 'cause only boys could be presidents-- Speaker 1: Hmm, that's deep. Speaker 2: --which is interesting. So the Girls' Association, then I was president of--over all the gir--I had dominion over all the girls (laughter). And the other is an award I got for when I was on the Speakers' Bureau and they awarded me this in recognition for my--I spoke before the, the, the American Legion. Speaker 1: This is when I ran for Homecoming Queen at San Francisco State, and this is narrowed down of--rather large-filled of comp--competitors to the--only to us four; we became the, you know, the, the Queen's Court and stuff. And I--as I told you, I won the popular vote, and so here I am. And this year would be 1961. This is the year my mother--my mother was dying. Speaker 2: This is pledging AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority]; I was a Ivy Leaf (ph.) pledge--the Pledge Club for the AKA Sorority. Our charter was at University of California at Berkeley, and these girls came from all the four-year institutions around the northern California to form this pledge group (laughter); it's very interesting. And there's my sorors. And the picture that's below that was my graduation. Can you, can you lift that? Does that lift? Oh, it's--yeah. Let's see, the Class of August '66 [1966]. This one I got my Bachelor of Arts degree. Are we on? Speaker 1: Emm-hmm. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --And I want you to know I graduated with honors, and--but the other thing is that when I graduated, I had three children; my eldest was 3, and I had a 1-year-old and a 9-month-old--Piper and--and so there I am holding the babies. And I received--my Sister's--Emma's standing there with me. And I received a standing ovation. Speaker 2: Hmm. Speaker 1: That's at the Cow Palace in the, in San Francisco [California]. Speaker 2: Oh, I remember the Cow Palace. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: That was a odd (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Disney. Speaker 2: This is the Color of Friendship (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--That's the cast from the Color of Friendship. (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--The cast from the Color of Friendship. And Disney put out all these learning tools for the schools, and they put them in throughout the, the, the junior and high--the junior--the elementary--the junior and elementary schools (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Who was that that played you? Speaker 2: Her name is--and I love her--P., P., P.--Penny--Johnson. Speaker 1: And that's Carl Lumbly (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Carl, Carl Lumbrey (ph.), uhh-huhh. Did they get it? Speaker 1: Emm-hmm. Speaker 2: Now, there's a picture of me with Danny Glover, and Danny is a home-boy, San Francisco, and he went to San Francisco State University, and everyone knows him--this wonderful, talented actor and producer. Alfre Woodard and Sheila Frazier are shown, with me in the middle; this was after congres--this was a Congressional Black Caucus weekend. Some of our other guests and friends were Phyllis Hyman, who is in the blue, who's departed; there's Marla Gibbs who's far to the left, Phyllis Hyman in the blue, and Madge Sinclair, who is also deceased now. It's very sad; it's hard to look at this. Speaker 1: Emm. Madge Sinclair is--yeah, I didn't know she's--she passed. Speaker 2: Yeah, she passed. Speaker 1: She's a good actress. Speaker 2: Yeah, they were all wonderful. Speaker 1: --of, of, my sisters and I; I'm in the white, my sister Beth, my sister Mary; we're there for my (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--(Unclear) on there (laughter). Speaker 1: --my, my niece's--yeah, isn't that something? (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--(laughter); you look great there. Speaker 1: And my kindergarten teacher Mrs. Wilson, Sheila Wilson, who was Miss Young when I was in her kindergarten class, and she was perhaps like the second black teacher in, in the Berkeley School System. And below that is just a picture of, of my daughter Piper, of my two grandchildren Sydney and Dylan, and Eric. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: This one here is the christening of my--here's a picture of the christening of my granddaughter, Olivia--I'm holding Olivia; my, my daughter-in-law Elizabeth, her husband, my eldest son Brandon, and my middle son Eric--my middle child, Eric. This was taken in Los Angeles at the church, at her--their church...