 Story_ID: 54963 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm the interviewer today with the HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Ma'am, can you please give us your full name and spell it for us, please. Speaker 2: It's Karen Eileen DeWitt. Karen is spelled, K-A-R-E-N; Eileen is spelled, E-I-L-E-E-N; DeWitt is, D-e, that's a capital D-, E-, capital W-, I-T-T. Speaker 1: All right. And what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: 4-18-44, Washington, Pennsylvania; Washington County. Speaker 1: And what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm a writer. Speaker 1: A journalist? Speaker 2: Writer, journalist. I've been a producer, television producer; but, basically, I'm a writer. Speaker 1: All right. And what is today's date? Speaker 2: Oh, gosh. It's June 16th, 2012. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: Washington, D.C. You're in my home. Story_ID: 54964 Speaker 1: All right. Before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we ask as sort of a warm-up, and they only require a short answer. The first one is: Do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: A favorite food. Something I absolute--that goes in and out of phase. Right now, I like Bindaetteok, which is a Korean mung bean pancake. But I like sushi. I've lived all over the world, so different foods. There are two foods--now, if you'd ask me two foods that I don't like, I don't like mochi and I don't like natto; both of which are Japanese. Speaker 1: And can you spell Bindaetteok for us? Speaker 2: Oh (laughs). Bindaetteok. Oh, I'm going to--well, since it's in Korean characters, it was like, I'd say, B-I-N-N-D-E-T-E-K (sic), Bindaetteok. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. And do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Green. Speaker 1: All right. Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Autumn. Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Well, that, too, is like, I've lived in a lot of different places, so I like cool weather, basically, though. I mean, I'm not somebody who is going to be drawn the Caribbean, lying on the beach; it's too hot for me. I like places that are cool. So if it's a beach, like, someplace like Sag Harbor, I like it better in the winter than in the summertime when there are lot of people. But Portugal, I like Portugal, Italy; Mediterranean. Speaker 1: Okay. And the last question is: Do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Yes, I actually do. It's the Greek Stoic, Epictetus, and it's, "First decide what you want to do, and then do what you need to do." Story_ID: 54965 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, I'm going to ask about your family history. I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side. But we'll start with your mother's side first and then we'll try to bring them together. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Geraldine Norma Streibiling. You want her married names as well? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. It's Geraldine Norma Streibiling. That's her maiden name. And then she married my father, Donald DeWitt. So it was Geraldine S. DeWitt. And my father died, and she got married the second time, so it's now, Geraldine Streibiling Moran, M-O-R-A-N. Speaker 1: All right. And what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: My mother was born December 1st, 1921, in Washington, Pennsylvania. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what do you know about your mother's side of the family? I mean, how far back can you trace them, and what were they doing? Speaker 2: I'm not really into the details, but we can go back into the nineteenth century. There is my grandmother's [Helen Jones] family; she had, like, 13 brothers and sisters. I showed you a picture of her stepfather. Looks like he's white. I've never seen a picture of her father. There's supposed to be--I have a great-great-grandmother, Sally, who's--looks like she's white in a picture that I can show you. And they're supposed to be some relationship to Thomas Jefferson, since they're all Virginia people. My grandmother's family are from Staunton (sic), Virginia, and they were a sort of wild, high-yellow, red-haired clan (chuckles), of mountain people who were married to Indians, Powhatan Indians; white people or the black people, but it was a big clan. Speaker 1: This is a Staunton, Virginia? Speaker 2: Staunton (sic), Virginia. Speaker 1: Staunton. Speaker 2: Yeah. Or they say Staunton, Staunton. I'm not-- Speaker 1: Is that near Charlottesville [Virginia] where [Thomas] Jefferson's place is? Speaker 2: It's--you know, it's not--I'm really not sure. I usually have taken a train into Richmond [Virginia] and then driven my mom or we've driven down. It's about--I have no idea. But it's close, yeah. In the Charlottesville area. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So do you think there's any veracity to the claims of-- Speaker 2: Don't know. Don't care. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (Laughs.) Speaker 1: But they have red hair, which is Jefferson's hair color. Speaker 2: Well, my grandmother had, yeah, had red hair. But there's lots of black people with red hair who aren't related to Jefferson (laughs). Speaker 1: This is very true. Very, very true. I just, you know, just for the sake of the interview-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --just establish that. So, do you have--are you aware of where that rumor--I mean, what they used to substantiate--well, what's the story they tell? Speaker 2: No. My grandmother used to tell me these stories of it. All I remember is she--we didn't do a lot of that kind of stuff, but she talked about one of the relatives was married to a Native American and he never came in the house and they had eight children. So it was sort of a funny joke, but, you know. He never slept in the house, but they had eight children. But my grandmother would say that. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. And what kind of Indians were these? You said these were-- Speaker 2: Powhatan. Speaker 1: Powhatan. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. That would around that area. Speaker 2: Yeah. They're Virginia Indians. Story_ID: 54966 Speaker 1: Okay. Now--so, I guess at some point, your mother's [Geraldine Steibiling Moran] side of the family, somebody moves to Washington, PA, right? Speaker 2: Yes. So, actually the heritage my grandmother [Helen Jones] talked about was that--I'm not, as the great-great-grandparents say, we're from two plantations, and they were the signs of, you know, master and slave, and that they married these--in one place it was two brothers, and their brother was a mixture, and another place it was the daughter. Have no history of this, but she would say that, and they married these two people. I guess the plantations were not far apart. And they took the son in one place and daughter in the other, married them, gave them a wagonload of goods and things, and sent them over to West Virginia. Now, I guess they ended up coming back to Virginia, but that's what my grandmother used to tell us about. And that's where the origin of that side of the family, should would say, came from. And my grandmother used to say that the old folks were mean. Actually they were just very strict. What do they say nowadays. Yeah, they were just very strict. And so my grandmother had a brother-in-law and sister who lived in Little Washington, Pennsylvania. So my grandmother was teaching at sixteen, you know. She was teaching school, but she was still under the aegis of the family rules. So she moved to Pittsburgh--I mean she moved to Washington, Pennsylvania, and lived with her brother-in-law and sister or a cousin. I can't remember which. She was 16 years old and she was, you know, obviously, wanted a bigger life than there was in Staunton, Virginia, and she didn't like the rules and regulations of the people she was living with. She looked around town, saw a, you know, a veteran of the first World War, my grandfather, Harrison Streibiling, who was also from Staunton (sic), though I don't think they knew of one another because she was only seventeen and I think he was thirty. Set her cap for him and got him. Speaker 1: Okay. That's Stripling. That's, S-T-R-I-P-L-I-N-G? Speaker 2: S-T-R-E-I-B-I-L-I-N-G. Speaker 1: Okay. That's an unusual kind of name for a, you know, as a black kid (?), you don't hear it that much. It's a German name, of course. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Streibiling. Okay. And he was from the same-- Speaker 2: He was from Staunton (sic), too, but they were much more sedate, as my mother says; less the wild clan of the--Jones is--my grandmother's name was Helen Jones, and my grandfather's family was much more sedate, sort of members of the community, and I'd guess you'd say even though they probably, they weren't very middle class. They had sort of middle class values. Story_ID: 54967 Speaker 1: Okay. So they-- Speaker 2: And he had gone to college for a couple of years, so. Education was big in both families. Speaker 1: Now is that the gentleman in the World War I photo? Speaker 2: That's my grandfather [Harrison Striebling]. He was in the First World War, yeah. Speaker 1: So, do you know where he went to school? Speaker 2: I think he went to a school that's now defunct. Maybe it was West Virginia College. I looked it up one time and I have it somewhere in some notes. Speaker 1: I know Storer College [Harper's Ferry, West Virginia] is defunct. Speaker 2: Yeah. That--I think it might be. Speaker 1: Is that it? Speaker 2: I am not sure. But, yeah, I think it might have been Storer College. Speaker 1: It's in Harpers Ferry [West Virginia]? Speaker 2: It's in Harpers Ferry, yeah. Speaker 1: And that's it, Storer College, right. Okay. Okay. So they settled in Washington, Pennsylvania? Speaker 2: They stayed in Washington, yeah. They stayed in Washington [Pennsylvania]. Had my mom. A singleton. She's an only child. Story_ID: 54968 Speaker 1: Okay. So, well, what did she [Geraldine Streibiling Moran] say about growing up in Washington, PA [Pennsylvania]? Speaker 2: Not much. She had a dog named Skeezics (ph.). My grandmother [Helen Jones] was very strict, and my mother says she remembers sitting on the front porch with her dog, Skeezics and an ice cream while the other kids ran up and down the street, because my grandmother was, like, "You're not going to play with those little hellions." I mean, she was--already had sort of separated herself. My grandmother was a woman before her time. I mean, by the time--and I have pictures of her--she was on the radio, she went back to school, she became a hairdresser, but a businesswoman. She was sort of an amazing woman, and she was in the Second World War. She was a WAC [Women's Army Corps] in the Second World War, 'cause when I was a little kid, I had a handkerchief from her from Paris, and I always thought, "Oh, I can't wait to go to Paris where my grandmother is." Though she'd been home by then, because, you know... Speaker 1: So she was married as WAC? Speaker 2: Yeah. My grandmother was married. Yeah. Story_ID: 54969 Speaker 1: As a matter of fact, my mother [Geraldine Streibiling Moran] got married, and I have a photograph of the wedding pictures. My mother got married at Wilberforce [Wilberforce University, Wilberforce, Ohio], where she and my father [Donald DeWitt] went to school and met one another. And my mother lived with a professor there, who I actually call my Grandpa and Grandma Warrick (ph.), but she lived with Professor Warrick and his two daughters, who were my Aunt Elina (ph.) and my Aunt Allison. And got my mother got married at their house. And my grandmother [Helen Jones] got leave, and there's a picture of her in her WAC uniform with my grandfather [Harrison Streibiling] in a suit and the whole crew. Speaker 2: Okay. All right. So you said your mother got a scholarship, an A and E scholarship to go to Wilberforce. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Now this is--was she the first person in the family to get a four-year college degree or AB? Speaker 1: Well, my grandfather went for two years. And my grandmother had finished high school, but she was always going to school. And she went back and got her master's when she was 75. So, she was the first person, I guess, probably, to get a four-college education. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: In her family. Speaker 2: All right. And your mother met your father at Wilberforce. Speaker 1: Actually, that's not true, because I have an aunt, one of my grandfather's sisters who graduated from Hampton [Hampton University, Hampton, VA] in 1902, because I have her little graduation books. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So I don't know whether Hampton, at that time, was a two-year or a four-year college. Speaker 2: So, but your mother met [Geraldine Streibiling] your father [Donald DeWitt] at Wilberforce? Speaker 1: At Wilberforce, yeah. Speaker 2: Oh, okay. So did she have any stories at all about growing up in Washington, PA [Penssylvania], or any stories about Wilberforce? Speaker 1: No. Punching. I just know the phrase "punching," which meant that they were sort of courting one another, and no. And then she was--my grandmother went--my mother went to college when she was seventeen. She was smart, so she went when she was seventeen, but--and she had a great German professor who told her that she would be, you know, was really a great--would be a good German student. She was a premed student. But she said that her mind wasn't there, she didn't really--that she wanted to get married and have kids, so. Story_ID: 54970 Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Let me go to your father now. Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: My father's name is Donald LeFevre DeWitt. It's Donald, D-O-N-A-L-D; middle name is, L-E-F-E-V-R-E; capital F-, E-V-R-E; DeWitt, D-E, capital W-, I-T-T; capital D. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: My dad was born in October, I think, 7th or 9th, 1917. Speaker 1: Okay. Is there a story about the origin of his name, the LeFevre and the DeWitt? Speaker 2: Well, they're two families from Upstate New York. His mother's name was LeFevre. And, actually, it's sort of long, but his family has been in New York for 300 years, because when--Kingston was the capital of New York City before New York. And when Kingston had its Tricentennial, and it was before the Bicentennial, the United States, they did a whole newspaper article on the black DeWitts and the white DeWitts. And--somewhere around here I have a magazine, Ulster (ph.) Magazine on the DeWitts and the LeFevres and they're sort of mixed-race people that used to live at a place called Eagles Nest. And then they put in a--what do you call it--it's flood, all that area is flooded, but I do remember going up--I wish I'd find that magazine somewhere. But they're all my relatives or all of these sort of mixed-race people who were Dutch, Indian, African--and they lived up in the hills, and they were known as Herbalist. But my father grew up in Kingston with his--did he grow up with the LeFevres--he grew up with the--I think he grew up with the LeFevres and not the DeWitts. Speaker 1: Okay. Kingston, New York, is--is that like-- Speaker 2: It's in the Catskills. Speaker 1: Okay. In the Catskills. Speaker 2: 'Cause my father picked apples in the summertime-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --to fund college. Speaker 1: This is Rip Van Wrinkle territory. Speaker 2: It's Rip Van Wrinkle territory, yeah. It's beautiful country. Story_ID: 54971 Speaker 1: Washington (unclear). All right. Now, are there any stories, specific stories, about individuals on your father's side that-- Speaker 2: Oh, I have a lot of family. I mean, my Grandmother LeFevre, and I have a picture of her, was apparently quite a harridan and didn't have very much confidence in black men. And she wanted my father to be--to go to Wilberforce [Wilberforce University, Wilberforce, Ohio] to be an industrialist and got him, I guess, made sure that he went. And she was a member of the Dutch Reform Church, which is the same church as South Africa. And I only have stories. My Grandfather LeFevre hung himself in the barn, so she must have been a formidable woman. And my father kept rabbits and had a rabbit hutch when he was a little boy, and he came home and she had slit the throats of all the baby rabbits. So she must have been a little nuts herself. And I have a story of my father, because, of course, at that time, he would--he rode motorcycles. My dad did cross-country motorcycles, and he could ice skate, and all of those things that they say black people don't do, but he did all of those things. And he went to a 99 and 44/100ths percent white high school. He went to New Paltz [New York]--was it--no, not New Paltz--but I have his high school yearbook in here. And he said that they would sing "Old Black Joe," and everybody would turn and look at him. And he said at that time, the boys used to wear big white collars when he was little, and he remembers being chased by some white kids and they threw stones at him and it stained blood on his collar. So, those are the stories I remember. Other than that, no. I had a conversation with him when I was going off to college, because he was a Kappa, and I said, "Should I join a sorority?" And he told me about it, then he says, "It's really up to you." So. Speaker 1: Okay. So he served in the war-- Speaker 2: No. My dad didn't. He had heart--he had had heart problems. As a matter of fact, I have a picture of him and my mom, because he was--my mother was (unclear) to marry him. My mother's eight months pregnant, and I'm in the picture, and they had just come from the service board, and he had been rejected because he was an only child for his grandmother, and also he had heart problems. Story_ID: 54972 Speaker 1: Okay. So they went to Wilberforce [Wilberforce University, Wilberforce, Ohio] (unclear). What did he say about Wilberforce? Speaker 2: Nothing. Not very much. My parents--I have photographs, and I would ask my parents [Donald DeWitt and Geraldine Streibiling Moran] about this and that, you know, and when they had the student strike and stuff like that. But, no, they didn't talk very much about that. Speaker 1: Were they there when the students had the student strike? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Now, this is--set this up for us. Tell us what (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: I don't really know what it was about. I don't. This was in--so it must have been in the late thirties, because my mother graduated. My mother was in the class of '44 [1944], but she dropped out and graduated--because she dropped out to get married. So this must have been in the early forties, because my father graduated before my mother. Story_ID: 54973 Speaker 1: So there's a--they--when did your mother graduate from Wilberforce [Wilberforce University, Wilberforce, Ohio]? Speaker 2: I think she graduated in '46 [1946]. She went back to school after she had me. Speaker 1: And I know that there was student uprising in '46 [1946] (unclear). Speaker 2: I don't think--this was before. This was before. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Because the school split in '46 [1946]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Wilberforce split off into Central State [Central State University, Wilberforce, Ohio]. Speaker 2: Right. In to Central State, yeah. Speaker 1: And there was conflict-- Speaker 2: Right. Between the church and the state side of the school. Speaker 1: Yeah. Right. Which spilled over to the students and the parents. Speaker 2: Yeah. No, I have actual pictures. I have a book of them, you know, when they're all sort of milling around. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, we'll have to investigate this--you think it's in the '30s [1930s] that this-- Speaker 2: I think it's either in--it must--it might be even early '40s [1940s], because my mom, let's see, she graduated--she was supposed to graduate in 1944, so she went to college in the 1940s, so it must have been in 1941 or '42 [1942] that they had that, because by '43 [1943] she was married to my dad, and then she went back to school and graduated in '46 [1946], 'cause--but her class is '44 [1944]. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. I suppose this took a while to happen, but, you know, (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah. I'm sure that they-- Speaker 1: --so (unclear) (simultaneous) probably, maybe some--Charles Wesley, being a key figure in this, and--all right. So-- Speaker 2: I spent a lot of time over there when I was a little kid, because that's where my Grandpa Warrick was. He was a professor, and I have no idea of what he was a professor of, but I spent--I saw them more than I saw my real grandparents. Speaker 1: Of the Warricks? Speaker 2: Warricks. W-A-R-R-I-C-K. Speaker 1: Okay. Warrick. And you don't know what he taught? Speaker 2: (Shakes head). Mm-mm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I guess I could ask my sister-in-law (laughs), 'cause one of the daughters is married to my brother. Story_ID: 54974 Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So--now, is there a story about how your parents met? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: But they were punching each other (laughs)? Speaker 2: Punching was called--it was called punching (unclear) to be--walk out with somebody. It's not kissing and holding hands and-- Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: And my Grandmother LeFevre was not happy that my father [Donald DeWitt] married a brown-skinned girl, because she wanted them to marry some high-yellow woman who was a dentist in New York, who eventually threw herself out of a building, so. Speaker 1: Really? Speaker 2: Mm-hm. Speaker 1: That's--was it because of your--? Speaker 2: No, not because of my dad. I don't know why she threw herself out of a building, but she killed herself. Speaker 1: Now, was that--was that your--was your grandmother really fixated on color? Speaker 2: I don't know if she was fixated on color, but she didn't give any money to my father after he married my mom [Geraldine Streibiling Moran]. Speaker 1: Okay. But that's because-- Speaker 2: I don't know. My mother said she didn't like--my mother said she met her one time, and she said that she could just tell that she didn't like her, and she asked my father to off and introduce her to this very light-skinned woman. And my mother said she knew she didn't like her. She did send a picture of me when I was a baby, and Grandma LeFevre said some something about, you know, up east or whatever, down east, or wherever it was, we take pictures of the babies with no clothes on, and that was her only remark, so. Speaker 1: Now, was your father much lighter than your (unclear)-- Speaker 2: No. My father's darker. He's brown-skinned. Speaker 1: Okay. But your grandmother wanted your father to marry someone lighter than him? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So she must have been color struck. Speaker 1: I would think. I would think. Now--so--what did they--now, they got married in forty-- Speaker 2: '43 [1943]. Speaker 1: '43 [1943]. Okay. Speaker 2: June of '43 [1943]. Story_ID: 54975 Speaker 1: So, after your mother graduated from Wilberforce [Wilberforce University, Wilberforce, Ohio], did they go back to Washington, Pennsylvania? Speaker 2: No. They went to Dayton, Ohio. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Dayton, Ohio was booming. That was where--you know, it was wartime, post-wartime. So it was a big manufacturing city and a lot of people are coming. A lot of whites came up from--the hillbillies came up from Kentucky, so it was a magnet for-- Speaker 1: And they settled there. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And so-- Speaker 2: Yeah. We lived in the projects when I was a little kid. Speaker 1: Okay. DeSota Bass? Speaker 2: Yeah. That's right. We lived in DeSota Bass Courts. Story_ID: 54976 Speaker 1: All right. So, now, what did your parents do for a living? Speaker 2: My father [Donald DeWitt] was a school teacher, and he couldn't get a job as a--teaching in the Dayton Public Schools 'cause they were segregated when he first started. So he was a meter man, he read meters, and then eventually got a job with--public schools integrated--teaching school in the Dayton public schools. And my mother [Geraldine Streibiling Moran] worked for the federal government out at Gentilly (ph.). Speaker 1: Okay. What school did your dad teach in? Speaker 2: I only remember Waterman [Waterman Elementary School, Dayton, Ohio]. Speaker 1: Okay. And your mother worked in Gentilly? Speaker 2: Mm-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She bought airplanes and airplane parts. She used to come home and tell us how much taxpayer money she'd spent on airplanes. Speaker 1: Now, that's a--coming from that area, I know quite a few people that have had that sort of job (unclear)... Speaker 2: She started out as a clerk-typist. But eventually ended up doing that kind of work. Speaker 1: They call it procurement or something or-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Procurement. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. All right. Now, do you have an--now, you were born in Washington, PA. Speaker 2: Mm-hm. Speaker 1: So your mother went back home to have you? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: That seems to be the case in those days a lot, you know-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --a pattern. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: A lot of people don't (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: I was born--I've stood in the room I was born in. I wasn't born in a hospital at all. Story_ID: 54977 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, so, your first home in Dayton [Ohio] is in DeSoto Bass Courts? Speaker 2: Mm-hm. Speaker 1: And--describe, I guess, for people, what the projects meant in those days. Speaker 2: Well, it was a store--it was a place where people could live, because there was a housing shortage. It was right after the war, and there were a lot of people who were coming out and there weren't places to live, so. Speaker 1: And was there broken glass and people shooting dice-- Speaker 2: No. No, no, no, no. I mean, it was perfectly--reasonable place to live, you know. It was sort of like a little neighborhood. The only thing I remember is, we must have been not very far from the dump, because I can remember the flames from the dump occasionally, but, no, it wasn't dangerous, like some--like projects have become dangerous. Speaker 1: In those days, they were considered temporary housing. Speaker 2: Yeah. It's temporary housing, and it was temporary housing, because, like then we moved into a rental--not a rental house, but a rooming house on Summit Street, in which we lived in one room; my parents and me and my baby brother. At that time, Donald was born. And then it was--my mother is my grandmother's child. She was like, "We're not going to be living in a rooming house." So my father was always into "let's save money." And my mother found a house on Homestead Avenue, which is off Cincinnati Street. And I grew up at 26 Homestead Avenue until my family bought a house up in Pineview [Ohio]. It was very interesting, because Pineview had been farmland, and some white guy looked up and said, "Hey, there's all these sort of middleclass working-class black people who, were looking for homes." And so, he built these homes, and my parents rented to buy for a year before they bought this house, and my mom still lives in the neighborhood, which is now a historic neighborhood in Dayton, Ohio. Speaker 1: Right. Right. It was next to the Lakeside Amusement Park. Speaker 2: Right. It was up the hill from the Lakeside Amusement Park and Lakeview Avenue. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And (a soldier's home?), so it really was on the edge of the city. Story_ID: 54978 Speaker 1: Okay. Right. Now, do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: Yeah, I do. As I said, I was born in Washington, Pennsylvania. My grandparents [Harrison Streibiling and Helen Jones] separated, and my grandfather was living a basement apartment, and my mother [Geraldine Streibiling Moran] was living with him for a while, because my parents separated a couple of times when we were small until finally, I guess about three, my mother said she realized that she had a good man, and she needed to go home. But my grandfather smoked a cigar. My grandmother had an old Singer sewing machine and lace curtains on the window. And so I remember the sewing machine with the gold Singer on it, the sunlight coming in from the lace curtains, and outside was a lilac--what looked to be like a tree, but being a little kid, it probably was just a very large bush, and the smell of the lilacs coming in, and running outside and seeing--they don't do this anymore--but planes that would do skywriting, and it was doing the skywriting going "Coca-Cola." It did a "Coca-Cola." And then I remember the evening, my mother made stuffed peppers and put them under a grill. So I remember of the sort of the burnt green pepper smell. And my grandfather picked me up and he had his cigar and he burnt me on my shoulder (unclear). So, that--yeah, that's the very first memory I remember. Those are the first things that I remember. Speaker 1: Okay. Now-- Speaker 2: Smells and colors. Story_ID: 54979 Speaker 1: Tell us about your siblings. Can you name them and where do you fit in? Speaker 2: I'm the eldest, and I have a brother. His name is Donald LeFevre DeWitt, Jr. He was named after my father. He's two years younger than I am. And then I have a brother who's eight years younger than I am, and he's Mark Andre DeWitt. Story_ID: 54980 Speaker 1: Okay. So, we always ask this question, and you've already answered some of it in this great description for your first memory. But what are some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Why, I remember when we first moved into 26 Homestead Avenue [Dayton, Ohio]. It must have been spring or it must have been an early summer, because I remember going into the kitchen and there was a peach tree in full bloom outside the--outside that was beautiful. And there was an old-fashioned telephone, a candlestick telephone, the kind that has the long neck, in the house. So I thought that was interesting. I do remember that. I went to the art institute when I was six. I won a contest actually when I was six. I won it--there was a movie out about the Mayflower, and I won a contest for that, and then I ended up going to the Dayton Art Institute. And I remember walking along the banks of the Miami River with violets. It must have been springtime, and just like a carpet of violets in front of me. Smells. Oh, the smell of a starfish in Miss Crowe's, one of my fourth-grade teachers, the way it--the sort of funky smell of a starfish. She had this dried starfish. And the way the windows would look when my mom would be--come home from work early, when they steamed up in the wintertime. My next door neighbors, Miss--we lived in a duplex house owned by--I can't think of the lady's name, but her yard was so interesting because they had--oh she had--these were very old-fashioned flowers, snapdragons, day lilies, hydrangeas. And I liked to go over in in her garden because it was really pretty. And the taste of starch, Argo Starch. She had a--she actually had a housekeeper. She was a black woman, but she had a housekeeper, who came in and do ironing for her, and she would eat starch, so, of course, I wanted to try this, and it wasn't all that interesting. And she also had a grapevine where they grew concord grapes. And since they would rot on the vine, my parents asked if they could use the grapes. And the smell of making grape jam, jelly. My parents made--all of us, my mother [Geraldine Streibiling Moran] and father [Donald DeWitt], my baby brother [Donald DeWitt, Jr.] at that time, who was two years younger than I am, and I made grape jelly in the kitchen. And the winey smell of grape jelly. The jars which she sealed with wax and not a screw top. And it was just an all-day sort of adventure. It was nice, yeah. Story_ID: 54981 Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Now, you described it--before we started, you were telling me about the Art Institute [Dayton Art Institute, Dayton, Ohio]] and what you liked about the Art Institute. Can you kind of describe it? Now, you were six when you started to going to the Dayton Art Institute. Speaker 2: I was six. Actually, I had--my first-grade teacher at Irving Elementary School was named Miss Duty (ph.), and at that time, teachers didn't get married, and she lived with my art teacher Miss Baines. Oh, no, no, no. It's Miss Duty and--was it Miss Baines? Yeah, I think it was Miss Baines, B-A-I-N-E-S. And I took art from her and she got me into the Dayton Art Institute for some reason. And it was just a--it was a marvelous. Now, if people know the Dayton Art Institute, now it's very clean lines like any other art institute or any other museum. But when I went to the Dayton Art Institute, it was--oh, it was a wonderland for a kid, because the Egyptian section, you actually went down a ramp into a dark area where there was a sarcophagus of a mummy. So it--but the atmosphere was made that way. And upstairs, there was a Chinese pavilion with a pool that koi in it. They had a gong so that when you entered it, you know, it was like being in China. It was just an amazing, amazing place. And I took art from the time I was six until, I think, twelve. So I went every Saturday, I guess. But I also went after school because I remember taking the bus there. But I would go for classes, drawing; we did clay and it was very interesting. It was--we did this clay and we did real clay, and that's not plastic, but stuff that's going to be fired and hard. And I made an ashtray. I think I must have done this at Irving and--no. I made a cow sitting down. That's what I made, a cow that was sitting down. And I remember taking it home, and my mother said, "Well, you need to make that into an ashtray," you know. So then I added this extra stuff onto the cow, so the cow was sitting down with the grass around, and it was sort of an ashtray for my mother to smoke pipes and cigarettes. And then I took it back to my art teacher and she was like, "Take that ashtray thingy off of it," you know. So I always think of it as the first time I had a clash between art and practicality, that that was an incident in which the art was saying, you don't add stuff to it that's superfluous to your original vision, and then it was sort of the practicality of making it useful to do something. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: All right. Now-- Speaker 2: And that's still a theme in my life. Speaker 1: Okay. So you like art real well, and-- Speaker 2: Very much. Yeah. Story_ID: 54982 Speaker 1: Now, what else did you like to do? Speaker 2: Tell stories. We had--I grew up as a reader, and I grew up before television for which I thank the good Lord, because you have great opportunity, meaning that when we lived on Homestead [Dayton, Ohio], I guess there must have been 13, maybe 20 kids from ages of--the youngest were, like, six to maybe twelve. And Saturday morning was devoted to playing cowboys and Indians, dodge ball, softball; but we did great adventures. I mean, we'd spend all morning long taking ailanthus leaves--this was so funny because the girls ended up, when there were fewer girls, we always ended up being the cowboys, which, of course, was totally uninteresting, you know. You'd have your little cowboy hat, your cap pistol. But the boys had the really interesting things. I mean, they would take somebody's headdress that they'd gotten for Christmas and break it all up, and each guy would get a feather. And, you know, they would take off their T-shirts and paint their chest, and they'd take ailanthus leaves and make arrows out of them and take--these were serious things--and take pop bottle caps and pound them across the tops so that you'd actually get a point, and they'd make bows and arrows. And we'd spend all morning long doing that. And then they'd hunt the cowboys. I mean, we didn't really have a chance (laughs). But they would seriously shoot this stuff at you. But it was just this sort of amazing use of creativity that I don't think--yes, I would watch Howdy Doody, you know, once we got a television and things like that. But there was still a lot was spent outside and in your own mind. I belonged to a children's book and record club, so that every month I would get either a book or a record or a book-record combination. So I always looked forward to that. I'm not a girly girl. My mother--I did have dolls, and I actually had black dolls. I had a Patty-Jo and Terri-Lee were the two black dolls that I had, and I chide my mother every time I can because she gave all this stuff away, and I said, "You know how much a Patty-Jo original is now on eBay? You can get about, for a thousand dollars." I say, "See if didn't throw all that stuff away, you could be selling it or putting it on eBay." So I had black dolls, but I was not a dress-up-the-doll. But I did love my dollhouse, because she could make stories up about the dollhouse. And I would take my dollhouse people on outside adventures, you know, we'd go rafting down the--down the middle of the yard was a runnel for throwing wash water. You know, when you washed your clothes, you could throw the wash water down there. 'Cause occasionally, my mother would wash in a tub for short things. We had an old-fashioned wringer-washing machine, but, you know, if it was small things, she might use a scrub board and a tin wash thing and wash on the back porch. And we just had great--I mean, it was just--when I think about it, it was just like--I loved school, so that was not a problem, and I was very good in school. As a matter of fact, my second-grade teacher told my mom that there were three of us in class who should probably be two years advanced. But I liked school, and the weekends were, you know, full of play. Story_ID: 54983 Speaker 1: So did you start at Irving [Irving Elementary School, Dayton, Ohio]? Speaker 2: Yeah. Irving was the first school that I went to. I also took ballet from Josephine Schwartz, who was a Jewish woman who had the first integrated ballet school for kids in Dayton, Ohio. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And also, life was very disciplined then. I mean, my brothers [Donald DeWitt, Jr. and Mark Andre DeWitt] and I talk about this that we know what you did; you had chores every day. I mean, Monday it was repair clothes. You know, if you had a torn hem or a button off, that's when you repaired it; Tuesday, you wash clothes. That meant that I hung the clothes out before I went to school and then brought them in in the evening, and then I learned how to iron; and this was at six years old. I was washing the dishes and my brother [Donald DeWitt, Jr.] would stand on a step stool and dry. I can tell you what meals we had, because we--our house was very organized. Meals were planned for the month. My parents went grocery shopping. We went grocery shopping on Friday night as a family. We'd have spaghetti on Friday night, Chef Boyardee; ground beef and a Chef Boyardee sauce. I remember my grandfather [Harrison Striebiling] came with an Italian friend of his, a real Italian. And he discovered that I liked spaghetti. So he made spaghetti and meatballs, huge meatballs to me, and it was my first introduction to cooking, which I love and even loved as a little kid. Because he went and he got garlic, and he got--he got fresh garlic, not powdered garlic, and he got tomato sauce--I mean, tomato paste to make the tomato sauce. And he made meatballs with, you know, Italian bread and a combination of veal and beef. It was just an amazing experience. But I didn't like it. I really preferred my mother's, which was made with ground beef and Chef Boyardee. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But it was my first taste of real spaghetti, real Italian spaghetti. Story_ID: 54984 Speaker 1: Now, did the discipline come from both your parents [Geraldine Streibiling Moran and Donald DeWitt] or was it just-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. No. Our parents were both--I mean, there was--there was no backtalk or--but I--and we got spanked then, not very often, but I can remember the three times; the three occasions in my life when I got spanked. Speaker 1: Okay. Did you do something really awful? Speaker 2: No. I did cartwheels in the backyard when I was about five with no underpants on, and I got spanked for that. I got spanked for running away from home after we terrorized our babysitter. My parents had gone out and we sort of terrorized the babysitter and she told on us. So I just took off figuring that if I disappeared for a while, that my parents would, you know, be really happy and embrace. And I ran down to the corner, which was a bar called Whitey's Bar. It was night. It was a white bar, and I know this sounds strange, but the bar was white even though the neighborhood was sort of integrated. And I remember sitting outside waiting, you know, figuring out how long will it take before they'll you know, start to really worry about me. I probably stayed out, maybe, ten minutes. When I came back home, man, I got spanked (laughs). And my parents--since both my parents work, we were not allowed to have company in the house or to leave the house until my dad came home. My dad taught school, so he would come home before my mother. And I remember one day, my brother [Donald DeWitt, Jr.] and I heard him drive in the driveway, and we were out the front yard, and across the yard when he leaned out the front porch and asked where we thought we were going and who we had told to--so we got spanked when I was like, I think, twelve then. That was the last time. Story_ID: 54985 Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. So, well, tell us about Irving [Irving Elementary School, Dayton, Ohio]? Did you have a--not--was Irving integrated when you were there? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. It was 99 and 44-100ths percent white. Speaker 1: Okay. Alright. Were any--oh, you named a couple teachers. You said there were some teachers had recommended you to the art institute in (simultaneous) (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Miss Baines and Miss Duty (ph.). And I ran into them years later when I was a senior. And two elderly white ladies with white hair. Yeah. Miss Duty was a very good teacher. I had great teachers there. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And Ms. Baines got me--made sure that I got into the [Dayton] Art Institute. Speaker 1: Now, did you have a favorite subject as a student at the Art Institute? Speaker 2: I loved reading. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I loved the art too. We did art, which I don't think they do anymore very much in school. I like those two things. I like reading and art. Speaker 1: And you saying earlier that you took piano lessons growing up. Speaker 2: I took piano lessons. I started taking piano lessons from--God, I can't think of her name. She's an African-American woman--when I was ten, I started taking piano from her, and then when I went to high school, I took violin. Story_ID: 54986 Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Now, did you go to middle school at all? Speaker 2: No. There was no such thing. First grade through eighth grade and then into high school at that time. There was no middle school, no junior high. Speaker 1: Now, you went to Julienne High School [Chaminade Julienne Catholic High School, Dayton, Ohio]. Did you go there from the very beginning of high school? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Now, your parents [Geraldine Streibiling Moran and Donald DeWitt] are not Catholic. I mean, what was-- Speaker 2: They are Catholic. They're Catholic now, but they weren't Catholic at the time. But they wanted me to go to a good school, and they thought that, you know, a good sheltered school would be an all-girls' school. So when I was in seventh grade, my parents went and talked to the people, and they said they would it would be a good idea if I went to the nuns, the Sisters of Notre Dame, or suggested that I go to a Catholic grade school for a year. So I went to St. John's Elementary School for the eighth grade where I didn't do anything. I mean, I was way ahead--I know this sounds strange, but the public school was--I had so much better education than I did at that Catholic Elementary School. I remember now my teachers and I had, because this is the time when a lot of black teachers couldn't or didn't have the opportunity--my math teacher--can't think of what his name--my fifth-grade. I had algebra in the fifth grade, because the person that was teaching math, and I can't think of his name, had his master's or Ph.D. in mathematics, and he was teaching elementary school. So I had math from him. Miss Pittman (ph.), who was a very well-known English teacher. Then we explicated Shakespeare and wrote poetry, and things like that. So I had really good teachers. These were all African-American teachers. And sometimes I regret that I didn't go on to Dunbar [Dunbar High School, Dayton, Ohio] with my very best friend, who was my competition in high school, named Beverly Ann--Beverly Walton Smith, and she still lives in Dayton [Ohio]. But Beverly was really smart. She went to Dunbar and she graduated at seventeen and went to--she went to Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee]? No. She didn't go to Fisk. Maybe she did go to Fisk. Anyway. But those teachers were fairly demanding, and I just thought they had set great standards and gave me the basis, both my white teachers in elementary school and the ones that I had at Walderman where I went to elementary school. They didn't cut any corners and-- Speaker 1: So you went to Wogaman too? Speaker 2: Yeah. I went to Wogaman. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: 'Cause my parents moved from Homestead to Pine View when I was ten, and that was our first house that we owned. The first and only house we owned. Speaker 1: So this was 1954, you in Wogaman I guess, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. I was in tenth grade, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Was your dad still teaching there? Speaker 2: Yes, he was. He taught shop. Story_ID: 54987 Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. All right. So. Now, was Wogaman (ph.)--had--did Wogaman have a blacker population than Irving [Irving Elementary School]? Speaker 2: And Wogaman was all black. There were no white people that went to Wogaman. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: As a matter of fact, when I first got there, people would say that I talked very proper (laughs), 'cause I didn't talk like--didn't talk like them. I wasn't certainly trying to be snooty. I just talked like I talked. Speaker 1: Were most of the teachers black (simultaneously) (unclear)-- Speaker 2: All the teachers were black. Speaker 1: Oh, all. Okay. Speaker 2: There were no white teachers at Wogaman, at least there weren't--I never saw any. It may have been, but, no. Speaker 1: Now, from what I understand, in those days, [Dayton] Public Schools were like channeling black students towards Dunbar [Dunbar High School, Dayton, Ohio] or basically some were enrolled rather than (unclear) channeling to Dunbar. Speaker 2: Yeah. People I knew went to both Dunbar and Roosevelt [Roosevelt High School, Dayton, Ohio]. I mean, kids that graduated from--they went to both Dunbar and Roosevelt equally, and I knew kids who went to Roosevelt, black kids who went to Roosevelt, and also kids who went to Dunbar. I would have preferred to go to Dunbar anyway, though. Story_ID: 54988 Speaker 1: Now, what publications were coming into your house when you were growing up? Did you read--was there a black paper in Dayton [Ohio] when you were growing that you were reading? Speaker 2: No. We read the--I read the Dayton Daily News and I guess the Dayton Journal, because they had two newspapers at that time. But we got Ebony and Jet. That was--and the Negro Digest. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But I had a house full of books. I mean, I have books that my grandmother [Helen Jones] had. We have a copy of "The New Negro," so I grew up with all of these things. So I didn't really read a, sort of, black paper. I just read books. Speaker 1: Was there a lot of topical discussion around the house about black politics and Civil Rights (simultaneous) (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Not at all. Not at all. They didn't even--not at all. Speaker 1: Did your mother and father ever discuss W.S. McIntosh? Speaker 2: No. I do remember, we did find out that whoever was delivering our milk, there was--they had had an annual, sort of, picnic or sometime someplace in Dayton for their customers. And one day, at one time, they accidentally flooded the West Side with these things, and, of course, they weren't going to let us go to these things. And I know we stopped taking the milk because of that. And I--it was funny because the milkman was white and he sort of apologized to my mother. And she sort of said, "Well, that's all right. You know, we're not holding it against you. We're just not going to take your milk anymore. We're not going to take your product anymore." Story_ID: 54989 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, when you were ten, Brown vs. Board of Education hit, and then a couple of years later-- Speaker 2: Fifty-four, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. You know, the Montgomery Bus Boycott. So these things were on TV and on the radio and in the news. So there was no discussion of-- Speaker 2: No. No. I didn't--we didn't watch very much TV period. I remember, actually, the occasions--I mean, I was certainly aware of racism, because my mother told stories about when she would go back to Wilberforce [Ohio], that there was a place they'd stopped at in West Virginia, and they wouldn't serve blacks up front, but they told her that she could go around the back, and she said, "I'm not going around the back. I'm going to sit here on the bus and wait." And my grandmother [Helen Jones] was formidable in Washington, Pennsylvania. I mean, she really was somebody who boycotted things like that. And on Saturday morning, all the kids went to the movies then, and--all the kids, integrated at that particular time. But when the main feature came on, all the black kids had to go upstairs. And my grandmother once went one Saturday morning with them, and when it was time when the black kids were getting up, my grandmother said, "Where are you going?" Said, "Well, we have to sit upstairs." And my grandmother said, "We're not moving. We, you know, paid the same money. We're staying." And my mother [Geraldine Streibiling Moran] said that she, if it wasn't for her little brown face, because my grandmother was fair and her little friend was also fair--but the usher came down and told my--when she spotted--when he spotted my grandmother--when he spotted my mother, said, "Well, you know, you have to move upstairs." My grandmother said, "We're not moving upstairs." He then came and told her did she know she was causing a disturbance. She said, "The only disturbance being caused is you standing here right now talking." And she didn't move, but my mother said her little friend slipped out and ran home (laughs). She didn't know what was happening. But my grandmother said, "You're not going to that theatre anymore period." You know, so. So I was aware of things like that, but not any sort of mass movement. Story_ID: 54990 Speaker 1: I think the first thing I ever remember was of the killing of Emmett Till. Now, that left a really incredible impression on. And I do remember, somebody once asked me--I have a lot of friends, period, but I have a lot of white friends--said--he was English, and said something about, "Oh, you have more white friends than black." And I said, "Why would ever say that?" I said, "I grew up in a black neighborhood, I had black grade school, black high school." And he said, "Well, what did you think of whites?" I said, "I thought they were potentially dangerous and untrustworthy." I said, "Even though I had good teachers, I always figure that you never know what they were going to do." And that was my initial, was that these are not people that you can--they're potentially dangerous and they're untrustworthy. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And he was sort of stunned. He said, "Really?" I was, like, "Yeah." (laughs). I said, "You know, I can see pictures of people who've been lynched, and they certainly weren't lynched by other black people." I said, you know, "Pictures of crowds of white people, you know, looking on, having picnics at these things." I said, "Yeah, my feeling was, strange white people, they might be friendly, but they were also potentially dangerous." Speaker 2: Okay. Okay. Speaker 1: But we didn't have a lot of discussion about these kinds of things. It just sort of, you know, it came with the atmosphere. It came with being in a particular era. Speaker 2: So were your parents members of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] (simultaneous) (unclear)-- Speaker 1: Yeah, they were. But they didn't do a lot of--they didn't do a lot. But I don't come from a chatty family (laughs). Speaker 2: Okay. Well, a lot of traditional families, you know, they just sit up where they do, you know, things on schedule. They--everyone eats together, except that that was a common thing in those days (simultaneous) (unclear)-- Speaker 1: Oh, yeah. We ate together, but it was all very--it wasn't--it wasn't a conversational thing. It was mealtime and then you get up and do your--you clean up and then you do your homework. And then you go to bed. By nine o'clock. Story_ID: 54991 Speaker 1: Okay. So--so you were at Wogaman from the fifth grade through-- Speaker 2: Seventh. Speaker 1: --seventh. And went to seventh at-- Speaker 2: No. I went to the eighth grade at that St. John's for one year. Speaker 1: St. John's, okay. Where was St. John's? Speaker 2: I don't know. It's down off--is it down off Fifth Street? One of the streets back in there. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I don't think it exists any more. Speaker 1: Okay. So it's off Fifth Street. Speaker 2: I think. What went by--yeah, I guess it was Fifth. I guess--does Fifth Street become Lakeview or was it--or was it Lakeview? It was Lakeview. Yeah, it was off Lakeview. Speaker 1: Okay. So you kind of felt you got a better education at Wogaman and Irving [Irving Elementary School, Dayton, Ohio] than you at [Chamanade Julienne Catholic High School, Dayton, Ohio] (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Oh, there was no question. I mean, I didn't do anything at Julienne. I remember the nun that was there, Sister Mary Stevens. I spent all year reading. I mean, she knew I was ahead of everybody in that class. And I remember one time it was very, very quiet, 'cause I was sitting--I think they have some math classes, very elementary math class, and I had a book sitting next to me and I was reading, and I suddenly realized it was very quiet and looked up and got--an eraser hit me on the side of the face and in the eye. She really meant to hit me on the top of the head, but it had gotten quiet. And she basically said, "You know, I know that you already know this stuff, but, you know, try and pay attention or I can give you some extra work or something like that." But, yeah. But I fell in love with the smells and bells of the Catholic Church and the mumbling Latin, so. That was fun. It was something new. Speaker 1: Okay. So, now, did you share this with your parents that you weren't learning anything at this-- Speaker 2: No. I mean, you didn't--it wasn't--unlike kids today who have these grownup conversations with their parents--it's funny because I remember being in New York [New York City, New York] once when I lived there and seeing it, two parents sort of drilling into this little girl named Amanda. And it was, like, "Why don't you want to go to camp, Amanda? Why don't you want to go to camp?" And she was like, "I'm not going to camp." And I think she must have been five or six. And I thought, "Does Amanda have a fucking choice in this kind of stuff?" Excuse my French (laughs). Because I was packed off to camp regularly. Nobody said, "Do you want to go to camp?" Or, you know, "How long do you want to go to camp." I mean, I went to YM--I went to YWCA [Young Women's Christian Association] camp in the summer, and, you know, this was--this wasn't about me, this was about giving my parents a break. So, man, I was packed off to camp, to go to camp. Speaker 1: Just like Camp Carver. Speaker 2: I don't remember what it was called. But I went to a YW camp, and you just went to camp (laughs). It was not a discussion, "Do I get to go to camp?" Or "Do I want to go to camp?" No, you just packed off to camp. Downtown you went, put on the bus, and off to camp. Story_ID: 54992 Speaker 1: Now, was church a part of growing up at all? Speaker 2: Not very much. My parents [Geraldine Streibiling Moran and Donald DeWitt] weren't churchy at all. I mean, I went to Sunday School, but my parents didn't go to church. Speaker 1: Were they members of any church? Speaker 2: Yes. They belonged to Miami. Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: 'Cause they had gone, you know, to Miami Church. But, no. They took us to Sunday school. Dropped us off to Sunday school. And so I think that's probably the one thing I liked about St. John's, was the mysticism. Though I was interested in religion very early 'cause we had--we had a book in the house on the "Three Great Religions," and it had Protestantism, Catholicism, and Judaism, and I just thought that was really interesting. Oh, I was about, you know, about ten years old when (unclear). I might even still have that book around the house. And so I liked the sort of Catholic, you know, the priests, the mystery, you know, the wine into blood, the bread into--I didn't think about the cannibalistic aspects of it. So when I was, I guess, between my freshman year and between my eighth grade, year, I asked my parents if I could, you know, convert to Catholicism, and they said, "Sure, if that's what you want to do. Sure." And I took--'cause I just wrote a column about this. I took instructions from this elderly German priest. They were grownups here, and I was the youngest. And I used to sit behind him, and I remember him talking about, at this time, the Catholic Church's dogma was that, even if you were a good Protestant, or a good anything else, you couldn't go to Heaven because you weren't Catholic. Catholics trumped everything. And I thought, "That's the stupidest thing. At thirteen, I thought that was a stupid thing. And I just sat behind him and thought, "You know, I'm just going through it to become a Catholic. I'm not going to--I don't believe that." Then he talked about how you shouldn't practice control. I don't he ever aid, birth control, but he basically said, children were a gift from God, and that you should have all the children that God sent you." And I thought, "Mm, that's interesting. How come the--this one family, it's rich. God has only given them three kids. And this other family's got, like, sixteen kids and were always, you know, doing clothes drives for these--I thought, God gave me a head as well as a body. And I'm thirteen years old at this time, but I was like, "Okay. I want to become Catholic," because I liked the Latin and the smell and the bells. And it was, it's nothing more beautiful than a, you know, a high mass with the little boys, before their voices changed, singing, and the smell of incense in the air, and the Latin, which they don't do anymore, and all that mystery upfront was my Twilight, you know. Teenage girls now are into vampires. I was into Catholicism. Story_ID: 54993 Speaker 1: And did you have a favorite literature? I mean, what kind of literature did you read in those days? Speaker 2: Everything. I mean I have here the "Book of Knowledge," which was something I read from the time I was--as soon as I could read. As a matter of fact, my mother [Geraldine Streibiling Moran] gave it away, gave them away when I was--went off to the Peace Corps. I came home, and I just almost wept that she had given all my clothes and all of the "Book of Knowledge," 'cause she said, "Well, you want new clothes, and, you know." It was really her set of the "Book of Knowledge." I have the, basically, gotten resuscitated that thing by getting old "Books of Knowledge," and so I now have a complete set of them again. But that--but everything--that was another thing I remember, because I was allowed to read anything. Nobody said you can't read this or this is too old for you. I think I even snuck out a copy of the "Lady Chatterley's Lover," which was in my mother's bottom drawer and read that, which, of course, about sex, but, you know; but like ten, you don't recognize that. But I remember when I was in high school, they had the library in the high school organized by what freshman could read, what sophomores would read, what juniors could read, what the seniors could read. And I had never in my life been restricted from reading anything. And I got a copy of Sigit Unset's (ph.) "Christian Laban's Daughter," and I remember taking this book down and this nun getting my hand and saying, No, dear. You can't read this until you're a senior." Well, I promptly went off to the public library and got the whole damn trilogy, you know, to read this thing. And it's interminable. There's all this stuff about Medieval Scandinavian farm life. You know, family life. And, yes, there is a tincture. She has premarital sex, and when she gets married, she's pregnant. And this is the big scandal, because she keeps it secret. But I thought to myself, "This is stupid." And I do remember, there was a nun in the library who recognized that I was a reader, and she said, "Just come to me if there's anything you want to read." Because the head librarian, I said. "What is this thing, you know, I can't read books?" And she said, "Well, you know, you're not supposed to read these books or books on the Index. And I thought, "Index? What is the Index?" and it's a list of prescribed books and things that--so then I discovered that "The Three Musketeers were on the Index. So I went and confronted this nun. I said, "the 'Three Musketeers' is on the index. Why I can't read the 'Three Musketeers?'" "Well, the (unclear), basically, the church says you can't read it." Another nun, who basically told me I could read anything I want said--she said, "Well, it's because of the dueling, you know, killing one another." I said, well, nobody duels anybody any more. And I just--I was always a quiet little girl, but also rebellious in intellectual areas. Story_ID: 54994 Speaker 1: Julienne High School [Chaminade Julienne Catholic High School, Dayton, Ohio]. This is year of-- Speaker 2: Fifty-nine. Speaker 1: Okay. Nineteen fifty-nine. Okay. So what--now, how did you like Julienne? Speaker 2: It was okay. I mean, you know, it's sort of like, once again, being sent to camp. You know, this is where my parents [Geraldine Steibiling Moran and Donald DeWitt] decided I was going to go. It wasn't about me. It was about what they decided because being non-Catholics, they also paid something for this. So, you know, it was a privilege as far as they were concerned. I just remember that we had these uniforms and that they measured eight inches from the ground, which is about like four inches up from my ankle, which is like being something from the nineteenth century, it was so long, which I promptly learned from all the girls that you just folded it up and put in--pinned it so it was up at a better level. But then you take it out when you went to school, because you'd have to kneel. And if the material didn't flow over your knees, the nun could literally rip out the hem so that you would end up walking around school with this hem out. Oh, I liked school. I mean, I loved Latin. I absolutely loved learning Latin. I liked world history. I liked school. And I took violin from a really, really nice nun. Story_ID: 54995 Speaker 1: Did you have any favorite teachers in school [Chaminade Julienne Catholic High School, Dayton, Ohio]? Speaker 2: Sister Mildred Shirlee (ph.). She was my violin teacher, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Now, well, the time that you were in school, I guess, you know, once again, there was a lot of civil rights activity going on and (simultaneous) (unclear)-- Speaker 2: I was totally oblivious to it. But, you know, you're a high school kid. You're interested in boys, and since I went to school with girls, I was interested in boys. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: But I had--I ran with a gang of boys. I would go to the movies with them. So I dated in groups like they do now. No girls. Just me and the guys. Speaker 1: Where would you go to the movies? Speaker 2: Downtown, Loews (sic) [Loew's Theatre, Dayton, Ohio]. Speaker 1: Okay. Did you have any favorite movies in those days? Speaker 2: My very favorite, and I'll never forget it because I went with a neighbor's daughter who was--had come from the Bahamas, and she talked through the damn thing, it was "Gi Gi." Speaker 1: Okay. Now, did you listen to the radio growing up or did you- Speaker 2: Not much. No, I mean, whatever was on--I think there's a--but it was a black station that would be on very early 'cause my mother left the house before everybody, and so she would leave. About five o'clock in the morning, I'd hear this boom, boom, boom, boom, boom on the radio. But I had jobs in high school. I mean, I could--I had babysitting. I babysat from the time I was 12 until I sold my babysitting practice to another girl. And as soon as I was old enough, I got a job at the Dayton Public Library in the Acquisition Department. So I would go after school to Downtown and stamp all the new books. And in my spare time, run off and see the guys who repaired books, which was fascinating to me. They were all old guys, and they would be, you know, paste and stuff--they were real artists, and (you could run up into the stacks?), and I read Ovid for the first time. Once again, his book on love, 'cause I was, you know, you're interested in that kind of stuff as a kid. Story_ID: 54996 Speaker 1: I need to ask you about this because a law that celebrated writers out of Dayton [Ohio], the black one is the most celebrated was Paul Laurence Dunbar. Were you--you know, can you remember when you were introduced to Dunbar's works? Speaker 2: Oh, probably in the fifth grade, because I get--I mean, I learned--and I discovered it and then I just--I read everything, and I, you know, I know some of the poetry by heart, and I like the rhythms of it. Speaker 1: Was the Dunbar House open then for you to go to visit and that sort of thing? Speaker 2: You know, I don't know. I used to take piano around the corner. I knew it was around there, but I don't think it was a museum at that time. Or if it was, I wasn't aware of it. I knew where it was though, because I think Dunbar's high school song talks about up on Summit where it stands, Paul Laurence Dunbar, you know, the school was named after a famous man or something like that. Story_ID: 54997 Speaker 1: Okay. So in terms of being a high school, you know, there being a--were you more of a Dunbar High School [Dayton, Ohio] sports fan or (simultaneous) (unclear)-- Speaker 2: No. I had no interest in sports whatsoever. Speaker 1: None whatsoever? Speaker 2: No. My brother played. My brother [Donald DeWitt, Jr.] went to Dunbar, and he played football. And I think I went to one game. But I had no interest in any of that kind of stuff. I played basketball and it was half-court basketball in school because it was required and--but, no. I wasn't interested. I am a--I was a reader. Speaker 1: Okay. Now you said you were a fast basketball player? Speaker 2: Yeah. I was a forward. Yeah. But we played half court and it doesn't really do very much to be fast when you're only playing half court. Speaker 1: Okay. So, now, did you have a--was your--you're still mostly a reader, and did you start to write in high school [Chaminade Julienne Catholic High School, Dayton, Ohio]? I mean-- Speaker 2: Yes. Actually, I wrote when I was a freshman. I wrote a book--I wrote a short story called "Anemone." And the reason it's called "Anemone" was because I discovered the word, and I thought, this is a great name for somebody. And it's about a ship's captain who's lost his religion and how his daughter, Anemone, brings him back to the church. And it was the first--I got an "A," and I read it--and I also got a standing ovation. It was the last class on a Friday. And you had to read these things in front of your class, and people were sort of stunned, and people stood up--the class stood up, and the nun told me that she'd never heard anything this--that showed great maturity in the story. And then she marked me down because of punctuation. But that didn't really make any difference to me. It was powerful. It was a powerful feeling that what you write by yourself can affect people who, you know--it was just an amazing experience. Speaker 1: Okay. So did you continue to write stories throughout high school? Speaker 2: No. I personally didn't. I was on the school newspaper, and I wrote book reviews when I was on the school newspaper. And I played violin. And I was willowy. (laughs). I was thin. And I was president of the senior class, so. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So I must have been kind of popular, although I don't think I ever made any attempt to do it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: As a matter of fact, I just had last Saturday, this is my 50th anniversary high school reunion, which I hadn't really thought about going to. And I got a call from a woman named Carol Henley, who I--if she walked in the front door I wouldn't be able to recognize her. But she was telling me that her husband--she'd been married, her husband died--they bought a place in Michigan, he died a year afterwards, and she got married again. And she now lives in Kansas or Iowa, I can't remember which. Kansas, because I've taught in Kansas. And she said when they moved in--when they found the perfect house, she said the Realtor said to her, she said, "I live in a really small racist town." I said, "Well, I do know Kansas." And she said the Realtor said, "Well, you know, it's a really nice house, but the neighbors next door are African-American." And she said, "And I said, 'Why should that make any difference? My high school president was African-American.'" I was, like, "You go girl." But who knew that that kind of thing would, you know, be a self-defining moment for her, you know, that they class--'cause the class selected me president. I don't--don't even remember campaigning very much for it. Story_ID: 54998 Speaker 1: Okay. How many black students were at Julienne [Chaminade Julienne Catholic High School, Dayton, Ohio] out of--what did you have, about-- Speaker 2: I guess we had about 300 people and probably--oh, God, total, probably 50 blacks out of 300, 400, 500 kids. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Not very many. A sprinkling. Speaker 1: Okay. Any--you have--are any of the students memorable, that really stand out that were at school with you? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Ah, yes. There was one person. Linda Bodie (ph.) She was my--I was--she was in my sophomore class. And this was when contact lens were first coming in. She was blond but with the little pageboy, and in class she was always crying, and I just assumed that it was because of her contacts. But she was pregnant, and so she dropped out of school and got married, you know. So that was memorable. It was a memorable incident, so I have a very vivid picture of her because people said, "Oh, you know, she got pregnant," and you got married in those days. So she dropped out of school and got married. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: At 15 or 16. God. Speaker 1: Cautionary tale of growing up. Speaker 2: No. It was just a--it just the thing. I wasn't getting pregnant. There was no question. I wanted to get out of Dayton, Ohio. And that meant getting through school, get through college, getting out. Story_ID: 54999 Speaker 1: Now, did you travel much when you were growing up? Did you see other places other than (simultaneous) (unclear) Speaker 2: No. We went to Upstate New York, 'cause which is where my father [Donald DeWitt] was from, once, and then we kept--occasionally go to Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] in the summer to visit my grandmother. But, no, we didn't do a lot of traveling. We went and rented a cabin one time, I guess, in the woods 'cause my father would go fishing with some friends of his, and so we rented a cabin once and stayed in his cabin. But, no, we didn't do a lot of vacations. Speaker 1: Okay. The local area around near Wilberforce [Ohio], Yellow Springs [Ohio], Springfield [Ohio]. Did you (simultaneous) (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Yeah. We'd go to Springfield 'cause my parents had friends there. And as I said, I sort of grew up on Wilberforce [Wilberforce University, Wilberforce, Ohio] campus while the Warricks were there, 'cause we'd go over and see Grandma and Grandpa Warrick, which has woods and near it, Brian State Park, which is beautiful. Speaker 1: That's in Yellow Springs? Speaker 2: Yellow Springs, mm-hm. Story_ID: 55000 Speaker 1: I think you said when we were talking, before we started interviewing, you really wanted to go to Antioch College [Yellow Springs, Ohio]. Speaker 2: Yeah. I wanted to go to Antioch. Speaker 1: And, now, what kind of counseling did you have about college when you were a senior? Speaker 2: I didn't have any counseling that I recall. I mean, I knew I was going to college from the time I was--you know, as a little kid. My parents said, "You're going to college." And, you know, I knew they put money away for college, so that was never--it was never, like, "You're not going to college." I mean, I just knew I was going to go to college. I knew that they'd been saving for this, so I was going to go. And I was on an academic track when I was in high school at a girl's Catholic school. That's the school I went to. There was St. Joseph [St. Joseph Commercial High School, Dayton, Ohio], which was for technical training, and I went to Julienne [Chaminade Julienne Catholic High School, Dayton, Ohio], which was a standard academic high school. So there was no track. The track was college for everybody. Though, at that time, a third of the girls became nuns, a third got married, and a third went on to college, 'cause that was--it wasn't a big aim for most young women at that time, was going to college. But I knew I was going to college from, as early as--I mean, I grew up even as a little kid looking at pictures of my parents when they were in college, so I knew I was going to college. Speaker 1: So how did you make your decision of, you know (simultaneous) (unclear)-- Speaker 2: I didn't. (laughs). My parents made my decision. You know, I wanted to go to Antioch, which was a five-year college. They accepted me, but on condition, because they had said that I was probably not sophisticated enough, you know having gone to a girl's school. My mother thought that was insulting that they, you know, they were going to accept me on condition. I got accepted at Vassar [Vassar College, Poughkeepsie, New York], but my mother, once again, decided that I wouldn't be happy there because it was a school full of rich girls. I'd been perfectly fine there. And my dad had gotten his Master's from Miami University at Ohio [Oxford, Ohio]. So I ended up going to Miami. Speaker 1: Miami University in Oxford, Ohio. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: It was 1962. Speaker 2: Right. Story_ID: 55001 Speaker 1: Okay. Were there, you know, what was the atmosphere like at Miami [Miami University, Oxford, Ohio]? Speaker 2: Oh, they had en loco parentis, which I have to explain to a contemporary audience, which means that girls--the university was your parent, and for girls, that meant that there were hours. That means that you couldn't stay out past ten o'clock on campus, unless--boys could, but girls could not, unless girls made honors, and I made honors, and so the junior and senior year, I lived honors dorm and had no hours. But an 18-year-old boy, he could do anything, but not girls. And I also discovered defiance there from a young woman--the school was also 99 and 44/100ths percent white--from a young woman there who refused to come in. I mean, she just said this is stupid and I'm not going to do this. And she would consistently come in when she felt like she was coming in. And, of course this meant--we also had a housemother, and she was constantly in the housemother's office. She wasn't screwing around, 'cause I guess this was, you know, to protect us from sex. She just refused to do it and eventually transferred to another school. You know, they were, "We're going to tell your parents." And she said, "My parents don't demand this of me." And I thought, "Wow, that's amazing. This is somebody who is breaking the rules consistently and getting away with it." 'Cause they would say, "Oh, well, you have to come in your campus," and things like that. And she would just ignore them. (laughs). I thought, "Wow." You know. Here's somebody who will not follow the rules at all and got away with it until she transferred. And she said, "This is not the kind of school that I want to go to." And by that time, it sort emboldened me, 'cause I remember the second year, I lived in the same dorm that I lived in in as a freshman, Talawanda Hall, and this dorm mother said something about us--her being like our mother. And I said, "There's no way you could be my mother, lady." That was the first time I ever spoke out (unclear). "This is just ridiculous. I'm not going to be involved in this." Story_ID: 55002 Speaker 1: But the sophomore--my sophomore year--and I remember freshman year, this is when I really became aware of discrimination, racism, whatever you want to call it, and, because I--did Kennedy [President John F. Kennedy]--die that year? What year did Kennedy die? Yeah, it must have been--I must have been a freshman-- Speaker 2: Sixty-three. Yeah. Fall of '63 [1963]. November the 22nd. Speaker 1: Okay. Then I went to college in '62 [1962], so it must have been I was at sophomore, and I took a philosophy. And I remember going to look at the grades, and there was a guy named Ray Fisch (ph.), and he and I both had aced the philosophy exam. And he and I walked back, he walked me back to my dorm and he wanted to know, he say he--discussed why he couldn't go out with a Negro. That's what we were called then. And we decided we would go to the movies. So we went to see "Lawrence of Arabia," and it was probably one of the most tense evenings I'd ever had, 'cause Oxford, Ohio, is very small, and everybody walked up the same walk to go to this sort of town area. And Ray and I went to see "Lawrence of Arabia," and I can still remember--I think of us were really nervous about this. And I was thinking, "God, I'm safe." And, of course, it became dark and then it was a wonderful movie, and when the lights came up, there were four guys, four brothers, from the basketball team who were sitting in front of us and turned and saw me with little Ray Fisch, and they felt--though not one of them had asked me out. One guy, James--I can't remember his name--was from Cleveland [Ohio], came over to see me one day and was explaining to me, telling me that they had seen me at this movie with this white guy and what was I doing, you know, with him. At which point, I said, "Not one of you has rung my bell. And you're not going to tell me what I can do or who I can do it with, and get out of here." So, you know, I saw it on both sides. And here's these guys who were just going to tell me who I could date because I was their race, and I said I'm not doing that. Forget it. Story_ID: 55003 Speaker 1: And that was the year that I worked for the Pittsburgh Courier. I had--got a summer job as a journalist. I was an English Lit. major, but I also took a journalism course and I got a job working for the Pittsburgh Courier, and that was when I really became aware of the Civil Rights Movement. I worked with Phyllis--she's dead now. Phyllis [Garland]--I can't think of her last name. Phyllis and her mother both worked for the paper, and Phyllis went on to be a famous journalist, but I also discovered discrimination by black people, because the paper was owned at the time by a Chicago [Illinois] cosmetics magnate named Johnson, whose last name was Johnson, and not the same Johnson-- Speaker 2: George Johnson (unclear). Was that the one? Speaker 1: Yeah. George Johnson. I'll just never--he gathered the whole staff one time, and he was talk--he said, "I'll give," a twenty-dollar bill, 'cause, I mean, that was a lot of money then--maybe it was a hundred. It was a hundred dollar-bill. He said, "I'll give a hundred dollar bill to anybody who can tell me the greatest gift to mankind. The greatest thing for mankind." And to see these black people who I had such regard for, you know, jumping up and trying to answer this man's question. I just remember one guy. I think he was a photographer. You know, I mean, that--a hundred dollars is a lot of money. And George--is it Johnson that you say his last name was? Speaker 2: Yeah. That was the cosmetic (simultaneous) (unclear)-- Speaker 1: Yeah. He had made soap and things like that. And he said, "No, you're all wrong. And since I--the answer is wisdom, and since I got the right answer I keep the money." At which point, I don't know what happened to me. I mean, I'm 20, I'm a summer, basically, this is an internship, I stood up and I reamed him out. I told him that this was disgusting and denigrating and not the kind of way that black people should treat one another. And he was funny, and because of, obviously, his temper was there, and it just exploded. And, you know, all these are grownups, 'cause they were grownups and I was a kid, they sort of just eased away from me, even though I was sort of standing up for them. I remember sitting at my desk and just feeling this wave of emotion go over me, and also that I had really stepped out there on the edge of the universe, you know. And a little while later, somebody came down and said, "Mr. Johnson wants to see you." I thought--I thought, "God, I, you know, I came up here for the summer for a job, and I probably don't have a job anymore, and what's going to happen?" So I go upstairs and he said, "Young lady," he said, "you're really passionate." And he said, "You're going to have a heart attack before you're thirty. You just need to use that energy for something else." And he didn't--he just--it was sort of admiring in a way, because he told me how he had become this magnate; how he had got cheap soap from somebody, put his own labels on it and went door-to-door selling this stuff, you know. And he was sort of--almost sort of being admiring of me for having stood up to him. But he just says, he said, "You know, you got a lot of passion and spunk." And he said, "You need to channel it into sometime or you'll be dead by the time you're thirty. You'll have a heart attack." And so I went back downstairs, and, you know, I saw the adults--were like, I said, "I just had a conversation and I still had the job for the summer." But it was amazing to be--to have that kind of power over people. And it was just a setup because he had no intentions of--I just knew he had no intentions of giving anybody that one hundred dollar bill. It was just, you know, it was just sort of be, "I am, who am" kind of thing, and "I have power over you and I know more than you," and I just thought that's disgusting, and I told him that. Speaker 2: Now this would be in the summer of-- Speaker 1: Well, I was a sophomore, so. Speaker 2: It would be summer of '64 [1964] then. Speaker 1: Yeah. Right. And so, then I was really becoming aware of what's going on Down South. Story_ID: 55004 Speaker 1: Now this is interesting, because--well, you may say this anyway, but I know they marshaled the SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] group. They went into Mississippi at Western College the spring, that spring, at the beginning of that summer to go into-- Speaker 2: At Western College for Women [Oxford, Ohio]. Speaker 1: Yeah. To go to Mississippi. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: That was (simultaneous) (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Was it spring of '64 [1964]? Speaker 1: Yeah. That was the beginning of Freedom Summer. Bob Moses and all that group. Speaker 2: Yeah, I know Bob. Sixty-two, sixty-one. Sixty-one. Yeah. I worked for the Pittsburgh Courier when I was a sophomore. Speaker 1: So were you already in Pittsburgh when this was going on? Speaker 2: Yeah. I was in Pittsburgh. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, that's the summer they killed [Andrew] Goodman, [Michael] Schwerner and [James Earl] Chaney first. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Then they--they were still in Oxford then. That's where he made his speech to students, you know-- Speaker 2: Right. Yeah. So that was an exciting summer for me, for many reasons. I had my first real grown-up boyfriend, first sex (laughs), which was not all that interesting after you've--but, you know, it was what it was. Yeah, it was an interesting summer. But I became much more aware of--but still cautious, because we formed an SDS [Students for a Democratic Society] Chapter on Miami University's campus. And I can remember both my parents telling me never sign anything, because they remembered the McCarthy era. And they said don't sign anything. And I remember one of my best girlfriends, Sidinae (ph.) Smith, was one of the founding members of the SDS Chapter on the university. But I was very--I must have been very passionate because I remember writing a piece on James Baldwin for the college magazine, "The Fire Next Time." I don't know. Must have been somewhere. It was sitting there somewhere. Story_ID: 55005 Speaker 1: What did you think of "The Fire Next Time?" Speaker 2: I loved it, and I--it was--I mean, it got a lot of response, the piece that I wrote. And then I wrote--I worked for the school paper all through high school, and actually, I did theatre reviews. I took theatrical reading, literature reading. Speaker 1: I had--I neglected to ask you a question about Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], and I guess it shows what I--I don't know that much, but Teenie Harris, the celebrated photographer, I think, was still there at the Courier. Did you meet him? Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But (that don't mean all those people were too sort of famous to me?), but they'd been there. They wasn't old. You know, when you're 20 and somebody who's probably in their mid-forties, that seems ancient to you. I mean, Mr. [George] Johnson, I don't know how old he was, but all of those people seemed very, very old to me. Speaker 1: Bill Rhoden, was he there--I mean (simultaneous) (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Yeah. (unclear) He was a sportswriter. In fact, I thought--it might have been him. Brown-skinned with a mustache? Yeah, I think he was one of the people who was, you know, vying for this $100. Oh, I was just, oh--I was appalled. I wish that everybody had just sort of sat there and looked at him. I was just appalled by his treatment of these people that worked for--Tokie Shault Johnson (ph.) wrote Phyllis Garland. I knew Phil Garland. Yeah, was--Phyllis Garland went on to teach at--I think she taught at Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York] or some place. Speaker 1: And she wrote for the [Pittsburgh] Courier? Speaker 2: She wrote for the Courier, and her mom wrote for the Courier. Tokie Shault Johnson wrote the social column. Tiny (ph.)--actually, I have a front page from the Courier somewhere. (laughs). We--one of the things we covered was a cross burning outside some town in Pennsylvania, and we went interviewed the black people who had seen the cross being burned on a Fourth of July weekend. Then we went up this mountain to find it, and I think--I think I was with Tiny, who got some ash in his eye, and then the person who was leading us said, "Oh, here's the cross." And I left Tiny halfway up this hill with the ash still in his eye (laughs), and went tearing up to see where this cross was. And we did find it. It had been on this hill. I think I have that somewhere, too, on the front page, that cross. Story_ID: 55006 Speaker 1: Now, let me bounce a little bit to '63 [1963]. The summer of '63 [1963], do you remember the March on Washington [Washington, D.C.]? Did-- Speaker 2: Yes. Because I actually down but didn't go (laughs). I came down and we stayed at the Four-H-Club out here on--it's in Bethesda [Maryland], and remember--and I stayed up all night talking to this--other kids, smoking cigarettes and talking, and just slept in the next day. Didn't go at all. So, was there a group from Miami [Miami University, Oxford, Ohio] that came after (simultaneous) (unclear)-- Speaker 1: No. We didn't come in--I mean, yeah, there was a group. But it wasn't organized. It was, like, you know, all of us went--just decided to go to and come in the car. Speaker 2: So you didn't--did you see the speech on it-- Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: --on the television or anything? Speaker 1: Like I said, I guess I must have saw it later on, yeah. When did Kennedy [President John F. Kennedy] die? Speaker 2: He died-- Speaker 1: He died after the March. Speaker 2: Yeah, it was after the March. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Can you remember where you were when that happened? I mean, when you heard the President (simultaneous) (unclear)-- Speaker 1: Yeah. I just aced my philosophy exam. Yeah, I do remember. And I remember coming back and people being stunned and--but my father [Donald DeWitt] had died by that time, so to me it was, you know--I remember people being appalled that I'm thinking, "Why?" You know, Lincoln [President Abraham Lincoln] was assassinated. We've had these before, and--yeah, people were really wrenched by it. But, no, I wasn't--you know, I wasn't, because my dad had died. So, who was more important than that, you know? Presidents are very distant. Story_ID: 55007 Speaker 1: Well, tell us about that now. This is while you were in college [Miami University, Oxford, Ohio] your father [Donald DeWitt] passed? Speaker 2: Mm-hm. I think that was the year. Yeah, 'cause my dad died before it. He died before Kennedy, 'cause he died when I was in Peace Corps training. What year did he die? What year did Kennedy die? Speaker 1: Sixty-three. November 22nd, 1963. Speaker 2: When did I go in the Peace Corps? I graduated in April '66 [1966]. So '65 [1965], I spent in California, and '64 [1964] I spent in California. No, I thought my father died before Kennedy, but I guess not, 'cause he died the summer of '64 [1964]. And Kennedy died in '63 [1963]? I don't know. I certainly didn't have the same, well, you know--I mean, it was a defining moment for many people. I certainly remembered where I was, 'cause I said I remember coming back from the philosophy exam. But I wasn't devastated like a lot of people were. And the next year, my father died. So, even more, he had been sick. He'd had a heart attack, so. He died when I was in California studying for the Peace Corps, and that was probably more devastating to me than anything. That was the defining moment for me, when you realize that your parent, who you expect to be around forever, even though that's not reasonable, isn't going to be around. Speaker 1: Okay. Were you fairly close to your father? Speaker 2: You mean did we hang out (laughs)? Speaker 1: It could have been. I mean, some people think they--I mean (simultaneous) (unclear)-- Speaker 2: No. I don't think I was very close to either one of my parents. We didn't have intimate relations. I do remember sitting up with him one night when I was in college and asking me about the--whether I should join a sorority, and we sat and talked about his childhood, which I think is the first time I'd ever heard that, you know, this story about the rocks being thrown at him, and them singing "Old Black Joe." Those were the only stories they ever had, but, you know, it's your dad. So, yeah, it was extraordinarily painful. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 55008 Speaker 1: So in '65 [1965], now--we went--kind of went through '64 [1964] now, and '65 [1965], now. What did you do--you went to California in the summer of '65 [1965]? Speaker 2: I went to California in the summer of '64 [1964]. Yeah, '64 [1964]. I graduated in '66 [1966]. Went back to California. Sixty-five [1965] I spent in California. The right guess. Speaker 1: So it's '63 [1963] in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] then or-- Speaker 2: Sixty-three [1963] in Pittsburgh. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: California in '64 [1964]; in '64 [1964], '65 [1965]. I think '64 [1964]. I graduated in '66 [1966] around April? Yes, because I was in California twice. Yeah. So it was '64 [1964], '65 [1965]. I spent two summers in California in Los Angeles. Speaker 1: Okay. So what were you doing there? Speaker 2: Peace Corps training. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Peace Corps had started something called Advanced Training Program. They discovered that volunteers did better when they actually knew the language. So what they did was recruit me when I was a junior. So--and then I was in Los Angeles that summer of my junior year at UCLA [ University of California-Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California]. We had a revolt actually against the Peace Corps in Washington, because we didn't like our training. And so we actually sent, you know, telegrams to Washington saying the training was useless, and designed the course so that the next summer before I went to Ethiopia, I lived in East L.A. with the Chicano family in the ghetto, in the projects and taught- Story_ID: 55009 Speaker 1: But in 1964, so here you are in California, and you said there was a revolt in the beginning. Now, from what I understand, and correct me if you think I'm wrong. I'm understanding if it's wrong. Peace Corps was formed after the summer of '64 [1964] when all the students volunteered with SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee]. I think the government said, "Well, maybe we should have something for the students to volunteer for (simultaneous) (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Let's see. I went in in '66 [1966], and I was a Seven. So, no, the Peace Corps was formed--it was seven years old when I went in. I was seventh--in the group of Seven, 'cause I was a quote, unquote, Seven, even though I was in advanced training, I had actually studied two years in a row. So it was before that that they--that they formed the Peace Corps. I'm not quite sure. Speaker 1: And Sergeant Shriver, I guess that he must have formed it in '60 [1960] then. Is that correct? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: All right. All right. Speaker 2: Yeah. So it was before all of the-- Speaker 1: This is the Kennedy [President John F. Kennedy] Administration initiative-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --to try to, you know, to send volunteers around the world. Speaker 2: Right, quote, unquote, Third World countries. Yeah, I remember when I--a boyfriend--well, actually it wasn't a boyfriend, it was somebody I was dating, he told me, he said, "Oh, you should join the Peace Corps." And he said, "And if you go take this test, I'll take you out to the Lamp Lighter," which was a restaurant in Oxford, Ohio. I--so I went and took the test and completely forgot about it. And then I got accepted (laughs). I got accepted in this program called Advanced Training Program, ATP. And I was the first--I don't think they had after us. I think they ended up spending about $10,000 on each one of our training with old-fashioned tapes, and I lived in East L.A. [Los Angeles, California] First we went to UCLA [University of California-Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California], the first year, but then we revolted. There were 60 of us 'cause we didn't like our training, which didn't seem relevant to anything. And that's the year my dad died. So we revised our trainings, and so we thought it was important that all of us live in ethnically different neighborhoods than our background or--so I ended up ending in East L.A. and living with a widow and her two daughters in the projects and teaching at Stevenson Junior High School. I taught seventh-grade remedial English. But it was funny, because, I guess people sort of volunteered for it. You did get paid for it, but there was a guy named Andy Kaufman, who was from Vancouver [British Columbia, Canada], and he was probably the wealthiest of all of the volunteers, and he ended up living with a black family in Hollywood [Los Angeles, California] (laughs). They had a swimming pool and he had his own private room. So, he was certainly ethnically different, but not economically any different. So we'd go see Andy because he had television in his room, and, you know, swimming pool in this lavish house. I lived in a, as I said, in the projects and eat Chicano food every day. And my mother, quote, unquote, she said to me one day when she made--she made fried chicken, corn on the cob, and sliced tomatoes. And I must have inhaled it, and she said, "I don't think you really like Chicano food." I was like, "Yes, I do. But this is what I'm used to." Speaker 1: Okay. Those are the days when you didn't really account a lot of ethnic food growing up in Dayton [Ohio] I don't (simultaneous) (unclear)-- Speaker 2: No. The Chinese food, you know, from a Chinese takeout place. Pizza. That was about it. So, no. And fish or tuna and salmon out of a can. So, no. But I did--I ate, you know, jalupes and drank horchata (laughs); homemade horchata. Had great students. Speaker 1: So you did that for two summers. Now, meanwhile, you (simultaneous) (unclear)-- Speaker 2: The second summer. Speaker 1: The second summer. Okay. But, your major is what? In-- Speaker 2: English Lit and philosophy. Speaker 1: Okay. English Literature and philosophy. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: Nineteenth Century, English Lit. Story_ID: 55010 Speaker 1: Okay. So, who were your favorite teachers at Miami [Miami University, Oxford, Ohio]? Did you have any? Speaker 2: Oh, God. I think there was a guy who taught English Lit. I liked him a lot, and I can't think of his name, because I did send him a letter when I was married and lived in Beirut [Lebanon]. I thought I wanted to go to graduate school, and he was teaching at that time in Indiana. I can't think of his name. I liked him. That's about it. I didn't really have a favorite teacher at school. He was fun because he'd actually had us over to his house, which was very unusual to have the students over at your house. Speaker 1: You have a favorite course, one that you look back on and think it maybe, you know, had influence on some of what you-- Speaker 2: What I do now? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I loved microbiology. You mean there were two--three--'cause you had to take--at that time, Miami had common curriculums. So you have to take certain courses. You take physics; you can take chemistry or take micro, microbiology. I took micro, and I loved microbiology. It introduced me--I loved invertebrates. I loved that part of school. But, you know, there was nobody there to say, "Did you know you can make a future in this kind of thing." But I really liked it. I aced the course. I liked it. It introduced me to something that I hadn't taken before, so. Story_ID: 55011 Speaker 1: Okay. So when you're on the verge of graduation, were you thinking about graduate school or just--you knew you were going to the Peace Corps? Speaker 2: I knew I was going to the Peace Corps. Yeah, I mean, my whole thing was that I thought I'd probably be a college professor of English and go to graduate school. But I didn't want to go straight out of college into graduate school, and the Peace Corps offered me an opportunity not to do that. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, did you graduate with any kind of honors or anything (unclear) high school? Speaker 2: No. No. I was just sort of, you know, top third of the class, but, you know, nothing particularly outstanding. Speaker 1: Okay. Graduation was in June of '66 [1966}? Speaker 2: No. I graduated in April. Story_ID: 55012 Speaker 1: April? Okay. Now, so--now, how did you end up going to Ethiopia? Speaker 2: That's where the Peace Corps sent me. Speaker 1: Okay. So it wasn't a choice. It's just a (simultaneous) (unclear)-- Speaker 2: No. When I was accepted, at first they told me that I was going to India. And I was, like, yay. And then they told me I was going to Turkey. And I was, like, yay. And then they said, "You're going to Ethiopia." And I thought, "Where is Ethiopia?" And so I looked it up and looked up the only Ethiopian student on campus, and who I didn't know he had existed, and he didn't know I had--knew anything about it, and sort of hung out with him for a while. But I didn't really care where I went. Speaker 1: So it didn't resonate with you, I mean, Ethiopia, being referenced so much in all-black literature, in [Paul Laurence] Dunbar's poems and that sort of thing? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: And the (unclear). Speaker 2: [Shaking head no]. Speaker 1: Okay. Did you have a feeling that you were going to Africa? Speaker 2: No. I was going to Ethiopia. You know, there's 54 different countries in Africa. I was going to one that was in the highlands with a particular culture and, you know, it had historic--it had interesting history. And I'm still fascinated by Ethiopian history. You know, it had kings and it was thought to be Prester John's place, you know, by Europeans, and--but I liked the country, and I liked the cool weather, and that was one thing they asked me when I--they said, well--I said, "As long as it's not someplace hot, I don't like hot weather," so. And the highlands aren't hot. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. But you didn't think, "Oh, I'm going to Africa?" (unclear). Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: It didn't have any special meaning or anything? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Could have been anywhere? Speaker 2: Could have--as I said. First they told me I was going to India. I would have been perfectly happy there. Turkey, been perfectly happy there. Ethiopia, perfectly happy. Speaker 1: Tell us about the trip- Speaker 2: --Pardon? Speaker 1: Tell us about the visit to Ethiopia. Meaning-- Speaker 2: I taught English as a second language to seventh graders through eleventh graders in the countryside, who lived in the countryside; lived in a house that's about the size of this made out of mud. I saw it. Forty years later, I went back and saw, it's still there, it's still made out of mud, it still has its tin roof. Liked the culture, didn't like everything about it. They treated women like shit, I didn't like that. They treated little kids like shit, didn't like that. Story_ID: 55013 Speaker 1: Had an--I had an altercation on a bus once with a guy, because the buses were really funny. You get a bus in Addis [Addis Ababa, Ethiopia], and halfway through there was a town called Tulu Bolo [Ethiopia]. And, of course, to maximize profits, they take everybody off bus and put them all on another bus. So a bus that had a capacity for thirty people would have sixty people on it. And one time, I've actually written about this in--called, "How to Grow Tomatoes," and it's in a Peace Corps book--and I read it actually at the thirty fifth anniversary at the--this was after 9-1-1, so in October of-- Speaker 2: Two thousand one? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I read it at the Lincoln Memorial and had the crowd laughing and stuff like that. So it was a great experience. I wish somebody had taken a picture so--you just don't think of things like that--and sat next to Sergeant Shriver. It was a lot of fun. But we but we got halfway through in one of these times when it was, like, I think it was Western Christmas. Ethiopian Christmas is about two weeks behind, and, you know, you don't love everything about a culture. They got everybody off the bus and put us on a second bus. Well, they took people off a bus that was behind us and put them all in that. And they were throwing the women in the aisle and throwing the kids out so that the guys could sit down. And I was sitting up front next to a farmer, and this guy got on and he was obviously what they would call in Amharic, a [telic sal, ph.]; that means a big man, you know, somebody of importance. And he looked on the bus, and, of course, it was a crowded bus. And he shoved this farmer over so that the farmer and I were--the farmer was small, and I was small, too, sitting in the same seat so that he could put his fat ass down. And I told him to get up. And I spoke to him in Amharic, and I spoke to him in polite Amharic. I said, "You know, you have to get up," and he thought this was amusing and sort of, you know, because he's an important person--addressing the bus, "Oh, you know, these foreigners, these Peace Corps volunteers, they have no jobs in their own country. They come here, they eat meat," which, of course, is a big thing 'cause nobody eats meat every day. "They eat meat, and the women are immoral," and--at which point, I took my little Ethiopian umbrella, which is about this big, and I jammed him in his thigh, and I basically said, "Get up." I said, "You have a big mouth," this is an Amharic pun, "and a little 'ick'." Well, the whole bus goes (speaking in Amharic). This is like astonishment. And the bus driver told him to come up and sit on the engine box. And then he start--continues his lecture, we're the--"These Peace Corps volunteers are immoral, the women are immoral, we all know they're sluts," and bla-bla-bla. At this point, the poor former, far from being appreciative, by this time moved over to the far end of the other side of the seat, so I had more than my fair share. And when we get--he said, "I'm going to take her to the police station when we get to the next town." I mean, this is night. I don't know what possessed me to do this, but I just was not going to tolerate this 'cause I said, you know, "If you're--", he told me, "I'm a lawyer." (speaking in Amharic). "I'm a lawyer." I said, "Well, if you're a lawyer and you're from Addis, you can read that sign that says that there are only supposed to be thirty people on this bus, and they're sixty people, so get up." And we get to my town, Waliso, and it was a paseo (ph.), where that is when the students are walking around in the evening, and the--everybody's walking around in the evening, and he got off--and this guy jumped off the bus and grabs me by my arm and, "Where the police tapien (ph.), we're taking you to the police station." And I beat him around the head and shoulders with my umbrella and stabbed him. I mean, as I described, I was like some black Mary Poppins, you know, which, you know with this umbrella beating him. And, by this time we're attracting a crowd, you know. My students are going, you know, "Oh, Miss DeWitt, what is it? What is it?" I'm fighting this guy and trying to get away from him. And finally the police come and they--the police had all been drinking kali kala, which is a local brew like moonshine. And they were like, "Well, we're all going to the police station." Story_ID: 55014 Speaker 1: So, now we've got--we must have, like, sixty people, you know. I got the national teachers, the Ethiopian National Teachers are there, because by this time, I've lost all Amharic, and I am down to Anglo-Saxon four-letter words. You know, I'm thinking, if I'm leaving the country, I mean, I'm going to beat the crap out of this guy in the street. So every opportunity I got to jam him with my umbrella or hit him with an umbrella, I would do that. So we finally get to the police station, and it takes the police about fifteen minutes to find the light switch. Now, we're all outside the police station, and he's saying to--"She attacked me on the bus." And I said, "Yes, and I would do it again," and "Yes," and everything he said, "You know, she hit me and," and I said, "Yes, I did." You know, "yes, yes, yes. He's sitting in a seat illegally. Yes, I did all of these things." And the police said to him--because, you know, people think of these countries--I remember some Americans talking about how Ethiopia was a communist country, and I said, "Ethiopia doesn't have the sense that it is a country." It's different provinces and people are more--have much more allegiance to where they leave, and they drew the concept of Ethiopia. So, they said to him, "Well, who are you?" You know, "Who are you?" And he says, (speaking in Amharic and switching to English) "I'm from the capital. I'm a lawyer." And they said, "Well, you're not from our country." You know, "You're not from argare [ph.], my country. You're not from our country. She's from our country. She's a teacher here. What do you do here? You're from Addis [Addis Ababa, Ethiopia]. You're a lawyer." There're no more buses tonight. We're putting you in jail tonight and she's free to go." So (laughs), they put him in jail. Probably not for very long. And my students all escorted me home and asked how I had to have the cojones basically to attack this person of a higher status than I was. And they said, "Of course, you're a teacher, but, you know, he is a--he was a lawyer." And I used the opportunity to talk about democracy and things like that. But I have to say that it was probably--I mean, I did it because I was angry and it was, you know, I was personally being imposed on. I didn't use it as any sort of, you know, standing up for democratic principle. I was just offended that this guy that, you know--I mean, week after week if I would go to the capital, you know, the women and the children would be put in the aisle and the men would take the seats, and it was just unjust. But I used that as an opportunity to talk about equality. I don't know whether it rolled off on the students or not, but-- Speaker 2: Well, it was a justice issue. Speaker 1: Yeah. It was a justice issue. Yeah. Story_ID: 55015 Speaker 1: Do you ever hear from your students? Speaker 2: One of my students actually runs a restaurant here, yeah. I told him, I said, "You're doing far better than I am in America." He said, "You actually employ people." I said, "You embraced the capitalist system." And I did check the English on their menu. It's called Mescarum (ph.), little restaurant that's called Mescarum (ph.). So I had checked the English on it. But I don't know. Then there was the Revolution, and I think the students that I supported while I was there--when you say supported, they basically, they ran errands for me, they did my wash and then they went to the market for me. I don't know what happened to either one of them. It's Heidi Mykiel (ph.), Heidi Maryum (ph.), and Shifbrow Asyfiel (ph.). I don't know what happened to either one of these kids. I hope they're alive and well. Story_ID: 55016 Speaker 1: Yeah. The Revolution was in '74 [1974]. Speaker 2: Yeah. I don't remember, but it was not nice. Speaker 1: No. When I heard that the Ethiopians are a very stratified society, you just spoke to it on some level. Speaker 2: Yes, I guess. I mean, it certainly--yeah. There was--but, I mean, you know, it's like any place. You know, we're a stratified society. I mean, when I was talking to my IRS agent, she was talking about how, you know, she's pursuing some 85-year-old guy for something, and she said, "And, you know, I've got corporate people who are, you know, they don't even come down to see me. They send some minion down to see me. They don't deal--they don't deal with me all." So, every place has a stratified society. So, yeah. Ethiopians were sort of--kind of--I guess you can say "kind of" feudal. The Amharas were, you know, sort of the elite, and that went away. But it's still stratified, I'm sure, with the present government. Story_ID: 55017 Speaker 1: Okay. So you--how long were you in Ethiopia? Speaker 2: Two years. Speaker 1: Okay. And you still speak a little Amharic? Speaker 2: Yeah. My Amharic is good actually. Speaker 1: All right. Okay. So you were there from--until 1968, I guess. Speaker 2: Yeah. I came home and then I--when I left Ethiopia, I left Ethiopia in June and I hitchhiked around Europe until October. I came home in October. Speaker 1: Now, you were in Ethiopia when Dr. King [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was assassinated, right? Speaker 2: Mm-hm. Speaker 1: So, how did you hear about that and what did that-- Speaker 2: I think in a "Newsweek" magazine. But it was not only King, but also Robert Kennedy shortly after that. So it was the summer of all of that. Speaker 1: What were your feelings at that time? Speaker 2: I didn't have any particular feelings. I wasn't devastated, if that's what (unclear)--no. Speaker 1: You're pretty resilient, aren't you? Speaker 2: Well, I don't know if resilient, but I wasn't devastated. I mean, you know. Story_ID: 55018 Speaker 1: Okay. Well, all right. So you come back home in June of '68 [1968]. Speaker 2: No. I came back home in October. Speaker 1: Okay. So you went to Europe. Speaker 2: I didn't come home. I hitchhiked around Europe. Yeah. Through Greece, the Middle East. And because I spoke Amharic, I was sort of--really loved Egypt and Arabic, and I liked the Arab world a lot. So when I got back to the United States in October I had to decide what I was going to do, and I stopped through New York [New York City, New York], and a friend of mine that I'd gone to college with, Bryna Taltman (ph.), she's dead now, but we had been in college together, she said, "Look, we just lost our only black reporter, Nancy Hicks--Nancy Hicks Maynard to the "New York Times," so, you know, there's a spot." So I applied while I was at--in New York to work for the "New York Post" and went home to Dayton [Ohio]; thought about the "Dayton Daily News," and I had a job in New York three weeks later. So I was going back to New York. And my mom said she was really happy. She said, "I just don't think Dayton is for you anymore." And so I went to New York and worked for the "New York Post," and took Arabic at and studied Arabic at the New School for Social Research [The New School, New York, New York] on the weekends. Speaker 1: Okay. So you took place of Nancy Hicks Maynard? Speaker 2: She was Nancy Hicks. Speaker 1: Hicks later. All right. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: This was before she married-- Speaker 2: Bob Maynard. Speaker 1: Bob Maynard. Right. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Of the Maynard Institute, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Just want to establish that. Speaker 2: Yeah. She went to work for the "New York Times," and I went to the "New York Post," and Ted Poston--I don't know if you know who Ted Posten was. He was very famous--he went Down South and did lots of labor reporting in the '30 [1930s] for the "New York Post," which, at that time, was a very liberal paper. It was owned by Dolly Schiff. This is so the people know that this is not the Rupert Murdoch "New York Post," but Dolly Schiff's "New York Post," which was a liberal-leftist kind of newspaper in New York. Story_ID: 55019 Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. So the New York--I just want ask you one question before we move on to the "New York Post," is that, what was it about the Arabic culture that you liked so much? Speaker 2: I don't know. I just liked it. I like the culture and the spoke Amharic, which is--and another Semitic language. So I find words in Arabic and Amharic that are very similar. So I just liked it, I don't know. I still like it. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, what--Egypt was the country you spent the most time in? Speaker 2: Egypt and Lebanon. Speaker 1: Okay. This is while Nasser [Gamal Adbel Nasser] was the president, right? Speaker 2: Mm-hm. Nasser was the king--was president. Story_ID: 55020 Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Okay. Now, at the New York Post, you want to tell us about that? Speaker 2: Oh, I covered the riots at City College [City College of New York, New York City, New York]. You know, diversity was a big issue. It was--people were putting out, you know, non-negotiable demands. So I covered education, the education sort uproar. And that's when I first met Bob Maynard. He came up to New York [New York City, New York], and I ended up--we both covered something and he asked me how long I had been at the "New York Post." And I think I'd been at the "New York Post" maybe three months, 'cause I had done my probation period. And--so it must have been January. And he said what did I do, and I said, "You know, I'm so new at the "New York Post," and I'm just learning that. And he said, "Well, what about your weekends?" And I said, "Well, I study Arabic at the New School of Social Research [The New School, New York, New York] on the weekend." And that was about all we had a conversation. And he went--came back to the--he said, "Oh, you should come and work for the "Washington Post." He said, "This is the hot place to work." And so he--I got an invitation from the "Washington Post" to come down and do an interview, and I was interviewed by them. And Bob had told Jesse W. Lewis, who was the first Mideast correspondent for the "Washington Post" and had covered Vietnam about me, and he said, "There's this sister up in New York [New York City, New York], pretty black sister, who speaks Arabic." And Jesse called me, I guess I'd gone back--no, 'cause we went out down here. He came up to New York one time and basically asked me to marry him. And so we got married. Speaker 1: Just like that (laughs)? Speaker 2: Yeah. Got married. He asked me, like, in April, and we got married in June, so. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Okay. I thought--it was, you know, I was 25, he was the seventh guy I had slept with, then I thought, "You know, you don't want to become a tart here," and you know, it's time to get married. So I got married. I thought he'd make a good husband and father for my children, so, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. So this is 19-- Speaker 2: Sixty-six--'69 [1969]. I got married in '69 [1969]. June 7th, 1969. And so we went to the Middle East. We went--he was the first--he opened the--we opened the Beirut Bureau for the new--for the "Washington Post." Speaker 1: So you really started with the "Washington Post" in '69 [1969], right? Speaker 2: I didn't work for the "Post," he worked for the post. Speaker 1: He--okay. So you was with--all right. Speaker 2: I went over as his wife. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I ended up working for the "Beirut Daily Star," which is the largest English-language newspaper in the region, and for "Endhar (ph.) Reports," is an Arab economic magazine, and being his wife, of course, which was the prime job, as he would consistently tell me. That his--my responsibility was take care of the "Washington Post" Mideast correspondent. Speaker 1: (Laughs). It's hard to believe that (laughs)--well-- Speaker 2: Hard to believe what? Speaker 1: No. That that would be an acceptable, you know-- Speaker 2: Thing? Speaker 1: For you (unclear). Speaker 2: It wasn't. That's why I'm not married to him anymore (laughs). But as I told him when we got divorced, I said, "It wasn't always fun, but it was never boring. It was like living inside a kaleidoscope. He was absolutely nuts and probably one of the smartest people I know, but also psychologically and physically abusive, so. I wasn't standing that. But we bought a sailboat together, we sailed the Mediterranean, and we had great adventures. We fought all over the Eastern Mediterranean and made up all over the Mediterranean. So, as I said, it was never dull. Story_ID: 55021 Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So, now, you were in Beirut, now, this is, this is the time when--was there a lot of conflict in Beirut in those days (simultaneous) (unclear)? Speaker 2: No. It was beginning. It was beginning. The Palestinians--the Palestinians had been settled on the airport road, so from to time, the Palestinians would erupt and put burning tires and isolate the airport. But that was the big issue, was the Palestinians. And I remember trying to sell stories to American papers on the situation about the Palestinians, and there was absolutely no interest at all. But we did interview Kathleen and--Kathleen Cleaver and her husband in Algiers [Algeria]. We went there to do that. Speaker 1: Now she's--now Kathleen Cleaver was in exile with her husband, Eldridge Cleaver-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --of the Black Panther Party. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And, you know, so I remember him going to-- Speaker 2: He was in Algiers. Speaker 1: --Algiers. Speaker 2: Yeah. It was really sad in a way, because he didn't speak French, and he didn't speak Arabic. And he was so happy just to see some Americans. Jesse [Jesse W. Lewis, husband] interviewed him, and I interviewed Kathleen. Kathleen spoke French, so she could hand--she was handling some of the daily life. But they put them--the Algerian government had put them out sort of in this little road, where there wasn't very much of anything, probably so they could watch them. But it was a very isolated kind of life. I felt sorry for him. He very--a very gentle soul, sort of--out of his depth out there, so. That was just a--I didn't have very much conversation with him, but he seemed so appreciative of being able to talk to some Americans. Speaker 1: Now, this is around the time that "Soul On Ice" was published? Speaker 2: I think it had already been published. Speaker 1: Yeah. Okay. So it--yeah, it was clearly--it was out in '68 [1968], I know that. Speaker 2: Yeah. Now, we were-so we were there. I think we interviewed him in the '70s [1970s]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Probably 1970. He--Jesse interviewed him, and I interviewed with her. Speaker 1: So how long were you in-- Speaker 2: In the Middle East? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Five years. Speaker 1: Five years. Okay. So from '69 [1969] to '74 [1974]. Speaker 2: '69 to '73 [1973]. I came home early, I came home--I came home in October, and he came home in January. We were on our way to divorce (laughs) by March. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No. Did he come then or did he come home earlier? No. I'm sorry. He came home in '73 [1973]; '69 [1969] to '73 [1973]. Yeah. That would be right. Yeah. Story_ID: 55022 Speaker 1: Now, what I have here, you were hired by the "Post" [New York Post] in '77 [1977], right? Is that true? Speaker 2: Mm-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. So, what happened in the interim since '74 [1974] and-- Speaker 2: I worked for "National Journal." I covered the Senate, no-fault insurance, HEW [Health Education & Welfare]. Speaker 1: This was for--this was for who? Speaker 2: "National Journal." Speaker 1: Oh. "National Journal." Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I'm not familiar with "National Journal." It's a-- Speaker 2: Oh. It's a huge magazine. It still exists. It's a big policy magazine. Sort of like a CQ. It was started by a guy named Randy Smith, who made a lot of money on Wall Street and couldn't figure out what was going on in Washington, so he decided to found a magazine. '73 [1973]. I guess I must have worked--worked for him in '73 [1973],'cause I came back to the United States, and the guy who was one of the writers with the "L.A. Times," Bill Toohey, had written a whole bunch of people, "National Geographic," the "Washington Star" still existed, "Time Magazine," telling them about me as a writer. And I didn't get a job. There was--what's his name--Seib with the--at "Time Magazine" told me, he said, "Well, if we were hiring, we would hire you, but we're not hiring anybody"--Bill Seib, Bill Seib. Yeah. S-E-I-B. But he on-passed (sic) my resume to the guy who was the editor of "National Journal," whose father had been the press secretary for Governor Brown [Edmund G. Brown, Jr.] in California. Anyway, I ended up working for them. I started doing a freelance piece on the National Association of Manufacturers. It was one of the most boring pieces I've ever done, 'cause it wasn't a very interesting organization. But, I did that piece and then they hired me. And so I covered HEW at the time. Story_ID: 55023 Speaker 1: Okay. You covered HEW for "National Journal" magazine--so, what was going on that you remember? Speaker 2: Oh. I remember a guy, Joe--what is his last name. He was Korean, a blind Korean guy, who worked on the Supplemental Security Income. They were passing that, SSI. And I remember writing an article about it, and he told me there were only six people in Washington [Washington, D.C.] who actually understood that--the legislation; him, me and four other people (laughs). I wrote about that, and no-fault insurance, which never passed. Oh, it was just--and the pieces were long. I was just--I really liked it. It was really interesting. I lived in a little efficiency apartment in Southwest Washington. All I could think of was that I wanted to get home. So I was--spent my weekends, once again, studying language (laughs), Arabic again and working for "National Journal" and looking for a house, and I found a house, and bought a house. I bought my house in '74 [1974]--no, '73 [1973]; '73 [1973]? Yeah, '73 [1973], and lost my job in 1974 at "National Journal." They had an economic cutback on Valentine's Day, 1974. They cut 17 people from the staff, including a guy who had given up his job working for the "Baltimore Sun" in December and moved his family to Washington; he was cut too. And I remember it was 1974. I had bought a car in December, my little Honda Civic; signed a contract for my house in January, and lost my job on Valentine's Day. And they still refer to it as the Valen--St. Valentine's Massacre at "National Journal." That was deep history, old history at this point, but they still talk about that. So there I have--but I had saved up money. I had saved up $10,000. Can you imagine that, saving up $10,000? All I did was go to work and save money, even though I took taxis, because I didn't drive at that time. I took driving lessons as well. So I'd bought a house; I had a car, a house, and no job. And so I remember the day that we were told that we didn't have a job--we had a big conference table and this mahogany conference table, highly polished; you could see your reflection in it. And the one guy from the "Baltimore Sun" complaining that he wished he had known because he wouldn't have given up his job, and here he was jobless with a wife and kids. And I thought, I need to get a freelance piece. And I had been freelancing for "Black Enterprise." So I promptly got up and said, "Well"--they were nice. They actually gave us severance, and they told us we could use the office until, you know, for a couple of months. So I got up and went back to my desk and called up "Black Enterprise," because I'd been freelancing for them for--and asked them if they wanted an article on how the economic crisis was affecting black businessmen, and they said, yes, they would pay me $800--$800? Yeah, $800 for a piece. And after I got off the phone, one of the other reporters said to me, he said, "Well, how is the energy crisis affecting black business?" And I said, "I haven't the foggiest notion, but I will by the time I need to write this piece." And it turned out that only petroleum--on people who required petroleum-based products were impacted by it. Story_ID: 55024 Speaker 1: Okay. So this is the era of the energy crisis-- Speaker 2: Mm-hm. Speaker 1: --and it's the era of Watergate. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So this--you're in Washington, D.C., when all of this is going on. What was--what are your-- Speaker 2: That was the year of--the summer of John--well, that was before the summer of John Dean, 'cause, like, '74 [1974]--when was Dean testifying? He was testifying, I think in '73 [1973]? 'Cause by the time, it was--I think this (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: It had actually happened in '72 [1972]. Speaker 2: Two. Yeah. Speaker 1: So, yeah. Yeah. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: But people didn't know about it. Speaker 2: Until '73 [1973]. I think it was the summer of '73 [1973] that he actually-- Speaker 1: I think there was a little blurb about it, but nobody paid any attention to (unclear). Speaker 2: Right. (laughs). It didn't mean squat to me, quite frankly. I was not surprised. People were, like, horrified that their government would do this. I wasn't surprised at all, and actually, I found it really boring to (unclear) day after day of that (unclear) of John Dean testifying. I thought, "God, this is so boring, and I don't know why people are stunned and amazed that their government would do this." But I thought that's probably because I'm a black person that doesn't feel this, you know, so. Speaker 1: Yeah. As a journalist, how do you feel about the investigation of it or do you have any thoughts about that? Speaker 2: No. I mean, I thought it had its right outcome, but I didn't feel like, you know, this is the greatest thing since sliced cheese. I was, like, I'm sort of surprised that people don't think that their government does these kinds of things. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I'm very self-focused (laughs). All this other stuff that goes on, it's like, oh, okay. I was interested in how I was going to pay for my house, and I had no job. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: And I didn't have a job for, '74 [1974], '75 [1975], '76 [1976]; '74 [1974], '75 [1975], '76 [1976]. So, what is that--I didn't really start working for the "Post" [Washington Post] until-- got by the "Post" in December by Shelby Coffey the third [Shelby Coffey III]--of '76 [1976], so, I didn't have a job all that time. So my whole thing was less what was going on and how I was going to pay the mortgage and the car note. And I was doing that as a freelance writer. Story_ID: 55025 Speaker 1: Okay. So, well, tell us how you got hired by the "Post" [Washington Post]. Speaker 2: Shelby Coffey the third [Shelby Coffey III]--I'd done a couple of--he had been the editor of the "Washington Post Magazine," which was called the "Washington Post Magazine" at that time. I think it was called "Potomac." It was called "Potomac," and he was the editor there. And I came up with doing a piece on Clifford Alexander, who was running for mayor of Washington against Walter Washington. This was a first pre-elections. And I'd looked at the magazine, and I did a piece on Clifford Alexander. And I took it into Shelby, and he looked at the piece and he said, "Well, you know." It was a very linear piece, and I could tell that there was something wrong with the piece and I couldn't tell what it was. And he did an amazing thing for an editor, 'cause he said, "I'll give you the kill fee for it," and I said, "I don't want the kill fee. I want the whole price for it. So what do I need to do to make this piece what you want?" And then he said, "Well, have you looked at the magazine?" And I said, "Yes, I looked at the magazine. I thought that I had done everything in the magazine." And he said, "Well, you need to use fictional elements in it, you know, you dialogue, conversation, things like that." And he said, "It doesn't necessarily have to be linear." So I said, "Well, let me try this again." So I did the piece a second time, and when I brought it in the second time, and as I said, he did me an enormous favor, because very few editors will actually sit there and go through your stuff line by line. As we were going through it, I said, "Stop. I know where the lead is. The lead is at the end. It's this last piece that I'm talking about. And I'm going to flip the whole piece around, because I think this is the moment where the true crisis or the true--the problem that Clifford Alexander is going to have with this is epitomized by this one scene. So I did that for Shelby, and he liked it, and he not only gave me my fee, but he added some sweetener to it and gave me extra money, and he gave me the money--I walked in, he called up--he told his assistant, Debbie, he said, "Call upstairs, tell them to cut her a check now." He said, that "You'll be up to pick it up in 15 minutes." And then I--and then I started freelancing for him. So I did freelance pieces for him. And then he became the editor of the "Style" section, and asked me if--it was the election. It must have been Carter's [President Jimmy Carter] election. Yeah. That was the year Carter [President Jimmy Carter] was elected. He said-- Speaker 1: '76 [1976]. Speaker 2: '76 [1976], yeah. He said, "Where would you like to be on election night? Pick any place you want to be." And I said, "I want to be in the emergency ward of the hospital." (unclear) We're going to do little vignettes around. So I went to Washington Hospital Center and sat in the emergency ward, and, you know, nothing went on. It was very, very quiet and the doctors and nurses were wandering around, and you could hear the election in the background, you know, as the states came in. And then, over the intercom came the "Code Blue. We have a Code Blue." And the doctors and nurses who had been drinking coffee and bullshitting one another, so they went into action as they brought this woman in who was having a heart attack and got to work on her, and she died. The doctors and nurses drifted away. And then you could hear that Carter had won. So I mean, I just basically did a little scene. And after that, Shelby took me out for lunch, and he said, "You got any more story ideas?" And so I went down a list of about 20 story ideas. And he said, "Keep the list, come work for me." And so I went to work for the "Washington Post." I was hired in December of 1976 and started in '77 [1977]. Story_ID: 55026 Speaker 1: And the first piece I did was on Zbigniew Brzezinski, which was great fun, because he was a terrible interview. I had gotten to the White House late, and he told me that I could interview him as he walked from the White House to the Madison Hotel. And it was freezing cold, I had my little tape recorder and my notebook, the photographer was running in front of us, and--he talks in huge paragraphs like he's lecturing at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. So, you know, you ask him a question and it would just be just huge paragraphs of stuff. And, I mean, I'm taking these notes and took us, maybe, seven, ten minutes to talk from the White House, 'cause he also walks very fast. And I got in and Shelby said to me, "How did it go?" And I said, "I'm not sure right now." But I called Brzezinski's parents up in Canada. I got all kinds of stuff. I wrote pieces, front page piece, and I was off like-- Speaker 2: Now, Brzezinski is the Secretary of State? Was he? Speaker 1: No. He was--the NSA, National Security--NSC, National Security Council. Speaker 2: That's right. Okay. Speaker 1: So it was fun. It was a fun piece to write, and it was a fun piece to get somebody who was basically--and he called me after the piece came up and he said, "I've just gotten up off the floor doing my morning prayers," because he's--his family's Catholic, and he was very religious, and he said, "My wife says"--his wife is a sculptor--he said, "My wife says that you captured me perfectly, so it was a wonderful piece." So I got to do a lot of pieces there. And the "New York Times" started quoting me a month after I got at the "Washington Post." Story_ID: 55027 Speaker 1: Okay. All right. How long did you work for the "Post"? Speaker 2: I started in January, and I was working for the "New York Times" by November, 'cause they offered me $10,000 more than what I was making; which was also interesting, 'cause if I'd have been a more sophisticated person (sic), I would have realized that I could have leveraged it rather than--I could have just walked into a Ben or somebody and said, you know, "The 'New York Times' is after me"--actually, the ear has a little piece about us, because apparently, Ben Bradley and the bureau chief at the "Times" had a sort of (conchutonk?) over it, and Ben tell them "keep your hands off my reporters." And the person at the "New York Times" said, you know, "You don't own any of these people." That happened in August, and I should have really realized when the "Times" kept coming after me that I can go into the "Post" and I could use this offer to leverage better stuff here. But I didn't. I just thought, you know, the "Times" ask me, I'll go to the "Times." Not because I was like, "Oh, God. I want to go to the "New York Times," but they were offering me $10,000 more than I was making. And quite frankly, when Ben hired me, they had a requirement that you had to have five years of newspaper business, and I had worked mostly for magazines and a little bit of newspapers. And I told him at the time, I said, "You're getting me cheap." He said, "Oh, no. That's not cheap, Karen, not with a--" I said, "You're getting me cheap, Ben, but it's okay because I want the job." And so I remember Howard Simons coming in--being brought in to talk to him, and he said, "Well, you know," he said, "The 'New York Times' has a suit by the blacks and the women, and that's why they want you." And I said, "Howard, I'm black and a woman here." I said, "So, you know, that may be true, but they're also offered me $10,000 more." "Well, we'll match it. You know, you're holding a gun to our head, but we'll match it." I said, "Thanks, but no thanks." And I really should have said, "Well, you know, if you want to be serious, Ben knew he was hiring me for under what I was worth at the beginning. You need to sweeten that stuff." But, he said, "Oh, well, we'll match it." And I just decided, no. I didn't even know how to talk about that, but I should have said, "Look, you know, Ben hired me for less than I was worth at the very beginning, and you know, if you're really serious, you'll do more than just match what the "Times." You know, you'll give me different opportunities." But I didn't know that kind of thing. And I went to the "Times" where I was miserable for a long time. Story_ID: 55028 Speaker 1: So what did they have you doing at the "Times" [The New York Times] Speaker 2: Oh, I wrote stories. You know, I mean, I wrote features, I wrote--I covered the FCC [Federal Communications Commission], the Consumer Product Safety Commission; I did profiles, I--really, what I liked doing at the "Times" (unclear) was "Week in Review" pieces. I was good at it, and I liked that a lot. But I was miserable. I didn't really like it at all. And so I quit. Speaker 1: What about it didn't you like? I mean, what was the worst part of it? Speaker 2: It was just an entirely different atmosphere than the "Post" [The Washington Post]. I mean, I remember when I came to the "Times," I came with 50 story ideas, and I remember some New York editor said, "Oh, we should just frame this." I mean, it was a whole different--it was a sort of New York attitude. And I remember talking to Paul Delaney at the time because I was so miserable at the "Times" when I first came, I mean. And he said, "Look," he said, "you are a fast racehorse in somebody else's stable." And he said, "Now, the 'Times' has you, and they don't care whether you run again or not." And Jim Wooten , who is a fabulous writer and is now at ABC, but was one of their premier reporters at the time and had covered Carter, said to me, "Know what you want from the 'Times,'" he said, "because they got it from you the moment they hired you." And he didn't mean just 'cause I was black and female, but basically, they got you. You could stay here, you could rot here, but, you know, you're just not on the other person's team anymore. So I just--I just decided to quit (laughs). I quit. Speaker 1: So, how long were you there before you quit? Speaker 2: God, let's see. Speaker 1: You came in '78 [1978], right? Speaker 2: I came in '78 [1978], and I quit in '81 [1981]. Yeah, I quit in '81 [1981]. I quit in September of '81 [1981]. Speaker 1: Okay. So did you have another job lined up? Speaker 2: No. I didn't like it. I was really unhappy. I don't like doing things I don't like doing. I guess it was because I had all of that discipline as a kid (laughs). I really don't like doing things I don't like doing. Story_ID: 55029 Speaker 1: Is there any one thing that broke this camel's back? One straw or? Speaker 2: No. I just--I mean, I'm a writer, and you know, I was just not get--I wasn't having fun writing, you know. I remember I--it's just--it was sort of--it was interesting, 'cause I remember when I first got there, I remember talking to Reggie Stewart [Reginald Stuart], who was a black reporter and very famous at the "Times" [the New York Times] because he was a Detroit Bureau Chief. And Reggie was just--oh, God, he was just amazing at coming into stories. When he would come into Washington, all the other reporters would be like, "What is he here to do?" "What is he getting ready to do?" And he used to call me "Sassy Laffy." And he said, "Do you know," he asked me, he said, "What color is your air travel card?" 'Cause he said, "What do you want to do at the 'Times'"? I said, "Well, I want to be a foreign correspondent." He said, "What color is your air travel card?" And I said, "It's red." He said, "You're never going foreign," he said, "because if they had a foreign assignment plan for you, you'd have a green international foreign card, not a red domestic travel--air travel card." So I asked a woman named Jo Thomas, Josephine Thomas who was known as Jo, who had joined the paper, like, three weeks before me. I said, "Jo, what color is your air travel card?" She said, "Green." So it was like a tracking, you know. So I became aware of these sort of things and, you know. I learned later on that you know that some people got more money. Even though there was sort of a union cap, there was something called the "publisher's payroll," so that if you know if they wanted to sweeten the deal for you or give you some extra, you could get extra money from the publisher's payroll, which had nothing to do with the cap that the union (unclear). So those kinds of things. And, of course, women hadn't been getting the same money, because that was why they had had a suit by both the blacks and the women so--it was all of it. It was, you know. And I wasn't a happy writer there, you know, so. I just decided, hey, I don't really need this. I'll step out and see what I can do on my own. Story_ID: 55030 Speaker 1: Okay. So you left in 1981. Did you stay in New York [New York City, New York] or did you come back (simultaneous) (unclear)-- Speaker 2: I never worked--I didn't work in New York. I worked here. Speaker 1: Oh, you were here (simultaneous) (unclear)-- Speaker 2: I worked in Washington [Washington, D.C.], yeah. I spent, probably, two weeks in New York. I didn't want to live in New York. As a matter of fact, I remember the--I can't think of his name--when I went up to New York, but the managing editor at that time, a very sophisticated man, said to me at that time, "How do you feel about New York?" And I must have indicated that I didn't want to go to New York. And he said, "Look," he said, "I'm just going to give you a piece of advice. Abe Rosenthal loves the "New York Times." He loves New York. He loves New York. So when he asked you about how you feel about New York, I'm not saying that you should lie, but you'd better give him an answer that will satisfy him." And I did. Actually, when I went up to New York, I pulled all of--this was in the days when they had the Morricks--I pulled all Abe Rosenthal's clips and read all of this stuff that he had done while he had been a correspondent in Poland. And apparently, it got back to him. I mean, I didn't do it, but he said, "I hear you pulled all my clips." And I said, "Yes," I said, "I wanted to see--you know, you're the executor editor of the "New York Times," so I wanted to see what you've done." And he said, "What do you think?" I said, "You had an exciting foreign thing, and that's what I'm interested in. I'm interested in foreign coverage," and he said, "Well, how do you feel about New York?" I said, "Oh, I love New York, most magnificent city in the world." I said, "But I don't think I've really done Washington, and what I'd like to become is the Janet Flanner of Washington, to tell people how Washington works." Which I didn't. It would still be a great assignment for somebody, probably more a magazine person. But I didn't get snatched up to New York, so. I didn't--I spent my time in the "Washington Bureau" both times, both times, and I did two stints at the "New York Times." Both times I did it here in Washington. Speaker 1: Okay. So the other stuff was like later on? Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 55031 Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So what did you do in '81 [1981]? Freelance (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah. I freelanced, and I was thinking about--I wrote short stories, I got my first rejections of--a friend of mine who's in the Peace Corps had written, like, ten mysteries, and his wife worked Putnam at the time, so I asked her to look at some of my short stories. She said, "Well, this is good." And I actually gotten really--she said--when I showed her my rejection, she said, "You're getting good rejections even though they're saying no," she said, "these are, you know, structural issues." But I'd never had anybody say no, so, she said, "Well, get over it. You need to toughen up your ego." And then I had--had some medical issues in the very next year, and I realized I was going to need to get a job again, because I--and I was still freelancing, and Joel Dreyfus (ph.)--do you know Joel Dreyfus? He's a "Fortune Magazine," "Washington Post" reporter--he said, "Look, there's this new newspaper starting called 'USA Today' and they're looking for professionals." And he said, "And they're particularly looking for black professionals." So I ended up going to work for "USA Today" as a columnist for them. Speaker 1: Okay. This is 1982? Speaker 2: Mm-hm. Speaker 1: Now-- Speaker 2: Yeah. That was in New York, and "USA Today" just started--had just started. Story_ID: 55032 Speaker 1: So are you--now, I have a note here about a BET [Black Entertainment Television] Television Show called "Karen's Kitchen." Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Did this happen--this happened at the same time, right? Speaker 2: It did. I--that summer, Bob Johnson, a friend of mine who worked for PBS, said, "Do you know, that they were going to--" that they were going to be--he works for WETA, WETA COM (ph.), which is the profit arm of WETA, said that Bob Johnson and WETA were in--had decided to do this show, and would I be interested. He knew me as a--as really a great cook, and--so Bob Johnson came over and actually interviewed me, and I--just out of the hospital, and he was so funny, he said, "Well, can you cook fried chicken?" I said, "Sweetie, fried chicken is a basic. Of course I can do that." So I did two and a half seasons of "Karen's Kitchen" for BET, which was just launching at that time. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That was fun. I wished I had been smart enough to recognize that there was going to be a food network and a food channel, and I could continue that. As a matter of fact, I've just started to work on a proposal, 'cause I really don't want to go out of my front door. I hate office--offices except newspapers. Speaker 1: You were then one of the first black women to have-- Speaker 2: A TV show, yeah. Speaker 1: A cooking show. Speaker 2: Right. I was. Speaker 1: Because Bernadine Groer (ph.), I think (unclear)(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Right. She had a cookbook. Speaker 1: Yeah. And she's on public radio-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --I think in those days. And--okay. All right. Karen's Kitchen. And, did you know Norma Darden of (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I have their cookbook, but I don't know the sisters (unclear) it was the "Strawberry Wine" and something else. Speaker 1: Yeah, "Spoon Bread." Speaker 2: "Spoon Bread and Strawberry Wine." I have their cookbook out in the kitchen. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Okay. So you were doing this, and this is a half-hour show? Speaker 2: Yeah. It was a half-hour cooking show from start to finish. Story_ID: 55033 Speaker 1: Okay. All right. BET [Black Entertainment Television]. So, well, tell us about "USA Today." What sort of articles did you work on for them? Speaker 2: I wrote a column. I wrote a column called the "Washington Scene," and the first columns I wrote were actually written, but then they told me they really didn't want--they wanted--they wanted bullets basically. It was a very funny kind of place, but Larry King, eventually ended up writing what they want. He would write things like--I just remember one of his columns was like, "Mmmmm, peanut butter, don't you just love it." I'm thinking to myself, this is very, very strange. So I didn't like doing that at all. I ended up--ended up being a rewrite editor, which I also didn't like. And then I ended up being a foreign correspondent for "USA Today," which I loved. And I always, you know, whatever one says about "USA Today" at that particular period, it gave me an opportunity that I'd never would have had at the "New York Times," which is to be a foreign correspondent and eventually, an assistant national editor, and they basically said what do you want to do. I went to--ended up going back to the "New York Times" for my second stint. But I loved to--I covered South Africa, I covered Central America, Panama, Nicaragua; that's where I learned Spanish. I learned Spanish because I was covering all of these civil disturbances in Central America. Speaker 1: Okay. Contra and all the (simultaneous) (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Mm-hm, the Contras in Nicaragua, and the Honduras rebels, and Noriega and Panama; yeah. So it was--I loved that. I really liked that. But I also covered Reagan, the Economic Summit in Tokyo [Japan]. I flew around with Nancy Reagan, as she went on her "Just Say No" campaign in the East. So, yeah. I liked that. It was a lot of fun. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Even being assistant national editor was fun, too, but not ultimately what I really wanted to do. I really prefer writing to being a reporter. Story_ID: 55034 Speaker 1: Do you have any good stories from the days of covering the Reagans [President Ronald Reagan and First Lady Nancy Reagan]? Speaker 2: The Reagans, they weren't all that interesting (laughs). I mean, I did--I interviewed Ronald Reagan after I'd come back from South Africa, and I remember coming out and said, "Well, Karen," you know, in his mellifluous voice, "the problem really is, you know, tribalism." And I thought, yes, a white tribe and a black tribe. It's not that kind of tribalism. But I didn't say anything, and I came out and somebody said I looked stunned. I said, "Yeah, because we got a 40-watt bulb in a hundred-watt circuit there." They said, "Well, didn't you find him charming?" I said, "No. I don't find dumb charming. I didn't think very much of him, no." I mean, he was probably having his early Alzheimer's, but, no. Not impressed. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what about Nancy, her "Just Say No" campaign? Speaker 2: I didn't think very much of her either. I mean, you know. But she was good. She was good. There's no question. I remember her coming out one time, and she was talking to all of these families, and she started talking about family, and she teared up, and I remember the women in the back saying, "Oh, you know, she's so--she cares so much about family." I said, "Yes, just enough to throw out her daughter and things like this," but, you know, it's all image, and she was really good at it, so. No, I don't really--people in the White House, they're on a whole different level than me, and covering them is fine, but. Speaker 1: That's interesting. Now, who is--who are some of the people around the White House in those days, you remember? Speaker 2: Don't know any. Don't remember any. Speaker 1: My mind goes kind of blank. Speaker 2: I don't think there were any. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I did cover somebody, but that was in the Bush Administration. And What's His Name over at the State Department, the guy who was--what was his name--who ran for president several times? Has a whole bunch of kids, Fundamentalist Christian. Very smart guy, but crazy. Absolute nut. Speaker 1: This is a black person? Speaker 2: Yeah. He ran for president. He's been on, you know--I can't think of his name. Speaker 1: Not Alan Keys (simultaneous) (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Alan Keys. Alan Keys is really smart. He is really interesting. He's a nut case though (laughs). He's really a very interesting man though, but very, very smart. Story_ID: 55035 Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Well, all right. Now, so when did you go back to the "New York Times" as a-- Speaker 2: I took--two times I took leaves of absence from the "USA Today." I took a year and taught at American University as the first black professor in their School of Mass Communications with Sandy Ungar--you know who Sanford Ungar is from CBS? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: He's now president of Goucher College [Towson, Marlyand]. But, at that time, he was the dean of the J School [Journalism School], and they had never had any--they didn't have very many women, and they didn't have any blacks. So I became the first black professor at American University School of Journalism and Mass Communications [Washington, D.C.]. And I took a break. I always think I'm going to be able to write books, but I'm a really good teacher, and teaching just sucks up all your time. There's a friend of mine, who is a writer, who was teaching at Washington College [Chestertown, Maryland] as a writer in residence and he was working on a book, and I said, "Look, I know you can, if you really teach," I said, "so you stealing time either from your book or from your students." He said, "There's no question. I'm stealing it from my students." But I really liked teaching. And so it was a lot of fun then. Speaker 1: What year were you teaching? Speaker 2: Oh, God. Must have--it was in the '80s [1980s] sometime, 'cause I took--'cause I was the White House correspondent, and I remember they said, "Oh, well, you're the White House correspondent at "USA Today," and we can't promise that you'll be a White House correspondent when you come back," which was fine. I didn't really care. I mean, I think being a White House correspondent is a horrible job because you have to respond to all these people who--every sneeze, cough, misstep of the President--I mean, you're taking the temperature of somebody every five minutes, you know. He's up, he's down, he's in, he's out, he's--. Do I didn't really care about that, but I remember Joanna Newman was the other person who covered the White House. And she had a wonderful ability, which I don't have, of making nothing sound like something. Making no news sound like something. Anyway, it's a real skill, you know, to take the barest amount of stuff and be able to write a whole column. I mean, Johnny Apple was wonderful about this too; R.W. Apple of the "New York Times." He could take nothing and, you know, make it into a wonderful column. It would be wonderful read, but if you went back and punched and said, what did I learn here, what facts are here, it would be very little. But it was beautifully written. It's a skill I've never had and which I have great admiration for, because I think it's really very helpful, particularly if you're going to cover something like a White House speech, where you're going to have write everyday again and again and again and again and again, to be able to take the barest smidgen of news and make it into a readable, interesting column, so. But you asked me a question about--oh, the first time was at AU [American University, Washington, D.C.]. So, let's see. I worked for "USA Today" from '82 [1982] to--I went back to the "New York Times" in '90 [1990], so it must have been in the mid-eighties. I can't remember what year. I'll have to look it up. And then I took another leave of absence from "USA Today" and taught at Kansas State [Manhattan, Kansas] from '89 [1989] until '90 [1990]. When I went back to the "New York Times"--I went back to the "New York Times" in June of '90 [1990]. And I knew I was going back to the "New York Times" even when I left "USA Today." Story_ID: 55036 Speaker 1: All right. So you were at Kansas State from '89 [1989] to '90 [1990]. Speaker 2: Mm-hm. Speaker 1: Teaching too, so you were on leave from "USA Today?" Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You were saying that "Today" had a very liberal leave policy, say that you can come and go. Speaker 2: I don't know whether they had a liberal leave policy or not. I knew what I was going to do (laughs). I mean, I was a Japan Society Fellow at the "New York Times" and it was very funny because, basically, I was going to be away the entire summer. But, you know, I had a mortgage, and I had to pay bills while I was gone. I wasn't renting the house. I did actually have a friend of mine who lived in the house, who was working for Gannett for the summer. But I remember when I discovered that I was going to be a Japan Society Fellow, I went to the bureau chief at that time, who was R. W. Apple, and said to him, "Look, Johnny, I mean, I'd been selected as the Japan Society Fellow, and I'll be gone all summer long, but, you know, I want to make sure that I have some salary. So I know we've all been having difficulties getting editors on the weekend, so from now until June when I leave, I'll do weekend duty so that I could accumulate enough to make money, plus my vacation." His only comment was, "I've never gotten the Japan Society Fellowship." (laughs). That was what he said. He said, "Well, that's fine. It's fine, it's fine, it's fine." I was, like, "Okay." So I spent the summer in Japan in the ninety--'95 [1995], '96 [1996], I guess. I'm in that class. Speaker 1: That's when you were at the "Times" [New York Times]. Speaker 2: Yeah. I was at the "Times." I never think about what is their policy. It's immaterial what their policy is. It's what I--what do you want to do. You know, you could always make a way. You can always negotiate. You negotiate everything except death. Speaker 1: As long as you're alive, you have a choice. Speaker 2: That's right. Story_ID: 55037 Speaker 1: Okay. So. Okay. So. You left "USA Today" in 1990, is that? Speaker 2: Officially I left in 1990. In my mind, I left when I went to teach in Kansas. And then I went to the "New York Times" from 1990 to 1997. Speaker 1: Okay. You really enjoy teaching you said? Speaker 2: Yeah, I do. I like teaching. But you can't do anything else but teach. I did write some poetry and got some poetry published, but I really wanted to work on a book, so. I guess if I'd really wanted to do it, I would have done it, though. Speaker 1: So you lived out in Lawrence Campus? Speaker 2: No. That's--Lawrence is at University of Kansas. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I taught at Kansas State. Speaker 1: State. Speaker 2: My--yes, Manhattan, Kansas. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: Which was a former Ag [Agriculture] School. A "Purple Pride," as they call it, as opposed to the "Snobs on the Hill," which is what they University of Kansas people, the Jay Hawks. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: There's a great rivalry between the two schools. In a way, I knew there was rivalry, including if you riding on the highway and the highway patrolman stopped you for speeding, you hoped that you had somebody from the university that you were teaching at; otherwise you'd get a ticket. Story_ID: 55038 Speaker 1: That's interesting. So you came back to the "Washington Post" in 1990. Speaker 2: Nope. Nope. Speaker 1: Right? Speaker 2: I went to the "New York Times" in 1990. Speaker 1: "New York Times" in 1990. Speaker 2: I went to the "New York Times" in 1990. Speaker 1: I'll correct this outline. Okay. So from Manhattan [Kansas] to Manhattan [New York City, New York]. Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: All right. So, what were your duties at the time when you went back? Speaker 2: I was there for the summer, which is horrible, but I just covered everything, including Mandela's [Nelson Mandela] visit to New York [New York City, New York], where I could tell that I had changed, because I'd been covering it all day long and I remember running into another black woman reporter who was sort of very nonchalant about filing she said, "Because I'm not getting the byline. The byline is going to the white person who's sitting back at the "New York Times" and writing this from all of my dispatches." And I thought, you know, I don't care, because I'm not going to be here for very long. But at the end of the day, I called it to my final--I called my final dispatch, and I'll never forget. John Landman, of the "New York Times" said to me, "Well," he said, "stay out there," he said, "and make sure those people don't riot." At which point, I said, "Excuse me?" He said, "Well, stay there because you want to make sure that people don't, you know, riot in the streets." And I said, "John," I said, "that's an utterly inappropriate thing to say. This has been a day of joy and celebration for these people. They're on the way home to see if they can catch a glimpse of themselves on TV and get ready to go to their J.O.B's tomorrow, and if you don't have anything else to say to me, I will be available at my home." Click. I was just outraged at this idiot, this asshole. He's still at the "New York Times," and I'm sure he's surviving and thriving, but I have very little regard for people like that. Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: And I watched him once take a story away from an intern and give it to a reporter. He denigrated this young intern who was doing a sports review--the sports article. And, then, you know, it wasn't light and lively, but with a few, you know, editorial clicks or suggestions, it could have been made really nice. But he actually just denigrated the story and denigrated this young man, and then gave the story to one of the--one of the reporters, and it was a front page story. And I thought, "You're an asshole, and you're going to pay for this," justice I guess. Story_ID: 55039 Speaker 1: In journalism, as in a lot of fields, there's the heightened competition in a place like the "New York Times" (unclear) atmosphere where assholes are sent to the top. Speaker 2: Yeah. Some of them do, yeah. But there're decent people, too, but this was just a person who was an asshole. Speaker 1: Okay. So you're not saying in general or anything, 'cause I know you didn't like that atmosphere-- Speaker 2: No, I mean-- Speaker 1: --at the "New York Times" very much. Speaker 2: Not the first time. I didn't like it at all. The second time, as I told somebody--somebody asked me, who was being courted by the "Times," he said, "What's the 'Times' like?" I said, "It's an equal-opportunity oppressor." I said, "Black, Jew, male, female," I said, "if you don't have a Rabbi, you don't have a chance. You need a Rabbi at the 'Times,' you need somebody." And they fall in love so easily, I said, you know. They love the new shiny thing that appears to be--I just remember, Alexander--what is his name--Alexander Stanley, had just joined the paper, and she sat next to me when I was up in New York [New York City, New York]. And I remember the head of the "Week in Review" used to stop by and say, "Now, if you want to write anything for the 'Week in Review,' section, just let me know. And anything on--" You could see she was totally dismissive of this guy, and I said, "Oh, by the way, I have some stories for the 'Week In Review.'" "Oh, oh. Okay. Okay." So. Then you just decides, what do you want to do with that. You can sell it to somebody else. But they did that to everybody. I remember Maureen Dowd when she was covering the Bush Administration, said, you know, "Do you want to do a story on the"--was it the Bush brothers? She had something on--the Blues Brothers--it was something about the Bush Administration. At the magazine, you know, these old people have their own little kingdoms. It's byzantine. People have their own kingdoms, and at the time, the guy who was head of the magazine said, "No. I'm not interested in the story." So she called up "Esquire" and sold the story. As soon as the "Times" said, we don't want it, she sold it to "Esquire," it was a cover story, and people at the "New York Times" were, like, "Well, you know, why didn't--you know, you work for the 'Times,' you have access to, you know, because of the 'Times,' and why didn't--" She just said, "A little late to have said--." "Hey, you said you didn't want it. And once you said you don't want it, then I can sell it somewhere else, and so I sold it." So they took her much more seriously after that when she offered ideas. But, could happen to anybody, as I said, you know. It's a big place. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: And it's the best, I still have to say. It's the best. It covers the news better than anybody else on the planet. I don't know about the English papers, but it's a great newspaper. Story_ID: 55040 Speaker 1: All right. Now, in '97 [1997], you're hired for the post of senior producer at ABC News. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Nightline. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Are you still at the "New York Times?" Speaker 2: I was at the "New York Times." Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Actually, Nightline had come to me shortly after I came back to the "Times" in '91 [1991]. A friend of mine who had been the "Week in Review"--one of the "Week in Review" editors, a Latina, whose name escapes me now, went to the White House, to the Clinton White House as a speechwriter, and she called up and she said, "I'm leaving ABC." She was the editorial producer. Said, "I'm leaving ABC right now--I'm leaving Nightline." And she said, "So if you are interested--" she called me and another guy at the time--said, "if you want to make the transition to television," she said, "here's an opportunity. Are you interested?" I said, "I'm always interested in conversation. I always believe in going and talking to people." So I went over and talked to them, and this was the beginning of the Clinton Administration, so it must have been--I can't remember when he came in--and I was having a lot of fun at the "Times," because Hal Ranks was the bureau chief. Hal loves my writing, so I got to do just pretty much what I wanted to do. And I loved--I just loved--I liked writing. And--but I did go over to "Nightline" and talk to them about this position, and I said, "Well, you know, I have great admiration for 'Nightline'"--and quite frankly, I didn't even watch "Nightline" that much. I'm not a television--I'm a writer. I had a television was about this big in my house that literally you had to go over and turn the thing on and turn it off. But I said, "You know, I have great admiration for, you know, 'Nightline' and it's in-depth news and Ted Koppel, of course, you know, things and all this stuff." But, I said, "I don't think our stars are aligned, you know, but, you know, maybe in the future sometime." And I let it go at that. And then, so it must have been mid-nineties (1990s). A couple of years later, Tom Bettag, the executive producer, called me up and said, "I think we might have a position for you," because, he said, "we need another senior producer at 'Nightline.'" And he said, "I think this will be a really interesting position to you. This is a management position." And I said, "Oh, well, I'd love to talk." And at that time, the "New York Times" kept trying to drag me up to New York--I was doing stuff for the Styles section, which I really didn't like, and I was based here in Washington. And they wanted--I could tell that, you know, the next move was to be to have me come up to New York and work out of the New York office, which I'd never want to work out of the New York office. So I conducted this sort of negotiation with "Nightline," got an agent to do it and then announced to the "New York Times" that I was going to "Nightline." And I remember Joe Lullivale (ph.) said to me, he said, "How come we weren't able to pin you down?" And I said, "Joe, you just used two words that I don't like. 'Pin me down.' You know. I said, "You don't define who I am. I define who I am." And so, you know, how often do you past the age of 50 get to go and do something that's brand-new and interesting and exciting and, you know, and double my income." I didn't say that, but double my income. So I went into television. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Which I didn't like (laughs). Speaker 1: All right. Now this is nineteen-ninety-- Speaker 2: Ninety-seven. Speaker 1: Ninety-seven. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 55041 Speaker 1: All right. Okay. Well, tell us about "Nightline." What was "Nightline" focusing on then, and what were you (unclear). Speaker 2: Well, I mean--first off, there were three senior producers, and if I had gotten a little more back story, because I would have--probably would have exited when I had another opportunity. When I talked to--I took everybody out to lunch, all the producers and, you know, the staff, and one of the top producers--there were, I think, eleven producers--they said to me, "We think we have one producer too many, and now here you come. And you know, and they--and they hired you because you're black." And I said, "Well, you know, I also have all of this expertise and stuff like that, you know, but, you know, whatever is in your mind is going to have to stay in your mind until I prove otherwise." But I really was superfluous, and I didn't realize that ABC-Disney had leaned on "Nightline," because all their top management were males, white males, and they needed some more diversity, which is fine. I mean, you know, you go someplace and you use it for something else. And I did talk to the executive producer at one time and say, "Look, you know, this--" actually, when I was hired and I went up to New York [New York City, New York], in New York, they said, "Are you sure you want to be a senior producer? Wouldn't you rather be on camera?" Which I probably should have taken, 'cause even Ted said to me, he said, "I think you're more like me." He said, "You should be on camera." And I said, "Well, I think there're enough black women on camera now, and I'm really interested in how television comes together." And he said, "In my place, it comes together the way I want it," which should have been all warning signs to me that you need to step back and look at this. And then there was some economic cutbacks the second year I was there, and I got an offer by "NPR" to come over and do "Talk of the Nation." And I thought, you know, I didn't feel like I'm really finished with television. So I talked to Bettag [Tom Bettag], and he said, "Well, no," he said, "you know, well, I see you as becoming, you know, an executive producer at some time. You're not coming along as fast, but I think you'll be an executive producer in time." Then he must have talked to Ted 'cause he came back to me. He said, "Well, you know, if you still want to go to "NPR's 'Talk of the Nation,'" you should go. And I was sort of stunned. So I thought, oh, I should have taken that job. So I finished out my contract and that was in 2001--in January of 2001, and I thought, oh, well, I'll get a job--another job in no time. Story_ID: 55042 Speaker 1: Well, can you go back and just tell us about "Found Voices." Speaker 2: Oh, "Found Voices." This was a piece that I ended up doing, and it was a wonderful experience, because it was just one of those assignments. There was no other producer to do it. And I ended up writing, not just being the producer, I wrote the script for it and did all the reporting for it, went out and had a fabulous editor who was black; had a fabulous cinematographer, also black, who was called the "Gentle Giant." He was just a wonderful photographer, whose signature shot is from down on the ground looking up, and this guy must be seven feet tall, so to hold himself down this small; and Eric Wray, W-R-A-Y, was the editor on it. And even though the editors went out on strike during the time, Eric had edited, I think, the first three minutes of the piece, and so he set the tone for it. So even though I had to drag this thing around to other shops for actual editing, I got his aesthetic from that, and it was beautiful. And we used lots of sceneries because there's a lot of voice-over and you don't have pictures of these slaves, and you don't have--you have to show pictures of places they might have been and things like that. So it's-- Speaker 1: Explain what it was about? Speaker 2: Oh. Okay. The Smithsonian [The Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C.] has slave narratives after the--that were done in the 1920s and '30s [1930s]. I can't think of the famous ethnologist who did it, but it was O'Neil Herston (ph.) who actually did some of these interviews with former enslaved blacks, and some of whom lived until the 1940s. And the one person is Fountain Hughes (ph.) who, I think, was 102 years old when he was interviewed. And they had all of these things on huge discs. You know, it was very primitive recording. So they were, basically, you made the disc at the time on huge 200 pound tape recorders that these lugged out and got people to talk in to. And they had--it was very scratchy, you know, like an old thirty three and a third, or a record you'd play over and over. But now that the digital era was here, they were digitizing--digitalizing all of them, so that the sound was clear. It was like you and I talking. So you'd be talking to somebody who was alive during the Civil War and their voices were as clear as, you know, having a conversation today with anyone. And so they were doing all of this stuff, and so, there's, like, 60--ones--but most of them don't have a really good narrative. So I identified three formerly enslaved people whose narratives were clear; two women from Eastern Texas, one of whom had been--whose family been the slaves of a very small farmer, and they had a very different relationship than the other woman who was on a huge plantation, which was almost sort of like mechanized. You know, they would--the women went out in the fields and then, you know, even if they had babies, they would only have a certain amount of time to get back and feed these babies. All the babies were kept by an elderly woman. The kids would--ate out of like--essentially like a slop thing. It was just a huge wooden trough out of which the kids would eat. And then there was Fountain Hughes, who was related to Thomas Jefferson, and him. So I found these three stories and talked about them. And it was--I'm a really good writer--and it was beautifully written. I mean, Ted says this on air. And he did a beautiful job of reading, and it was just wonderful. So--and it won an award. Story_ID: 55043 Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It happened--this happened all in the middle of the Bill Clinton thing, and our ratings shot up the night that this happened. So not only was it a good piece, but, you know, in the middle of a scandal that you would think, we got great ratings on a Monday night--or Tuesday. Now, Monday, Tuesday--Monday night for this particular show. I actually was in Ohio, 'cause my mother had gotten sick and I had flown home. But they said that the phones lit up a minute after it started with people saying this was amazing. Speaker 1: Was there any particular thing that you learned about that, that era that you didn't know or that changed how you thought (simultaneous) (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Well, I--you know, you often think of slavery as being sort of uniform, across the board, it's all the same, when actually--slavery, most of them were in small--people didn't have the huge plantations that you see in Tara or someplace like that. Most of them were much more like this one woman in Eastern Texas, where her family were the property of this other--this farmer, and, I mean, they even went to the same church; they just went at different times of the day and, you know, so, that it wasn't--it wasn't oppressive certainly to be owned by people, but it wasn't uniformly oppressive. And I remember speaking at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], and I said, you know, that there was often respect, and occasionally even love between these people. I mean, these students were just appalled, "You know, you're a slave, how could you possibly--" I said, well, you need to read more about, you know, more slave narratives. People have relationships and it's not always as you would like to think it would be. So that was interesting, but I loved Fountain Hughes, because he's being interviewed obviously by a young white guy, who says to him, (unclear) and he's calling him uncle, and he says, "Well, Uncle Fountain," he says, "you know, which would you prefer, you know, slavery or freedom?" And you could hear the amazement of Fountain Hughes when he says--he's almost sort of, like, "What? You know, how can you ask me this question?" He said, "Whether I be a slave or free," he said, "I'd kill myself," he said, "'cause you're nothing like but a dog. You're a dog." So, you know, you could hear this guy laughing in the background. He's sort of uncomfortable, but it sort of--Fountain Hughes is like incredulous that this guy could even think that there was anything pleasant. So I wasn't implying to the students that slavery was, you know, pleasant, but it wasn't always, you know, I mean, you see these what I would consider the standard thing. I mean, you know, there's so many, these movies are to me almost become stereotypes of them, you know; the slash of the whip, the moan, you know, the spirituals, the sound of the ship and stuff like that; when things were much more nuanced than you think they are. I mean, even Thomas Jefferson, if you read the book about Thomas Jefferson and Sally Hemmings, even though he still had the power of someone--I mean, he obviously had more feeling for her than you would expect in that situation, so, yeah; that's what I learned. It was more nuanced than you would think it would be. Story_ID: 55044 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, the Monica Lewinsky scandal is going on just before you leave and plays itself out. I mean, did you have any role in putting together stories about that? Speaker 2: Well, very--as a senior producer, you basically oversee other people's stories. You don't really do any hand--I mean, what I liked about this story, and what I learned from it, which is what one of the senior--one of the producers, who was probably the one that all the other producers--(unclear)--he said, "I think you're a line person." He said, "I don't think you're--" He said, "I think you like to get your hands dirty. You like to get into it." So--and he's right. I mean, if I had been younger, I would have become an independent producer, because I don't like--there was a guy out of Boston [Massachusetts] who was fabulous. He used to do things that "Nightline" would occasionally get--he did this piece called the "Country Doctor," and it was a batack (ph.); that is, there was no narrator--the story sort of unfolds through the sound and voices of the person that you're interviewing. Beautiful, beautiful job. And he was an independent producer. He--and that's what I would be, that's 'cause I'd be--I used to say--I'm not a team player. I remember Ted saying to me, he said, "Well, are you a team player?" And I thought, God, no, I'm not a team player. There's nothing--nothing about team sports that I've ever liked. And, no, I'm not really a team player at all. So, television requires you to be really a team, and one of the things I discovered in television was why everybody seems so nice, and that's because you have to work with people under pressure. And so if you're not decent, you know, you're not going to get your tapes, you're not going to get your editor; there's all kinds of things. So people are always nice. It doesn't mean they're really nice, but they're always nice to one another because you're going to be working in intense situations. And I used to say a "Nightline" broadcast was like trying to get an army down a very narrow hallway, everybody with their arms around one another, 'cause you have to work really--you really have to work that way. So if I was going to be doing it again, I was introduced to it--I love television. I love--even though theoretically, I know that a picture is worth a thousand words, the reality of that one story that I did, and its impact was so much further than newspaper piece that I did, and so much further than any kind of writing than most people do, is when you see it, it's just so much more powerful, that I would have wanted to become an independent producer had I been introduced to film earlier in my life. And tape. No longer film (laughs). Tape. Story_ID: 55045 Speaker 1: Yeah. Okay. All right. So, in 2001 you left ABC News and launched your own media consultant and television production business. Is this true? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Because you just said that you--no. Okay. I understand-- Speaker 2: No. God, no. Speaker 1: We'll scratch that out. All right? Speaker 2: No. I was desperate. I was freelancing. Oh, God, it was horrible. I didn't have a regular job for--I didn't have a job at all in 2001. I did some freelance writing. I did a lot of--the next year I did rescripting--repurposing for "Discovery" for a couple of their films. But no. I didn't have a regular job for four years. It was a really terrible time, because I'd had a--I got a big house, and I got a car, and I got a mortgage payment, and I got no job. And I kept getting interviews that were just going nowhere. And as a friend of mine said, "And you're also getting older." So, you know--realized. So I ended up--I went to work for--who did I go to work for first? Oh, I went to work for the D.C. [Washington, D.C.] Water and Sewer Authority as their Director of Communications during the lead in water crisis, which was interesting. I actually liked the work, but I don't like offices at all. And in this instance, the general manager had this woman who thought she was him, who was just a horrible, horrible person. And everybody knew it, but nobody did anything about it, and he didn't do anything about it. So there was a new newspaper starting, "The Examiner," which was a free newspaper. So in 2000--and Nick Horrock, who was a former colleague from the "New York Times," said, "Oh, you should come back to newspapers. We'll get you on the masthead." So I went to work for "The Examiner" as their Washington editor, which was a lot of fun. But by September, there were five of us who were all senior writers and editors, and we were going to sort of have these reporters, these younger reporters, and put out this great newspaper. But it was owned by--the newspaper is owned by Philip Anschutz. Do you know who Philip Anschutz is? Oh, he's a billionaire, conservative. The newspaper is very conservative, but as Nick said, that's only going to be the editorial page, the rest of it will be just regular newspapers. But Philip Anschutz really wanted his own people to run this. And the guy that had come to him with the idea, he resigned the week after I started at this paper. And by December--well, first, I was supposed to only be edit--you know, be an editor, and the executor director and the managing editor took me out to lunch in October and said, "Can you do a column for us as well?" I was like, "Yeah." Then they took me out again, and they said, "Can you also do a couple of stories?" And I'm thinking, "I'm editing, I'm writing a column, and I'm also writing a couple of other stories. And I got five reporters." I think this is not going anywhere. And I went home for Christmas and I got an email from a friend of mine who said, "John Wilbers (ph.) has just resigned from the paper." He was the executor editor. "What does this mean?" And I thought, it means what I thought it means. It means that I need to get another job. So I had already figured that out as soon as they asked me to do more than my contract had been. So I went to work for the Leadership Conference on Civil Rights, which is the first time I've worked for a nonprofit, and that was interesting. Story_ID: 55046 Speaker 1: Okay. So, 2006 you started working for the Leadership Conference on Civil Rights. Okay. So what did you do? Speaker 2: I was sort of director of communications. They had never had one before. Speaker 1: So you're writing press releases (unclear)-- Speaker 2: No. I had a staff. Speaker 1: You had a staff. Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. I had a staff. I would oversee those kinds of things. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know, you basically do strategic communications. You think about--at that year, it was the voter's--renewal of the Voting Rights Act, and they actually had had a consultant, who wasn't doing very much--they had a fabulous press secretary named Miss Dicono (ph.), who is now, I think, director of international communication for Google, and she was just a powerhouse; wonderful young woman to work with. Speaker 1: Explain what this crisis is about the renewal of the Voting Rights Act. Speaker 2: Well, the Voting Rights Act has to be renewed from time to time, and what the Republicans were trying to do was to get a lot of Southern states off the list that requires them, before they make any changes in Voting Regulations, to ask the Justice Department. But it protects minorities' rights to vote, and--so they were renewing it. Story_ID: 55047 Speaker 1: Okay. We'll go back to "The Examiner" for a minute and just--I was to clarify what it was. Just tell us again what "The Examiner" was and what it was trying to do. Speaker 2: "The Examiner" was an idea by a guy whose name I can't remember and his partner, John Wilbers. And they took this idea that there would be a free newspaper, would be targeted to upscale areas of Washington, and that basically you would get--it would pay for itself by really upscale advertising, which it wanted, it was the advertising dollars. And he took it to Philip Anshutz, who is a billionaire here in the United States, and the art--it started here in Washington. They had a big launch, and things like that. The paper was going to be conservative, but then newspaper was going to be straight down the line; and the whole hierarchy of the paper would be, get five senior editors, and then we would have, like, five reporters underneath. It's young people who make it guide, and help shape and edit the paper. That was the idea behind it. But it actually did a very good job in covering local news. So in many ways, I remember talking to Milton Coleman at the "Washington Post," and he essentially, saying, he said, "You're really keeping us on your toes," because we did such a good job covering local news. Did very well, actually, in Southwest. I mean, Southeast [Washington, D.C.], in the black neighborhoods. But that wasn't the demographic that the paper was really looking for. But it did a terrific job across the river and into Prince George's County [Maryland]. I mean, fabulous people liked it, because they didn't feel like the "Post" was really covering some of the things that they were interested in. Story_ID: 55048 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, the Leadership Conference on Civil Rights, there's I guess, an education component to what you're trying to do, right? Try to let people know why--what the Voting Rights Act was and what they-- Speaker 2: Yeah. But, I mean, the Leadership Conference on Civil and Human Rights--that's what it's now called, the Leadership Conference on Civil and Human Rights--is a coalition of 200-plus civil and human rights organizations; everybody from B'nai B'rith, the League of Women Voters, to the Mexican-American Legal Defense Fund. So basically, it's a way to coalesce all of these interest groups behind things that are good for all of them, like, the Voting Rights Act, so you can have leverage on that kind of thing. For example, one of the things that the opponents of the Voting Rights Act wanted to do in its renewal was strip out the language requirement. Well, that would have broken up the coalition, 'cause, of course, the Latinos, you want to make sure that things--that voting information is in Spanish; the Asians wanted it in various Asian languages; and Native Americans wanted it. So you had to fight back these kinds of things, and the way you fight it back is you can--strength in numbers, kind of thing. Speaker 1: So you were with a Leadership Conference on Civil Rights until 2010? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So what's--what do you remember the most about that--your work there? Speaker 2: I helped them--they used to do conference calls. Well, they used to do press--they used to do actual stand-up press events. And, for me, the thing that I helped them do is to realize that's--unless you're going to do--unless you have congressman or senators, you shouldn't do that anymore, because reporters are in the 24--7 to--24-7, and they can do a better job unless they need a picture interviewing people over the telephone. So that doing audio briefings is much more efficient and you get more bang for your buck out of that. Also, from scripting it, because they would often do these things as if they were still doing stand-up press conference--they'd have six people on it when you don't need six people on a press conference. You need a spokesperson and maybe two or three people at the most. So I helped them be more efficient. Speaker 1: So, I was thinking a lot of organizations don't realize that, that-- Speaker 2: Even today. Speaker 1: --the first thing you want to do is have a press conference. Speaker 2: Yeah. I mean, you don't want to have a stand-up press conference anymore. I mean, anybody who's doing that is still stuck in the 20th Century. You know, you can do--there's all kinds of things. You can do a web press conference; you can do an audio briefing; you can do--edit memos; you can do--you can provide the media basically with almost a packaged story. Like, when we did Katrina, I said, "You know, let's just go interview people who have been impacted by Katrina and put together basically a little, a video email for them." You know, you do--you give them B-roll, you give them the, you know, two or three interviews of people that they can basically cut together themselves. And you give them all the information of people that they're going to talk to so that, if they want to, they can go do it. But a lot of small stations will just use what you already give them, you know, and cut it their own way, put their own person voice-over; so those kinds of things and just brought them into the 21st Century. Story_ID: 55049 Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So the thing I learned the most, I learned the most about social media, and I didn't learn it from my peers, I learned it from my 20-something staff. They were sharp. I learned the most--and I told them all. I said to them, I said, "You know, the one thing I'm going to miss from here is being around people who are 24 and 25 years old, because it's just--it's just your (unclear- new year?). And I said, "And, you know, a lot of the people who are my age are just stuck in where they--in thinking that they came up in the '60s [1960s]. As a matter of fact, I remember some of the staff members, the young staff member, were paid $30,000 here in Washington, D.C. That's not enough money to do anything, to even find a place to live. And I was told by one of the senior managers, "Well, I--I only made $25,000." I was like, "Yeah, but you've been here 25 years, you know. Life has changed outside, you know." Or you know, that "You have to mentor the junior staff." I was like, "Junior staff?" I said, "Martin Luther King [Jr.] was 25, 26 years old when he lived at--" "We ain't got no junior staff here. Everybody here works like everybody else. So there's no such thing as junior staff. Now, maybe you have somebody who's just come on and is an intern. They've got to learn things, but anybody who is working here is not a junior, you know." I was, like--it was the whole attitude that I was just--the hierarchical stuff--don't like it (laughs). Does that come across? Story_ID: 55050 Speaker 1: I think so. Starting to get an idea. Now, you also worked for Sheriff Michael A. Jackson, who had some public relations issues, right, did you? Speaker 2: No. He didn't have-- Speaker 1: Did you? Speaker 2: I worked for him. I was his director of communications when he was running to be Prince Georges County's [Maryland] executive director, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He didn't have any public relations--he did have some--I'm sorry, you're right. But this was before I got there--with the dog. The whole international dog thing where his people shot the dogs, yes. And Michael--it was really hard to convince Michael. I said, "You know, you always say I'm sorry, you know. And it's the first thing in crisis communications; empathies, sorry, these things happen; but, you know," I said, "you know, but a whole year goes by and you don't go by and see this guy and apologize and say, 'well, you know, these things happen; you know, you were targeted by some drug dealers and we thought you were the drug dealer, and you can understand that in the press of the moment, things happen. What can we do?'" He never did that. So, of course, that bugged him when he was running--running for the job. But even more was--Jack Johnson was one of his supporters, and Jack didn't come out. Do you know who Jack Johnson is? Oh. Jack--you must have heard this--he used to be the executive--Prince George's County--the county executive, and the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] was following him saying that he was taking bribes, which, indeed, he was, and he was no longer going to--it's a term--limits; so he was limited by terms, but the big thing was they had taken his cell phone, and they gave it back to him, and he called his wife on the cell phone--excuse me, you're not being really bright--and said, "Get rid of that $100,000 check and the $800,000--the $80,000 worth of cash sitting around," on the phone. Well, the FBI is, you know--the Feds knew all of this stuff, so he got arrested for bribery and fraud. But she stuffed the $80,000 in her bra. So the stories were all about where do you put $80,000 worth of cash--I mean, what denomination of bills is it, you know, and what did she look like with all of this money; so anyway. I thought you might have heard it because it was a national story. But he was backing Michael, we actually didn't want him to openly come out and say he was backing. He didn't do that until a week beforehand that he'd actually come and start to work on the campaign. But Michael lost. And quite frankly, he wasn't really ready. And he may be ready in a couple of years, but he wasn't ready anyway to win, because he didn't seem to me to have the passion to win, and he certainly didn't present himself like a winner. Story_ID: 55051 Speaker 1: Okay. So in 20--now, you left the Leadership Conference on Civil Rights to go to the Sentencing Project. Now what was that--? Speaker 2: I'm at the Sentencing Project. I didn't leave the Civil Rights-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --I worked on the campaign in between. Speaker 1: Oh. Okay. All right. Speaker 2: And I was hoping that Michael would win and I'd have a job-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --because I had certainly--and now, I just ended up with the Sentencing Project as another job, but-- Speaker 1: Okay. Well, tell us about that. Speaker 2: The Sentencing Project is a 25-year-old organization that's worked on sentencing and prison reform, and they do research and put out papers. Speaker 1: Now this is a--well it's an issue that comes up over and over again-- Speaker 2: It's huge. Speaker 1: --(unclear) that people feel deeply about, but for some reason, we're never organized around them, I guess. Speaker 2: Well, I mean, part of it is, you know, if you got--I mean, what's her name--Michelle Alexander, has a book out called, "The New Jim Crow," which talks about, you know, that three out of four black men are, you know, under the supervision, you know, of the police or things like that. But that didn't happen overnight. That began with, you know, the differentiation and sentences for crack cocaine as opposed to powder cocaine. Crack cocaine is cheap. It was what was in the Latino and black neighborhoods, and also mandatory minimums. So, you know, we've got people in jail who, three strikes out and you've got a life sentence, even if you were a small time--and he might not even been a drug user; you might have been a drug--might not have been a drug dealer, you might have been a drug user, I mean. But now, and with unlimited money, it's not affecting the majority population. It's affecting minorities, and it's affecting black communities. So, you know, the only reason that there is, I believe, and I'm sure that they would disagree with this at the--in the Sentencing Project, is because we are in a fiscal crunch. States can't afford to keep throwing money putting people up, I mean. I did a story at the "New York Times," and it's been a long time ago, very early in my return to the "Times," so it must have been in the early '90s [1990s], on a prison in Pennsylvania, and this was when--even prison wardens were working with religious people and people were against incarcerations saying, "We got to do something besides warehouse these people. We're spending $35,000 a year for one prisoner. And, you know, this doesn't make any sense." Half of these people have--I remember going up to this prison in Pennsylvania--the education level of these guys, who look fabulous, 'cause all they got is time to, you know, workout--they couldn't read at the fifth-grade level, you know. They'll probably have some addiction. They have no skills, so even if you put them in for three years, the recidivism rate, I think it's like in the seventy percent, you're going to have them back again. The totally unprepared ones, they go out, they're going to be going back into the same communities with the same kind of temptations. You need some kind of transitional, you know--the other thing that makes no sense is a lot of people get training in prison for things that they can't do once they come out. For example, if you train as a barber, there are a lot of states that require you to have a license. And if you have a felony record, you can't get a license to do this, because you're handling something that people consider lethal. So it's a sort of a Catch-22. We have all of these sort of gerrymandered, gerry-rigged laws that keep people who want to make a clean break and a turn--from turning their lives around, it's just stacked against them. And the fact that their black people as opposed to--as I wrote one time, I said, you know, if this was happening to white men, there would be, you know, "Nightline" specials, "New York Times" headlines; but it's happening to a minority and it's happening to a minority that's been demonized in the past. So my whole feeling is, I'm glad this organization does this research and things, but the reality is this is something that black people are going to have to solve themselves. Story_ID: 55052 Speaker 1: I mean, when I first moved into this neighborhood, I had a black guy who had a company, and they did the lawns, they did the grass and things like that. And I used to ask him, "Why do--the guys that you hire, don't they see you as a black man? You have this company." He said, "No, Karen." He said, "They want enough to get some booze or some drugs." Now, it's nothing but Latinos. The guy who does my lawn now, he started out with one truck, he's got three trucks and a whole bunch of people who work for him. It's--I think part of it is, you know, the who knows what the second and third generation of Latinos are going to do. But the immigrant desire to take care of yourself is there. And we need that in our community. There's no reason--I used to teach classes of 40 Ethiopian kids who, when you have to walk to school barefooted, and they wanted an education badly. And, you know, when people say, "Oh, well. Our schools aren't good." Cross river and Southeast, some little Asian girl who didn't speak English when she got arrived, got a National Merit Scholarship out of one of these schools where they say you can't learn. She learned, so. And I think the only way to help us is for us to help ourselves. It's not going to come from anybody else. There's no percentage. There's no investment in it. And now the Latinos are the biggest minority community in this country. And I remember going to a Unity meeting, the very first one in Atlanta [Georgia], and it was all geared to black, white; and on the stage after one of the opening of all the ceremonies, the Native Americans, the Latinos, the African-Americans doing their dances, and they had this panel open to the audience. And I remember this young Latino standing up and she said, "I don't know why you are talking to him. Latinos are the big minority here." And there was this swell of woo, woo, woo, kind of thing. Which is why I speak Spanish now, because I remember going down to Miami [Florida], the first time I went down to Miami and I thought, "There're women who look just like me who speak English and Spanish, and nobody who looks just like me is going to have that advantage." So, yo hablo Espanol muy bien. For that reason, and unless people wake up to it--I'm studying Chinese now. My nephew, who's 17 years old, he speaks almost fluent Chinese, 'cause however you look at it, it's going to be the Asian century. If you don't know how to deal with these people in this great diverse world, you're not going anyplace. And I just--I mean, I might--it makes my heart weep when I see, you know the sixteen year old who's smart enough to run a drug deal, you know, being marched with his hands behind his back. And you, you've got the same smarts. You just need to learn how to do it on Wall Street where they reward you with this kind of stuff, so. Yeah. They do. I remember talking to a colleague of mine at the "New York Times" and he and another guy with the techies in their place, and he was black from Southeast, and I used to say to him, I'd say, "You know, how come, you know, you're from Southeast." And he said, "Yeah, I walk through Farragut Square," and he said, "and I see people I went to high school--." And I said, "Why can't we use rap music, all of this stuff--I mean, if all of these kids know what a blunt is, Cristal Champagne; you know, all of this stuff, then they can also learn that, you know, an SAT of 1600 is the thing you want, you know. This is how you prove that you--." You now, I have broadsheets from the 1870s that are touting Kansas, and when black people couldn't survive in the South and Ben Singleton used to lead people into Kansas, which was the Promised Land. This was in an era where the people had to hand out pieces of paper. We live in a digital age. We live--we're in the mobile age. We (unclear) cell phones. There should be a way to harness all of the skills that we have to help the black community. There is no reason that I should hear kids on the street, where I don't even understand what they're saying in English. There's no reason for that, none whatsoever. And so we need a new movement. And quite frankly, you want me to talk about nonprofits and Civil Rights Movement? They are useless. I watched this when we had that whole--the six guys in--Down South who were being--the high school kids--I can't remember, the something Six, and Color of Change, which was started by some 20-somethings, raised money and got money to these people in no time. And the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] was like an arthritic, old man in a wheelchair. And 90 percent of the money, once again, went for infrastructure. And people tell me about, you know, how Ben Jealous is moving this thing along. Well, my God, if you're going to move it along, it's going to take 20 years before you get--catch up with things, and it'll be--life will be so far down the track, you'll still be up the proverbial creek without a paddle, so. I think, well, that's probably more than you wanted to know. Story_ID: 55053 Speaker 1: No. That's fine. I think my question is like, what does fuel--what's the engine--the motive--force for your writing? Speaker 2: Well, everybody comes here and is unique. There're no human beings that aren't unique. And I've had great opportunities, unique experiences; and I want to tell stories that nobody else is going to tell. And I haven't done that. And I'm coward in one way. And I'm trying to decide now whether, you know, I keep the house or just let it all drop and go live in some developing country, in Quanka (ph.), in Ecuador and write. You know, my mother always says, "Well, what do you want to write about?" As a writer you don't know what you want to write about until you start writing. That's how you discover what you want to talk about. But I lived in Ethiopia, and the last time I was there, I realized the parallelism between Japan in the early 16th Century and Ethiopia in the 16th Century when Jesuits were in both countries. This was also the time of the Reformation in Europe. So the Jesuits were trying to shore up the Catholic Church; one, the wanted to convert the Japanese to Christianity; and even though Ethiopia is a Christian country, it was, you know, not--it wasn't Roman Catholicism, it was Orthodox Christianity. So the Jesuits were in there, and they would mess around in both places with, you know, trying to play off one group against the other. And when I was in Japan Society, I remember reading a story--reading some information about Nobunaga. They were three Japanese warlords before Japan was unified, Nobunaga--I can't remember the others--and Ieyasu. And the Jesuits--Nobunaga was very interested in what the Jesuits had to say, not because he was going to convert to them, but he figured that he could leverage them. And one of the things they did was they gave him a black man. They gave him this person as a present. And Nobunaga was very suspicious of him. So he had them build a big fire and big pot of boiling water and put this guy in there and had his women scrub him, because he thought the Jesuits had painted this guy. Anyway, he discovered that the man was, you know, he was black; who knows where he was from. And he became one of Nobunaga's retainers. He worked for Nobunaga. And Nobunaga ended up having to commit suicide because he was losing it. And then this guy disappears from history. And I thought, what if it had been somebody that the Jesuits took from Ethiopia to Japan and this person lives and grows up in Japan, kind of learns the power and, you know, fighting methods and things like that, but then finally decides to come back home to Ethiopia at the same time that the Jesuits are doing exactly what they were doing--are doing in Japan in Ethiopia. And there was a tug of war between the Orthodox Church and the Catholics at that time, and there were several emperors and competing emperors. And I thought, I'd just like to write about that. I'd just like to do that. I think it would be fun, you know, because you think back on those times, and a lot of people don't think people moved around very much, you know. How do you get a black man in Japan? Yeah, well, he was. Just like you had the famous English guy who ends up in Japan. How do these things happen? And there was a lot more movement around than people think about, so I'd like to do that, and I need time to do that. Story_ID: 55054 Speaker 1: That's true. So that's one idea. I know you got a lot of ideas, but that's (simultaneous) (unclear)-- Speaker 2: I do. Yeah. And I think they'll be a lot of fun to do. And I started a book--actually, I started one called "March Madness" when I was at "Nightline," and I like to learn things, and I thought, I can't sustain myself writing a mystery book unless I learn something. And I learned about money laundering, enough so that I was invited by an expert on it to talk to the now-president Ambassador to Lichtenstein, who's a friend, Claudia, because Lichtenstein was only European country to be on the blacklist for money laundering until she got here, and she got them off of it. But, I taught myself about money laundering just from the Internet. Now, I have to update it because now you can do micropayments, and you can get thousands and thousands of micropayments, and you can move money around the world that way, digital cash, so. Those kind of things. I like to--I like to learn something and write about it, so. So now I'm writing again for the Baltimore Post Examiner so that I can establish another identify, because--and I've got an idea for a nonprofit--it's for a book on nonprofits. I'm going to call it, "No Profit, Little Change," because I think if it takes 25 years to do anything, you've done very little change. And people who are bent on change, actually get stuff done. So it shouldn't take 25 years to change something if you're really committed to it. Didn't take us that long to get a man on the moon because why? The nation was committed. Well, then, how long will it take to reform, you know, prisons and things like that? If it takes 25 years, then, I don't it will either--you know. I think a lot of people have jobs. Remember OEO [Office of Economic Opportunity? I think of it--I think of nonprofits--most nonprofits like OEO. They give a lot of black middle-class people jobs, and then they get--make money and move off to Prince George's County and live in a big house. But the vast majority, the people down here, they're no different than they were before. When I was talking to the lawyers, Stone, the other day, I asked him if his clientele, his people that he likes to work with had changed; in other words, poor people; people with no access to power. I said, "Has there been any change in the population?" He said, "No." He said, "There is--the same kind of people. Their communities don't have enough money and they don't have enough resources," and he said, "and they don't have enough education or sophistication or--." And he said, "And then, quite frankly, I think lawyers, whatever kind of lawyers are, need to do things for this constituency," he said, "because lawyers have so much access to justice." Story_ID: 55055 Speaker 1: So you think that we need to dispense with social service agencies or change in the way social services operate? Speaker 2: Mm-hm. I think they should change the way they operate, 'cause my whole feeling is, you should empower the person to do this stuff themselves. I mean, for example, here in Washington there's a school up here called Murch [Ben W. Murch Elementary School Washington, D.C.]. It's an elementary school. It's superb. It's a public school. The parents who send their kids there are doctors, lawyers; so they're paying extra money for--to get an art teacher, a music teacher, for outings and things like that. Now, you know, there is some feeling--and I saw this in New York where they say, "Oh, well, you know, you can't do that." Screw that. If I'm a parent, I'm going to give my kids all they--opportunity. What I think is, for the poorest schools, you need to have somebody who can go and write a grant that does these things. Not have you, you know, mothers bringing in chicken for a chicken fry. But the sophisticated way--okay, here's the things we need in this school. Then there should be people who are available to help those communities help themselves. When I was in the Peace Corps, one of the things that we used to be--they always used to tell us that, you know, we're going to tell you how you can live your life better, you Ethiopians. I'm American. I know everything. And the story that I told you I wrote about called, "How to Grow Tomatoes" It's a perfect example. I'm from the Midwest, I'm a farmer, I know how to grow tomatoes. We stake them. Hey, put a stake in it. Well, the Ethiopians used to build cages and get you get more tomatoes. And my students got more tomatoes. They know their soil. They know their plants. They know their culture. Yes, can we learn other things from one another? Sure. I don't need to tell you how to live your life or what to do. I need to help you do what you need to do. For example, in the village that I was in, Paul Tsongas was in this village in the very beginning; Senator Tsongas. And they built a playground. By the time I got there seven years later, there was no vestige of that playground there. You know, they had jungle gyms and things like that. You don't need this. Kids run, they climb trees in this culture. You don't need a place to go, because the whole country was a damn playground, you know. I mean, it's like when I came back (unclear) the guys said, "Have you been on a farm?" I'm thinking, all over in Ethiopia, the whole place was a farm, mostly. You know, I'm walking on crap, even in the city. Donkeys crap on the--you know--so, yeah, I'm exposed to all this stuff. So I think the thing is to do--is to talk to people about what they want, what--how they want to do it, and help them plan a way to get it; not--and support them in that. Not sort of just provide social services. Just provide alleviation. And I know people are often much just on the edge, but it also, I think, fuels--I hate to say this 'cause it makes me sound conservative--a certain dependency on somebody else coming in and helping you. Story_ID: 55056 Speaker 1: I remember the first time I lost my job, and I was sitting in the waiting room and somebody said, "Oh, well, you know, you should get on welfare because then they'll take care of this (unclear)." And I turned around, and I said, "But then you have to do what they say you do. That means that if somebody else say to you, 'you can't have this man in this house.'" You know. I said, "Who wants that?" "Oh, well, yeah, you know, but you get (unclear)--" I'm like, "No. I don't want that." And so I think that people need to--I remember--I saw this the other day, because they had a piece on Pablo Escobar, and they had George Bush [President George H. W. Bush] holding his crack cocaine in his hands saying that they got that in Lafayette Square [Washington, D.C.]. It's a lie. They planted that. And they got some kid from Southeast who'd never been to Lafayette Square to come here so they could grab him and say, "Oh, we got this park across from the White House." Bullshit. It was all fantasy. And then I saw it once again perpetuated. What you want to do is say, "Look. If you can run at thirteen years old--." And I remember a police officer saying to me, he was going to stop being a police officer because he said, "The kids who were running drugs were 13 and 14 years old, and, Karen, I don't want to kill a thirteen or fourteen year old." If you've got these skills, then we should be able to teach you how to use those same skills, which are marketing, capitalistic skills, into utilizing it some other way. If you have to teach them the stock market when they're six years old, do that. Show them how to do that. Say, "Where do you want to be? You want to live like Beyonce? You want to do this? There's a lot of money in drugs, but look at--let's look at some percentages of whether you're going to make it that way. Yeah, you know how to use your glock and things like this." But, you know, then you teach people about reality, but also what potential you have. What's the guy whose name was--the big drug dealer here? Had a huge organization here in Washington, and I remember I was teaching in Kansas at the time. The only thing he had, he had so much money he couldn't even think about what to do except he knew that Sugar Ray Leonard went to Las Vegas. So what was his big goal? He would go to Las Vegas. Did you ever say, "Have you been to Rome? Have you been to any place in Africa? Have you been to Japan? China? No. Because the circumference of his life was Southeast, and they say "Soufeast" with an "f". And, "Oh, Sugar Ray Leonard. Maybe I'll go to Vegas." It's because people's circumference--their lives are limited, and until they can see themselves beyond that, you can't move. And so many people see--can't see themselves beyond that. I mean, you look at these little girls who get pregnant. I remember going to the school--God, it was so sad. The youngest girl was 10, 12, something like that. And the group that got me, two of them discovered they're been impregnated by the same guy, you know, right then. That's when they first discovered it. But, this one thirteen-year-old says, "Well, I wanted to be a woman." Having a baby? (laughs). (unclear). You want to know something is like having a millstone around your neck is to have a baby? But, you know, she lived in a community where this is a rite of passage and you should be doing this, and you don't see any options, then, you know, "I'm a woman. I'll have a baby." Yeah, and all the problems that that comes with, and no daddy for the baby, and--I don't know. So, but I think that's something that you have to wake up and realize. It's sort of like when you teach school. You teach 40 kids, and how many of them are you going to touch out of the forty? Maybe two, three. Story_ID: 55057 Speaker 1: All right. Ma'am, when you look back on everything you've done to this point, you know, what today would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: Actually, I would say I don't very much--one at this point, even though I'm going to be seventy in a couple of years. I don't think I have much of one. Teaching. The times that I've taught. I still have students that I've taught that are in contact with me, mostly writing students who want to be writers. You don't really know. I mean, I'm a decent person, so, I've been mostly decent. But I don't think that I've done what I should have done, which is, I've been gifted with the gift of writing. And I remember one Kwanza, I went to--and you know, you have to go around and say what you do--and I'm not usually into that, so I said, "I have to go take off my coat." And I felt when I came back I would get out of it, and they said, "Oh, no, no, no, no. You have to say--." I have the gift of speaking for people who can't speak for themselves. You know, I can tell stories about people. I can touch people that way, and I haven't really committed to doing that. So I have to decide whether I want to do that or not or otherwise my legacy will be a very tiny one, which is of being a really terrific teacher. Story_ID: 55058 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, if you look back over the same period of time of your life again, I mean, is there something that you would change if you could go back and change it? Speaker 2: I think I would have--and I think I mentioned earlier that I saw that there was a sort of leitmotif in my life, which was between the pragmatic and the artistic. I think I would go more with the artistic and less with the pragmatic. I mean, if everybody knows you're going to work every day for the rest of your life, so you might as well work at something you really love every day, even if you don't make any money at it. I mean, I have a beautiful house, which I got from being in television, but, you know, it's as much of a drag as it is something that I still love, you know. So I have to certainly decide, you know, do you want to spend your life paying for an object that will still be here when you die or do you want some other legacy? I would prefer something else. I mean, as I said, I have people who remember me as a great teacher, but I think I would like to leave something more in writing, some piece of art, even if it's--I mean, painting. I mean, if I was going to go back to art, I might even go back to art, but I think I need some space to find that, and that's what I would do. Less the sort of, you know, get a job, get married, do those kinds of things, and more--and I've been fairly adventurous, but I think I should have been even more braver. Braver. Because as they say, it's not the things that did that you're going to regret you're lying on your deathbed, it's going to be the many things that you didn't do that you could have done that you're going to regret, so. Story_ID: 55059 Speaker 1: Okay. Well, tell us something about your family life, be an extended family or what, you know. So I know you told us about your parents [Geraldine Streibiling Moran and Donald DeWitt], how you grew up, but-- Speaker 2: What does that mean? I'm not quite sure. Speaker 1: Yeah. Well, I take it you don't have children, right? Speaker 2: No, but I have twenty seven godchildren, and the last one just graduated. Speaker 1: There we go. Speaker 2: Yeah. Last one, Deidre Darden, just graduated from City College [City College, New York City, New York], and she's going to be an art curator. And my other--the other last one is Sam Siphon (ph.), he graduated from Temple [Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], but he's going to go to graduate school to be a journalist. So I have twenty seven godchildren and they're all grown and done at this particular point. And I don't think I'm going to be getting any more. I don't think I'll be getting their kids. At least nobody's asked me for that. And I shouldn't--but I have a very good group of friends, a lot of very good women friends for the last twelve years I have walked with; two other women, Pauline Schneider, who's a partner at--a senior partner at Orrick [Orrick, Herrington & Sutcliffe LLP] and she's a municipal bondser; and Karen Williamson, who used to be a vice president at United Health. We walk six days a week. It is as much exercise as it is also a sort of psychological, you know, if your boyfriend or financial or whatever, you know, it's sort of like therapy on the move kind of thing. So we do that. So I have a lot of--I have a lot of friends. I'm not terribly social, even though I have a lot of friends. I run my house as a bed-and-breakfast, because I decided this big puppy, which I love, has to pay, and there're three rooms upstairs, and I'm licensed to do that, and I have a--I belong to a consortium that handles the bookings and things like that. It's funny 'cause both these women say, "Well, you're not nearly as social as either one of us. How do you deal with, you know, having people in the house?" I said, "Well, they're only here for two or three days, so, it's fine, you know, because I'm living with them all the time." So I--and it's been a wonderful experience. It was something I was very resistant to until a writer friend of mine, Celia, who was married to--Celia Morris, who was married to Willie Morris, the famous Southern writer, and they had a four-story townhouse on Capitol Hill [Washington, D.C.]. And when they split, she said, you know, she wanted to keep her house. And so when I was having issues with how to keep the house, she said, "Turn it into a bed-and-breakfast." And so I have, and it's been a wonderful experience. I have people from all over the world who have been here. I've been invited all over the world. And I need to do is get enough money so that I can actually go to--follow up on all of these. So, yeah. I think I have a very rich life, and if I was going to give myself a grade, I'd say I have a B plus. A minus, B plus. Speaker 1: Okay. Now your mother is still in Dayton? Speaker 2: Yes. My mother [Geraldine Streibiling Moran] still lives in Dayton, Ohio. She's ninety years old, and she's quite independent. One of the reasons that I brought this--bought this house was that, there is a suite on the first floor, and I thought that she would come and live with me. She same for my birthday in April and she caught bronchitis and was sick most of the time. But she couldn't wait to go back to her house. I mean, it's not that we don't get along. It's just I come from a family of very independent people, and she said, "I want to be in my house. I want to die in my house," and I hope that she gets her wish, you know, that she can live out her life where she wants to live. But, you know, if it comes to being in an institution, I'd rather have her here than in some institution in Dayton, Ohio, where I'm not quite sure what the care is. I know these are good places, but I also know that, you know, people are very busy, and nobody will take care of you like your family. You can always go home, so. I hope that if she wants, it's here for her. Story_ID: 55060 Speaker 1: Okay. Is there anything I have asked you we need to cover before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: I don't think so. God, it's been long (laughs). You've been very lively. But it's a long--it's a long time to sit. And then, you know, there's so much of life that doesn't even come out in a conversation this long, so. Speaker 1: All right. Well, the last question is similar to legacy but a little bit different, a little bit. Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Oh. I actually did one of these. I think I have a little gravestone. I'd like to be remembered as creative, artistic, and someone who did something for humanity. Story_ID: 55061 Speaker 1: Can you tell us about this picture? Speaker 2: The front row is full of the teachers at Ross Gobannock (ph.) Secondary School. I'm the only woman in the front row, and the people behind us are the eleventh grade class. Speaker 1: That's (unclear) Speaker 2: And this is in Gyan (ph.), Ethiopia. Speaker 1: This is me and my mom. And my mom is ninety years old this year. And I think this picture was taken when she was probably in her eighties. Speaker 2: Okay. What's her name? Speaker 1: Geraldine Moran. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: This is me and my friend, Nancy Stitch Stearn on the Almafi Coast in Italy. We were in the Peace Corps together, and we were friends for 40 years until she died. Speaker 2: Go ahead. Speaker 1: This is me in Ethiopia, and I'm sitting on top of a mountain outside Gyan Walisa (ph.). We used to go up and climb on top of the mountains and feed the hawks, and I'm holding bread so that the hawk will come down and take it from my hand. And they would. Speaker 2: Hopefully, not your thumb. Speaker 1: This is my great--my great-great-great grandmother Sally ,and her daughter, and her daughter's daughters, who are twins, though they're not--they're fraternal twins. That's me in my backyard when I was thirty six in Washington, D.C. That's me now with my baby brother and his son Daniel in Durham, North Carolina. Speaker 2: Did you mention your brother's name? Speaker 1: I did. That's me at the "New York Times." That's the wedding party when I got married in 1969. This is me when I was the host of "Karen's Kitchen" for "Black Entertainment T.V." I'm standing there with the contest winner who won a contest, and we're showcasing her meal, which I can't remember, but I'm sure it was delicious since we probably ate it. Speaker 2: Is there anything on the back of this? We didn't say anything about the back. Speaker 1: You can just say it then. I'm not married to him anymore, so it doesn't make any difference. Speaker 2: It's for history now. Speaker 1: Yeah. Oh, that's true. And this is a collage of pictures of me. Speaker 2: You want to start on the top left? Speaker 1: Okay. This is when I was a baby. The next picture is when I was six years old. The next picture is straight out of college, twenty one. This picture is when I was in my early fifties. That picture is from my--say, 1966, college graduation. That picture is also from 1966, I'm graduating; and that's a picture of me in my--graduation--from Miami University in my graduation gown. Speaker 2: The Harvard of the West, what they used to call it. Speaker 1: Is that what they call it? Speaker 2: In the Nineteenth Century, yeah. Speaker 1: Oh, really? Okay. Speaker 2: Harvard of the West. Speaker 1: This is a picture of me and my good friend Nancy. There's another picture of us on the Almafi Coast, but we were getting ready to leave Ethiopia. We were Peace Corps Volunteers. This is me and my brother Mark, is the tallest one, my brother Donald, and my mother at her seventy fifth birthday. This is my parent's wedding on Wilburforce University Campus at my grandparents'--my honorary grandparents' house. This is a picture of my mom with my brother, who's two years younger than I am. She's with Donald walking down the street. Speaker 2: When was this shot? (unclear) Speaker 1: This is my grandfather, who was in the first World War, and he's in Nance in France in this photograph. Speaker 2: What's your grandfather's name? Speaker 1: His name was Harrison Streibiling, S-T-R-E-I-B-I-L-I-N-G. And this is my grandmother who was a WAC [Women's Army Corps] in the Second World War. So, we've got people who have served this country. Speaker 2: Oh, is you and Gerald Ford? Speaker 1: Yeah, but we don't even look real in that picture, do we? (laughs). But it is. That's me and Gerald Ford when I was a reporter at the "New York Times." Speaker 2: In the Wax Museum. Speaker 1: Doesn't he look like he's in a Wax Museum? We both look like we're in the Wax Museum. I don't know what is the light on that. Speaker 2: This is my father's mother whose name was Ida and my grandfather, my father's father, Cornelius. Oh, this is my grandfather--this is my grandfather's mother, Annie Elizabeth Streibiling. Just take that one 'cause--this is me and my brothers on our first house that we lived in in Dayton, Ohio, and our dog Muffin, who died from distemper. Speaker 1: Is that DeSoto Bass Courts? Speaker 2: No. This is Homestead. Speaker 1: Oh. Okay. Homestead. Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Which ones you want--which ones you-- Speaker 1: Let's get them all. Speaker 2: Okay. This is me and my brother with my grandmother. This is a picture of me with my brother who is two years younger, Donald, and this is a picture of all of us outside our house. And that's just my brother Donald. Speaker 1: Is something on the back? Speaker 2: No. That's my grandmother, and there was a great figure. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I think you got it. I think you got the whole family. Speaker 1: Okay. This one just fell out. Speaker 2: Oh, that's all right. You can put it up there. But, I--well, you know my pictures and that--that's my wedding. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. All right. Speaker 2: I don't really care about that. Thank you. Speaker 1: Well, thank you...