 Story_ID: 378374 Speaker 1: I'm Denise Gines interviewer for The HistoryMakers and Neculai [Neculai Burghelea] is the videographer. Would your state you name and spell if for me please including your maiden name and your middle name? Speaker 2: I'm Lisa Ellen Davis [HistoryMaker Lisa E. Davis], and that's L-I-S-A, E-L-L-E-N, D-A-V-I-S, I never changed my name so that is my name. Speaker 1: Okay, that's fine. What is your date of birth? Speaker 2: February 6, 1960. Speaker 1: And your place of birth? Speaker 2: I was born in Flushing, Queens in New York [New York]. Speaker 1: And, your occupation? Speaker 2: I am an attorney. Speaker 1: And can you give us the location of the interview? Speaker 2: The location is in the conference room of my law firm where I am a partner - it's Frankfurt Kurnit Klein & Selz [Frankfurt Kurnit Klein & Selz PC, New York, New York]. Speaker 1: Can you spell that please? Speaker 2: Sure, Frankfurt is F-R-A-N-K-F-U-R-T, Kurnit K-U-R-N-I-T, Klein K-L-E-I-N, and Selz S-E-L-Z. Speaker 1: And what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today is January 8th, 2007. Speaker 1: Thank you. Story_ID: 378375 Speaker 1: Now we're gonna start with some People magazine-ish type questions, just to get started. Tell me your favorite color. Speaker 2: Purple. Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Lobster. Speaker 1: And a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Summertime. Speaker 1: And where do you like to vacation? Speaker 2: Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts]. Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase? Speaker 2: Yes, I do. "Power concedes nothing without demand. It never has it, it never will." It's Frederick Douglass. Speaker 1: Very good. Story_ID: 378376 Speaker 1: Okay, so we're going to start with talking about your family. And we're going to start on your father's [Nathaniel Davis, Jr.] side. So tell me who you remember as far as your maybe great-grandparents of your father? Speaker 2: I remember my father's grandfather, my paternal grandmother's father, because he lived with some of my great aunts in a big rambling apartment in Harlem [New York, New York], which I think was the family apartment for years, but when I was a child I remember going to visit my great aunts and great-grandfather who had at that time converted to the Jehovah's Witness [Jehovah's Witnesses] religion. My family is Baptist and then we became Catholic but he is a Jehovah's Witness and, was a Jehovah's Witness, and so he used to--I had a reputation as a bookish child so he used say, "You like to read," and he would always come out with The Watchtower [The Watchtower Announcing Jehovah's Kingdom] and say, "Why don't you read this," and try and convert me, which didn't quite take since my grandmother [Earner Davis] was taking me to Catholic church every, every weekend but but I don't remember much about him except that because that, that seemed to be the focus at least later on in life that was you know he was very focused on his religion. Speaker 1: What was his name? Speaker 2: I guess he was Arthur Reed, Sr. [ph.]. Speaker 1: Okay, and do you know how old he was? Speaker 2: When he passed? You know, I'm not certain. I'm not certain how old he was when he passed cause I don't have an exact date when he died, I think he died in the early '70s [1970s]. Speaker 1: Where was his family from originally? Speaker 2: South Carolina. Speaker 1: Do you know what part? Speaker 2: Around Charleston [South Carolina]. Speaker 1: And so your grandfather, what was your grandfather's name? Speaker 2: My grandfather's name was Nathaniel Davis, Sr. and my grandfather was a very interesting man. He unfortunately died when I was very young, I was five but he was very much a self-made man. He was from Florida and he, when he was a young person, was a caddy on some of the golf courses and learned golf that way and then also when he moved up north. He originally moved up to Saratoga [New York] and was working with horses and the track and came to, came to Manhattan [New York], came to Harlem [New York, New York] met my grandmother and got married and he was working in a dry cleaners as a presser and apparently got a reputation of being one of the best pressers, you know back when men dressed very, very well, and he parlayed that reputation into owning his own dry cleaning business and then he owned, opened a second one and he owned buildings in Harlem and, you know through the assistance of the, his former employers actually he and my grandmother moved to St. Albans, which is a community in Queens [New York] and they were the first black family to break the restricted covenant out there. They moved there in 1946. So he was a very dynamic person, a businessman, apparently he had some land out in Nevada or had an opportunity to invest in Vegas [Las Vegas, Nevada] in the '50s [1950s] with some of his friends and business partners. So I'm sorry that I never, you know that he didn't live long enough for me to get to know more about, you know, his business and his business acumen. He clearly had quite a bit of it. Speaker 1: What was his family racial background? Speaker 2: He was black. Speaker 1: Well, you know, because I am just trying to get the--to ask if there were any interracial marriages back then? As far as your family that you know of. Speaker 2: Not on my father's side-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Not on my father's side that I am aware of. You know, my great-grandparents on my father's side were both African American. My grandparents were both African American, so, as far as I can tell there was no mixing (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Story_ID: 378377 Speaker 1: So now we are going to talk about your dad--that was your grandfather [Nathaniel Davis, Sr.]--and tell me your father's name. Speaker 2: Now, my father is Nathaniel Davis, Jr. And my dad is a jazz musician. He was an only child and, you know, was raised in sort of a very privileged background. Went to--I can never remember--I think he went to Bronx Science [The Bronx High School of Science, Bronx, New York] or Stuyvesant [Stuyvesant High School, New York, New York] but he went to one of the elite high schools here in the city so he was very bright, you know, studied the piano from when he was five years old. Went to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], didn't complete college but was really passionate about being a jazz musician and when my grandfather died a little earlier than everybody had expected, the expectation was that my dad would take over the business but he didn't, he really didn't want to do that. He really wanted to be a musician, and through, you know, being a musician he's traveled all over the world. He's performed in Japan, Indonesia, and Saudi Arabia so, you know, that is the passion that he's pursued. Speaker 1: Okay, and you said that he went to Howard. So he had pretty much a higher education even though he did not finish. Any stories about him growing up? Did he share any stories about how he grew up and the things that he did as a child? Speaker 2: Well one of the things that he talked about was being in that community, being in St. Albans [Queens, New York] in the late '40s [1940s] and the early '50s [1950s] when you've got, you know, Lionel Hampton living around the corner, Brook Benton living around the corner and all of these jazz musicians. I think it made him feel that this was a real possibility as a career because he was surrounded by people who did this for a living so I think that, that was one of the influences on him. You know there were probably many more successful black entertainers in '50s [1950s] than there were black business people. Can't really fault him for not wanting to run a dry cleaning business necessarily, not the most exciting thing in the world I suppose. So that was, that was the main thing that he talked about. He seemed to have a lot of friends he still has, you know, he still has a lot of his childhood friends he's still friends with. So he had a close knit group of people that he came up with that he's still friendly with which is nice. Story_ID: 378378 Speaker 1: We're going to talk about your mother. Tell me your mother's name. Speaker 2: My mother's name is Gwen Webb [Gwen Martin Webb]. Speaker 1: Okay and where was she born? Speaker 2: She was born in, well let's see was she born in Harlem [New York, New York] or was she born in Brooklyn [New York]? They moved to Brooklyn very early on so I--she probably was, they were living in Harlem when she was born. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you remember anything about her grandparents or parents? Speaker 2: Her grandparents, I--they died before I was born. You know, her parents, you know died fairly recently, those were my grandparents so I was very close to them so-- Speaker 1: Well, tell me about your grandparents. Speaker 2: Well my grandparents, they were both from the West Indies. My grandmother, Iris Martin came over from Trinidad in the early part of the 20th century and actually landed on Ellis Island [New York, New York] along with my, some of my aunts and my uncle and she, her father was white and her mother was from Trinidad but was Venezuelan, you know Carab-Indian. And my grandfather [Herbert Martin] was also from Trinidad came over to this country at fourteen. Similarly his father was Portuguese, his mother was Trinidadian, you know, black Caribbean, Afro-Caribbean I guess you'd call it. So they were both half white and both of them were light enough to pass, although they didn't, point of pride because back then a lot of people did. So that's, you know that's their background I guess. Speaker 1: Okay. Let me step back, just because we didn't get your father's mother's name. Speaker 2: Oh right, Earner Davis, it's an interesting name E-A-R like earner, like wage earner. She was Earner Reed [ph.] Davis. And she is still alive, she is 102 and a half. Speaker 1: Wow, do you know anything about her that you could share? Speaker 2: Sure, I mean she you know is one of six siblings and she was also very bright. I found out that, you know, much later that she went to, again, one of the special high schools. She did not go to college but, you know, she completed high school. This was in the early part of the 20th century, married my grandfather [Nathaniel Davis, Sr.] right out of high school. I mean it's actually a very funny story. She was petite and was very chubby until you know, you know late, until her eighties she was chubby and she talked about being on 7th Avenue [Adam Clayton Powell Jr. Boulevard] I guess dressed to the nines hanging out with one of my great aunts and you know I guess the guys and the gals would walk up and down 7th Avenue checking each other out and my grandfather apparently said, "I like that one, the little fat one there" (laughter) you know, and you know that started dating and they got married and she was afraid to tell her mother (laughter) that she had gotten married so she was seventeen and she was married but she was still going home. I guess my grandfather said, "Look we're married, you have to tell your mother that we've gotten married and you have to, like, move out of the house." So they, she got married very early on and she is probably the only black woman I know who was a housewife. She never worked, you know, so she, you know, she had a very--my grandfather I guess worked very hard to give her a nice lifestyle, you know he used to buy a new Cadillac every two years, she has a fur storage closet in her bedroom, I mean she had a very, you know, nice existence for a good long while, so-- Speaker 1: And you used to visit? Did you have-- Speaker 2: I used to visit--my parents were divorced when I was pretty young so I would spend every other weekend I would go out to my grandmother's house in Queens [New York]. We were living in Brooklyn when I was a child. So I would go out and spend the weekends with my grandmother and, you know, we'd go shopping on Jamaica Avenue and she'd take me to church on Sundays, I'd go out there for Easter, get the new Easter outfit, you know. Story_ID: 378379 Speaker 1: We were talking about your mother's parents, so what else can you share about your [maternal] grandmother? Speaker 2: My grandmother and I were very, very close. Iris Martin was her name and when my parents got divorced, my grandmother had bought a, had purchased a brownstone in Brooklyn [New York] and that's where my mother took my brother [Tony Davis] and myself so we moved in with my grandmother and, you know, she always kind of looked out for me you know they--I read a joke once that grandmothers and granddaughters have a bond because they have a common enemy meaning, you know the mom (laughter) and not that I feel that way about my mother at all but we were very close. She was just a hard working person she worked, she was a seamstress. She was a member of the ILGWU [International Ladies' Garment Workers' Union] and she--I've never seen a person, you know they say make those presidents cry before they leave their wallet, that was my grandmother. She, you know, on a seamstress' salary bought a brownstone in Brooklyn, then together with my aunt and uncle bought a house in Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts] in the early '60s [1960s], and then bought another house for herself in the early '70s [1970s] and retired to Martha's Vineyard where she lived until she died back in 1997. So, and she, you know, she introduced us to Martha's Vineyard so I felt that she was always, you know, sort of looking out for her grandchildren, preparing a way for us. She had bank accounts for us so when I was in law school [New York University School of Law, New York, New York] so that I didn't have to work, she said, "Well I have this bank account and I going to send you every month enough money so that you don't have to have a job so that you can study," you know so it's things like that. When I graduated from college [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] my grandmother took me to Europe, you know, and she and I went on a trip to Europe for three weeks and I lived with her first, you know, when I was in Brooklyn it was my mother, my grandmother, my brother and myself and when my mother remarried, my grandmother--I feel like we were following her--because my grandmother said, "Well, you know, Gwen [Gwen Martin Webb]," that's my mother's name, "you're remarried I should--your husband [Arnold Webb] doesn't need to be living with his mother-in-law so I'll move." So she moved in with a good friend of hers who was a widow who lived in New Rochelle [New York] and she was living in New Rochelle and her good friend the widow got a new husband and was gonna be moving upstate and selling her house, so my grandmother basically called my parent up and said, "Hey, you ought to buy this house," so she, you know, couldn't kick her out twice and so she lived with us in New Rochelle until she retired and moved up to Martha's Vineyard. So I spent--I lived with her most of my childhood. Speaker 1: Okay. What about your grandfather? Speaker 2: My grandfather, I come from a long line of divorced people. My grandparents were divorced long before, you know, I was born. My grandfather lived in Brooklyn and also had his own business. My paternal grandfather, I mean maternal grandfather his name was Herbert Martin. And he had a luncheonette kind of a diner, luncheonette newsstand. He used to sell those dream books--I never knew what they were for years. I was like why do people need these dream books? I don't understand what this is? Not until I was in my twenties I was like numbers that's what they're for, numbers. And he had this lunch counter. There was this wonderful woman there everybody called--her name was Elizabeth Ferguson [Elizabeth Ferguson Martin (ph.)] and everyone called her Babe and Babe was the cook. She was one of these--she was from Ohio--but she was one of these, you know, southern, originally from North Carolina; wonderful woman, wonderful cooks, they ended up getting married. So they lived in a brownstone in Brooklyn and I used to go visit them, you know, a lot and he just died in, I guess, it was, was it '99 [1999]? I think 1999 or maybe as late as 2000 and I was living in Brooklyn for a good long while so I used to visit him as an adult when I was living in Brooklyn I would go and visit him so I spent a lot of time with him also. Story_ID: 378380 Speaker 1: So now your father--tell me about your father. Speaker 2: We just did talk about my father, Nat Davis [Nathaniel Davis, Jr.] or my stepfather maybe? Speaker 1: Your stepfather-- Speaker 2: We didn't talk about-- Speaker 1: Okay, sorry your stepfather Speaker 2: My stepfather is Arnold Webb. My mother [Gwen Martin Webb] and stepfather got married, I was seven years old and my stepfather has been just a big influence. He was an educator--he had been an English teacher. He had a real, had--he's still alive, very much so. He has a real love of language and culture, as my mother does as well, but he was just really, you know, a good, solid, steady person who always encouraged my intellectual development, you know, just encouraged me and just a real positive person. Story_ID: 378381 Speaker 1: Your mother [Gwen Martin Webb], tell me about her education. Speaker 2: My mother, was also an educator, my mother went to Hunter College [New York, New York] and then went back and got her master's degree for Baruch College [New York, New York] in I guess the late '70s [1970s] but she worked as a schoolteacher for several years and then became an administrator at the central headquarters, which they are now turning into condos. She worked as an educational administrator for probably about twenty-five years. Speaker 1: Anything else that you want to share about your mother? Speaker 2: Well, there's lots that I could share about my mother she's, you know, she's a--I really attribute a lot of who I am and the confidence that I have to my mother because she was one of these people who believed that I could do absolutely anything. I mean still to this day she'll say, "Well," you know, she'll look John Grisham or Scott Turow, "You're a lawyer, why can't--you can write one of those books. They're writers, they're talented. You could do that, you could, you know--Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] you could do that." Anything that anyone is doing, you know, she believes that I can do it which is, which is a great gift and a lot of, I think frankly a lot of black folks don't have that, you know and there are so many other forces around that tells us we can't do things so that when you have people in your family constantly telling you yes you can, it's armor that you can take out to the world. And she was a tremendous influence in that respect and, you know, just a very nurturing person but also a no nonsense person. You know, brutally honest but very loving at the same time and I think that's a nice combination. Speaker 1: Who was the disciplinarian in your home? Speaker 2: Everybody (laughter). My mother, my stepfather [Arnold Webb], they both were, they took no shorts at all. Although my mother will often say that she, you know, she had to walk a fine line because, as is typical with most black families, you know, we raise our children to be respectful and I always had a mouth. She said, you know, "I had to sit on my hands half the time because I didn't want you to be afraid to speak up for yourself." You know, "I wanted you to be respectful but not cowed," so, you know, she was sort of consciously, you know, so probably slapped me upside the head half as many times as she wanted to (laughter). Speaker 1: And, your siblings. Speaker 2: I have one older brother, Tony Davis, and he is fifty-one and he lives in Queens [New York]. He's married, he has, well he has five children--he has two from his first marriage--that are grown children and he has three children with his current wife. Story_ID: 378382 Speaker 1: So now we're going to move into your childhood. Tell me what is your earliest memory, childhood memory? Speaker 2: My earliest childhood memory? My fifth birthday, I just remember a cake and sitting in the kitchen in Brooklyn [New York] and my mother [Gwen Martin Webb] and grandmother [Iris Martin] and my brother [Tony Davis] singing 'Happy Birthday.' That's probably my first memory. Story_ID: 378383 Speaker 1: You were born just as civil rights were really hot, tell me what was going on in your household, as far as your parents [Gwen Martin Webb and Davis' stepfather, Arnold Webb] talking or watching television. What was going on in your household? Speaker 2: Well I think that there was just incredible awareness of it, I mean, for one thing I was living in Crown Heights [Brooklyn, New York] right across from the Bed-Stuy [Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn, New York] border. You know, I was in, you know I was in a nice block and nice neighborhood but I was in the inner city in the mid-'60s [1960s]. We watched the seven o'clock news--Walter Cronkite every night over dinner we, we're watching what was going on. I remember exactly where I was and what I was doing when Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was killed. Speaker 1: Tell me about that. Speaker 2: I was, I was eight years old and I, my brother [Tony Davis] and I used to watch television after school and we were watching, my brother was watching 'The Three Stooges' and I was enduring 'The Three Stooges' and there was a news bulletin that broke in and it said that Martin Luther King has been shot and even at eight I was very aware of who he was, what he had been doing and I was like this is horrible and I remember thinking this sense of disbelief, you know, that he can't die cause you know when you are eight years old, you know you don't think that somebody is going to die. Cause I was not old enough to remember JFK [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] or when he was shot or anything like that. And then shortly thereafter they said that he had died and I just couldn't believe it and I remember sitting watching the funeral and watching the whole, you know, on television and being really upset about it and my parents of course were upset, you know, everybody I knew was upset and you know, the next morning, well this was before the funeral but the next morning, I was bussed to a white school, you know, they had mandatory bussing I guess. And so I was walking to the bus stop and I had to cross Eastern Parkway and go into Bed-Stuy and all the windows were broken, you know, there had obviously been, you know, rioting is probably too strong a word but disturbances the night before, when he was killed. And then I remember, you know, then two months later Bobby Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy] gets shot and I remember, 'cause again I was in New York and that was our senator, everybody loved the Kennedys, Bobby Kennedy, he was going to be great. I was very engaged, you know, we had a lot of conversation about politics and civil rights in my house and I was very much aware of it. There was also the insipient Black Power movement that was going on and, again, the Panthers [Black Panther Party] were pretty active in New York. There were people that we knew that were involved, you know, involved with people who were involved in more nationalist movements. A friend of my mother's phone was tapped by the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] because someone she was dating was, you know, a nationalist. So, you know, there was a real awareness of the ongoing struggle for civil rights, equal rights, black power. Story_ID: 378384 Speaker 1: Tell me about the school, the elementary school that you went to. Speaker 2: Well, I initially went, my mother [Gwen Martin Webb] was a teacher in Bed-Stuy [Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn New York] and I initially went to that school, P.S. 243 [The Weeksville School, Brooklyn, New York]. Everything in New York is just P.S. this, P.S. that. And then when my mother and stepfather [Arnold Webb] hooked up--my stepfather said, you know, "You need to get her in a better school," and because he worked in the central headquarters he knew a principal at another school in Brooklyn [New York] out in Flatbush and, you know, they were bussing kids from Bed-Stuy, so he said, "Okay, I'll get you in," and I wasn't zoned for the neighborhood where they were bussing so I, that's why I had to walk three blocks and go across Eastern Parkway and I was bussed into the school and the classroom so that was--that started in third grade and that was P.S. 255 [Barbara Reing School, Brooklyn, New York]. They had homogeneous grouping basically ability grouping, tracking in elementary school. So all the kids that were bussed in were in the lower quote, unquote tracked classes and I was in the top class. I was the only black kid in the quote, unquote smart class. So what that meant was, you know, that I got harassed by the kids on the bus who said, "You think you're this, you think you're that, you think you're smart." "I don't think I'm smart, I know I'm smart. You're smart too but nobody knows you're smart that's the problem," but it was a very interesting experience because when we first got there of course there were people who were opposed to bussing who were--I remember being greeted the first day with people protesting and someone calling me nigger, you know, and then the black kids on the bus, the other black kids don't like me because I'm in the smart class with the white kids and of course I made friends with them, you're eight what are you gonna do? You know, I remember kids asking me, again the white kids, first couple of weeks of class, would ask, "Well, what are you?" I would say, "Well what do you mean what am I?" You know, it's 1968, I said, "I'm a Negro," I'm like what do you think I am? But they thought that I might have been Sephardic or something like that cause they just had, they, in Brooklyn, had never seen, I guess had never seen a black kid before until this bus load of black kids showed up. So I ended up making, you know, friends with all of those kids. When we moved to Westchester [Westchester County, New York] and I was in sixth grade, they threw me a going away party, they gave me two Temptations [The Temptations] albums as a going away present (laughter) so it was an interesting experience; you had to get along with a lots of different kinds of people-- Speaker 1: So it wasn't only black and white in school, was there other nationalities? Speaker 2: Not too much, I mean there was--basically you had Jewish folks, Italian folks, couple of Irish folks, you know, Irish American I would say and then, you know, black folks and most of the black folks were black folks from the South not originally from the South, not West Indian. Story_ID: 378385 Speaker 1: What other activities did you participate in? Any Girl Scouts [Girl Scouts of the United States of America], dance lessons, music lessons? Speaker 2: Not a whole lot, I was in a Girl Scout troop. I always say I was a bad Girl Scout. My mother [Gwen Martin Webb] reminded me recently it wasn't that I was a bad Girl Scout, I was in a Girl Scout troop in Bed-Stuy [Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn, New York] and nobody, you know, people wouldn't show up, you know, it was just--I remember we were raising money for these starving kids in Biafra you know, I was going around collecting money and it just, there just wasn't, there wasn't a lot of activity in the troop so I wasn't a Girl Scout for very long although I did sell cookies I have the pictures to prove it. I took dance more when I was in junior high school [Albert Leonard Junior High School; Albert Leonard Middle School, New Rochelle, New York], modern dance class with some friends. Unfortunately I never really took music lessons which I wanted to but we didn't have a piano which was the only instrument that I wanted to play. So I was, as I said, I was a bookish kid I read all the time, I wrote all the time. You know, probably not until when we moved to Westchester [Westchester County, New York] when I got to middle school and high school [New Rochelle High School, New Rochelle, New York] I was then involved in a lot more things. Speaker 1: Well, at this point what were you reading? What did you like to read? Speaker 2: I loved poetry, I loved novels. You know, I read all the children's classics, you know 'Little Women' [Louisa May Alcott], 'Little Men' [Louisa May Alcott], 'Black Beauty' [Anna Sewell]--all of those, 'Heidi' [Johanna Spyri], all of those things and every year other kids would get toys, I got books. You know, I would get these, you know it was Grosset & Dunlap [New York, New York] these illustrated classics with these lovely covers and these color illustrations. I was also really into Peanuts, you know, Charles Schulz so I had a collection of those but that's what I read a lot (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Story_ID: 378386 Speaker 1: And so after elementary school, by this time, you have moved to Westchester [Westchester County, New York]? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, so what year did you move to Westchester? Speaker 2: February 11, 1971, we moved to New Rochelle [New York]. Speaker 1: New Rochelle, and tell me about that experience. Speaker 2: Well that was, it was really great, you know, living in a, you know, as opposed to a brownstone we were living in a freestanding house with a yard. I could walk to school; I had friends who lived around the corner as opposed to a bus ride away. The school was integrated it wasn't black kids being bussed in, the town was integrated so there were--the class was probably half and half, black and white. I made literally life long friends. The people that I am closet to today are friends that I made when I went to New Rochelle in either sixth grade or junior high school [Albert Leonard Junior High School; Albert Leonard Middle School, New Rochelle, New York]. Story_ID: 378387 Speaker 1: So, it's 1971 and you moved to New Rochelle [New York]. All right, tell me about your junior high school experience. Speaker 2: Junior high school, I went to Albert Leonard Junior High School [Albert Leonard Middle School, New Rochelle, New York]. There were two junior high schools in town and that was the one on the north end. Not a lot to tell, it was, you know, uneventful. I guess that I was old enough that I wasn't being bullied by kids which was nice and, you know, at an age where kids stop that sort of foolish, you know, fighting because anybody who is going to fight at that age I think that, you know, they really intervene, they don't say that oh they're just little kids. So I just enjoyed school, there weren't a lot of activities, extracurricular activities in junior high school so I really was just going to class and you know spending time with my friends and, you know, listening to music, starting to go to parties, starting to try and have boys think that you were cute, you know whatever, normal stuff. Speaker 1: (Laughter) And you said The Temptations, the music that you listened to? Motown [Motown Records] was that--? Speaker 2: Motown, although probably by, you know by then, let's see, '71 [1971], I, you know, that was probably right around the time BLS, you know WBLS [WBLS Radio, New York, New York], the black owned station, got the FM station. That was the big excitement, you know we were listening to LIB [WLIB Radio, New York, New York], which would go off at sunset and to have a station that was on late into the night, you know what a, you know Jackson 5. Every kid my age was into the Jackson 5. Instead of who is your favorite Beatle it was like who is your favorite Jackson--do you like Marlon [Marlon Jackson] or do you like Michael [Michael Jackson], Jermaine [Jermaine Jackson] Jackson 5, Spinners [The Spinners]. My brother [Tony Davis] was into Earth, Wind and Fire--I probably got more into Earth, Wind and Fire more towards ninth grade. What else? James Brown always, you know, given the fact that he just passed away, I was going through my old 45s and I--the first fifteen 45s were all James Brown because every three months he had a new record I mean just one of those things where you talk about really good branding and good will, James Brown has a new record you just go buy it you don't have to wait, you hear it once and you just go to the store and buy it. So, you know, we had all of that, you know, bought a lot of 45s. Probably not that different from what teenagers do today; spend my Saturdays at the mall, hang around, go to the record store, go to the movies, try to buy, you know, some silly little trendy clothes. And-- Story_ID: 378388 Speaker 1: What was the make-up of the community of New Rochelle [New York]? Speaker 2: New Rochelle was I think about 20 to 25 percent black, the remaining 75 percent was white and that was split between working class Italians and affluent Jewish folks. Speaker 1: So who were your friends? Speaker 2: Black kids (laughter). Speaker 1: No white friends? Speaker 2: I had a couple, more when I got to high school [New Rochelle High School, New Rochelle, New York], because again when you get to high school and you start having tracking and you're the only black kid or one of two black kids in the class then, you know, I had more white friends in junior high school it was more, you know, heterogeneous grouping so my friends were friends from the neighborhood that I had gone to elementary school with--my friend Cheryl Hoakes [Cheryl Hargrove Hoakes (ph.)] was well she was Cheryl Hargrove then but, you know, still one of my closet friends and Dayna Cunningham who is someone else you guys should interview who's again, one of my friends from junior high school [Albert Leonard Junior High School; Albert Leonard Middle School, New Rochelle, New York] I met right before seventh grade. We ended up going to junior high school, high school, college [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], and law school [New York University School of Law, New York, New York] together. And then my friend Margaret Walton [ph.], you know, these are just people that I have known since sixth grade and we just, we all hung together. We were like the smart black girls so we were all, we all liked school, kind of liked the same kind of things. Margaret and I we liked old movies and art house movies so we'd be in high school and say, "There's a Bergman [Ingmar Bergman] film playing, let's go see that, that will be a nice uplifting thing to do." See, I remember one Christmas, scenes from (unclear), sitting there with Margaret and we sat there and watched--which is one of the most depressing films that you would ever want to see other than 'The Seventh Seal' which is really depressing because it's about death. But you know, that's so those were who my friends were. Story_ID: 378389 Speaker 1: As far as school, the teachers that you had, was there anyone who might have influenced you or someone that you can remember that might have encouraged you? Speaker 2: Definitely, I mean I--one of the things that I often talk about in terms of how I ended up where I did is that I think that I was lucky to go to school as a civil rights baby. You know, I had white teachers who believed that black kids could be smart--I mean now, I think that you have teachers who don't think that black children can learn and so they're expecting failure. I think I had a lot of teachers who expected success and not just starting out in elementary school [P.S. 243, The Weeksville School, Brooklyn, New York], of course going to school where your mother [Gwen Martin Webb] is a teacher, the teachers know you but even when I moved to New Rochelle [New York], teachers didn't know my parents, didn't know what they did and just said this is a bright kid. I had a, you know, wonderful English teacher, I ended up being an English major and, you know, Mrs. Reddington [ph.] in the ninth grade [at New Rochelle High School, New Rochelle, New York], you know, very patrician, you know, woman who read some poetry of mine and said, "This should go into a national anthology for high school students--this is excellent poetry--you're a really good writer." You know, I had another English teacher in tenth grade, Mrs. Lipman [ph.], in honors English in eleventh grade, Mr. McCowan [ph.], I mean I had these great teachers, you know, history teacher Mr. Agresta [Frank Agresta]. I had, you know, really terrific teachers all of them. They liked teaching, they were good at it, and I think that when they saw a kid that was engaged, they just got really excited and, and pushed us. Story_ID: 378390 Speaker 1: When did you decide that you wanted to be an attorney? Speaker 2: When I was eight years old and I came at it sort of backwards. At that time I said I wanted to be president and I looked around at the politicians that I'd seen and I said they all seemed to have gone to law school first so I guess I am going to have to be a lawyer if I am going to be president. Then I discarded the idea that I was going to be president, but you know, I stuck with the idea of law, I wanted to be an advocate. I really cared about justice and fairness--I'm fairly argumentative--so I figured it was a good use of my skills and my interests. You know I'm still interested in sort of play around the edges of politics so. Speaker 1: When did you learn about Thurgood Marshall? Speaker 2: Probably knew about Thurgood Marshall when I was, I'd say maybe in elementary school, I remember when I was in second grade, we had an assignment, we were supposed to do a quote unquote term paper, which is absurd, it's second grade what kind of term paper but you had--this meant you had the entire term and you pick a subject and you would do a report with pictures and text. Well, my mother [Gwen Martin Webb] decided, she said, "Your term paper will be on black history, that will be what your term paper will be on," and she went out and did all the research (laughter). It's not clear to me that I did any writing on it but I had this lovely term paper with all of these famous important black people, you know, going from explorers, and writers, and, you know, Thurgood Marshall and all of those figures. So I think that's when I probably first learned about them. Speaker 1: I'm trying to see, you wanted to be an attorney and you knew you wanted to be an attorney at eight but where were your role models, who were you looking at, making you know--besides your mother telling you that you could be anything, that, that would be an avenue, a door that would be open for you? Speaker 2: I think again, because my mother was saying that you can do whatever, I wasn't focused on who was in front of me. There was no one in my family who was a lawyer, they were all teachers so it was more--it wasn't specifically-- not until much later, it wasn't specifically I want to be a civil rights lawyer and Thurgood Marshall was someone to look up to that was probably not until really law school [New York University School of Law, New York, New York]. It was more, this is a step, if you want to be in politics, you need to be a lawyer. If you want to be an advocate for people, you need to be a lawyer. You know, maybe this was my mistake, I was looking at white people I wasn't looking at black people and saying well that's the limit of what I can do. Speaker 1: Well, I mean, be it black or white, who were some of the people that you looked at to say, well just because, it doesn't mean because I am black, I cannot achieve what they have achieved, who are some of the people--? Speaker 2: Well, I don't want it to make it seem like he was a role model, because God knows he wasn't, but Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] was president at the time and he was a lawyer so I was like okay, well he's the president so you know it was that sort of kind of mechanical this was what this person has done to get to this place. I didn't know yet about the lying and the cheating and all of the other stuff that he did but-- Story_ID: 378391 Speaker 1: Were your guidance counselors [at New Rochelle High School, New Rochelle, New York] very helpful in helping you to make a decision about where to go to college? Speaker 2: My guidance counselor was pretty helpful because, I mean and again that was not the experience that all of my friends had--my girlfriend that I just mentioned, Dayna Cunningham, she had a guidance counselor who was trying to, to restrict and constrict her options and telling her not to shoot very high. I had a guidance counselor who said, "Well you can shoot for," you know, he helped me put together the list and the list of schools that I applied to was Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut], Brown [Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island], Amherst [Amherst College, Amherst, Massachusetts], Georgetown [Georgetown University, Washington, D.C.], my safe school was University of Rochester [Rochester, New York]. Why I applied there, there was not way in hell I was going to spend four years in Rochester, New York but that was my safe school. So yeah, I would say he was helpful. I mean, I think my parents had some ideas, you know, but I got one if those--well a couple of things--you know you go and get the big Barron's book, you know I went through that and when you take the PSATs, people starts sending you letters so between those two things, you know, I began to put together a list and the guidance counselor was helpful and, again, was encouraging. He was not trying to limit my options but was saying, "You should go for it." Story_ID: 378392 Speaker 1: So you get to--tell me the name of your high school. Speaker 2: New Rochelle High School [New Rochelle, New York]. Speaker 1: Oh you went to New Rochelle High School. So tell me about your high school years. Speaker 2: My high school years were really fun, I got involved in just about everything. I was the president of the French club, the president of the black culture club, the editor of the literary magazine. I was completely uncoordinated as far as sports was concerned and I can't play an instrument but I said well I can be a leader, I can do all of these things, so I got involved in a lot of activities. I enjoyed all of my classes. I had taken well I took AP bio [Advanced Placement biology] in junior high school [Albert Leonard Junior High School; Albert Leonard Middle School, New Rochelle, New York] but I took AP English, AP French, Honors English so, you know, had engaging classes; had a lot of extracurricular activities, had a lot of friends and had a good social life. It wasn't nearly as much pressure on high school students as there is now, you know, now I would be looking at my applications saying gosh you have no sports, you have no instruments, you haven't traveled overseas, you've not built a school in some third world country, you know, you can't possibly get into Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. Back then it was enough to be you know, an A student and have a bunch of extracurricular. Speaker 1: What were some of the other extracurricular activities that you had? Speaker 2: Well, other that the French club, black culture club, the literary magazine, I was on staff one year and then I was the editor the next year. I was in, I shouldn't say it was a goofy organization, it was Students Against Vandalism Everywhere [ph.]. We were sort of the anti-graffiti squad and there was also the student service society we collected, you know, turkeys, canned goods, and put together packages for poor families at Thanksgiving and Christmas so, you know, I did that as well. Story_ID: 378393 Speaker 1: Did you go to the prom? Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: Tell me about your prom. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well I can brag about my prom date now because my prom date was the lieutenant governor of New York, [HistoryMaker] David A. Paterson, that's who took me to the prom. So, yeah, yeah that was, yeah I went to the prom. I had been dating David for maybe about nine months, my whole senior year [at New Rochelle High School, New Rochelle, New York] so there was no question that he was going to take me to the prom and you know, the typical thing. Went to the mall with my mother [Gwen Martin Webb], picked out a prom dress we got a limousine, a bunch of us went to the prom. We took the limousine into the city [New York, New York], we lied about our age, not that they were people were fooled by a bunch of people in tuxedos and evening gowns but, you know, we went to a little disco, we hung out for a while just a very, you know, sort of a very typical late '70s [1970s], you know, prom kind of date, I guess. Story_ID: 378394 Speaker 1: When did you find out that Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] was where you were going to go to school? Speaker 2: You mean, when did I get accepted or when did I decide that that was my first choice? Speaker 1: Well yeah. Well, let's start there. Speaker 2: My parents and I took a college tour, you know, like a college tour, one of those road trips. We drove, we went to Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] and then we drove up to Brown [Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island] and then to Amherst [Amherst College, Amherst, Massachusetts], and then our last stop was going to be Harvard. And my stepfather [Arnold Webb] had a cousin who lived in Cambridge [Massachusetts] who lived right down the block from Harvard, we going to stay with her and I had a buddy, a good friend from Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts] who was at Harvard already and, you know I was putting my applications together. I knew, this was kind of my list and I went to Yale and I said this place looks too much like a church, very gothic, the library has all this stained glass I just didn't like the way the campus felt. I went to Brown and I remember asking people, "Well what do you do on the weekends?" "We go to Boston [Massachusetts]." And everybody I asked, they said, "We drive to Boston." Well I said I can go to school in Boston. Why am I going to go someplace where all I do on the weekends is go to Boston? And then I went to Amherst and it was just too remote and I didn't really like it. And I remember we were driving back down and we were coming along, you come along the Charles River, I guess it's not Mass Ave [Massachusetts Avenue], Memorial Highway [sic. Memorial Drive] I guess and the first thing I saw was this big building, Dunster House [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], but it was this tower, white building, brick building, white and a big crimson clock and I said, "This is it, this is where I want to go to school," and so that's, you know, it's completely ridiculous, random and has nothing to do with what the classes were like, are you going to like the people there, it's like no, this looks like a college (laughter). Lovely to be seventeen and just have nothing in your head at all. So my stepfather was recently teasing me recently about the day I got the envelope, you know, because back then of course you don't get things via email, you would get thin envelope, fat envelope, that was the big thing. And so April 15th they all came and I remember coming home and in the mailbox there was an envelope and it was a fat envelope, Harvard University, Cambridge, and I, I apparently called my stepfather and I was completely incoherent, I don't remember this but he says that I was like shrieking on the phone and I couldn't speak clearly because I was so excited. Speaker 1: And you go that on April 15th. Speaker 2: Um-hm, 1977 (laughter). Speaker 1: And when you opened it, you were just screaming and hollering, you told your stepfather, what did your mother [Gwen Martin Webb] say? Speaker 2: My mother, well my--this is the funniest story about my mother. My mother of course was ecstatic and thrilled. She did not tell me until we were in the car driving home from my gradation from Harvard that when she was--when I was a child of like five, it was her dream for me to go to Harvard and she said, "I was afraid if I told you, you would not go just to spite me (laughter)." I'm not a spiteful person, I'm really not, I don't know why she felt that way but she just wasn't taking any chances. Story_ID: 378395 Speaker 1: So you graduate from New Rochelle High School [New Rochelle, New York] in 1977 and you go off to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. Tell me now, I mean, this seems to be a big change. Is this the first that you are away from home? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, so tell me about your experience. Speaker 2: It was fantastic (laughter), you know I just, well first of all I was going away to college with one of my best friends, Dayna Cunningham who I mentioned. She also got into Harvard and what we requested--we didn't want to be roommates because we wanted to meet other people but we asked to be put in the same dorm so she was down the hall and we were in this dorm, you know, typical Harvard. Our class was actually the first class that gave, that had equal access for women because, of course, Harvard used to be Harvard and Radcliffe [Radcliffe College, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and Radcliffe was one fourth the size of Harvard. So the classes would be--even with they quote, unquote combined the schools, there would be three times as many guys as women. So it wasn't until my class that that they said, "We are going to allow equal access. We are not going to artificially jury rig the numbers," and, of course, women are smarter than men so once they did that they had about 50/50 men and women but they hadn't prepared the physical plans. So they put us in a dorm that had one floor of women surrounded by two floors of men on either side of us and it had been a men's dorm usually where the freshman football players lived cause it was right close to the union where the football team met and all the bathrooms had urinals and so there was only one bathroom in the center. You had to go through two locked entries to get to a bathroom with toilets. I said, could they have, could the richest school in the world, they couldn't have put some fricking toilets in here for some women? Apparently not. So that was my freshman dorm experience which was kind of hilarious. I mean when you wake up at three in the morning and you have to go and you're like okay I have to remember the combination here and the combination here or it could be very embarrassing. It's just like this bathroom in the middle of the hallway with, you know, eight stalls and, you know, eight sinks and then in your entry you had three other, you know, three suites and you had a bathroom with a shower, sink, and a urinal. Story_ID: 378396 Speaker 1: Now you were a very good student in high school [New Rochelle High School, New Rochelle, New York]-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Did it carry over into the college phase? Speaker 2: Yes and no. And the reason I say yes and no is because, I came in and I was very excited to be there and I was very motivated and I did very well my freshman year and basically once I realized that I could do well, you know, I just said well I don't have to work that hard (laughter), which is terrible. So I was a, frankly I was B student for most of my time at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. I was not an A student. Speaker 1: Well what about the classes that you took when you got there, was there anything that you were surprised about or that you really enjoyed or just did not like at all? Speaker 2: Well the one thing that I did, because I didn't know any better, Harvard had--and they probably still have--but they called distribution requirements. They didn't really have a core curriculum but they said you have to take--you're a humanities major, you have to take a certain number of courses in the, you know, natural sciences and, you know, the social sciences. So I was trying to be a conscientious freshman and I said, okay I'll take a science course. And I took this, you know, this course, you know, Life on Earth, E.O. Wilson and three weeks later my friend said, "Are you out of your mind? That's a pre-med course." I said, "I don't know, I figured it was biology, it's E.O. Wilson." So I got a C in that class but I figured, hey it was a pre-med course, I was not pre-med. I can say that I took a course with E.O. Wilson--there are worse things. Story_ID: 378397 Speaker 1: What was the climate like at that time? Speaker 2: Well the climate was, you know, and this is part of the reason why I didn't focus so much on my school work. You know the climate at that time--I tell people that I majored in English or I majored in protest and minored in English because I spent most of my time organizing demonstrations and being involved in demonstrations. This was a time before, you know, before when Nelson Mandela was still in jail. You know, when we thought it was a good thing that Mugabe [Robert Mugabe] was running Zimbabwe. I remember in fact when Zimbabwe got its independence having a midnight--we had like a, not a demonstration but a celebration and we all got out of our dorm rooms and we had cow bells, we were marching, "She's free, Zimbabwe is free." You know, we were all excited about that and we were pushing Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] for divestiture. We were trying at that time, the African American studies department [Department of Afro-American Studies; Department of African and African American Studies] was very weak--they really weren't supporting it--long before Skip Gates [HistoryMaker Henry Louis "Skip" Gates, Jr.] got there so we were protesting trying to get them to strengthen their department. We had started out--when I started out at school there was a physical building that was the African American Cultural Center [Harvard-Radcliffe Afro-American Cultural Center, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and the building was a building that was condemned. I mean literally, I remember a party--I was reminiscing about this with some classmates recently--the floor would move and people would say, "You can't dance because the floor is going to give way and we were all going to go into the foundation." You know, it was, you know, so to us it was indicative of how the administration felt about the black students who were there. You go to Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut], they had a building that had a solid foundation. So that's, so the climate was, you know, was like that. It wasn't as polarized as, I think, as--I don't think it's polarized now, but as polarized as some campuses became I think in the '80s [1980s]. I remember when politically correct was actually a positive term and not a pejorative one. I was sort of, you know, in college when that term first began to be used and it was a real push for, you know, more inclusiveness and we called it third world unity rather than multiculturalism but there was a sense of you know finding common cause with Latino folks and Asian American folks, Native American folks, and gay people so that's what the environment was like and there wasn't, you know, Harvard doesn't attract, I think, you know, real, real conservative people. There were some of course, there was a college Republican club but there wasn't this sense of hostility from the mainstream students; it was, you know, sort of respect or friendliness or sort of benign neglect, to coin a phrase as Daniel Moynihan late of Harvard did but not--no hostility. Story_ID: 378398 Speaker 1: And what about your professors? Speaker 2: The thing about Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], you know, graduate students do all of the teaching so the professors are, you know, they're at the distant end of a lecture hall. So, the only professors that I developed relationships with--there was Guinier [Ewart Guinier] who was [HistoryMaker] Lani Guinier's father who was Afro-Am, he was the first chair of the Afro-Am department [Department of Afro-American Studies; Department of African and African American Studies] there and he was my Afro-Am professor for a couple of classes. He was wonderful and you know, mainly the professor that you had a relationship were all the folks in the Afro-Am department even though I was an English major and then I, there were some English professors also. My, this is going to sound terrible but this is what they called them, the housemaster, you know, Harvard after freshman year everyone is in a house and you stay in that house for the next three years and each house has a faculty member who is the housemaster. So the housemaster was an English professor so I took the sort of the sophomore survey course with him and I had a wonderful relationship with him. Robert Kiely was his name. Story_ID: 378399 Speaker 1: Anything else about Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] that stands out in your mind? Speaker 2: The other thing that was interesting and fun was you know, I comped for The Crimson [The Harvard Crimson] and got on the Harvard, you know, daily newspaper, The Crimson, so a lot of people who are prominent journalists today were folks that I was on The Crimson with, you know, twenty-five years ago. And it's (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Like who, can you remember anyone? Speaker 2: Sue Faludi [Susan Faludi] who wrote 'Backlash' ['Backlash: The Undeclared War Against American Women'], Bob Whorston [ph.], Bill McKibben, [HistoryMaker] Mark Whitaker who was the editor for Newsweek. I mean, Bob was in my class and he was actually in the dorm room right below me and Sue Faludi was in my class. Mark was senior to me so he probably has no recollection of this freshman who was comping but they were all in the building. Speaker 1: What else did you like to write, you know, you wrote poetry, did you continue your poetry then or did you start to write other things? Speaker 2: You know, not so much. I mean I guess I wrote short stories a little bit. Obviously being on The Crimson, I was doing journalism. I was writing a lot of speeches for rallies, that was the main thing. Speaker 1: That was your main thing. Remember any of the articles you wrote? Speaker 2: I wrote an article about the Afro-Am department [Department of Afro-American Studies; Department of African and African American Studies] and actually what ended up happening, I--you know I made it on to The Crimson at the end of my freshman year and I was on The Crimson staff my sophomore year and then I, I decided that didn't want to be writing about protests, I wanted to be participating so I said I can't, you know, obviously I can't be objective and I don't want to just have this as my beat. I want to do it so I said I--you know, stepped away for The Crimson at that point. So that's the main thing, that was my big front page story so. Story_ID: 378400 Speaker 1: You knew that you wanted to be an attorney at this point, is that right? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Did you know what type of law you wanted to practice? Speaker 2: I thought I wanted to be a civil rights lawyer. That was my, that was my plan at that time. Didn't turn out that way. Speaker 1: What happened to change your mind? Speaker 2: Well, it's interesting, you know, I went to law school with that idea and in fact I got a scholarship to law school [at New York University School of Law, New York, New York], the Root-Tilden Scholarship [Root-Tilden-Kern Public Interest Scholarship]. Speaker 1: The Root-Tilden, sorry? Speaker 2: Yes, the Root-Tilden. It's named after Elihu Root and I forgot which Tilden--I don't think it was Samuel Tilden but it might be. But--and that is for, it's designed for people who are going to go into public interest law and you have a moral obligation to pay back the scholarship if you end up not going into public interest law. So I went to law school with that intention, I--my first summer I was an intern at legal aid, my second summer I applied to the NAACP Legal Defense Fund [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.] and was not given a job offer. I then went to into a big firm for the summer as a summer associate and then I knew I wanted to clerk for a federal judge so I applied for a clerkship with Constance Baker Motley and I got that clerkship so I clerked for her right out of school and interestingly she was not necessarily encouraging us to become civil rights lawyers, you know, her view was we fought so that you could have the opportunities to go into these big firms. I will never forget being in chambers and there was a headline about the big firms raising their salaries for first year associates and she said, "Girls," 'cause all of her law clerks were women, she said, "you go down there and get that money (laughter)." We were like, "Judge!" and she said, "Just get a paper bag and go get that money," (laughter). You know her view was that she fought for us to have opportunity not for us necessarily to keep fighting. I don't know if she could have envisioned things turning out quite the way they have but-- Story_ID: 378401 Speaker 1: We were talking about you were clerking for Constance Baker Motley. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: She was someone who could be very influential or encouraging for you to do whatever--let's talk a little bit about her because I mean you were probably six when she was being appointed--well, no she was a borough president first, right? Speaker 2: Right, she was a Manhattan [New York] borough president and then she was the first black woman appointed to the federal bench and yeah I was about six, you're right. Speaker 1: Okay, so did, I mean just being able to clerk for her. Tell me what that experience was like? Speaker 2: Well, you know, it was an amazing experience, you know, she was quite a formidable person as you can imagine. But, I have a great story about her that I can tell you. But the thing that I always say that was invaluable to me in working for her as my first job out of law school [New York University School of Law, New York, New York]--I think that, the thing about law is that in a lot of ways it is very subjective you know assessments of people's skills are really, you know, they're not objective, it's not like when you're a banker and someone can say, you know, well how much money have you brought in? It's really, well how do you analyze, how do you come at a problem, how do you write and people bring their biases to those assessments. So when your very first job out of law school is for a black woman, she says you're screwing this up, you know it's not because she thinks less of you because you're black or because you're a woman and you have nothing to hide behind so you really know that you are getting an honest assessment and real honest feedback, which is great. And then, you know she was chief judge [for the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of New York] when I clerked for her so to be, again, I have been very fortunate in working for someone like that who was at the pinnacle of their career and that's a black woman and you see everybody else being deferential to her, you have this sense of well there is no limit to what I can do and what I can achieve because look at who I am working for. Story_ID: 378402 Speaker 1: So my fun story about Judge Motley [Constance Baker Motley], I love telling this story. One of the things, and she really did look at her clerks like family. She would have Christmas parties every year and invite all of her former law clerks to come back to chambers and they would all come back. So you would also have the opportunity to meet lawyers who had been out, you know, five, ten, twenty years by being her law clerk. And then all kinds--James Meredith would come through chambers, all kinds of famous people. You'd pick up the phone and you never knew who was on going to be on the other end of the line. But one of the things she did--she had a summer house in Connecticut and so rather than just take a vacation, she would sit by designation in Hartford [Connecticut] so that she could be at her summer house but she would still be working because she said, "Why do people retire, what do they do?" She really loved the law, she could not imagine not doing that so she would ask her law clerks to come up and spend, we would rotate, and we'd spend two weeks, two of us would each spend two weeks, we'd go home on the weekends, we'd fly in Monday morning and we would stay at her house. And her husband, Joel Motley, Sr. [Joel Wilson Motley, Jr.] was a wonderful man, I mean everyday he would pick her up from chambers, you know, he would say, "Come on Connie, it's time to go," you know, and he was just this lovely man. I remember waking up, you know, I would sleep in her son's room, you know, her son's little single bed and his Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] degree on the wall and her husband would play, Mr. Motley would play Stephanie Mills so every morning I would wake up (singing), "Put your body in it," and I'm like okay but he was also a very interesting man. He'd been involved in real estate and had been involved with some of those people moving to St. Albans [Queens, New York] and those neighborhoods in the '50s [1950s]. The other thing that we would do, we would take these walks after dinner, Mr. Motley and me, and he would tell me these stories. So, Judge Motley used to always get her hair done, I can't remember the name of the hairdresser but there was this well-known hairdresser in Harlem [New York, New York] who would do her hair and occasionally would come up to Connecticut to do her hair for her. She never did her own hair like most black women. So she was having Judge Bryant [William B. Bryant], who she always insisted on calling Judge Bree-aunt, who was going to be the new chief judge coming for dinner and she said, "I've got to do something about my hair," and I said, "Well judge you can do it, you could--," and she said, "Really?" We're on lunch break so we go into some kind of Walgreens [Walgreen Co.] or something and I said, "Well you just--do you have some shampoo?" And she said, "No I don't have anything because I don't normally do my hair." And I said, "Okay well do you have a blow dryer," she said, "No." So I got the shampoo, we bought the shampoo, the conditioner, got a blow dryer so we go home and I'm figuring okay well you've got your stuff. Well dinner's over and Mr. Motley says, "Okay well we'll go for our walk," and she says, "Joel, no, there's no walking we're doing hair," and I was like, "What do you mean we're doing hair?" And she's like, "Lisa [HistoryMaker Lisa E. Davis] you're going to do my hair." So I was like, "Okay well Judge, you could shampoo your hair." So I go into the bathroom and she's got her head over the sink with the shampoo without any water and I was like, "No, you have to wet it first (laughter)," so I shampooed her hair and then I conditioned it and then I said, "Okay I can blow it dry but we need to press it," because she did not have a perm and I said, "Do you have a hot comb," and she said, "Yes," and she had one of those combs you put on the stove and she had an electric stove and I'm like okay and I had never pressed hair before but of course I have kinky hair and I have had my hair pressed and I was like okay you have grease. I think we might have had Vaseline and I'm sitting there with the grease and hot comb and I'm like my legal career could be over right now, just one singed ear, it's over, it's over but I pressed her hair. She's like, "Good job," she was very--she was like, "Good job." She was like smiling and she said, "All right Lisa, you might have a little sideline here." So that's my great, my great Judge Motley story. Story_ID: 378403 Speaker 1: She tells you that you need to go get the money, go get the money, show me the money-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So what happens now? Speaker 2: So I then was deciding okay what firm I am going to go to--I had been a summer associate at this law firm called Cravath, Swaine and Moore [Cravath, Swaine and Moore, LLP] and I-- Speaker 1: What's--say the name again. Speaker 2: Cravath, Swaine, and Moore. Speaker 1: Can you spell-- Speaker 2: Cravath is C-R-A-V-A-T-H, Swaine is S-W-A-I-N and I believe there's an E, I think. And Moore is M-O-O-R-E. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And they are a very old line white shoe firm. I knew I didn't want to go back there. When I was a summer associate, I worked in the corporate department and my joke--the first day I got there someone said to me, "Oh a woman in corporate, a trailblazer," and I am thinking okay it's 1984 what does being a trailblazer about being in the corporate department? And the joke that I told people when I came back from being a summer associate was that they were so sexist I don't think they ever noticed I was black. So I knew I wasn't going back there. So I was looking at firms like Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton & Garrison [Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton & Garrison, LLP] and then I had some friends who I went to law school with--I was on law review at NYU [New York University School of Law, New York, New York] so all of the folks who were on law review together we were all sort of commiserated and one good friend of mine, a guy named Jeff Trackman [ph.], who had clerked for Judge Motley [Constance Baker Motley] the year before actually says, "Well I am going to this firm Kramer, Levin [Kramer, Levin, Nessen, Kamin & Frankel; Kramer Levin Naftalis & Frankel LLP] you know it's this great firm. They're kind of like Paul, Weiss but they are a little smaller and it's a litigation boutique and they're you know, they're midtown so you know and they attract all of these former law clerks." So I interviewed there and that's where I decided to go so that was my first job after my clerkship, was this firm Kramer, Levin--what is it now--it used to be Kramer, Levin, & Nessen, but now it's Kramer, Levin, Naftalis, & Frankel, I can't even remember the whole name. Kramer, Levin. Speaker 1: Kramer, Levin, okay let me just go back to put this on record. You graduated from Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]-- Speaker 2: Nineteen eighty-one [1981]. Speaker 1: Okay and then from New York (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) NYU. Speaker 1: Okay. In 1985? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 378404 Speaker 1: And so tell me about your first job. Speaker 2: Well my first job, it's a law firm of about a hundred, at that time it was a law firm of one hundred twenty lawyers, I was the only black lawyer. I may have been the first black lawyer they hired although I am not certain of that. I was there with a number of my friends from law school so it was, you know, a fairly comfortable environment because you know it was a bunch of folks from NYU [New York University School of Law, New York, New York] that I had known or people that had clerked. There was a young woman who had gone to Yale [Yale Law School, New Haven, Connecticut] but she had clerked for Judge Carter [HistoryMaker Robert L. Carter] so I knew her from the courthouse. So, you know, when you're a junior lawyer it's, you're basically, the law firm basically owns you, you work all the time. So if you're in a place where you like the people you work with, it's not so bad. So, you know, I was working as a litigation associate and just working the hours doing research. You're doing parts of briefs, doing memos, you know, that's what you do as a litigation associate. I had one colorful case where we represented some of the--there was a split between some of the people that owned the 21 Club [New York, New York]. I had some pretty interesting stuff that I worked on but it was basically, you know, big, big firms, big commercial cases so nothing all that intrinsically interesting or sexy. Speaker 1: Okay. So how long did you stay there [Kramer, Levin, Nessen, Kamin & Frankel; Kramer Levin Naftalis & Frankel LLP]? Speaker 2: I was there two years. Speaker 1: Two years. Story_ID: 378405 Speaker 1: And then what happened? Speaker 2: Well, then what happened--there's some back story to it. I ended up--I came here but the way that I landed here. There was a woman that I went to law school with named Loretha Jones [Loretha C. Jones]. She was a year ahead of me at NYU [New York University School of Law, New York, New York] and she was at this firm and she had a young filmmaker client named Spike Lee and, you know, she called me up and said, "Lisa [HistoryMaker Lisa E. Davis] you know, Spike would like a black accountant and I figured that you might know some black accounting firms," and I told her Mitchell & Titus [Mitchell & Titus, LLP] is a black accounting firm and I recommended them to her and so we got together for lunch and I said, "Well, you know, tell me about what you do. I love the arts and I always have and, you know, entertainment law sounds very interesting but I don't know what's involved." She was telling me what was involved on the day to day and then she called me up a couple of months later and she said, "You know, that I have decided to transition and become a producer but I've brought all of these African American clients to the firms and I don't want to just, you know, go and leave them here and not try and provide another opportunity for someone." So she brought my resume in. At the same time I was living in Fort Greene, living in Brooklyn [New York]. Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION) Speaker 2: So at the same time I was living in Brooklyn in Fort Greene, I coincidentally met Spike because he was living right around the corner and when he heard that I had applied to the firm that was representing him he was kind of pressuring them. He would just say, "So when are you going to hire another black lawyer," and they were like, "Well--," and he would say, "Well, what about Lisa Davis? What about Lisa Davis, what about Lisa Davis?" (Laughter) So I think that combination. They interviewed me and at the same time I decided well this is something I want to pursue so I started networking and talking to folks and I ended up getting an offer from another entertainment firm so I was in a position to say okay I have these two offers now, which place am I going to go to and why. So I decided to come here at the time the firm was called Frankfurt, Garbus, Klein, & Selz [Frankfurt Garbus Klein & Selz, PC; Frankfurt Kurnit Klein & Selz, PC] and I came here in 1980-, I guess that was 1989. I can't remember if it was '88 [1988] or '89 [1989]. I think it was 1988, actually 1988. Speaker 1: And you--did you then take over all of the clients that were here? The black clients (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, not immediately and not all of them. In fact, Arthur Klein [Arthur J. Klein] who, sadly our deceased named partner, he worked very closely with Spike after Loretha left and he told Spike, "Listen, I--we're going to hire Lisa but you're going to have to, you know, you have to stay away from her for a year," and what he meant was, you have to let us train her so that she understands the business before you just have her working all on your stuff because she's gotta know the business and understand how entertainment law functions before she can just get immersed in one client who may have their own demands because I might not be in the right position to give them the right advice or the best advice if did not get the training first. Speaker 1: Well, how did that training go? What was the process that they took to get you ready to actually start practicing entertainment law? Speaker 2: Well they sort of threw us I--at the time, came here, the firm is now, today forty-eight lawyers, then I came here there were twenty-five lawyers and we had a number of clients that had. We had a number of independent production clients so the partners would take an associate and say, "Okay, you know, we have this production--we're production counsel that means we have six actor agreements, a director agreement, a composer agreement, you know, maybe there's a location release. You have to do all of these agreements and you have to negotiate them. You can come to us for guidance, you can come to us with questions, and here is a stack of forms we use." One of my partners Tom Selz [Thomas D. Selz] who's very--he's a law professor, he teaches at Columbia [Columbia Law School, New York, New York] and he sort of created these templates that everybody used as a baseline. Said, "Okay, we're going to give you a baseline template but then you've got to draft the agreements and we've got to review them," and that's--so you got sort of thrown into the deep end of the pool-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --with a life preserver though. Story_ID: 378406 Speaker 1: But tell me more about your work. Tell me, you know, who you work with and actually what it is that you do? Speaker 2: Well what I do is, I'm an advocate, I'm a shrink, I negotiate, whether it's financing, publishing deals, film deals. When I started out I was doing a lot of production work, I did a lot of production work on many of Spike's [Spike Lee] movies so it was a great way to get immersed in it. I would end up talking to Spike several times a week usually because he'd be barking about what's taking such and such agreement so long. It was good preparation though because I would be able to say I drafted it on this date, I sent it out on this date, I've sent this follow-up letter, I've done this, you know the lesson was never let the delay be anything that's at my doorstep. Always be responsive, always be moving the deal forward to completion. All kinds of interesting things, you know, come up on a production. We worked on 'Malcolm X.' There were--we had to lease empty trains, there's a scene where Malcolm X is a Pullman porter and Spike was getting an antique train from a train museum in New Hampshire and I had to make sure that the insurance covered the train, I had to make sure how the train was going to get down to Brooklyn [New York] for the shoot. When the Mecca [Saudi Arabia] shoot was happening, there was a whole, I'm sure Spike has written about this, you know, there wasn't enough financing and at the time the studio was saying, "Well you can just shoot in New Jersey," and he's like, "I am not shooting New Jersey for Mecca." So there was a lot of, there were a lot of cliffhangers--whether he was going to get the financing to go to Mecca and, you know. There were documents--I remember him calling me one Sunday morning and he was in Mecca and it was Sunday morning and what he wanted to know was, "How did the Knicks [New York Knicks] do last night?" (Laughter) I'm like, "Who cares about the Knicks, do you have the access you need? Can you get the shots that you need?" But that let me know that everything had worked out, everything was fine because he just wanted to know, did the Knicks win? Story_ID: 378407 Speaker 1: The thing that is exciting about what I do, and that has been exciting about my career is that you never know who is going to be on the phone when the phone rings. I started out my career, I was working with, I was representing Spike [Spike Lee] and I was representing Public Enemy right at the, you know, right at the heyday. I brought Public Enemy in--I'll never forget the first meeting I had with them, you know Chuck [Chuck D] and Terminator [Terminator X] and Professor Griff and the S1s [S1W group]. They all--it was a two o'clock meeting they all come, no Flavor [Flavor Flav]. Hour and a half later here comes Flavor. I'm like you think for someone who wore a clock around his neck that he might be able to be on time? No, and we had this lovely, this blonde receptionist and she's like, "Lisa [HistoryMaker Lisa E. Davis], there's a Mr. Flav here to see you," so I (laughter) I go out and I was like, "Oh hi Flavor, you know, I'm Lisa Davis." He says, "Hello Lisa, I'm Flavor." I'm like of course you are. So, you know, I was involved in the whole situation when Professor Griff, they had to kick him out of the group and I remember him saying to me, we were at some conference and he was like, "Lisa, why do people hate me?" I said, "Because they think you're a demagogue. I mean you're spouting this anti-Semitic rhetoric, what do you expect people to think? It's like you seemed like a nice enough guy but, you know, they can't take you on this ride." So, you know, and these were things that I was involved in very early on in my career and then interestingly I got a phone call, and you know again, just there aren't a lot of African American entertainment lawyers considering how many African Americans there are in entertainment so and in New York [New York] there are not--there're even fewer. So I would just, I knew a lot of people. I had been involved in politics, you know, I was sort of well-known in the bar and knew a lot of people. So when anybody ever had an entertainment issue they would call me. So a woman I knew from politics said, "I'm going to call you to refer a client to you and you may not thank me for this because she may be a bit, you know, she'll be tough to deal with but, you know, she needs some help," and I said, "Okay, who is it?" Betty Shabazz and this was before Spike was slated to direct 'Malcolm X' when Warner Brothers [Warner Bros. Entertainment Inc.] was going to go forward with it and so I was, I was looking at the, she had already sold the film rights years ago so I was looking at the agreement, you know, negotiating that with her and I guess as a woman who had six daughters, you know, she just looked at me, she's like I know how to deal with young black women so we'd go out to dinner and she's like, "Okay I have, you know, a Links [The Links, Incorporated] event up in Westchester [Westchester County, New York]. I want you to come as my guest," and it's just amazing. I'm, you know, I'm sitting up here, I was obsessed my whole life with Malcolm X and I am sitting here with Betty Shabazz and she is my client, you know, I was like thirty years old. So, you know, to be able to work with those kinds of people it's, you know, amazing. Speaker 2: Who else did you work with? Speaker 1: Okay Public Enemy, Sister Souljah, she's a current client, [HistoryMaker] Terry McMillan's a current client, Vibe magazine, I mentioned Spike, you know, over the years I've worked with Missy Elliott. I've worked with Mos Def--who else, gosh, a lot of authors, just lots and lots of interesting people who were doing exciting stuff. Story_ID: 378408 Speaker 1: Do you find that most of the black entertainers are looking for attorneys that--entertainment attorneys of color? Speaker 2: No, actually, and I think, you know you talked about me being a civil rights baby and I think that's the, you know, people of my generation and my age that's our mindset and we just think that everybody has that mindset and you realize that people that are younger, they did not come up that way so they don't necessarily think about it that way. You know somebody like Chuck D, certainly he was looking for, I mean first of all he is my age and second of all, and totally immersed in, you know, nationalism and black empowerment but you know some of the younger folks, not necessarily and then there are a lot of different influences. I think, you know, agents and managers will, you know, recommend people and they don't always recommend, you know there are a number of prominent, you know, black lawyers who so entertainment so there are prominent people that they can recommend. So yes, do I get referrals from those folks? Sure but it's not always--they may say, "Well, you know, I am more comfortable with someone else," and they refer those clients to someone else. So it's not always an advantage. Speaker 1: Has there been clients that you would not take on as a client? I mean of course and who asked you to represent them that you would not? I mean you don't have to give me their names but-- Speaker 2: Right, right. I have been fortunate in that, that hasn't happened I haven't had to do that and I think that sort of over time you get a particular kind of reputation there's certain kinds of clients that if you looked at the people that I have worked with they tend to be either trailblazers Spike [Spike Lee] was a trailblazer in film, Terry [HistoryMaker Terry McMillan] was a trailblazer in publishing, you know, or there are people with a political point of view, Sarah Jones who, you know, had 'Bridge and Tunnel' on Broadway. You know there are people who had--or Public Enemy, they have a certain point of view and I think, you know, not to say that they all have a little club and they all talk but I do know that when Terry was looking for a lawyer she did call Spike and he said, "You should call Lisa [HistoryMaker Lisa E. Davis]," you know, so you tend to attract a certain kind of client because of the clients you have worked with. So I haven't had to have, you know, someone who does something that I think really denigrates women or denigrates black people and I've had to say no I can't, you know, work with you. I haven't had, I have not been faced with that dilemma. I've been fortunate. Speaker 1: So movies, writers, I guess theater (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Theater, I represent [HistoryMaker] Ntozake Shange? Speaker 1: How about [HistoryMaker] Charles Randolph-Wright? Speaker 2: Of course I represent Charles Randolph-Wright. I love Charles. Story_ID: 378409 Speaker 1: You mentioned just a moment ago that you were in politics. We didn't talk about politics, let's talk about that for a minute. Speaker 2: Well politics was always something that I had been interested in, you know, back from working in you know protests in college [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. And when I was in law school [New York University School of Law, New York, New York] actually and this came out of there was a search, there was an effort to have a black mayoral candidate and we're talking about '85 [1985]. So I think there was some hope that [HistoryMaker] Basil Paterson was going to run and he didn't end up running and then I think it was Herman Badillo running, I think maybe Denny Farrell [Herman D. Farrell, Jr.] was also running and a group of us got so disgusted with it that we sort of came together in this loose group and it was David Paterson [HistoryMaker David A. Paterson], Phil Thompson [J. Phillip Thompson], somebody else Dayna Cunningham's husband, somebody else you should talk to--he is a professor of political science at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] Wayne Winborne, Dayna Cunningham, Chuck Sutton [Clifton "Chuck" Sutton], and I think that was the nucleus of the original group and basically we said that, you know, the generation that has been politically active in New York [New York] is kind of, we felt, kind of bollixing things up. They're so ego driven that they're not, they're not reaching out to the younger generation, they're not effectively forming coalitions, what can we do? So we started this group, we started meeting. We called ourselves--we couldn't think of a name so we called ourselves the Organization of Concerned New Yorkers and we said we were going to try to coalesce around very low level political office campaigns, not to run but to find candidates that we would support and work with them and then also try to do some direct service work. So the first thing that happened--so that, we started that when I was in law school and then out of law school, I had just graduated in '85 [1985], I started my clerkship in September, I graduated in June, I had taken the bar and David Paterson called me up and said (laughter)--okay, he said, "You've taken the bar, you don't start your clerkship for a month," he said, "from now until then your ass is mine. I'm running in a special election for state senate and you're going to run my campaign," and I'm like, "Okay." So there was a special election and we pulled together volunteers and it was all, you know, it was all county committee stuff you were, you know, not for the general election but for a special election so you're working really to get the nomination doing party politics. So we were doing fundraisers and politicking and late nights and I just, I loved doing it. I didn't see it as a career but it was just something that I thought was fun and interesting. So David was our first success and then (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And he ran for what? Speaker 2: He ran for state senate which was the, until he became lieutenant governor last Monday, you know, that was his position he had in the 29th senatorial district. So, you know, the group of us, you know, continue to meet, we did some homeless kids in a hotel, Brooklyn Arms Hotel [Granada Hotel, New York, New York]. We did some carrying petitions for Al Vann, Ed Towns [Edolphus Towns], Jesse [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] when he was running again, I guess in '88 [1988]. Just the foot soldier stuff that you do in politics. Going through the projects and trying to get people to sign petitions to get people on the ballot--stuff like that. I had a buddy to run for district leader and you know the New York electoral rules are very, very arcane and I had the same woman who recommended Dr. Shabazz [Betty Shabazz] to me trained me how to do election law so that I can be his election lawyer and help this guy Ron Ashford get on the ballot. He didn't up winning but I learned how to do that stuff. Speaker 1: What is election law (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well in New York there are very specific laws about what you must do to get in the ballot. You know, you have to have a certain number of signatures on your petitions and petitions can be challenged and they can be challenged for all kinds of technicalities so you need to be, if you are the lawyer for the campaign you need to understand what the regulations are what the bases for challenges are and how to withstand those, how to fight back and so you have to supervise the signature gathering process to make sure people aren't getting faulty petitions. It's totally anti-democratic but because people who are under the party they get you know union members or whoever their foot--they have, you know, an army of people to go out and get signatures or they'll say that somebody will carry your petition so an incumbent will say, "Well okay I'll carry your petitions as well." You know the incumbent is going to get all of the signatures that they need if they're carrying your petitions, you're going to get on the ballot. Story_ID: 378410 Speaker 1: Do you remember the first time that you voted? Speaker 2: Let's see, it would have been 1978 yeah. I was eighteen that was the first time that I voted and I'm trying to remember did I fill out an absentee ballot. I know that while I was in college [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] I did briefly register. There was someone running in Cambridge [Massachusetts] for some local office and I registered in Cambridge so that I could vote in Cambridge. Speaker 1: I just wanted to know, you know everyone has a different experience for their first time voting you know I was just wondering was there a story behind it, you know, was it very uneventful? Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, I'm in the North so (laughter). Speaker 1: So, let's see, let me make sure that I have the right dates. You came to this firm [Frankfurt Garbus Klein & Selz, PC; Frankfurt Kurnit Klein & Selz, PC] in what year? Speaker 2: Nineteen-, I have to remember, I'm pretty sure it was 1988 (simultaneous). Story_ID: 378411 Speaker 1: You also do a lot of speaking engagements and a lot of different organizations talk about a lot of different things but at one conference you spoke about branded entertainment and intellectual property. Can you tell me what that is about? Speaker 2: Sure, sure. Branded entertainment is one of those things that everybody sees it now but they might not necessarily know that that's what it is where you see brands, consumer brands, you know, sort of combining with entertainment productions so you might see a television show where a brand is embedded in it, like you take 'Extreme Makeover' ['Extreme Makeover: Home Edition'], Sears [Sears, Roebuck and Co.] is really involved in that so that's what branded entertainment is because people are realizing that there's so many claims on people's attention that if you're not actually in the entertainment program in someway, people will TiVo over the commercials, they'll mute the commercials, they'll skip the commercials so that's, you know, that's an area. It's an evolving area, an emerging area of entertainment law and of advertising where the two fields are sort of coming together. It's similar to what happened with the birth of television, all television and radio was all sponsored, that was why they're called soap operas because they were all sponsored by detergent and soap companies. So we're sort of going back to that model in some ways. Story_ID: 378412 Speaker 1: I spoke to a group of in house lawyers about that. What I like to talk more about with audiences is, you know, demystifying the career. I mean, I think that we live in a very celebrity-driven, celebrity-obsessed culture and one of the things that I talk to, when I talk to young--whether it is law students or college students, I try to A) demystify the field and explain to them, what it is I do and what's involved and one of my standard jokes is I'm not lying poolside with Denzel [Denzel Washington], I wish I were but I am not. I'm in my office, I'm negotiating contracts, I'm doing deals. The perk is that at the end of a deal that I get to go to a movie premier or I get to go to a Broadway opening instead of getting one of those silly little tombstone ads in The Wall Street Journal like most lawyers or something. But the point is really that not to be so obsessed when you're as close to people, you know, celebrities as I am and what I do, you know, they are demystified. They are people just like, you know, the rest of us and you realize that you really wouldn't want their lives because they have no privacy. When they go through trauma or pain or anything like that it's on display for the world to see and the world to comment on and people, you know, based on some of the people that I represent who will come up to me, people who don't know my clients at all and don't necessarily know me that well, and they'll start to try to engage me almost in an argument, "Well why did your client do thus and so," and I am thinking did somebody ask you why did you transfer? Why did you leave this job and go to that job or why did you break up with your husband? Is a random stranger approaching you and asking you these personal questions? We have this feeling in this country that we own these people. I think it's because that people's lives are kind of empty and they are not looking for the deeper meaning whether it's spiritually or politically, looking for something bigger than themselves so they glom on to these celebrities. So part of what I like to talk about is, try and demystify the whole thing, you know, to me what you celebrate in people is their creativity, people who are writing books and making music or making films, they are leaving something behind and it's a cultural legacy and in particularly as black people that's a big part of our cultural legacy, you know, and to have a role at protecting that is what makes me feel good about what I do 'cause that's the important thing. It's not about, you know, going to the fancy parties and seeing the (unclear) lights or going down the red carpet because early in my career I used to agonize every time Spike [Spike Lee] would have an opening, what am I going to wear, what am I going to wear and about the third opening I said you're the lawyer nobody's looking at you, it doesn't matter what you wear because I watch the cameras go like this (gesture) and then they go like this (gesture) when I walk by. So you learn early on it's not that's not what it's about. What it's about is when I see 'Malcolm X' I can say that I helped make that possible in some small way, as a lawyer, you know, making sure that all the contracts are done, making sure that the financing came through, that that film that's going to last forever is something that I helped contribute to that's, you know, that's what's meaningful about what I do. Story_ID: 378413 Speaker 1: What other organizations do you belong to? Speaker 2: These days I'm not doing much because I have two small children [Marcus Jamison and Noelle Jamison]. I was involved with--I was on the board of The East Harlem School at Exodus House [New York, New York] for about six years and I was the board chair for several years. I was involved with the Hurston/Wright Foundation on the board for a couple years. That's an organization that supports black writers and supports and celebrates black writers and trains black writers. They have a writing workshop they train up and coming writers and then they have an awards ceremony where they give awards to emerging and established black writers. So I would say that the things that I am passionate about are education, politics, and literature, you know, those are the organizations that will get me out of my house. Story_ID: 378414 Speaker 1: But I am trying to spend most of my energy now, you know, I have a fourth grader and a first grader and I am trying to make sure that they grow up to be good students, good people, disciplined, you know, happy, caring so that's--a lot of, that's where my time that that I am not working is spent with them mainly. Speaker 2: What are your children's names? Speaker 1: My son's name is Marcus [Marcus Jamison] named after Marcus Garvey and my daughter's name is Noelle [Noelle Jamison]. She was due Christmas Eve but she has her own mind and she did not show up until January 5th. Speaker 2: Tell me about--since you say that you like to spend time with your children, tell me about the holidays with your children. Speaker 1: Well, we're big on holidays. My poor husband, his birthday is Christmas Day. Speaker 2: What is your husband's name? Speaker 1: My husband's name--yeah, my poor husband, we're an hour and a half into the interview and my husband is just getting mentioned now, poor thing. His name is Anthony Jamison and he is a film editor and producer and he is a proud graduate of Howard University [Washington, D.C.] and Bed-Stuy [Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn, New York] do or die (laughter) and-- Speaker 2: You were talking about Christmas--holidays sorry. Speaker 1: Well, my husband is a Christmas baby so that means that all of the Christmas preparation is on me because my husband is not going to lift a finger because it's his birthday. So we usually get the tree about two weeks before Christmas and, you know, this year my kids actually decorated it but it's usually a thing with my husband and the kids decorate the tree. They get the ornaments, we pick a color scheme, you know, we alternate different years what the color scheme is. We put stockings up by the fireplace. I make Christmas cookies every year, I've done that every year with my kids since my son was about four and either we'll invite some friends over and we'll do a cookie party and everyone will bake or mainly I will bake and they will sprinkle a couple of things on the gingerbread men to make them think that they're doing something or this year I just baked with my kids and we put them cookies in little bags and they brought them to their friends. You know, we made cookies and milk for Santa [Santa Claus]. I'm getting a little tired of the Santa racket because I would like the credit now but I'm not going to bust their bubble so they believe in Santa. Thanksgiving I alternate with my mother-in-law [Barbara McKay] but we go back and forth, you know, who cooks Thanksgiving dinner. Christmas dinner, I always host Christmas dinner. So, I make the turkey, the stuffing, the macaroni and cheese, the sweet potato pies, and I do all of that stuff-- Story_ID: 378415 Speaker 1: Yeah, I can cook too (laughter). I saw that look on your face like really? I think I'm that last generation--I tell you know, young sisters--I was at a dinner with a bunch of lawyers at Paul Wiess [Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton & Garrison, LLP], a bunch of black women lawyers and I said, "If you're looking for a husband know how to cook. I don't care how many degrees you have. Your husband does not care if you made law review because that is not going to, you know, keep him warm at night and it's gonna keep him fed," and it's very, sort of, retro advice I suppose but I guess I was raised to believe that as black women, we have to do it all. We have to be smart, we have to look good, we have to cook, we have to be able to take care of the house, we have to do it all and maybe it's the West Indian in me, you just work hard, that's just it. You do it. Speaker 2: So you're able to juggle this high power position, take care of a house with children, no nanny, no housekeeper (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, heck no! I'm not crazy. You have to be able to do it all doesn't mean that you have to actually do it all, all the time. No, I have a nanny, I have a cleaning person, no, no, no, no, no. But I have been a janitor in my, you know, I can clean a bathroom floor, I can clean a toilet if I have to. Story_ID: 378416 Speaker 1: You said you were a janitor, when was this? Speaker 2: When I was in college. Speaker 1: What other jobs have you had? Well, let's back up. Where were you a janitor? Speaker 2: I was a janitor at a wood burning stove company (laughter). You know, you go to the placement office and Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] alums will say, "We want a Harvard student to do this job." So my job was to clean up the office, it was one little floor, clean up the office, you know, straighten up, clean the bathroom, vacuum, straighten up the papers, take the garbage out and the guy was so cute, he would have sherry at the end of the day and sometimes I would have to go to the liquor store to get sherry because every day at the end of the day we would have sherry and I was allowed to have sherry as well. But, I did that, I was a mother's helper, which also involved a lot of, that was when I was in high school [New Rochelle High School, New Rochelle, New York] cleaning kitchens, dishes, toilets, mopping, vacuuming. What else, what other jobs? I shelved books in the physics library. What else have I done? I'm trying to remember what other part time jobs that I did--and I never did any babysitting. Cleaning, I can do that well. Story_ID: 378417 Speaker 1: So is there anything else about your life that you want to talk about? Speaker 2: Well let's see we've covered my kids [Marcus Jamison and Noelle Jamison], my husband [Anthony Jamison], my job, my childhood starting with my fifth birthday. I think that we covered just about everything. Well, no I can talk about--we didn't talk about what I do in my spare time. I'm a runner so I'm a distance runner. I've run the New York Marathon [New York City Marathon] twice and I run half marathons now. So that's something else that I do. Speaker 1: Do you have a regular exercise routine? Speaker 2: I run about three to four times a week and I run about four to five miles most times. I'll go long one day, every couple of weeks I run six and a half miles or seven miles to sort of stay in shape for the half marathons 'cause I do two half marathons a year. Story_ID: 378418 Speaker 1: Well, thinking about your career, what attorneys do you admire that's in today's society? Speaker 2: I would say Ted Wells [HistoryMaker Theodore Wells] is somebody I really admire. Have you all interviewed him yet? Speaker 1: Oh, I am not sure. Speaker 2: You have got to interview Ted Wells, he is, he's huge. He's representing Scooter Libby. He's a criminal defense lawyer, he's co-chair of the litigation group at Paul Weiss [Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton & Garrison, LLP]. The kinds of folks that I admire, somebody like Ted who, you know, did not feel that being successful meant that you had to be stiff, that you had to assimilate, that you had to forget who you were, you know. There's no mistaking that Ted is a real black man when you meet him. He's also undeniably brilliant and those are the kinds of people that I really admire. I mean, I had the good fortune of meeting Thurgood Marshall once when I was in law school he came to speak at NYU [New York University School of Law, New York, New York] and he taught, he used the occasion to talk about the death penalty and I remember he said, he was talking about why he felt it was unconstitutional and he said, he ended it and said, "I don't know about the rest of them but I can sleep at night," and then afterwards there was a reception and he was talking to some of the students and I remember there was like a guy who was a class ahead of me, a brother named Lenny Noisette [Leonard Noisette] and he said, you know, and we were introducing ourselves and he says, "I'm Lenny Noisette," and he said, "You from Baltimore [Maryland]? I know some Noisettes from Baltimore," and I'm like wow, this is Justice Marshall saying, "Hey, I know some Noisettes from Baltimore, you related to them?" You know, just like that to me because I think so much particularly for my generation, a lot of the message that you receive from society is that something inherent in our culture that, you know, is incompatible with academic and professional success and so the people that I admire are the people that achieve the success academically or professionally and do not forget who they are, change who they are so those are two examples that I can point to. Story_ID: 378419 Speaker 1: Because this is going to be information that generations to come will see, what would be your message for future generations? Speaker 2: I mean I think it would really just be sort of elaborating on what I just said which is that, you know, one of the things that I think we have lost sight of and I think this current generation, the generation is the generation behind me, lost sight of is that we as a culture, black Americans, have a lot to be proud of. We have accomplished a lot in the face of incredible odds. We have, not to say that we have overcome but I was going to day that we have overcome incredible odds. We've invented things, we've created things, not just culturally but in terms of inventions, there are all sorts of things that we have been able to achieve and it's important I think for all of us and future generations to be educated about our history because again that's an armor that you take out into the world because often I am in an environment where I am the only or one of a few, you know, black people and the confidence that I have is not just because my family always told me I can do things, it's because I know that I am not the first smart black person to be in--to walk around in this country. There are legions and legions of very, very smart, smarter black people that have come before me and so knowing what they were able to do, you know, there's a path that's there and I think that's the important thing and then not to fall back on, you know, racism exists but we cannot use that as an excuse not to do our best work, you know, and just say, you know, you're going to outsmart them. God gave you a brain, use it! So that would be my message. Story_ID: 378420 Speaker 1: We were talking earlier and you said something about the fact that what you do is--you said something about your satisfaction that you get out of your job was because you were like a civil rights lawyer for the affluent? Speaker 2: Yes which--right, (laughter) right. Speaker 1: Elaborate on that, what you mean by that. What is it that you do that makes you feel that way? Because I know that a lot of black folk need protection because they don't know so this is kind of what you do, is that right? Speaker 2: That's, so that's exactly it, you know, the greatest wealth that has come out of the black community is in the area of culture, arts, and intellectual property whether it's music, whether it's books, poetry, whether it's dances that we have choreographed. That is where we have created and generated wealth and if there aren't advocates advising those creators, those cultural workers so to speak and saying this is how you protect what you've created both from the standpoint of not compromising your artistic vision but also for making sure that they maximize the money that they make and that it's available to their children and their heirs. If you look at the Cole Porter estate, I mean, I don't think he had any kids but it's still generating incredible revenues. The Rodgers and Hammerstein [Richard Rodgers and Oscar Hammerstein II] catalog, that's, you know, those people are set you know, whereas if you look at, you know, the heirs of many well-known jazz musicians, you know, it's not the same thing so that's why I feel it is so important because from the foundation of some wealth you can build and say okay, we're going to build the youth center, we're going to build--we're going to contribute an endowed chair to a historically black college [HBCU]. We're going to do these things but we are going to start from creating and amassing some capital and this is where we generate it but it goes out of our communities. So if I can help people keep more of it, that's an important thing to do. Story_ID: 378421 Speaker 1: So is that one of your concerns? Are there any other concerns about the African American community? Speaker 2: I have lots of concerns about--the African American community as a whole? Speaker 1: As a whole. Speaker 2: To me the biggest concern right now that I have is about education. I mean, I am, as a beneficiary of Brown vs. Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] I am stunned at the complete resegregation of the schools. I saw Derrick Bell [HistoryMaker Derrick A. Bell, Jr.] speak a year ago and he said the schools are more segregated now than they were at the time of Brown vs. Board of Education and the incredible backlash that has occurred in the last twenty years to erase all of the gains. You look at what's going before the [U.S.] Supreme Court right now they're looking into whether they can do away with a voluntary integration plan. This is the plan where the elected board of education has said we want to have some kind of racial balance in schools because we recognize that it's good for society and it's good for learning, it's good for students and the courts are going to upend that. When I look at what goes on even in my affluent community school district where there's tracking and even in a community where the income of the black families is higher than the income of the white families. The top classes are 87 percent white and the bottom classes are conversely 87 percent black. That to me is my biggest concern for our community because they are going to take away all that you know, Thurgood Marshall and Constance Baker Motley and all those people gained. They're going to take it away. So that's my obsession right now quite frankly, is education and what is happening to the education of black children. Story_ID: 378422 Speaker 1: If you were going to look back over your life, of course you are not as old as (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Old as some of your other interviewees (laughter). Speaker 1: Exactly, but even to this point because, you know, hopefully there will be a second part to your interview when you are eighty. Speaker 2: Right, God willing. Speaker 1: Just looking back over what you have done, what stands out the most? Speaker 2: In terms of--when you say what stands out-- Speaker 1: In your life, any experience or anything. What comes to your mind when you just think over your life what just comes to your mind? Speaker 2: I guess the main thing that comes to my mind that I've been--what do they say luck is the combination of preparation and opportunity? So I've been very lucky because I have always tried to be very prepared for the opportunities that are going to come and I have been fortunate that the opportunities have come to allow me the kind of career that I have had. You know if I think back to when I was a senior in college [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and I sort of envisioned my life and I am living the exact life that I envisioned but I am very disciplined in that way so it's good fortune but it's also trying to meet that good fortune with some preparation. Story_ID: 378423 Speaker 1: Usually, you know, we ask older people how they want to be remembered, but instead of that, what kind of legacy are you trying to build to leave? Speaker 2: You know, I think the legacy will be twofold. Obviously I have young children [Marcus Jamison and Noelle Jamison], they're seven and nine so I hope that when you come back and I'm eighty that--and they're forty-seven and forty-nine (laughter)--that they are successful, happy, healthy, well-adjusted, well-educated kids and you know, I hope, you know the thing about lawyers and I realized this when my partner Arthur Klein [Arthur J. Klein] died and I saw how, you know, he got no obituary in The Times [The New York Times] and a very small one in the trades and the thing about lawyers is a lot of what we do, unless you are a civil rights lawyer, a lot of what you do is invisible. So, you know, you have clients who are happy and they're satisfied and you've help, like a said, in some small way, you know, my name isn't anywhere on 'Malcolm X' nobody knows, you know, other than me saying it in this interview or if you pulled some contracts out of files, you'll see that the cover letters all came from me. You know, a lot of what I do is invisible. So, so I don't know if I'll leave a legacy in law other than trying to be an example, trying to mentor people, trying to be, you know, a positive, positive member of the bar someone that people can point to, "Well this is a person who was a partner. There are all these studies in The New York Times about blacks not making partner in law firms." You know, here is somebody who was a partner, here's somebody who was on law review, here's somebody who did these things and broke down certain barriers and you know, represented a number of prominent people and did it well. So I guess that would be, you know. Not a real exciting legacy, but you know-- Speaker 1: But it's a nice legacy. Story_ID: 378424 Speaker 1: So for a female African American woman who is going to law school, what is your advice? Speaker 2: First advice is to get the best grades you possibly can, to really study hard, and you know, I would say, I would rather say what my advice is for a young lawyer starting out, whether it's African American woman or man rather than a law student, because people always tell you study hard. That's easy, easy advice, that's all you have to do in school. But the key thing I think when you are starting out practicing law and the mistake that a lot of people make, particularly when they're working in big firms, is that they just say I am going to put my head down and just do my best work and that's going to be the key to my success. And the key thing is to realize is that no one is responsible for your career except you and so the way that you build your career and you enhance your career. If I look back and say--you know you asked me before--what's the one thing that I can look back on and you sort of notice or look back and say that I have done well or successfully. I have to say it's that I was always out and what I mean about that is that of course I was doing my work, I was doing a good job, I was very dedicated but I was, at the same time, I was politically involved and politically active and so I have a tremendous network of people that I know and other people that know me. There's a, and I don't know the term for it but there's been a, there's a school of thought now in Corporate America that black women are undervalued because we are doing all of these things outside of the job that nobody knows but where we are demonstrating leadership capacity. You know, whether it is in our churches or community groups and things like that, things of that nature but that's where you meet people. The other job offer that I got came because I was working on a political campaign with a guy in the union whose wife was a secretary in a law firm and she said, "My law firm does entertainment work let me walk your resume in." So you never know where opportunity is going to come from. I would say that that's my advice to young lawyers. Don't think that the answer is within the four walls of your place of employment. Remember that you are part of a community whether it's a community of lawyers, a community of black people, community of activists, community of people in the arts. You need to think about what you want to be and say I have to be part of that community because that is how you get career success in addition to doing excellent work, that's a baseline. Story_ID: 378425 Speaker 1: What do you hope to achieve in the very near future? Speaker 2: In the very near future I have some prosaic goals in terms of building my practice which is a very prosaic goal. I have some fantasies. I'd like to write a novel. Probably every lawyer you tap has a novel or a screenplay in the drawer. So in the near term those are probably my two goals professionally and then I want to figure out a way to turn this obsession with education into some real achievable results whether it's locally--I'm involved in a committee in my local school district, I'm trying to get a certain curriculum brought in you know whether it's that, it's the International Baccalaureate curriculum, we are trying to bring that into our school district. Whether it's that or something on a bigger scale I really want to have some impact on education because it's, to me it's the engine of social mobility in this country and, you know, black people aren't getting it we're just not. Speaker 1: Well, I think that what you have done so far is very admirable and-- Speaker 2: Thank you. Speaker 1: --and it's just wonderful to be able to meet someone who is such a go getter. Speaker 2: Thank you. Speaker 1: It's just wonderful because you, like I said, we do a lot of older people but to have somebody like you is just really a pleasure-- Speaker 2: Thank you. Speaker 1: --and we want to thank you so much for spending the time to give us this interview because we know that your time is valuable. Speaker 2: Thanks very much...