 Story_ID: 609174 Speaker 1: I'm Denise Gines, the interviewer for The HistoryMakers, Matthew Hickey is the videographer. Would you please state your name and spell it for me, please? Speaker 2: My name is Myrtle Reid Davis [HistoryMaker Myrtle Davis], M-Y-R-T-L-E, R-E-I-D, D-A-V-I-S. Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth? Speaker 2: October 9th, 1931. Speaker 1: And your place of birth? Speaker 2: Rock Hill, South Carolina. Speaker 1: Tell me your occupation? Speaker 2: I've had many. (Laughter) I started off as a pharmacist. And then for a period of time I, I was--and worked at pharmacy for just a short period of time before I got married. And then I was a full time housewife and mother for a number of years before I went back to work. And when I went back to work, I went back--well, I did have a short, short work period at Grady Hospital [Grady Memorial Hospital, Atlanta, Georgia] as a hospital pharmacist. I worked in retail before. But, the opportunity presented itself for me to do--to work with a program called Leadership Atlanta, which is a leadership development program here in Atlanta. And I worked with that program for about ten years. And, of course, during that time I ran for political office and I spent twelve years as an elected official [for Atlanta City Council]. And after my days as an elected official, I went back to work at the city for the water department [City of Atlanta Department of Watershed Management] as a water utility manager. And I retired in 1998. So I've done a number of things. Speaker 1: Okay. So, you're a retired pharmacist (laughter)-- Speaker 2: Program director (laughter), politician, and, and water utility manager. Speaker 1: Okay. And the location of this interview? Speaker 2: It's at my home in, in Atlanta, Georgia. Speaker 1: And today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is February 28th, 2008. Story_ID: 609175 Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna ask you what I call People magazine-ish type questions. Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Tell me what it is. Speaker 2: Brown. Speaker 1: What about a favorite food, what do you like to eat? Speaker 2: I like gumbo. Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Fall. Speaker 1: And what about vacations, what's your favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: In the whole world my favorite vacation spot is Italy. Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase? Speaker 2: I think it's the golden rule: do unto others as you would have them do unto you. Story_ID: 609176 Speaker 1: Let's talk about your family, and let's begin with your mother. Can you tell me your mother's name, spell it for me, and tell me when and where she was born? Speaker 2: My mother's, my mother's name is Emmalee, one word, E-M-M-A-L-E-E, Williams, W-I-L-L-I-A-M-S, Reid, R-E-I-D [Emmalee Williams Reid]. And she was born in Swansea, South Carolina. Speaker 1: Do you know what year? Speaker 2: I think 1903, somewhere around that time. She gave several dates so (laughter), I think 1903 is the year that she was born. Speaker 1: How far can you go back in your mother's lineage? Speaker 2: Well, I knew my grandmother. I did not know my great-grandmother, so I can't go back very far. And my daughter, Stephanie [HistoryMaker Stephanie Davis], is the one who has really pulled together as much information as she could through Ancestry.com and working through that. But I don't have a remembrance of my grandparents at all only, well, of my grandparents, I do not my great-grandparents. I don't have any remembrance Speaker 1: All right. Well, tell me your grandmother's name? Speaker 2: My grandmother's name, there again, it's Georgia Holley, G-E-O-R-G-I-A, Georgia Holley [Georgia Holley Williams], H-O-L-L-E-Y. She later was known as Claudia. She changed her name to Claudia Holley [Claudia Williams] but, nevertheless she was quite a lady and someone who kind of broke the mold. Living in the South with I think five children, and decided that she needed a better way of life and moved to New York [New York]. And, really whatever she earned she sent back to help support the children. But my mother was the oldest child and kind of took responsibility for the family. I think at that time she was a teenager. But the other brothers and sisters pretty much throughout their lives always relied on my mother as almost a surrogate mother for them. Speaker 1: What about your grandfather, what was his name? Speaker 2: My grandfather's name was George Williams, G-E-O-R-G-E, Williams. Speaker 1: Do you remember him? Speaker 2: Only vaguely, he died when I was quite young. I've heard stories about him, I knew that he sold insurance but I don't know much about him. Speaker 1: Was that the only story that you heard about him? Speaker 2: I don't have many recollections of him at all 'cause he, he died very early. Speaker 1: Before your grandmother went to New York, where did they live? Speaker 2: They lived in South Carolina, they lived in--I think in Orangeburg, South Carolina, which is very close to Swansea. Story_ID: 609177 Speaker 1: Tell me about your mother [Emmalee Williams Reid], describe your mother to me. Speaker 2: My mother was a mover and a shaker. She was truly the person in the family who had the ambition for everybody, I mean, and the drive and, and, anything else. But she, she graduated from South Carolina State with a normal education [Colored Normal Industrial, Agricultural, and Mechanical College of South Carolina; South Carolina State University, Orangeburg, South Carolina], which is equivalent I guess to junior college maybe, maybe two years of college. And, for years and years she was a teacher. She came to Rock Hill from Orangeburg [South Carolina] to teach. And for years and years went back to South Carolina State for summer school. And, little did I know, over the extended period of time she was working on her bachelor's degree at South Carolina State. In fact, did not receive that degree until the year of my graduation from college [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana], which was 1953. So, over a period of years she had been going back taking courses and--but working always toward getting her, her baccalaureate degree. She started her teaching in the county schools around Rock Hill, South Carolina when most of the schools were Rosenwald schools. Julius Rosenwald had, had endowed a number of schools and many of them were located in rural areas throughout the South. And, of course, she taught first and then became a principal. What, what, what being a principal meant was that she was the first there in the morning. They had to start the fires themselves, they did all of the preparation of lunch and so forth and so on. But, she was up very early, always cooked breakfast and dinner for us before she left and she was gone. And we usually saw her at the, at the end of the day. And she did that for many, many years. Story_ID: 609178 Speaker 1: My father [Carl Reid], rather, worked at the post office [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service]. Now, he was truly employed I think as a janitor but he did everything under the sun. I mean, he, he carried mail to the train station. He did a whole lot of things in his capacity and worked there for many, many years. A very dependable person, but always a person who, whose only interests was that of his children. A stay at home body, he was also up early in the morning making fires before he left to be sure that everybody was warm and taken care of. And, if it was raining, seeing to it that we got to school. If not, we of course walked because we were not that far away from school. And school itself, of course, was--I started at Emmett Scott [Emmett Scott School, Rock Hill, South Carolina]. Speaker 2: Well, excuse me-- Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: --but before you go-- Speaker 1: All right, I'm telling you about my mother [Emmalee Williams Reid] and my father. Let me get back to my mother because my mother was a--I told you about her work ethic and about how she moved from rural teacher. She later became a dean's supervisor. When she retired, of course, she was traveling around to various other schools like the one she was in, being a resource to pe- to teachers in those schools. And, of course, she retired as a dean's supervisor. Story_ID: 609179 Speaker 1: Did she [Davis' mother, Emmalee Williams Reid] share any stories about her growing up? Did she live on a farm or did they live in the city limits? Did she talk about that (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, they lived in the rural area [Rock Hill, South Carolina]. I don't think they did much farming. As I told you before, her father [George Williams] was an insurance agent and I know that all of her brothers and sisters were very, very much dependent upon her even as they became adults. She still was that figure in the family that everybody kind of gravitated to, to work out whatever situation it was. She didn't have a lot of stories but she had some rather eccentric brothers and sisters as well. Speaker 1: Tell me about--those would be your aunts and uncles. Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: Tell me their names and, and tell me about them? Speaker 2: All right. There was John who was John Williams, who ran a shoe shop in Orangeburg, South Carolina for many years. And, of course, he went back to school and got his master's degree and later became a principal. So, at the time of his death, he was really an educator. There was a brother, J. Lincoln [Joshua Williams], who was a head of the mathematics department at South Carolina State [Colored Normal Industrial, Agricultural, and Mechanical College of South Carolina; South Carolina State University, Orangeburg, South Carolina]. And his is also a very interesting story because we have some of the records of his obtaining a Ph.D. in mathematics from Columbia University in, in New York [New York]. And, of course, it's very interesting because he talks about the racism and how hard it was to achieve a Ph.D. even back in those days. It was even more difficult than it is today for the normal person who is trying to achieve that degree. But he was the kind of person who was very eccentric. Always drove a Lincoln automobile that he took the backseat out of, because he didn't want to have to carry anybody else in, in his car. (Laughter) And I remember on one or two occasions when we visited him, when he was further along in age, being in that car that had no backseat in it. But an excellent teacher, excellent teacher. Then there was a, a brother Theodore [Theodore Williams] who was--had moved away many years ago and lived in Washington, D.C. for a while. And he worked at the U.S. Mint for many years. And then there was the youngest sister, Blondell [Blondell Williams], who, as a child I remember her living in Greenville, South Carolina but she later moved to Nashville, Tennessee. And she died there just several years ago. But that basically is the family. Speaker 1: Were your mother and the uncle who received his Ph.D., were they the only ones that completed college? Speaker 2: No, John did. John went back and got master's and, and was a--I guess the only one that didn't achieve or didn't maybe did not go to college was Theodore, the one who went to Washington and worked at the Mint. I don't think he graduated from college but the others did. Speaker 1: Did he ever talk about the U.S. Mint and the type of work that he did there? Speaker 2: I wasn't around him that much (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That much. Speaker 2: Wasn't around him that much. Speaker 1: And what normal school did your mother attend? Speaker 2: South Carolina State. Story_ID: 609180 Speaker 1: I was gonna go to your father but is there any knowledge of--you said that you did not know your [maternal] grandparents [Georgia Holley Williams and George Williams] or your [maternal] great-grandparents, but do you know anything about their ancestry? Speaker 2: Well, I only know I had--my father's--on my father's side of the family I knew a sister by the name of Sally [Sally Reid (ph.)]. And, of course, I used to visit them in York. They lived in York, South Carolina, which was-- Speaker 1: Okay but on your mother's [Emmalee Williams Reid] side, you have no knowledge? Speaker 2: I have no knowledge. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, well then let's go to your father's side. Speaker 2: Okay, my father had a sister, Sally, who lived in York, South Carolina. Speaker 1: Tell me your father's name? Speaker 2: Carl, Carl, Carl Reid. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, one sister's name was Sally. There was another one whose name--a brother whose name was Walter [Walter Reid (ph.)], who also lived in York, South Carolina. And there was another brother, Homesey [Homesey Reid (ph.)], who lived in Charlotte, North Carolina that I got to know later when I got out of college [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana] and moved to Charlotte to work for a while. I had a brief time to, to get to know him. Speaker 1: Okay. And, did you know your grandparents [Jane Owens Reid and Joseph Reid] on your father's side? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Not at all? Speaker 2: Not at all. Speaker 1: Do you know anything about their ancestry as far as-- Speaker 2: No, I don't. Only their names but I, I, I didn't--I never knew--in fact, I'm sure they, by the time I came along, they had passed. Speaker 1: York, South Carolina? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And that area was known for the first settlors of the Catawba Indians [Native American], did--was there any talk of mixed marriages with the Indian. Speaker 2: Well, you would have to see the family to probably surmise that there was some, some Indian blood in the family but it was never discussed. And, of course, when we recently did a DNA testing with this company from Washington [D.C.], and of course there was no evidence of Indian blood on my side. So, we were able to go back and to determine there was some African blood in the, in the linage but all the details of that I, I don't have any knowledge of. Story_ID: 609181 Speaker 1: So, tell me about your, your father [Carl Reid]. Describe him to me. Speaker 2: Well, he was, he was a hard worker. As, as I said before, he was the kind of person whose only dedication of course was to his working and taking care of his family. A very non-social person who went to bed every night at nine o'clock and did not--he was just not a social person at all. My mother [Emmalee Williams Reid] was the social butterfly and wanted to be involved in everything. He, on the other hand, was not. But their relationship somehow, I mean, it was all worked out so there was never any problem as a result of it. As I said before, with my mother's working in the rural areas and coming home late, he was truly the person who was--that we could count on. Because, even though he worked at the post office [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service], his hours were flexible where if he had to leave work to come to see about something he could do that. In the evenings he was the one who helped with homework, even though he just had an elementary school education. But he was a smart man who, I guess, really just used arithmetic the way that most people would not know of. But he was, he was very thorough and always taught us how to reason and how to use--logically get to the, the answer of a, of a problem. He was very smart in that regard. And I do remember his--my going to him with, with arithmetic problems to help me and he was always very helpful to me. Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your mother and father met? Speaker 2: I don't think I recall them saying how they met. I don't think we've ever talked about how they met. I think she had come to, to Rock Hill [South Carolina] to work as a teacher and they somehow met, and married and, and the rest is history. But I, I don't recall a specific story about how they met (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Story_ID: 609182 Speaker 1: So, they settled in Rock Hill, South Carolina (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 1: Tell me about Rock Hill. Speaker 2: Well, Rock Hill now is probably a--it's a bedroom community of Charlotte, North Carolina. But it was a textile town. And, of course, I grew up in the days of segregation and I started off--as I was telling you, I started off with Emmett Scott elementary school [Emmett Scott School, Rock Hill, South Carolina] and I graduated at Emmett Scott high school. And went from--we didn't have kindergarten in those days but started at first grade. And we were the first class to complete twelve years of education. They added the twelve year with my class, which was the class of 1949. Speaker 1: Now, tell me about the neighborhood in which you lived? Did you live in a home? Speaker 2: I lived in a home. Speaker 1: Describe the neighborhood, give me a tour of the--a square block around your home? Speaker 2: I would imagine--I lived on Hampton Street, which is about two blocks from Main Street in Rock Hill. And I remember moving in that house because originally my parents had lived on Trade Street in Rock Hill. And I must have been four or five years old when they built the house on Hampton Street. It was a three bedroom bungalow type house and, of course, it remained our, our home place until my mother [Emmalee Williams Reid] decided, you know, after my father's [Carl Reid] death and so forth when she moved to Orangeburg, South Carolina. Back again, where I had a sister who was living there at the time. But, Rock Hill itself is, is a small town where everybody knows everybody. And I think for the most part I have rather led a sheltered life, I never knew how much struggle there was because they never complained about, you know, not having this, that and the other. So, I mean, the whole idea of, of, of poverty just never came up. I knew that there were a lot of people who had far less than we had, and there were a lot of people who had a lot more than we had but we seemed to have enough. And we seemed to make do with what we had. There was always the expectation that the three girls, my older sister Ruby [Ruby Reid Smith], my--the second sister who was Willie Carl [Willie Carl Reid] and me would all go to college. As Ruby and Willie Carl left to go to college, my mother since adopted three more girls who came to live--Dorothy Lynn [ph.] came to live with us when she was in high school. And she lived in the community that my mother had taught in, and had lost her mother. And my mother kind of took her under her wing and brought her in to go to school and to be a part of our family. Well, she, she is as close as any sister I have. Then there were two others who came. Florence [ph.], who was taken in the same way, and then there was Sadie Lasker [ph.], the last girl, who was also taken in. So, while she--my mother had only three natural children, she took in three additional girls for a total of six. Story_ID: 609183 Speaker 1: Tell me about the neighborhood and the people that lived in the community, maybe what they did for a living if you, if you know (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, all right. Speaker 1: And some of your friends, who were they? Speaker 2: All right, the, the people who lived across the street were the Gavings family. And the Gavings family--Dr. Gavings [ph.] was a dentist, his wife was really a business woman. She had--she helped run--they had a drug store and a flower shop. And their daughters, of course, moved into the same businesses, Doris [Doris Gavings (ph.)] and Glenda [Glenda Gavings (ph.)]. There was the Pride [ph.] family, which, which they were also across the street, all of whom had gone to--all the sons had gone to college. There was the Miller [ph.] family to the left of us. They were a couple without children and, of course, they took me wherever they wanted to go. I mean, if they were going to visit relatives in Greenville, South Carolina or Laurens, South Carolina I was usually their adopted child that they took along. My friends came from kids right there in the neighborhood. The Gavings family of course, the, the Pride family. My best friend was Betty Crockett [ph.] who lived not too far from me and she, of course, was, was a friend throughout my high school days. She was ahead of me in high school [Emmett Scott School, Rock Hill, South Carolina] and went to college before I started. Most of my other friends were friends that I had acquired in school. Story_ID: 609184 Speaker 1: What is your earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: What would be my earliest childhood memory? I can remember, I can remember as a child having--we played outside and I came back to, to nibble on something that was some leftovers that were left on the stove. And what it was, was some fish. And I ate a piece of the fish and got a fishbone in my throat (laughter), which had--I had to go to the doctor to have it removed. And I remember all of the confusion caused by the fishbone. That was one of my earliest memories. I, I couldn't have been more than four or five years old. Five years old maybe, but eating that fish and getting that fishbone stuck in my throat was really a, a traumatic thing at that time. I can remember playing--we always had to be back inside by the time the sun went down. I can remember going to the segregated movies and having--we sat in the balcony of course. But a treat was going to see the cowboy movies on Friday, Friday afternoon. And, I have so many memories, memories of going to church. And my mother [Emmalee Williams Reid] and father [Carl Reid] were Presbyterians; I later became Catholic. But growing up as a child I remember going to the Presbyterian church where they were members. Story_ID: 609185 Speaker 1: What do you remember about segregation when you were in elementary school? Was there something that your parents had to tell you, was it just things that you instinctively knew to do? Speaker 2: Well, we knew that there was a separation of schools. We knew that all the, the--then colored children went to Emmett Scott [Emmett Scott School, Rock Hill, South Carolina] and the white kids went to--I've forgotten the name of the elementary school but there was a Rock Hill High School [Rock Hill, South Carolina], which was the all-white high school at the time. And, of course, that was integrated long after I, I graduated in '49 [1949] and probably the integration of Washington High [ph.] didn't take place until the mid-'60s [1960s]. So, let me, let me tell you a little bit about the segregation. I never was faced especially with, with having doors shut in my face, but I think that was because my mother [Emmalee Williams Reid] and my father [Carl Reid] were both known. Whenever we went shopping anywhere there was never any differences shown, you know, we never were warned about not doing this, that and the other. We knew that there were black and white fountains and so forth because they were marked. Story_ID: 609186 Speaker 1: All right, we were talking about segregation. Speaker 2: Yes. Rock Hill [South Carolina] was a, a segregated city, as I said before, there were the signs on the fountains and of course there were things that, that we could not participate in. And there were--I'm sure we had a swimming pool but I never knew where it was and never was able to, to go to it. But I think my mother [Emmalee Williams Reid] and father [Carl Reid] did a good job of sheltering us, but yet being very realistic about segregation and all that it implied. My mother knew every retailer in town and of course was a welcomed customer whenever she came in so we never had any problems in terms of trying on clothes or shoes or anything like that. There was never any, any kind of difference shown but there was certainly a separation of the races. My mother in later years became very much involved with the business community in a number of ways. But, of course, that's a different era that's moving into the civil rights era. Speaker 1: Okay, we will, we will definitely talk about that (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. Story_ID: 609187 Speaker 1: Emmett Scott elementary school [Emmett Scott School, Rock Hill, South Carolina], do you know who Emmett Scott [Emmett Jay Scott] was? Speaker 2: Yes, I, I have heard a great deal about Emmett Scott and, of course, as a result of Emmett Scott and all that he--all of his contributions was the reason why our school was named as it was. The school itself was a, a huge two story building that was separated according to grades. My first grade teacher, Miss Millie Gist [ph.], was probably the best first grade teacher one could have. And I could say that if I go through--if I could recall the names. I do remember Miss--Mrs. Ana [ph.], who was the second grade teacher, and Mrs. Sweeney [ph.], who was the third grade teacher. But all of them gave us the kind of education, and I'm sure that the, that the resources were so much greater in the white schools but it never made a difference to them. They never made it a difference. If they were hand me down books from the white schools, we took it with a grain of salt. They weren't new books when we got them and we hardly ever saw new books, but nevertheless we learned from those books. And I think we learned a lot from the teachers themselves, who not only taught the reading, writing and arithmetic, but taught all the other things that go along with living. I can't say that my education was inferior because, when I, I went to, to take exams to go to college, I did quite well on everything. But I did manage to finish valedictorian in my class and, as I said before, it was ex- just expected that all of us were going to college. Story_ID: 609188 Speaker 1: Both my sisters had matriculated at South Carolina State [Colored Normal Industrial, Agricultural, and Mechanical College of South Carolina; South Carolina State University, Orangeburg, South Carolina]. My oldest sister [Ruby Reid Smith], after one year, went into nursing and went to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] to Mercy Hospital [Mercy Philadelphia Hospital] to become a registered nurse. And she later, of course, went back and got her bachelor's [degree] in, in nursing. And she has lived in, in Philadelphia ever since that--right after that freshman year out of college. My second sister, Willie Carl [Willie Carl Reid], graduated from South Carolina State and remained in the Orangeburg [South Carolina]--she lived there until she died. Dorothy [Dorothy Lynn (ph.)], who was my first adopted sister, went to South Carolina State and she graduated. Well, when my time came, and I was a year graduating before Dorothy, when my time came I did not wanna go to South Carolina State. I wanted to go someplace else, but I knew it was gonna be difficult to break the mold of going to someplace other than--and to justify it. So, I looked for something that would take me out of state, that I would still be able to get some, some help, some financial help with, and I decided on pharmacy. Pharmacy was only offered at the University of South Carolina [Columbia, South Carolina] and I couldn't go to the University of South Carolina. But the state would pay my tuition to go out of state. So I decided that I would go to Xavier [Xavier University of Louisiana] in New Orleans [Louisiana] and I wanted to do that, because I was a recent convert to Catholicism and I wanted to go to a Catholic college. So that was really the motivation for going. Pharmacy was just the, the vehicle to get me there. Story_ID: 609189 Speaker 1: Before we go on to college [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana], let's go back a little bit. You told me about the teachers that you had in your elementary [Emmett Scott School, Rock Hill, South Carolina]--you went to the same school all the way through to the twelfth grade (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) All the way through, yes. Speaker 1: Was there a teacher, one particular teacher, that encouraged you or someone that you looked up to? I mean, all these teachers seemed to be-- Speaker 2: All of my teachers were, were good. The one that I really liked who, who was not necessarily a warm and fuzzy person at all, but she was just a person who was, was my French teacher. Her name was Miss Figna [ph.], who was an excellent teacher, but she was somebody who kind of inspired me to learn, you know. She, she made you wanna learn. The little French that I know right now goes right back to high school, French that I took with her. She was really the motivating one but I had several other teachers. There was Miss Gigal [ph.], who taught biology who was excellent. There was a chemistry teacher, Mr. Ruff [ph.], who was also very good. It was chemistry and biology, of course, that helped me with my--in, in preparation for my pharmacy courses. And, little did I know that they were gonna, you know, things were gonna work out the way they did. But I, I excelled very well when I went to, to college [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana] and in my freshman chemistry class and everything else. Speaker 1: That help-- Story_ID: 609190 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) If you can think of a, a sound, a sight, or a smell that would take you back to that time, what would you say? Speaker 2: You know what, when you first said smell, the first thing I thought of was--and I'm trying to think where the bakery was, but the smell of freshly baked bread all the time coming from the bakery. And I, I can't for the life of me think of where that bakery was, but somehow my childhood and the whole idea of freshly baked bread comes back to me at some point. And it goes back but I can't, I can't recall where the bakery was but I do recall the smell. Speaker 1: Smell. Well, what about a sound? Speaker 2: A sound. Well, I'll tell you one sound. Well, for my birthday my father [Carl Reid] had given me a silver bicycle. I don't know whether you've ever seen a silver bicycle. Well, it was truly a silver bicycle, and we always kept it on the front porch. And it was one time following a storm, a real bad storm, electrical storm that lightening hit the bike and broke it into. But I also remember that I remember the sound of the thunder and the lightening that night, when we walked out and saw the bicycle, we could not believe it. But the bike had been struck by lightning. We were never able to get it repaired 'cause it couldn't be welded back. Speaker 1: Well, that was a sight as well. Speaker 2: It was (laughter), it was. Speaker 1: Was there another sight that you remember? Speaker 2: (Pause) Nothing comes to mind right now (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) To mind. Well, as I said, the, the sight of that bicycle had to be something. Story_ID: 609191 Speaker 1: Were you involved in any curricular, extracurricular activities? Tell me about that. Speaker 2: (Nods head) Well, I, I was a Girl Scout [Girl Scouts of the United States of America]. I also played in the band, I played the glockenspiel. I don't know whether you know what a glockenspiel, but that's the bells in the band. And it really was a hand me down from my, from my second sister, Willie Carl [Willie Carl Reid], who had also played the glockenspiel, so I took up the instrument because we still had it. But I played in the band, and I remember only too well playing at football games and so forth. And, was never much of a--I never played basketball, only with class members and so forth but I never was on the, the varsity team. But there were clubs in the school, like the science club and things like that, that I participated in. Speaker 1: What, what type of student were you? Speaker 2: Very good student. As I told you, I, I guess I excelled number one in my class most of my twelve years of school. But I forgot to tell you too that I was a, a piano student. So from, from a very young age I took music lessons from a Mrs. Diggs [ph.], who, who taught music lessons and I, I think we used to go twice a week I think it was. So I learned to play the, the piano well and that used to be a, a good pastime for me just to sit and play. Speaker 1: So, you had a piano in your home (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We had a--yes, we did. My mother [Emmalee Williams Reid] was musical and, and used to sing, and so she sang many times while I played. Story_ID: 609192 Speaker 1: What type of child were you? Were you mischievous, rambunctious, well mannered? Speaker 2: Well, let me tell you, I, you know, being my sisters [Ruby Reid Smith and Willie Carl Reid] were born '24 [1924] and '25 [1925], and I was born 1931, so there was like this six year difference between my next sister and me. And, of course, I think for a lot of time, a lot of that time they resented the, the baby because they always had to bring the baby along, you know, when, when they went to basketball games and things. I, I always had to be the child who was brought along, you know. I think I got in the way of their social activities many times. But, nevertheless, as a child I guess I was very mischievous but as I got older I think that mischief disappeared and I was a much more serious person. But, being the baby of the family, you, you get the brunt of, of many things from older, older sisters. Story_ID: 609193 Speaker 1: So tell me, what were your dreams or aspirations at that time? You know, as a young kid, we have these ideas of what we will become or what we will do in life. Speaker 2: Well, let me tell you what one of my favorite pastimes was. And, I, I played with paper dolls for many, many years. I spent many hours playing with paper dolls. In fact, my mother [Emmalee Williams Reid] said that when I went to college [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana] that she wondered if I was gonna take my paper dolls (laughter) with me, because I played with them just that long. And I guess I realized most of my, most of my fantasies were acted out with the paper dolls. I mean, even the ones that--they didn't have to be the ones the store bought paper dolls. I mean, I could cut out families and make my own families and this that and the other, and have the best time playing with, with paper dolls. But that was something that I enjoyed doing and it, it, you know, it--I could do that by myself and it didn't require any other person around to play with in order to do it. In fact, sometimes friends may have been like intruders because I really wanted to, to (laughter) do something else. And, of course, they were not interested in my paper dolls. Speaker 1: So, did you have any aspirations to become anything during that time, any profession that you thought about? Speaker 2: I think; I think at one point I really wanted to be a doctor. When I got into pharmacy, I still had that desire to, to go on but I didn't want, I didn't want the additional four years of medical training and all that it took to become a doctor. So I did try for when I--in my senior year in college there was some fellowships being offered at John, Johns Hopkins [Johns Hopkins University] in Baltimore [Maryland] that I applied for and I did not get it. But it was perfectly all right because I was ready to go to work, already had job offers and so forth (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 2: So, it didn't happen. Story_ID: 609194 Speaker 1: Now, you talked a little bit about church and your parents [Emmalee Williams Reid and Carl Reid] being Presbyterian, what church did your family attend? Speaker 2: They were Presbyterians; both were very active in the church. And let me tell you how the whole intrusion of the whole--how Catholicism started in my life. My father got sick and went to St. Philip's Hospital [Rock Hill, South Carolina] and was--which was a Catholic hospital. And, of course, he had daily visits from, from the Chaplin there at the hospital who was a Catholic priest. And this Catholic priest was telling him about his plans to build a new Catholic church in the colored section of town which was Saint Mary's [Saint Mary Catholic Church, Rock Hill, South Carolina]. And that he needed someone to, to be an organist and asked him if he knew anybody. So my father said, "Well, my, my, my daughter Myrtle [HistoryMaker Myrtle Davis] plays. Maybe she would play for you." So he asked me if I wanted to do it and I said, "Well, sure, I'll do it." But, what my father used to do, we used to go to the 9:30 Mass and I would play and he would be outside waiting for me to take me to the Presbyterian church. Well, as time went on, and we did that for a long period of time where every Sunday morning he would take me to play at the Catholic church and then we would go to the Presbyterian church. Then it got to the point where I really liked the Mass and the Catholic church. And, they were a little bit disappointed I guess that I did not wanna continue in the Catholic church, but certainly they said it was my decision to make. My, my father said, "You're already female and you're already colored, why do you wanna add another thing to your, your life, another misery to your life to become Catholic as well?" But I hadn't looked at it like that. But there at that time, of course, in Rock Hill, South Carolina there were very few Catholics. There was one Catholic church, Saint Anne's [Saint Anne Catholic Church, Rock Hill, South Carolina] and, of course, St. Mary's was developed when I was in, in high school [Emmett Scott School, Rock Hill, South Carolina]. But, that was the whole motivation for my changing in, in religion from one to the other. Speaker 1: How old were you? Speaker 2: Well, I was actually, when I became interested in it, I was probably was fourteen, fifteen years old. When I actually was baptized or taken into Catholic church, it was my freshman year in college [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana]. Speaker 1: Okay. What was the name of the Presbyterian church? Speaker 2: It was Hermon Presbyterian Church [Rock Hill, South Carolina]. Speaker 1: Okay, and the Catholic church again? Speaker 2: St. Mary's. Speaker 1: St. Mary's. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: And so, you went through the religious instructions to be confirmed and first communion and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right, that's right. Actually, what happened was I had taken instructions at St. Mary's before I went to college, and I didn't finish. Well, when I came back my freshman year, was when I had my--when I was taken into the church. My confirmation took place in New Orleans [Louisiana] because I was a sophomore in college and it was occurring at the St. Louis Cathedral in, in New Orleans and they had a confirmation class. And that's where I was confirmed. Story_ID: 609195 Speaker 1: So now, as you're approaching your, your senior year in high school [Emmett Scott School, Rock Hill, South Carolina], do you plan--do you become involved in any of the school student councils or any other organizations? Speaker 2: I don't even recall we had a student council at the time. Things that I, I mentioned to you I remember the science club. I remember, of course, the band that I was involved in but I don't think we had a--I don't recall the student council. I don't recall even having one. In fact, I don't even recall our having a PTA [Parent Teacher Association] at the time. Speaker 1: Okay. Did you have a prom? Speaker 2: We had a prom. Speaker 1: Do you remember your prom? Speaker 2: I do remember my prom. In fact, I didn't have a steady boyfriend so I invited a young man that I knew whose family had a funeral home. And I was so disappointed when my date for the prom showed up in his tuxedo and his white buck shoes. I will never (laughter) forget how disappointed I was, I wanted to cry (laughter). Speaker 1: So, where was the prom held? Speaker 2: The prom was held in the gym at school, and of course it was all decorated with streamers and so forth. It was a very nice prom. Story_ID: 609196 Speaker 1: You said that you were preparing to go to college. Was there a--did you have guidance counselors that would help you make a decision on what to do (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We had--we did have, in fact, I think it was--I've forgotten who it was. I really think it was the librarian who was most responsible for helping me decide when I, I decided that I was gonna take pharmacy. And, of course, I could get state aid from South Carolina to go. We made the arrangements when I had to take the exams to go to Xavier [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana]. The exam was being given in Greenville, South Carolina, and it was my pastor at Saint Mary's [Saint Mary Catholic Church, Rock Hill, South Carolina] who really took me over. The same priest that I had been helping at the Masses, he drove me over to Greenville to take the test. Well, after the test, it was just smooth sailing. I was accepted and ready to go, so. Speaker 1: What year did you graduate from high school [Emmett Scott School, Rock Hill, South Carolina]? Speaker 2: Nineteen forty-nine [1949]. Story_ID: 609197 Speaker 1: Before we go on to college [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana], in your teenage years, tell me about the outside activities as far as music. Who were you listening to, what was going on, because we're talking-- Speaker 2: Well, I always liked a wide range of music. And, you know, by learning to play and so forth one of the things I enjoyed doing was also buying sheet music of all the popular music. My mother [Emmalee Williams Reid] also had a good collection of books and so forth, so music was just a part of our family. I mean, I don't recall being--I can't even remember who the artist were back in, in, in--see in '48 [1948] and '49 [1949] and I remember some of the songs and so forth that we used to play. But, this was long before the, the, The Beatles and the, you know, the Elvis [Elvis Presley] and all of them came along. When the craze for music was such a--we didn't have that kind of attachment to recording artists and so forth as they did later on in, in, in my life. And before television, and before the explosion of television. I can remember when I was in high school [Emmett Scott School, Rock Hill, South Carolina] during the 1948 conventions. And I guess those were the first things that we saw on television. And the Millers [ph.] next door were the ones who had the television and we would all gather over to the Miller's house to watch television. And it was later on, of course, that, that other people and in our family finally got a television too when people started getting them. But I can remember when the radio used to be the main entertainment in the house. And there was a, a big television, we had a floor model called an Atwater Kent. I (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The ra- the radio? Speaker 2: The radio, yeah. Speaker 1: Radio. Story_ID: 609198 Speaker 1: In fact, I can even go back to, as a child in 1941, hearing the--when the bombing of Pearl Harbor [Naval Station Pearl Harbor, Hawaii] took place and hearing that on the radio. And not wondering, really wondering what in the world does going to war [World War II, WWII] mean, you know. Because even though I was born in, in 1931, I was born in the Depression [Great Depression], I never knew anything about a Depression. I mean, we just did not know that things were as bad as they were, you know. We never knew about the WPA [Works Progress Administration; Works Projects Administration] and people getting jobs and things because my mother [Emmalee Williams Reid] and father's [Carl Reid] jobs were the same jobs they'd been doing all along. And, you just, you just, didn't know what the Depression meant. I mean, to older children maybe it meant something else but certainly I didn't know. And when 1941, when Pearl Harbor was attacked, I can just remember being in the living room and hearing that on radio and just wondering, what in the world does that mean. And then later on as we prepared for war, you know, there was food rationing, there was shoe rationing, there were--I can remember getting government cheese from somewhere. I remember these great big pieces of cheese and so forth that came from the government. But I can also remember the [U.S.] Air Force raids, the air raid warnings that we used to have and people used to prepare for attacks. And it, it's very funny to me that in all of the talk we've had about homeland security and so forth, and what if the United States was attacked. And we have never gotten to the point where we were back in those days when people were really prepared in case we were attacked. You know, there were, there were shelters, bomb shelters, there were people who were--we were organized by communities, people who were wardens to be, you know, to show people where to go in case of an attack. You really knew you were at war. Being at war [Iraq War] now is, you know, we listen to it on television but it doesn't impact us really the same way. I often wonder if it was, if it was overdone. I don't think it was but it certainly--and, and the whole idea of buying victory bonds and so forth, I mean, that was a, an important way of contributing to, you know, to the war, to the war effort. My mother-- Speaker 2: Your mother and father, they bought victory bonds? Speaker 1: Of course they did. Speaker 2: Tell me about that? Speaker 1: In fact, we as children, bought them. You could buy stamps and you'd put stamps in books and so forth. And when you redeemed them, it was a way of saving at the same time. But it also--it was, it was a war effort to buy bonds to help, you know, to help the [U.S.] military. Speaker 2: So, where did you buy them and how much did they cost? Speaker 1: You'd buy them either at the post office or the banks. And I can't remember now the stamps, I think you could even get twenty-five cents stamps and so forth and you would fill a book, and you could redeem them once the book was filled or else you could convert it to, to something that was higher. But, it was really quite, quite a time when, when everybody was involved in, in the fact that America was at war. That hasn't happened in my lifehood, my lifetime since that. In our preparation for wars or later, you know, of Korean War and so forth. It was never to that degree; we didn't have that kind of readiness. Speaker 2: Was it something that was taught at school as well as at home where to go and what to do in case? Speaker 1: Oh yeah. Speaker 2: Tell me about that. Speaker 1: Well, they used to have warnings and you'd hear like these sirens that are now presently used to give you a warning about the storms and so forth. But you were prepared whether you were at school or at home what to do in the case of an attack. And where you were to go, and where, where the shelters were and that kind of thing. Story_ID: 609199 Speaker 1: Now you spoke about buying sheet music when we were talking about music, and so the sheet music so that you can play the piano. But since we were talking about the radio, what music were you listening to? Speaker 2: Well, you know, this was a time--and I was really trying to think of some contemporary artist that we danced to, but as I think about it, you know, this was also the era of Glenn Miller and Woody Herman and all of the big band sounds. Count Basie, Duke Ellington, but also the soundtracks that you got from movies and so forth. Some of the greatest songs came from those movies. And, of course, those were the pieces of music that you wanted to buy so that you could play them. I had a stack of, of sheet music that I used to play, I mean, just because it was, it was enjoyable. You know, it was, it was temporary, it was contemporary rather but it was also music that I enjoyed. It probably--my, my daughters [HistoryMaker Stephanie Davis and HistoryMaker Stacey Stewart] would probably consider it very corny but we didn't have--this was before all of the, The Beatles and the other people really started making their appearances along. And, and music took on a different kind of level. Speaker 1: And, before television you're listening to radio. You said that your family listened to the radio and what programs did you enjoy? Speaker 2: Oh, listen: in the daytime we had our, our daytime soap operas. And, of course, there was, you know, there is still the 'Guiding Light' on television, you know, the 'Guiding Light' went back many years ago. But there were also other soap operas that we listened to in the daytime. And, of course, Sunday, on Sunday 'The Shadow' used to be on, it was a wonderful mystery. 'The Lone Ranger' used to come on, which was something we always enjoyed. On Monday nights I can remember Garry Moore used to be on, on Monday nights. Jimmy Durante used to be on and just--and, of course, I'm trying to think of 'The Amateur Hour' ['The Original Amateur Hour'] when I think Gladys Knight got her start as a child on the-- Speaker 1: Was that Ted Mack? Speaker 2: Ted Mack's 'Amateur Hour.' All of those were radio shows. And there's something about radio that televisions never captured because you see the image on the screen. You can listen to 'The Shadow' and your imagination goes to work, I mean, you put, you put certain kinds of, of, of faces to people and so forth. So it really is a very creative kind of, of thing to do is to listen to the radio. And, and you make up in your own mind as to what those characters are like. Speaker 1: Did you ever think of a profession in music? Speaker 2: Yes I did, I did. In fact, my mother [Emmalee Williams Reid] wanted me to pursue music but, as I said, I had other ideas about it. So I, I really--it was not anything that she had to force upon me because I enjoyed playing anyway. Story_ID: 609200 Speaker 1: Tell me now about your transition to college? Speaker 2: Well, it was--I was going to New Orleans [Louisiana] and to a, a Catholic university [Xavier University of Louisiana] in, in New Orleans. And I used to take the train, the Southerner [Southern Railway; Norfolk Southern Railway] from Charlotte, North Carolina to, to New Orleans, which would take all day long. I mean we'd leave Charlotte in the morning about 4:30 or so and, of course, there was always a stop in Atlanta [Georgia] for a good period of time and then go on to New Orleans. But all along the way we would pick up various people who were living in, in other, other places so you got a chance to visit with a lot of friends on the train. My mom [Emmalee Williams Reid] always packed a lunch and, of course, we'd start eating as soon as we got on the train. I, I'll never forget one time she packed this lunch of pimento cheese sandwiches and fried chicken, and all the goodies that go along with it. And I had some leftovers that I had not completed in the day, and I was on the first floor of the dorm and I had no idea that New Orleans was a place where ants were prevalent. When I got up the next morning, my shoebox of goodies was filled with ants and, needless to say, I was very, very disappointed. Story_ID: 609201 Speaker 1: Tell me about the school? Speaker 2: Xavier [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana]? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Xavier was a good mix of kids from--most of the kids who went to Xavier of course were--lived in the New Orleans [Louisiana] area. But there was a small part of the student body that lived on campus, and, of course, those kids came from everywhere. There were a lot from Texas, a few from South Carolina. And because pharmacy[CW1] [College of Pharmacy] also attracted a number of students simply because it was the only, only black school [HBCU] in the country at the time. Only other one being Howard University [Washington, D.C.] had a school of pharmacy. Xavier was the second one and the third one was, was Florida A and M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida] got a pharmacist school later on. Because some of the graduates of Xavier became teachers over at Florida A and M. But Xavier had a good reputation of being a--I mean had an excellent reputation as a good school, and I did quite well there. I mean, I, I started off, as I told you before, with Chemistry 101 which was taught by Peter Payta[CW2]sh, who was an excellent teacher. And, of course, my first test under Peter Paytash I did very well. So it was smooth sailing for me from then on, from that point on because after the first test, you kind of get a reputation of being whether you're a good student or whether you're gonna require some help. I guess my greatest obstacle in the course that I didn't like was physics that I had in my junior year. I could not understand physics and did--I probably made a C, but I--it was not a course that I enjoyed. I enjoyed all of my biology courses and inorganic chemistry and organic chemistry was (unclear) and so forth, enjoyed all those classes but physics was always one that gave me a whole lot of trouble. Speaker 1: So, what type of student were you, I mean, did you really get good grades? Speaker 2: I got good grades at Xavier as well. I was on the honor roll each time. Probably made the dean's list a couple of times but I was always on the honor roll. Story_ID: 609202 Speaker 1: Who was the president at that time (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, at that time it was--I wanted to say Mother Katharine but Mother Katharine, who was--and I'll tell you about--Mother Katharine Drexel was the founder of Xavier [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana] who later became--was canonized in 19--in the year 2000 as a saint in the Catholic church, so she's now St. Katherine Drexel. But she was a person who founded the Sisters of the Blessed Sacrament and also founded Xavier being the only institution for blacks [HBCU] in the South that offered a number of, of courses like pharmacy that were not being offered in other places. But she was responsible also for a number of educational institutions both in black as well as Indian [Native American] communities. At her canonization, American Indians as well as the number of people who had come from schools that were founded by her, they were there to honor her and to be a part of her canonization. My daughter, Stacey [HistoryMaker Stacey Stewart], and I went so it was quite an experience. Speaker 1: And--but she was--was she--she was not the president then? Speaker 2: No, she was not the president, I'm trying to think of the president's name at the time[CW3]. But I wanna [CW4]tell you who the president is now and what he was when we were in school. He was a year behind me in--he finished in 1952, I finished in '53 [1953]. He went on to law school [Loyola University New Orleans School of Law; Loyola University New Orleans College of Law, New Orleans, Louisiana] and came back to Xavier, and when the president, who was a nun died, they made him president of the institution. And he has been president ever since. He's the longest living president of any college in the United States, [HistoryMaker] Norman Francis. And I think he should be about ready to retire but he, he's, he's been through his ups and downs even with all of the tragedy as a result of Hurricane Katrina and the campus was almost demolished. I mean, it has been rebuilt. I mean he's had, he's had more than his share of trouble but nevertheless he has, he's still maintained his, his presidency there at Xavier. Story_ID: 609203 Speaker 1: Tell me what else was going on, on the campus [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana]. Were you involved in any other activities? Speaker 2: Well, yes I was. I, I became involved in--had a lot of religious organizations which was Sodality [Sodality of Our Lady], which was a, an organization that--who has its main, who has as its main goal is the, the adoration and prayers to Mary. It was through the blessed mother, of course, that--but there were other--other than the religious organizations I became--I was class officer for four years. In fact, I was class secretary for four years. We had Greek organizations on the campus and, of course, I was in my sophomore year. I was inducted into Delta Sigma Theta [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority]. In my junior year I was on the homecoming court. In my senior year I was Miss Xavier. Speaker 1: So you were very active. Speaker 2: Oh, I was. Speaker 1: And, the Delta sorority, who are some of your sorors[LH5] that were there? Speaker 2: Really some of my--still my closest friends there, a person who was on line with me, who is now, she is Daisy Watts [ph.] who lives in Dallas, Texas was a line sister. We made Delta at the same time. There was another girl who was in the chapter, who was from New Orleans [Louisiana], her name was--her last name was, was Nichols [ph.]. Then there was another girl I think was president of the chapter at the time, Helen Bibilay [ph.], who was quite outstanding. There was girl who was--I was a Kappa Sweetheart who was Kappa Sweetheart before me was also a Delta. So there were a number, I had a number of friends who were Deltas. I had a number of friends who had gone in other sororities as well but-- Speaker 1: Why did you choose Delta? Speaker 2: Well, my mother [Emmalee Williams Reid] was a Delta, my sisters were Deltas, and it was like--and I, I wanted to be one. Speaker 1: Well, that's good enough. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Story_ID: 609204 Speaker 1: So, your studies are, are, are fairly easy for you. Speaker 2: Well, not easy. Speaker 1: Not easy? Speaker 2: They were certainly more difficult in college [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana], I mean, and re- required a lot more time. My schedule was very busy. And when we carried--at that time the pharmacy curriculum was for four years, which now's been extended out. But we were taking anywhere from twenty-three to twenty-five hours per semester. So, I mean, it didn't leave a lot of time for messing around and being irresponsible, you know. You really had to study. Speaker 1: What classes did you enjoy the most and which ones the least? Speaker 2: Well, I enjoyed all of my chemistry classes and biology classes. I also enjoyed--I had a teacher, Sister--trying to think of her name now. Sister Stanislaus [CW6][Sister Stanislaus Dalton] was the--our advisor for the class but there was a Sister who taught English my freshman year, who was--there was--I mean, she was just one of my favorite people but she was--I also enjoyed her English class as well. And most of the sisters that, that were there of course when I was there, I've gone back for reunions, for--I've gone back every five years anyway for--since probably the twenty-fifth, thirtieth, thirty-fifth, forty-fifth, and fiftieth. And, of course, we'll be coming, coming up on fifty-five very soon. Story_ID: 609205 Speaker 1: Were all the teachers, nuns? Speaker 2: No. The lay, there was a good mix of lay faculty as well. And I think I mentioned to you Dr. Peter Paytash who was the chemistry, inorganic chemistry teacher. But my pharmacy teachers, there was Dean Lawrence [CW7]Ferring [Lawrence F. Ferring] and also Mr. Kelly [Charles J. Kelly] who was one of the pharmacy instructors both were white males. My biology teachers, I had two good ones both of them were lay professors. I did have one nun who was a teacher of organic chemistry, Sister Veronica [ph.]. But it was a good mix of lay and, and religious. Speaker 1: Was there any one teacher that influenced you that just stands out in your mind that you will just never forget? Speaker 2: My daughter's name is--her middle name is Helene [HistoryMaker Stacey Stewart] and one of my favorite nuns was Sister Helene [ph.] and of course she was named for my favorite, one of my favorites. Speaker 1: How did she influence you? Speaker 2: Well, she--I liked her so much, I mean, she, she was just somebody who--I'm trying to think where, where our paths crossed and how we got to be as close as we were. But I liked her as a person and she was very helpful to me. I mean, there were--many of the nuns were, were helpful, and I mean if you had a problem they certainly were helpful in helping you solve that problem, you know. Speaker 1: Well, were there black nuns? Speaker 2: In this order there were only a few. I didn't have any black nuns who were teaching me at the time, but there were several people who were in school at the time. Ann Barner [ph.], who was a student at the time, left Xavier to enter the convent with the Sisters of the Blessed Sacrament. And then I had another very good friend, Rita Houston [ph.], who also left in our senior year to go to the convent and become a, a member of Sisters of the Blessed Sacrament. So, it's integrated to some degree, I don't know how much. Story_ID: 609206 Speaker 1: You graduate in 1953 and you said you already had a job. But you did apply for a fellowship? Speaker 2: I did apply for the fellowship but I had worked with LaBranche's pharmacy [CW8][LaBranche's Drug Store] during my internship in New Orleans [Louisiana]. Mr. LaBranche [CW9][Emile J. LaBranche, Jr.] was also on the faculty at Xavier [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana], but I used to work in his drugstore and that was the other thing aside from your own studies and homework and so forth to be done, you also put in a lot of practical work as well. So two or three times a week you were working in the drugstore and Mr. LaBranche always saw to it that I got home at night 'cause he would bring me back to the campus which was great. And my first introduction as to what the French Quarter [New Orleans, Louisiana] looked like, Mr. LaBranche drove me after work one time down Royal Street so I could see what the French Quarter was all about. And, and that re-, that brings to mind another thing. Story_ID: 609207 Speaker 1: Of course, I was always in New Orleans [Louisiana] during Mardi Gras time and my freshman year [at Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana] we went down to Rampart Street, went down really to Canal Street but Canal and Rampart was where the incident occurred where a man was stabbed in the street. And, of course, from that point on I did not wanna go back to Mardi Gras anymore, I mean, it was, you know, the crowds disbursed and ran in all directions, you know, the person had been killed. But I was fearful of going back from that point on, because Mardi Gras was a time when all of the factions in New Orleans came together. It was also a time when people wanted to settle their scores, you know, if there were outstanding arguments between people it was a time when they tried to get revenge. So, unless I was invited to someone's house, and that was a good way to spend Mardi Gras is to be invited to somebody's house. And, of course, they--the people in New Orleans are very hospitable and always open their homes. And people that I knew well. But the gumbo and the red beans and rice, and I mean it was just a feast and a party so it was enjoyed. But I never wanted to go back down to see the parades at down on Canal[LH10] Street anymore because of that death. Speaker 2: Mardi Gras and--is something that, that Louisiana is known for but also voodoo very prevalent there. What, what was your first impression about, about that? Speaker 1: I was never really exposed to it too much but I'm trying to think of the name of the parade where, where this killing--the Zulu [Zulu Social Aid and Pleasure Club] parade. I mean, it was the Rex parade that was the white parade but the black parade that went down Rampart Street not down Canal was the Zulu parade. And this is where all of the black people paraded. And, you know, there were all of the vestiges I guess of voodoo and so forth but I never was really exposed to that so much. But the black parade got a little bit out of hand sometimes (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Out of hand. Story_ID: 609208 Speaker 1: So tell me what happens at graduation [from Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana] time? Speaker 2: Well, my mother [Emmalee Williams Reid] came. My dad [Carl Reid] didn't come, but my mother came and our commencement speaker--I was telling somebody the other day it's funny that I should have, have had a relationship with the Urban League [National Urban League] for so many years but Lester Granger, who was then executive director of the Urban League was our commencement speaker. And at the time I had a little knowledge about the Urban League but, of course, he was a wonderful speaker and broaden my horizons a whole lot about what the Urban League did. And, of course, it was not until later on you, you, you know, with the Civil Rights Movement you heard more about the Urban League. In fact, that brings up another story about when I started working in Charlotte [North Carolina]. Speaker 1: So, you left the, the pharmacy [LaBranche's Drug Store] in New Orleans [Louisiana]? Speaker 2: Actually, when I graduated I, I, I did not work after that time. I came on back to Rock Hill [South Carolina], but I got a job at a drugstore in Charlotte, North Carolina called Queen City Pharmacy[CW11], which was on Second Avenue [sic. 2nd Street] in Charlotte. I worked there from '53 [1953] until I came to Atlanta [Georgia] in 1956. And I guess it was during that period that my roommate, who was June Creth [ph.] at the time and worked at the YWCA [Young Women's Christian Association], was planning a forum at the YWCA. And Whitney Young from the School of Social Work [Atlanta University School of Social Work; Whitney M. Young, Jr. School of Social Work] in Atlanta came to, came to--he was the keynote speaker at the forum. And she brought him home for dinner afterwards. So he said to me, he said, "I have a friend down in Atlanta who has a prescription shop and he's looking for pharmacists, do you have an interest?" And I said, "Yeah, I might have an interest in going to Atlanta." And he made the contacts for me, Dr. Hackney [Richard C. Hackney] got in touch with me, and I came down to be interviewed. And it was just a matter of months that I was moving from Charlotte to Atlanta, so that's how I got to Atlanta it was through Whitney Young. Story_ID: 609209 Speaker 1: So you make the move. Where do you live when you came here? Speaker 2: Well I (simultaneous)- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Is this the first time that you are in Atlanta [Georgia]? Speaker 2: First time--I didn't know anybody and, of course, Dr. Hackney [Richard C. Hackney] who was one of the owners of Triangle Prescription Shop [CW12][Atlanta, Georgia], got me a room at a friend's house of Mrs. Carrie Johnson [ph.] who lived over on Boulevard. And I lived with Mrs. Johnson for I guess about a year and then I moved in with Dr. Hackney's mother on Whitehouse Drive over across from Booker T. Washington High School [Atlanta, Georgia]. And I stayed there until I married, until I got married. Speaker 1: So tell me about your job and tell me what you think of Atlanta and what's goin' on because this is 1956? Speaker 2: This is 1956 and, of course, I come to Atlanta driving my own little Fairlane Ford [Ford Fairlane] that my father [Carl Reid] had helped me with. And he gave me the down payment and I continued to make the payments on it, but nevertheless I drove myself and came to Atlanta to work. I was working at Triangle Prescription Shop on, on Auburn Avenue and of course many times I worked the three to eleven [o'clock] shift. And my husband's [Albert Miles Davis] office was just above the prescription shop so he used to come down and sit with me until time to leave. And then we would go to the--there was a drive-in over on Simpson[LH13] where we used to go for a sandwich or so after work so that, that was how our relationship got started. Story_ID: 609210 Speaker 1: So tell me his name? Speaker 2: His name was Albert Davis [Albert Miles Davis] and he-- Speaker 1: And he was a physician? Speaker 2: Um-hm. And, and of course Albert was already divorced when I came to At- Atlanta [Georgia]. He had two little girls [Julia-Ellen Davis and Vicki Davis] who were with their mother in Charleston, South Carolina so he would go and I think when I came down for the interview Dr. Hackney [Richard C. Hackney] had called him about me. But he was in Charleston at the time visiting his daughters, so I missed seeing them up until they made another visit to Atlanta [Georgia] when I met them. Speaker 1: So you began to, to date. What was the first encounter? What was the first time you saw him? Speaker 2: The first encounter was on the telephone when he called in a prescription from upstairs. And I was a little annoyed by it because I was very busy, you know, there were a lot of people in the prescription[LH14] shop waiting to be--and then he's gonna talk, you know, and start asking questions and everything and I didn't really have time to talk because I was really busy. But that's how our relationship started, I mean, he was calling in a prescription. And, of course, he would come in after his office hours and sit with me in the back of the prescription shop until I closed so I wasn't there by myself. Speaker 1: And how long was it before you go married? Speaker 2: Well, I came in '56 [1956], we married in the fall of '57 [1957]. And of course--so it was, it was I guess from June of, June of '56 [1956] to September of '57 [1957], yeah, so a little over a year. Story_ID: 609211 Speaker 1: You say that, that the shop [Triangle Prescription Shop, Atlanta, Georgia] is on Auburn Avenue and Auburn Avenue is Sweet Auburn, tell me what's going on there (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Let, let me tell you where the prescription shop was because it's, it's really[LH15] not shown the way it really was right now. The building was the old Herndon Building [Atlanta, Georgia], it's where--I don't know whether you remember it or not but B.B Bearmons had a restaurant [CW16][B.B. Bearmons Restaurant, Atlanta, Georgia] on Auburn Avenue and the prescription shop was right next to that, and then John Calhoun,[CW17] who used to be on the city council [Atlanta City Council], had a furniture store on the other side. Well, that's not shown too much right now but nevertheless the building still stands, it's a historic building but it would take, take a lot to convert it. Story_ID: 609212 Speaker 1: You were telling me about Auburn Avenue. Tell me (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, the Herndon Building [Atlanta, Georgia] is directly across the street from the Odd Fellows Building [Odd Fellows Building and Auditorium, Atlanta, Georgia]. And you probably know where currently the Odd Fellows Building is the high-rise building on the corner that also has a, a--well, it's a place where a lot of entertainment takes place right now. There're art shows and receptions and so forth that's run by Janis Perkins who owns it now. But, of course, years ago on one corner was Yates and Milton Drugstore [Atlanta, Georgia], on the opposite corner was the high-rise Odd Fellows Building where there were a number of doctors' offices in that building as well. But Odd Fellows Building and the Herndon Building were the two buildings that housed many of Atlanta's [Georgia] doctors at the time. And the prescription shop [Triangle Prescription Shop, Atlanta, Georgia] was right underneath the Herndon Building. Speaker 1: Tell me what else was going on, just give me a, a description of Auburn Avenue and all that was going on during this time, 'cause we're at 1956, 1957, the Royal Peacock [Atlanta, Georgia] and different things that are going on then? Speaker 2: Well, all of the, the social life I guess. The Royal Peacock used to be a place where a number of entertainers came to perform. The Royal Peacock on occasions, also I can remember that my husband's [Albert Miles Davis] social group, the Guardsmen [National Association of Guardsmen], had a New Year's Eve party at the Peacock in later years. But it was a place where a lot of the entertainers like Ruth Brown and--oh, I can't even think of all the, all the entertainers that used to come. Most of the other shows though that were held in Atlanta were held over on Sunset [Sunset Avenue] at the Magnolia Ballroom [Atlanta, Georgia], which is where a lot of entertainers like Ray Charles and Nina Simone used to come and perform. Both of those places from time to time would also rent out for private parties and so forth, that organizations could rent it. And, of course, there was also the Wild (unclear) where--out on West Lake [Atlanta, Georgia] there used to be a place where entertainers, entertainment was also had. But this is, you know, we're still talking about the pre-civil rights days. This was before, when things were still segregated, before Atlanta opened up. And Atlanta was like a small town, everybody knew everybody else, except for the fact that there were people who lived on the west side of town and those who lived in the Fourth Ward [Old Fourth Ward, Atlanta, Georgia]. But, and, and basically the difference being David T. Howard [David T. Howard High School, Atlanta, Georgia] was in the Fourth Ward and Booker T. Washington [Booker T. Washington High School, Atlanta, Georgia] was on the west side, so I mean, there was that difference but you still got a chance to--most people knew everybody else it was really small town atmosphere. And it was really not until the '60s [1960s], in 1960 so to speak, when the, when the students' sit-in movement [Atlanta Student Movement] started that, that change had started to occur in Atlanta. Speaker 1: Okay. Before we go forward, the Fourth Ward, tell me what area of town that is in? Speaker 2: That's in the area of Boulevard (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Boulevard. In the (unclear)-- Speaker 2: --around where coming up now to where--coming toward--past the King Center [Martin Luther King Jr. Center for Nonviolent Social Change, Atlanta, Georgia] up to Boulevard and over in that area, going back from--which would be east of, east of Boulevard. Which is also being revived 'cause the Martin Luther King Historic District [Martin Luther King, Jr. Historic District, Atlanta, Georgia] is in that area. So many of those old homes have been refurbished but they are being refurbished according to the guidelines of, of what they were like, you know, in their heyday. Story_ID: 609213 Speaker 1: Now let's talk more about your husband. You get married and he's a very prominent physician, tell me about your husband and--'cause he's involved in a lot of different organizations and things here in Atlanta [Georgia] so tell me about some of his doings here in Atlanta (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, well he was, and particularly leading into the Civil Rights Movement. My husband was truly an activist. And I think if anybody had--if he'd had his, his--he made his own decisions about what he wanted to be I think he would have--first of all, he would have been a foot, football, football or basketball coach. He loved sports. But, in addition to that, he was truly a social activist. He became involved in, in causes and he was very active during, during the student movement [Atlanta Student Movement]. Supported the students entirely. He helped them get out of jail, he got out and picketed with them and so he was, he was that kind of person. I can remember one night in particular when he and [HistoryMaker] Dr. Clinton Warner and someone else went down to the old Heart of Atlanta Motel [Atlanta, Georgia], and they took bags and in the bags they had just packed towels, you know. They were gonna check into the Heart of Atlanta Motel because it was one of the places that, you know, just refused to open up. So they went down and, of course, they were arrested. So he did have--he had that streak of rebellion in him. I mean, he, he--there was, there was this need to, to make things better and he was gonna be a part of it. I mean, he--there was hardly a time that he ever sacrificed being out of his office but when something came up that he had to attend to that had a civil rights' nature to it, I mean, he was involved in that. There was a group of men who met on a regular basis to strategize and to support the students. And some of those people included Jesse Hill and--I'm trying to think of some of the early leaders in there but they were a lot of people on the Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] campus, professors on the--many doctors, folks who, whose certainly livelihood did not depend on, on jobs. I mean, they--there jobs were not threatened as a result of the actions that they took. But Albert [Davis' husband, Albert Miles Davis] continued to be active, he also became president of the Atlanta chapter of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and served in that capacity. In fact, I think he was serving as president of the NAACP when, when Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was assassinated. I mean, with it came a lot of--well, lot of things to respond to at the time, I mean, other than the student unrest and meeting with the downtown business people about opening up businesses. And he and Sam Williams [Samuel Woodrow Williams], who was--Sam Williams was a pastor of Friendship Baptist Church [Atlanta, Georgia], were very instrumental in meeting with the Atlanta school board to help integrate the schools. So he was very much involved in all of the integration efforts going on at that time. Speaker 1: Now, after you marry, you no longer work at the--as a pharmacist? Speaker 2: I worked for a while, I worked until possibly I was carrying Stephanie [HistoryMaker Stephanie Davis] and I stopped after a while during my pregnancy. Speaker 1: I'm sorry, I meant to ask you about your husband. You mentioned the Guardsmen [National Association of Guardsmen]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: What group was that? Speaker 2: It, it's a social organization that still exists. But they started a, a chapter here in Atlanta and there were about thirty guys who got together and established an Atlanta chapter. And what it was, it was truly a social club but they had entertainment at the various cities where each chapter was located. It still goes on this way about four times a year. And, of course, the Atlanta parties were the parties that, that people liked to go to 'cause it was a, really a good time. Story_ID: 609214 Speaker 1: So you continue to work until you get pregnant with your daughter, and how many children do you have? Speaker 2: Two daughters. Stephanie [HistoryMaker Stephanie Davis] who was born in '58 [1958] and Stacey [HistoryMaker Stacey Stewart] who was born in '64 [1964]. Speaker 1: And you mentioned that your husband [Albert Miles Davis] had been married and had two-- Speaker 2: Two girls. Right. Speaker 1: Two girls as well, what are their names? Speaker 2: Julia-Ellen [Julia-Ellen Davis] is the oldest and Vicki [Vicki Davis] is the youngest. And they're both still very much a part of our lives. Speaker 1: Was your husband older than you were? Speaker 2: Yeah, he was about thirteen years older. Story_ID: 609215 Speaker 1: So tell me what happens next? Speaker 2: Well, let's talk a little bit about the Civil Rights Movement because that's the part that I, I wanted to emphasize about my mother's [Emmalee Williams Reid] activities. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was during the '60s [1960s] that we were very much involved in the Civil Rights Movement here [Atlanta, Georgia]. But what was going on in Rock Hill, South Carolina was very telling as well. I mean, my mother's pastor, Reverend Ivory [Cecil A. Ivory], was being arrested but he was truly the leader of the movement there in Rock Hill. But, my mother took on a, a different kind of role. I think I told you about her interaction with the downtown business people and so forth, and how she was a valued customer and so forth. But, following the Civil Rights Movement and trying to get jobs for young, young black people to, to move into, my mother actually had her own method of selecting people for jobs and taking them to those jobs and being sure that they excelled at that job. She found a way to, to interact with some of those same businesses and find out what kind of people they needed. And she would go out and recruit them and bring them to the various stores, and then she would go back and she would follow up to be sure that they were, you know, doing exactly what they were hired to do. So, I mean, that was one of the remarkable things about her. I mean, aside from the fact that by this time, of course, she was retired and not teaching any longer. But she had an active volunteer life and she was volunteering at the hospital as a Pink Lady and she put in so many hours as that. And she was working with the businesses to be sure that, you know, the kids were hired and in, in, in jobs that they had previously not held. And, she was just doing all kinds of things. Story_ID: 609216 Speaker 1: There were some other things going on in Rock Hill [South Carolina] during the Civil Rights Movement even though it, it was a small town. But there were some significant things that happened, do you--can you share about those things? Speaker 2: All of them, all of them had to do with--and it was similar to what was going on here because we had the students, of course, who was sitting in [Atlanta Student Movement]. The same kind of adult leadership that was, that was assisting in every way that they possibly could. And I think most of them were emanating from the churches, you know, the ministers of churches and so forth were helping out. But there were a number of people who were jailed. Reverend Ivory [Cecil A. Ivory] was jailed and jailed for an extended period of time. Don't know how all of those cases--most of the cases were dropped though in terms of the charges against them. Speaker 1: So they were having sit-ins, I know there is one case about the--about nine black men [Rock Hill Nine] that went to jail for trying to segregate--to integrate McCory's lunch counter [Rock Hill, South Carolina]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, it, it was something that I read that I'd like to ask you about to see if it is true, because Rock Hill is saying that they were a city that did not have room for racism and that they were signs like that in the community. Do you remember anything like that, or did this happen after integration? Speaker 2: I'm not sure--I, I don't recall ever hearing that. I'll tell you what, they had a progressive mayor who was at least willing to sit down and to negotiate with the students. But they had their own problems in terms of the way they responded to the students who were trying to sit down at lunch counters and so forth. And we, we did have a bus boycott as well, I mean, there was a--and they developed their own system of transportation so they were very much involved in seeing to it that public accommodations was not just a, you know, was not being overlooked in, in Rock Hill even the small city that it was. Speaker 1: But wasn't this the first stop for the thirteen Freedom Riders? Speaker 2: It might have been. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It might have been (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) All right. Story_ID: 609217 Speaker 1: So let's talk more about Atlanta [Georgia] and the, the Civil Rights Movement. Were you involved in that all (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, let me tell you. It was--well, I was, you know, Stephanie [HistoryMaker Stephanie Davis] was small. And, of course, Stacey [HistoryMaker Stacey Stewart] came along afterwards. It was in 1960 that we had started to--that was the year of the first sit-ins in Atlanta. It was also the year we decided that we were building a house. Of course, we had a very active boycott of, of downtown Atlanta, which meant that we were not patronizing stores in the downtown area. Building house and trying to move it and to furnish it all the time was, was really a challenge, you know, as to how we were gonna do it but we did it anyway. And, of course, we weren't taking the kids to see Santa Claus at Rich's [Rich's Department Store, Atlanta, Georgia] anymore. I can remember when Rich's decided to, to take all of the, you know, signs of discrimination away. Stephanie was one of the first children to go down to the nursery, you know. Rich's had a nursery where you could bring children and children would play in the nursery while you shopped. Well, Stephanie was one of the first few children to participate in that nursery, you know, to be a part of that. But all of the lunch counters and everything else in Rich's finally opened up to everybody. And, it used to be that the only place to eat in Rich's was down, downstairs in the basement. And, of course, the bridge on--across that, that separated the main store from the store for homes was a, a store on the second and the third levels were places where people liked to gather. So those opened up and, and, opened up without incident too. And I think it's to the credit of--it was the leaders of the student movement [Atlanta Student Movement] at that time. It was Lonnie King [Lonnie C. King, Jr.], it was Ben Brown [Benjamin Brown], it was all the kids in the Atlanta University Center [Atlanta University Center Consortium, Atlanta, Georgia] who really were responsible for opening it up. But that they along with some of the leaders at the time, who the leaders always went along with 'em to be sure that they were all right and everything, that made it possible. Mr. Rich [Richard H. Rich], of course, was one of the first to say, "Listen, we've gotta, we've gotta do something about this," 'cause he didn't wanna affect his bottom line at all. And, Rich's was one of the first to open up and the others kind of followed suit. Story_ID: 609218 Speaker 1: Who was the mayor at this time? Speaker 2: Well, it was--Hartsfield [William B. Hartsfield] was the mayor prior to and then Ivan Allen [Ivan Allen, Jr.] was the, the mayor when during the '60s [1960s]. I guess it was mostly Ivan Allen because it was also during that time--I know you've heard about the Peyton Wall [Atlanta, Georgia] and the integration of Southwest Atlanta where a wall placed block, blocking a street to keep integration from going any further than that wall. And, of course, we saw that wall come down and we also saw block by block as Southwest continued to integrate. And what was happening was, as blacks were moving in whites were moving out. Southwest Atlanta used to be entirely white and then it became black block by block, by block. It was during that era that Mayor Ivan Allen was the mayor and, of course, at the time that Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was shot it was Ivan Allen who was also the mayor. It was also Ivan Allen who went to Washington [D.C.] and testified to the fact that, that various--that laws needed to be changed to accommodate, the accommodations for blacks. It was an interesting time to live through, it was really interesting. Speaker 1: Do you remember voting during that time? Speaker 2: I'm trying to recall when my first--when I first voted. I guess--and I'm not sure where I first--I voted the first time but I know I was registered to vote in Atlanta when I came here. But we never had any difficulty in voting. Story_ID: 609219 Speaker 1: You said that you were building a home and you were watching blacks move into Southwest Atlanta [Georgia], and that's where a lot of blacks wanted to live. And would you say they wanted to live there because whites were living there and they wanted to move there? Speaker 2: No, no. Because, as I told you before, to the west side you were really limited in the kinds of houses, you know. And, as those houses which were, you know, normal, middle-class homes became available, there were people who wanted them and I don't think necessarily because they were owned by whites but because they offered a kind of housing that they had not had before. We lived in Collier Heights [Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 1: But that--Collier Heights was-- Speaker 2: Collier Heights is just in Northwest Atlanta. And, of course, the area that we, we lived in was purchased by a number of black people and they divided the lots and they made their own sub-division. Well, there not many places in Atlanta like that, that were, were built by blacks themselves and it wasn't doesn't by a single developer. Each person bought their lot and got their own builder and built their house. Speaker 1: And, and that Collier Heights community you saying in Northwest Atlanta, but tell me where it is to--okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's north, it's north of I-20 [Interstate 20]. If you--the, the, the beginning of Collier Heights really would be at--near what is now Douglass High School [Frederick Douglass High School, Atlanta, Georgia]. The next street of course is Collier Drive to the left and Simpson [Terrace] to the right. Well, going left on Collier and going down Collier all of the streets over to the right of that going over to Bankhead [Avenue] would be considered Collier Heights. Speaker 1: So this was a very middle class neighborhood (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was a middle-class neighborhood but it was one of the nicest. In fact, when, when tours were taken through the city they wanted to show off the black homes. It was, it was the Collier Heights area that was normally where all the tour buses came through. These are blacks living in this area and they built their own homes. So, it was quite different even though it was southwest developed and so forth, it was--it never had the same appeal simply because, you know, they were houses that were formally inhabited by, by whites. And, of course, we saw the, the integration of Southwest Atlanta go into East Point [Georgia] and College Park [Georgia], and most of South Fulton [Georgia] happen the same way. Speaker 1: So you finished--what, what year did you build your house in Collier Heights? Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty [1960], which was beginning of the Civil Rights Movement here (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Nineteen-sixty [1960], Civil Rights Movement, okay. Story_ID: 609220 Speaker 1: So now, by, by 1963 and Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] is assassinated, do you remember what you were thinking or where you were during that time? Speaker 2: Yes. Of course, I was in my new house and of course we were very much--I can remember when President Kennedy was assassinated, I remember hearing it, you know, getting the news flash on television at the time. In fact, it was on a Friday, and when the word came, came through that he had been shot it was a--just a sad time. And, of course, followed by the assassination in '68 [1968] of Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]. And then followed by the assassination of Bobby Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy], which all happened, you know, in a short period of time. But nevertheless it was really a, a terrible time because what, what we were also seeing after the assassination of Martin Luther King was all of the reaction all over the country, you know, where cities were burning and blacks were burning their sections of town completely up. That cities like Detroit [Michigan] that have never come back from that, you know, that, that devastation that took place back then. Other places have--some places anyway have, have rebuilt and, and it looks--but some places are still very much like they were when they were burned down. Story_ID: 609221 Speaker 1: So, tell me next what, what happens in your life. You have one daughter [HistoryMaker Stephanie Davis] and your next daughter is born the next year in '64 [1964] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sixty-four [1964], right. I actually, and continued to be, I started on a road of--when Stacey [HistoryMaker Stacey Stewart] was, you know, two years or more I started participating in a number of organizations. And the first--one of the first places I went was, was very interested in politics. And I got interested in the League of Women Voters [League of Women Voters of Atlanta-Fulton County]. I went to a, a forum and, as I told you before, that Albert [Davis' husband, Albert Miles Davis] had quite an interest in the integration of, of Atlanta [Georgia] public schools and had worked in that capacity. Well, I went to a forum out at Sammy Coan Middle School [Sammy E. Coan Middle School, Atlanta, Georgia], which was one of the first middle schools built in Atlanta, and there was a presentation. It was a League of Women Voters' meeting on a Sunday afternoon, and it was so impressed with the kind of work and information that I got that I decided to join the League. And got involved in the education committee and also got involved in voter registration, and became very active. And it was not until sometimes later I guess in the '70s [1970s] that I became president of the League but there was a long span, you know, eight or ten years where I was just kind of doing a lot of, lot of things. Never thinking that it would lead to anything, I never had the desire myself to run for public office but we certainly encouraged young people and women in particular to seek political office. And, finally, you know, somebody said to me, "Well, why don't you run? Why, why, don't you run?" And, and that's the way it all started. But it started with that, that first meeting with the League of Women Voters. Speaker 1: Well, I wanna ask you about--just to go back a little bit, of why you didn't decide to go back to work in pharmacy? Speaker 2: Well, I did. I did at one point, I got to a point where I, you know, I figured I'd--had been away from it long enough and I, I really felt like I wanted to put my, you know, get back into it. And, my husband said, "Well, I don't know how you're gonna do it, you know, with all you've taken on and the, you know, being sure that the children were taken care of and that kind of thing." But I did. And I, I guess I would have stayed on but my housekeeper, who was helping me at the time with the kids, got ill and she was not able to keep it up. So I had to cut my--went down to Grady Hospital [Grady Memorial Hospital, Atlanta, Georgia] and I worked, I worked in the outpatient clinics and so forth, and doing various things and--but I wasn't able to stay because of the--because the illness of my housekeeper. Story_ID: 609222 Speaker 1: Let's talk a little more about blacks in the pharmaceutical or pharmacist--talk to me about that occupation (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Let, let me also tell you that when I came to Atlanta [Georgia] to work at Triangle Prescription Shop [Atlanta, Georgia], which was black owned, and I also mentioned Yates and Milton Drugstore [Atlanta, Georgia], which was also a black owned drugstore at the time, those were about the only opportunities for blacks or for opportunities in Atlanta. Most of the, of the stores that were like Eckerd's [Eckerd Corporation] or some of the larger chain stores, they were not hiring black pharmacists. Walgreens [Walgreens Company] and some of the others. Well, with the whole integration of, well, public accommodations and then the Civil Rights Act [Civil Rights Act of 1964] and so forth, and jobs start, started opening up. What also started was also the disappearance of the smaller prescription shops and the neighborhood stores to the chain stores. And, of course, the chain stores were located all over and they were at first slow to hire blacks, but found that the demand of course was greater and they had to put blacks in stores. Well, that changed everything in terms of benefits and salaries and so forth and so on. So it became much more attractive to work in a store, a chain store than it was to work in a smaller independent store. First of all, the independent stores were not getting the traffic, the prices were higher, the chain stores could afford to sell at lower prices, so it made for a different environment. The whole industry changed, there were just opportunities for pharmacists became much greater. And, if you will notice now, when I graduated from pharmacy school [Xavier University of Louisiana College of Pharmacy, New Orleans, Louisiana] there were a handful of women in the class. Now, the classes are, are, are basically women and when you walk into the drugstore now, there're as many female pharmacists as they are male pharmacists. That has not always been the case. Speaker 1: And, and what about in pharmaceutical sales, do you know much about the salaries and the opportunities there? Speaker 2: Well, I don't--I, I can't speak to it so much, but they're not necessarily the people who are hired to be--pharmaceutical reps are not necessarily pharmacists. They're hired, hired with an--in fact, most of them are not pharmacists. They're hired, to, to be detail persons who, who visit doctors' offices to, to educate them on what drugs are available to do what, but most of them are not pharmacists. But, even, even with that many more jobs have opened up for blacks as being sales representatives, when in fact during my time, of course, there weren't any. Story_ID: 609223 Speaker 1: What about pharmacists in the hospitals, was that an opportunity for blacks? Speaker 2: Some. But there were not that many hospitals who were hiring, hiring pharmacists. And, and that's another whole situation about the hospitals. And my husband [Albert Miles Davis] was very much involved in the integration of hospitals as well. Let me just tell you a little bit about that if I could. Both of my girls, Stephanie [HistoryMaker Stephanie Davis] and Stacey [HistoryMaker Stacey Stewart], were born at McLendon's Hospital [McLendon Hospital, Atlanta, Georgia] and Harris Hospital [William A. Harris Memorial Hospital, Atlanta, Georgia]. Both of those are--were small, black, independent hospitals. Hospitals were not opened to everybody, I mean, there was discrimination. My husband only practiced at McLendon's and Harris, and of course later on Southwest Hospital [Southwest Atlanta Hospital, Atlanta, Georgia], which was at first Holy Family Hospital, was opened up in Southwest Atlanta [Georgia]. And which gave the opportunity to admit patients at Holy Family and then of course Hughes Spaulding [Hughes Spalding Children's Hospital, Atlanta, Georgia], which was on the other side of town, but with very few beds. My husband and a group of, of other physicians along with [HistoryMaker] Xernona Clayton went to Washington [D.C.] and complained--this was during Lyndon Johnson's [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] administration--complained to the federal government about the misuse of federal money. Most of the hospitals had received Hill-Burton [Hospital Survey and Construction Act of 1946] funds, federal funds to do certain kinds of things and they were not supposed to be segregating and they were. Getting the federal government to move on that issue--of course, Ted Kennedy [Edward M. Kennedy] was one of the one's who helped push it through--opened up the whole idea of more blacks coming on to the staffs of hospitals. More beds available to black patients, and the whole integration of the health system here in Atlanta. So, I mean, all of those things are very much related, I mean, you can hardly take one from the other but with, with public accommodations and with the new Civil Rights law [Civil Rights Act of 1964] and the integration of schools and all came the integration of a whole lot of other things and of course it was health facilities as well. Speaker 1: Well, I didn't hear you mention Grady Hospital [Grady Memorial Hospital, Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 2: Well, Grady had always been the public hospital, and of course many of, many of Atlanta's leaders now, many of them--you've heard of the Grady Babies? Many of them were born at Grady Hospital. But they weren't born there by black physicians, they were born there by staff physicians. And the black physicians themselves had to go to these small hospitals, 'cause they couldn't get on the staff at Grady. Speaker 1: I see. Okay, any other information (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Could I just add one thing? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Because, you know, when we're talking about back in this time in the '60s [1960s] and all, there were probably forty black doctors at most certainly not over fifty. In the whole state there may have been about maybe sixty or seventy-five, most of 'em centered here in, in Atlanta. And, of course, after the integration when Atlanta also became a much more attractive place for people to come, I had no idea right now but the number of black physicians alone with all kinds of specialties must be well into the hundreds. In fact, there are doctors practicing in outlying areas that you're not even aware of who have practices and, and, and they're not restricted of course to, you know, to just the City of Atlanta and, and downtown. But this whole integration of, of facilities has just brought about a tremendous change and it certainly in the number of doctors and physicians, and pharmacists as well, because they all were involved in, in better opportunities. Story_ID: 609224 Speaker 1: So, let's move on to you were beginning to talk about the League of Women Voters [League of Women Voters of Atlanta-Fulton County] and now you're into (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. And there, and there were so many other things that I got involved and, I mean, was not just the League of Women Voters. It was--there was a daycare center called Gate City Day Nursery [Gate City Day Nursery Association, Atlanta, Georgia] that I served on the board there for a while. But it was--it started with a friend of mine, Charlie Mae Lowe [ph.], who was executive director of Gate City many years ago, and it continued with, with Sammy [ph.] who, who replaced Charlie Mae. But it was a, a daycare center that provided daycare services for African American children with several locations, many of them were in housing projects at the time. But it was also started by a group of, of black women who came together and saw the need for providing daycare services for black mothers and black families, and started developing those. And I think that's how the ones in housing projects and also got started because there was a need for daycare for the mothers who worked. And, I worked with Gate City for a number of years. And, of course, it was one of those places that, that I enjoyed the benefits of just, just being associated with. Speaker 1: So, you were associated from 1968 to 1976 about? Speaker 2: About. Yeah, (laughter) about that time. In addition, let me see, there were other things that came along that I did at the same time. I joined the board of the Urban League [Urban League of Greater Atlanta] before then and, and worked in a number of capacities. Story_ID: 609225 Speaker 1: What about the Girl Scouts [Girl Scouts of the United States of America]? Speaker 2: Oh, that was also (laughter). The Girl Scouts has started in, in the '60s [1960s] and I started with--I was first asked to join the nominating committee to help identify--there was always an effort during this--these times to, to integrate the boards and to, you know, to expand the services into the black community. Now there had always been black girl scouts, but they were separated of course. The board finally took action to, to eliminate the two service areas, they became one but then there was the need to identify people to come on the board that represented these other communities. So I started off on the nominating committee and then I was later asked to chair a task force for pluralism to bring about more involvement of blacks in the movement itself. And, from that--and then it went on to the board of Northwest Council--of Girl Scout Council [Girl Scout Council of Northwest Georgia, Inc.] and it was from there that I was asked to join the, the national board which occurred in the '70s [1970s]. But, yeah, my service on the Girl--and it really goes back to my own days of, of being a girl scout, I mean, I was familiar already with girl scouting and to become involved and to see it evolve into what it has become, where it was an organization that really served the girls from all walks of life, and it was certainly a growing experience for me to be associated with the organization for a long period of time. Speaker 1: Is it true that the Girl Scouts were segregated but summer camps were not? Is that true? Speaker 2: Well, I think the summer camps were--the troops went at different times. I think that's what it was more than anything else because they used to be segregated as well. I mean, it wasn't a, a, a thing that was left out, it was just that when they integrated, when troops went to camp, they just did not go at the same time. Story_ID: 609226 Speaker 1: What happens after 1970? Speaker 2: Well, I guess a lot happened (laughter). That was also growing up with, with, with my kids and there was the--all of the activities that involved them. Both my kids were also diagnosed with scoliosis, so we had a traumatic period of time where both of them had to, had to wear braces. And, of course, that particularly for teenage girls that represents a real problem. Stephanie [HistoryMaker Stephanie Davis] had to have surgery with hers and was in--I think I've shown you a picture of the sixtieth anniversary of my husband's [Albert Miles Davis] parents [Lena Miles Davis and Edward Langston Davis, Sr.] and the family pictures and so forth. But the only person missing on that photo is Stephanie because Stephanie was in bed with a spinal fusion at the time due to her scoliosis. Stephanie graduated I guess from college [Stanford University, Stanford, California]--from high school [Northside High School; North Atlanta High School, Atlanta, Georgia] in '76 [1976] and then Stacey [HistoryMaker Stacey Stewart] graduated from high school [The Westminster Schools, Atlanta, Georgia] in '81 [1981], so it was during that time that I was still involved a great deal 'cause usually they were in two schools. It meant, you know, whatever activities were going on with Stephanie I had to attend and those that were going on with Stacey--two different schools being like, you know, two different sets of activities. I was a band parent and went on the band parent--the, the band trips with the band and involved, very much involved with the PTAs [Parent Teacher Association] of both schools and so forth. So it was a lot of school activity at that time, along with the other things that I was doing on the side. When they were in school, I was at the League of Women Voters [League of Women Voters of Atlanta-Fulton County], the Gate City Day Nursery [Gate City Day Nursery Association], or the Urban League [Urban League of Greater Atlanta] or someplace else. Story_ID: 609227 Speaker 1: And then you get involved with the Leadership Atlanta. Speaker 2: Okay. Well, I served as president of the League of Women Voters [League of Women Voters of Atlanta-Fulton County] from I think from '77 [1977] to '79 [1979]. And it was following my--when I stepped down as president, I had also been in, in the Leadership Atlanta class of 1978. And the executive director left and the board asked if Elaine Alexander and I would assume co-executive directors--if we would job share. That was when the first idea of job sharing came about I think. I we, we were one of the best examples because we carried it off very well, we shared everything and there were two of us that was the extent of the staff. So we did everything for the program. I worked at Leadership Atlanta from '79 [1979] to '89 [1989] and of course in that period of time Elaine stayed on a couple of years after I did as a single executive director. But for ten years we worked as co-executive directors. And, of course, a lot happened in the meantime. Stephanie [HistoryMaker Stephanie Davis] graduated from Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California] in 1980, and of course 1980 was the year also that--of her car accident, which was in September of 1980. Stacey [HistoryMaker Stacey Stewart] was a senior in high school [The Westminster Schools, Atlanta, Georgia] and I had to--her accident occurred in California, and I had to make, make it out to California to try to be with her and to help her make whatever adjustments she needed to. But during her rehabilitation I stayed in California from September through the end of January. And, of course, coming back in January it was also a time when I needed to start with, with Stacey in getting prepared to go to college because all of her applications were due in and she was having to make choices about where she was going to school and that kind of thing. So it was a very traumatic time in our lives, and I think possibly the most traumatic of my whole life was the, was the accident she had that left her a, a paraplegic--a quadriplegic, I'm sorry, a quadriplegic and all that, that entailed. And, I, I'm sure that I could tell you about the success stories of-- Story_ID: 609228 Speaker 1: So you were telling me about your daughter's accident. Speaker 2: Okay. The accident occurred in California just about three months after her graduation from Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California]. And I joined her out in California, her rehabilitation was done at Santa Clara Valley Medical Center [San Jose, California], which was staffed by Stanford University, and they had a good spinal cord center there. And, even though the accident occurred in Truckee, California, she was first transported to Reno, Nevada which was the closest hospital. But they didn't have a spinal cord center there, so we were air-lifted from Reno to--which was Santa Clara Valley, which is in San Jose, California which is just, just about twenty miles from Stanford itself. But it was close enough where Stephanie's [HistoryMaker Stephanie Davis] friends (background noise). Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION) Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Speed. Speaker 1: Okay, I was telling you about Stephanie's rehabilitation in San Jose, California. But it was--Stephanie was still trying to make some career choices I think when her accident occurred and she had really thought about law school. I think had Stephanie's accident not occurred, she probably--she loved California and loved the Bay Area [San Francisco Bay Area, California] in particular. I think we would have lost her to San Francisco [California] but what happened was following her accident in September she still had the desire to maybe to go to law school. So we encouraged her to go ahead and take the--she had not taken the LSAT, we encouraged her to do that so it was further along in her rehabilitation probably about November or December when the LSAT was being offered at Stanford. And so she went up to Stanford to take the LSAT which she did, and she passed and then there was this decision about where she'd like to apply for law schools. And, of course, she's thinking now about the following September to apply to law schools. So, we decided that the best thing for her to do was to come back to Atlanta [Georgia] where she'd have a support system, that it would be difficult to, to, to do what she needed to do without a support system, that she would could back home and she would apply to Emory [Emory University School of Law, Atlanta, Georgia]. And, of course, she got into Emory. Story_ID: 609229 Speaker 1: When she [Davis' daughter, HistoryMaker Stephanie Davis] got into Emory [Emory University School of Law, Atlanta, Georgia] it was also the time when I decided to make a run for the city council [Atlanta City Council], when I was per- persuaded to run for city council all in the year 1981. And that was also the year that Stacey [HistoryMaker Stacey Stewart] was graduating from high school [The Westminster Schools, Atlanta, Georgia] and making decisions about going to college and so forth. So, a lot was going on at that time. But, nevertheless, Stephanie started law school at Emory. And I don't know how we managed it all but I was even driving her to and from Emory every day, you know, to get to school. So, but it all work--you know, I guess, you know, God doesn't give you more than you can bare and you manage to do what you need to do. Nevertheless, Stacey in the same time, we had taken one trip to Duke University [Durham, North Carolina] which she did not like. She had applied to other schools; she had applied to several other schools but sight unseen she wanted to go to Georgetown [Georgetown University, Washington, D.C.]. And so we didn't have a lot of time in between from the time I came back from California to go with her to visit all these other schools and to get her application in by April the 15th. But she decided that Georgetown was the place she wanted to go. Just I guess as a, as a, an enticement at that time John Thompson's basketball team and was very good so I think she was really fascinated by the fact that Georgetown would have a winning basketball team which would be very exciting for her. But, nevertheless, she went on to Georgetown. And she did come back for my first political race, which was in October of '81 [1981], and we won. Of course, it was a great celebration and that was the beginning of my political career on the city council in 1981. Story_ID: 609230 Speaker 1: Who did you run against in '81 [1981] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I ran against the very entrenched veteran on the city council [Atlanta City Council] by the name of Q.V. Williamson. And Q.V. had served for four terms, was up for a fifth term but had, had some, some unfortunate circumstances that even though he was considered to be the most powerful man on the city council, he was chairman of the finance committee. And, of course was very influential in getting pretty much everything he wanted. Q.V. was one of these early Republicans, who even though our races were non-partisan, we didn't run with any kind of political tags but he was very active in Republican circles. And had enjoyed the support of many of the business people in town and so forth. So, I mean, when I went to, to qualify for the, for the race against Q.V., I mean, the clerk (unclear) said, "Are you the lady whose opposing Q.V. Williamson?" I mean, as if to say, you got your nerve. (Laughter) There's no way in the world you can beat that man, you know. But it, it--and it really--I didn't beat him. I think Q.V. really--his, his own activities had really caught up with him. I think he had, he had really gotten to the point where he felt that the job belonged to him and not to the people. And, I don't think he had ever been challenged before so he stayed in office, you know, thinking most people thinking that he was unbeatable. And I, I think there were a couple of unfortunate circumstances that really made it possible for somebody else to run, and that person just happened to be me. Speaker 1: When you say unfortunate? Speaker 2: Well, there had been some, some DUIs [driving under the influence] and some other things that were not, not to complimentary so those were the things that I was talking about. I never had to mention them anywhere because they were mentioned by other people. So I never had to make it a part of my campaign rhetoric at all because it was already a matter of public record. Speaker 1: I see. And he was an African American? Speaker 2: Yes, in fact, he was the first black man to be elected to what was then the old Board of Aldermen [Atlanta Board of Aldermen; Atlanta City Council], and had been on, as I said for sixteen years once it was--became from the Board of Aldermen to the city council with the new charter. But, he was probably the most influential black politician in town. Speaker 1: Who else was on the city council at that time? Speaker 2: There was Barbara Asher [Barbara Miller Asher], Carolyn Long Banks who had just been appointed to fill the vacancy that was left by Carl Ware. Carl Ware, actually, Carl Ware became president of the city council. Carolyn came in to fill an unexpired term and became the first black woman on the council. But there were other people like Richard Guthman, Barbara Asher, Elaine--she was then Elaine Lester [Elaine Wiggins Lester], Jim Maddox who is still on there was on the council at the time. But in that group of people elected when I was elected came [HistoryMaker] John Lewis and Bill Campbell, and Tom Cuffie [Thomas F. Cuffie], Archie Byron, and we were the five people who were new to the council. John Lewis beat an incumbent of many years too of a guy by the name of--a white guy who'd been on the council for many years, by the name of Jack Summers [John C. "Jack" Summers] who represented--he was the city-wide representative but represented--came from the southwest section of town. Story_ID: 609231 Speaker 1: How did you make a difference on the city council [Atlanta City Council]? Speaker 2: Well, I'm not so sure I made a difference. I, I guess I was a different person on, than, than people had been accustomed to, but--and there was a great anticipation about my coming on simply because I had been involved with the League of Women Voters [League of Women Voters of Atlanta-Fulton County] which had a reputation of, of working for good government. So, it was different in that regard. But I came on too with a lot of people who were not necessarily, who were not necessarily enamored with the idea of my coming in replacing Q.V. [Q.V. Williamson]. So, I mean, I had to win some friends and it, it didn't take long, because they didn't know me before and they got a chance to, to learn who I was. Story_ID: 609232 Speaker 1: Who was the president of the city council [Atlanta City Council] at that time? Speaker 2: Marvin Arrington [HistoryMaker Marvin S. Arrington, Sr.] was president of council, and I, I think I was talking to you about some of the people who were--Marvin had also served with Q.V. [Q.V. Williamson] for any number of years. And I knew Marvin, I didn't know him well but there were a number of other people of course who had been very much influenced by Q.V. and of course I had to work with them, so it didn't take long to establish friendships with, with them and to be able to work in a harmonious way with them. So, the twelve years just went by. And this was during my first eight years where [HistoryMaker] Andrew Young was mayor. In fact, we were all elected together in 1981, he was elected mayor in '81 [1981] and served--he could only serve eight years. So he served the first eight years and then the last terms was served--Maynard Jackson came back as mayor again and served for mayor during the last term. And, of course, Maynard had been ill for a while and there was some discussion about whether he would run again or what was gonna happen. He really had made no decisions, but I had made a decision that I was going to run for mayor regardless who, who ran. And so I was really among the first to qualify and to announce the fact that I would be seeking the office of mayor. And my reason for doing so was not so much, I mean, it certainly had nothing to do with, with anybody else's plans. It had to do basically with--I had been on the council twelve years and I felt a certain frustration at not being able to make--as a single member of an eighteen member body it's hard to make changes that you see are necessary and we have a strong mayor form of government. And I felt if I was to make any significant changes at all then that's what I needed to do. I didn't need to be re-elected to the city council again. And I ran, and I lost but I lost--I, I'm not so sure I lost completely because it was the first serious candidate by a woman to--in the City of Atlanta [Georgia]. I think, and Shirley [Shirley Franklin] attests to this as well, that certainly I think my running first opened many doors in preparation for her running. I certainly would have enjoyed the same benefit but, nevertheless, it was something that I felt that I wanted to do. And, of course, I got the support of a number of people, including my family, if my family had not gone along with it--my husband [Albert Miles Davis] was just as, as anxious and excited about it as I was. 'Cause I always thought that, that if he had his druthers, he would, he would 'a run for mayor himself, you know, he was that kind of activist and wanted to do it. But, nevertheless, he gave me his full support and we ran a good campaign. Stacey [HistoryMaker Stacey Stewart] took time away from her job, Stephanie [HistoryMaker Stephanie Davis] was involved, so all four of us were involved at the same time which made it quite nice. Speaker 1: Now, what year was this? Speaker 2: This was '93 [1993], the campaign of '93. Speaker 1: And who were the other candidates? Speaker 2: Okay, [HistoryMaker] Michael Lomax, who was the Fulton County [Georgia] commissioner ran second and I ran third. The three of us were the major candidates in the race (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And, and you said, and Bill Campbell? Speaker 2: Bill Campbell was--that was the year that he won. Story_ID: 609233 Speaker 1: As you said, you were sitting on the city council [Atlanta City Council] when there were two different mayors. What was different about what was going on the city? Speaker 2: Well, they were different--certainly different in management styles. Maynard [Maynard Jackson] was a much more hands-on mayor; Andy [HistoryMaker Andrew Young] was a global thinker. I mean, he was, he was still very much interested in the international scene, bringing international business to Atlanta [Georgia]. He traveled a great deal. So it was certainly a difference in style, there were though, I mean, I think we're reaping the benefits and, and Shirley [Shirley Franklin] has, has certainly found it necessary to tackle some problems that probably were missed during the administration of both men Mayor Young and Mayor Jackson, and that's the infrastructure problem. We should have been paying attention to the infrastructure a long time ago. I often heard Maynard say that people would not vote themselves a tax increase, but in order to make the necessary arrangements for improving an infrastructure what you've gotta do is go out for a referendum and, and educate people on the need for it. You know, if we have a crumbling infrastructure, it has to be rebuilt. And the problem is now we're trying to rebuild it all at one time when it could have been done in increments. So, I, you know, I think she's solving some problems that go back many, many years. Speaker 1: Had you become mayor, would that have been an item you would have dealt with? Speaker 2: It certainly, it certainly would have been a priority of mine, and, of course, when I said so during the campaign, Bill Campbell just actually laughed at it because he was not as, you know, he was, he was really not on point in terms of what the city's infrastructure needs were. Story_ID: 609234 Speaker 1: And you talked about supporters. Who were some of the key supporters of your campaign [for mayor of Atlanta, Georgia]? Speaker 2: Well, I don't know if I can go by name or not. I had a good cross-section of people, it was an opportunity for a lot of women to get involved in it. My campaign office was basically housed by a number of women, people who had helped me in other campaigns for the city council [Atlanta City Council] but also he came in to just offer support. And, of course, you know women can also be very, very hard on another woman candidate so there're a lot of women who are not necessarily supportive but there were a whole lot of women who were. And I never ran a women's campaign per se but, nevertheless, I did have--and picked up a lot of support. And Albert [Davis' husband, Albert Miles Davis], of course, helped with the support among his colleagues and so forth. So it was a--we always enjoyed the campaigning part of that (laughter). Story_ID: 609235 Speaker 1: So when your twelve years are up [on the Atlanta City Council] and you run for mayor and you're not elected, what happens next? Speaker 2: Well, what happened was I got interested in a project that was related to the Olympics [1996 Summer Olympics, Atlanta, Georgia]. It was the '96 Expo project, which was a development that was gonna occur right in the downtown area. It was not nearly as successful as it should have been because the Olympic Committee [International Olympic Committee] wanted control of most of the development projects and didn't want it to, to happen. But I, I worked with them for a while and then Campbell [Bill Campbell] asked if I would come back and work in the water department [City of Atlanta Department of Watershed Management] and I became the customer service representative, the water utility manager for customer service in the water department. And I really enjoyed doing that. It was a, a great experience, it was also an opportunity to learn some, some of the things I did not know as a legislator about the water department and how to solve people's problems and so forth. So it was time well spent. And I really stayed there until my husband's [Albert Miles Davis] health failed. Speaker 1: And, you're--in what year did you come back to work there? Speaker 2: Ninety-four [1994]. Speaker 1: And you stayed until when? Speaker 2: Ninety-eight [1998]. Story_ID: 609236 Speaker 1: In the meantime your daughter, she went to law school [Emory University School of Law, Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And she graduated? Speaker 2: Well, she graduated--her graduation was--I'm trying to think--in '85 [1985], '85 or '86 [1986] somewhere like that. But she went on to, to be a law clerk for Judge, Judge Clarence Cooper and she stayed with him for a while until he was--he went to the federal bench. And then she got a job with the state court of appeals [Court of Appeals of Georgia] as a law clerk. And then later she was asked to be a, a pro hac [pro hac vice] judge in the magistrate court [Magistrate Court of Fulton County] and then was later made a permanent judge. Speaker 1: So even though she's a, a quadriplegic she became a judge. Speaker 2: Um-hm. She, she got through law school, took the bar one time, passed it and she hasn't looked back. She's been doing quite well. In fact, Stephanie [HistoryMaker Stephanie Davis] and I stayed--we, we lived together up until the time I sold the family home about two years ago. And she decided that she wanted her own place so it was liberation day for both of us (laughter). Speaker 1: And you said your, your husband's [Albert Miles Davis] health failed in '98 [1998]? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And, when did he pass away? Speaker 2: Ninety-eight [1998]. Story_ID: 609237 Speaker 1: What happens now in 1998? Speaker 2: Well, I still find a number of things to do. I, I've had a passion of working with the homeless population for a long time, ever since I left the city council [Atlanta City Council] I've been involved with the Task Force for the Homeless [Metro Atlanta Task Force for the Homeless, Atlanta, Georgia]. So I'm still working with them. This year I took on a different role and went back to the Urban League [Urban League of Greater Atlanta] to serve as chair of the board. They were having some difficulty and I promised to give a year, so my year is almost up. At the annual meeting I will turn the reigns over to someone else and I hope we'll also at the same time have a new president and CEO. We're in the midst of a search right now and we're looking at a new board and so forth, so everything's working well. Speaker 1: Now, from '98 [1998] until up until this time you do a lot of things, do you wanna just mention some of the things that you do from '98 [1998] and 2008, that's ten years? Speaker 2: Well, those two things I, I, I continue to do but in the meantime I've done any number of things. I worked on the city's ethics board [Atlanta Board of Ethics] for a while. I was a trustee at Shepherd Center [Atlanta, Georgia], which is right up the street, it's the--it used to be the Shepherd Spinal Center which is where Stephanie [Davis' daughter, HistoryMaker Stephanie Davis] got a lot of her treatment when she came back from California. And I served on their board for a period of time, I served on the Community Foundation board [Community Foundation for Greater Atlanta] for a while. So there've been plenty of opportunities to do a whole lot of things, life has not stopped. And I often said I had a life before I went to, to the city and I have a life since I left the city so. Speaker 1: All right. And you have received numerous awards for all of your, your service to the city and to other organizations. Is there one organization that you can say that is really your pet organization? Speaker 2: Well, if so, the one that I still hold onto which is Task Force for the Homeless. I still think it's a problem that needs the attention, that really does not get the as much attention as it requires. And I get a great deal of satisfaction in working with that organization, and will probably continue as long as I'm able to. Story_ID: 609238 Speaker 1: Is there something in your life that you have not done that you would like to do? Speaker 2: I still like to travel. I mentioned to you that my daughter [HistoryMaker Stacey Stewart] and I went to Italy in 2000 for the canonization of Mother Katherine Drexel, we had a wonderful time. Then in 1999 the year before that, my sister Dorothy [ph.] and I went on a, a cruise from--we flew to Athens, Greece and took a cruise to Turkey and that was ten days. And it was just a wonderful, wonderful trip. And I enjoy trips like that except the--travel now has lost a lot of its luster and appeal I think simply because with the security issues and so forth, it just makes it more difficult to travel now. So it doesn't--it takes the pleasure out of travel I think more than anything else. Story_ID: 609239 Speaker 1: Because you have lived a life of, of service to the community, is there a concern about the African American community for you? Speaker 2: Every day. I'm particularly concerned the plight of young people and, you know, as much as has been achieved with integration and better opportunities, we seem to, to be taking the step backwards many times. Whether that's due to the drug culture or whether that's due to whatever, I'm concerned that, that young people will not continue to carry forth, you know. And I'm really no talking--but there's many young people who are wonderful and who are doing wonderful things. But that doesn't apply to the larger population, the number of kids who are coming out of high school ill-prepared to, to go on and to, to do what they need to do to make a, a good life for themselves. So I think it's a, it's a, it's a problem and it's not a problem that they're making necessarily because I think parents certainly are to blame in many cases, that they've not, you know, taken care of the way they, they should. But I am concerned that, that our young people will be able to sustain themselves and to become valuable members of society in the years to come. Story_ID: 609240 Speaker 1: If you were to send a message to the future generations, you know, there will be young people looking at this video fifty years from now, what message do you wanna send to the future generations? Speaker 2: Well, I think I'd like for them as much as I see the success of some young people, I would like to see the success of more. And I think that there're many things that probably will work against them rather than for them, and I mentioned the drug culture for one thing, the peer pressure that comes from, you know, so many places. But, nevertheless, I think most people want to enjoy a better place in life than they probably had. And I think that takes concentration, it takes staying in school, and it takes following some sort of moral direction that takes you, you know, away from what is bad and puts you in touch with what is good. Sometimes that comes from within. And, sometimes that takes some guidance from older people but, nevertheless, I think you seek it and look for it wherever it is, and you take a hold of it and you run with it. Story_ID: 609241 Speaker 1: Can you tell me what you want your legacy to be? Speaker 2: I've never thought much about that. I just hope that my life has been an example for somebody else. Speaker 1: And people will remember you but what do you want them to remember about you? Speaker 2: Well, I've never tried to create an image so if, if, I have imparted something to somebody else, whatever that is, I hope it will be beneficial to them. I can't dictate as to how another lives their life, but I hope that, you know, I feel that my life has been complete. And I've done most of the things that I wanted to do, so (crying). Cut. Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION) Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): And, speed. Speaker 1: I think I'd like to be remembered most of all as somebody who cared. Who cared enough to get involved and to do whatever was necessary to make, make life a little bit better. And I think that's all one can expect. Speaker 2: All right, Ms. Davis [HistoryMaker Myrtle Davis], I wanna thank you for taking the time to share your story. It's going to be, and it is, most inspirational and we really appreciate you taking the time to tell your story. Speaker 1: Well, thank you, thank you. It's been a pleasure. Story_ID: 609242 Speaker 1: This picture is--was made on the day of--I opened my campaign office for mayor [of Atlanta, Georgia]. And, Stacey [HistoryMaker Stacey Stewart], going from left to right, Stacey is on the far left, I'm in the middle and my husband Albert [Albert Miles Davis] is to my right, and my daughter Stephanie [HistoryMaker Stephanie Davis] is in front. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): All right, go ahead tell us about this one. Speaker 1: That picture was taken at the wedding anniversary of my friend Elaine Alexander and her husband Miles [Miles Alexander], and it was made at the, at The Commerce Club [Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, ready. Speaker 1: Okay. In 1999, 1997 to 1999--I'm sorry, start over. In 1998 to '99 [1999], I served as president of the Kiwanis Club of Atlanta [Atlanta, Georgia], and here I am presiding at one of the meetings. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): All right, ready. Speaker 1: Okay, this is a picture of the Equal Opportunity Day Dinner, and it must have been around 1983. I was chairman of the board [of the Urban League of Greater Atlanta] and I'm presiding at the EOD Dinner and to my right is Lyndon Wade [Lyndon A. Wade], who was the president and CEO of the Atlanta Urban League. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): All right, I'm ready. Speaker 1: This picture was taken about six years ago when my daughter Stacey, who is in the middle with the, with the cap and gown on, delivered the commencement address for Trinity college [Trinity Washington University] in Washington, D.C. And to her right is her kindergarten teacher that she talked about in her address, Mrs. Hendricks [Annie Lou Hendricks], who was responsible for her early development in nursery school. To her right is Stacey's assistant, back of Stacey is her husband, Jarvis Stewart, and I'm to Stacey's left. And to my left is my sister Dorothy Lynn [ph.]. (Unclear). Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Unclear). Speaker 1: This is a picture of my daughter Stephanie, who was being sworn in as a magistrate of the Fulton county court [Magistrate Court of Fulton County]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, ready. Speaker 1: Yes, this picture is one of--we had the ribbon-cutting of a gymnasium that was built as a result of a capital campaign that I chaired. And, my, my daughters, my daughter Stephanie and Stacey are with me on that occasion. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: What year is this? Speaker 2: This is 19--I'm sorry, this is probably 2003. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): All right, ready. Speaker 2: All right. This is a picture of my four daughters, my two step-daughters and my natural daughters. To my left or going from left to right it's Vicki Davis followed by Stephanie Davis, next Julia-Ellen Davis and then my last daughter Stacey Davis. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: This picture represents my family. This was on the occasion of my seventy-fifth birthday celebration, and, of course, I'm seated in the middle and to my right to the back is Stephanie, and next is Jarvis, Stacey's husband, and then in the forefront is Stacey and her two little girls, my grandchildren, Savannah [Savannah Stewart], who's looking straight ahead, and Madeleine [Madeleine Stewart], who has her arms around her mother's neck. And, of course, Stacey and her family live in Washington, D.C. where Stacey is senior vice president at Fannie Mae [Federal National Mortgage Association]. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, ready. Speaker 2: This was election night following my first election to the Atlanta City Council in 1981, and this was in the middle of my campaign headquarters. And I am just elated over the victory. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, ready. Speaker 2: All right, this is my first formal photo as a member of the Atlanta City Council, Post 17 citywide. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, ready. Actually, we have a caption that tells us on that one. All righty. Speaker 2: Let me see what this lady's name--now this one really comes from the archives. This is back in the '60s [1960s] when we were voted Atlanta's Best Dressed in Atlanta. To my left, starting from left to right Bunnie Jackson [HistoryMaker Bunnie Jackson-Ransom], who was married to Maynard Jackson, then I am next, and the next person was Joanne Henderson [ph.], who was a cosmetologist here in Atlanta. She is followed by [HistoryMaker] Xernona Clayton and she is followed by Jackie Stevens [ph.]. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, ready. Speaker 2: All right, this is a picture and an article about my being appointed by the city council president, Marvin Arrington [HistoryMaker Marvin S. Arrington, Sr.] to chair the finance committee, for the City of Atlanta. Of course, it became big news simply because a woman had not done it before. And, of course, there were questions being raised about whether the bond rating was going to change as a result of it. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, ready. Speaker 2: Okay, this is the front page of a campaign newsletter that was done in 1981 when I ran for mayor. Election date of course was November the 2nd. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, ready. Speaker 2: All right, this is an article with a picture, I guess one of many articles that occurred during my political race for mayor...