 Story_ID: 28651 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Lloyd Evans Douglas, L-L-O-Y-D, E-V-A-N-S, D-O-U-G-L-A-S. Speaker 1: And, sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: My date of birth is October 5, 1951, place of birth, New York, New York. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your occupation and title? Speaker 2: I am currently the associate director in the Office of Contracts and Grants at the University of North Carolina at Greensboro [North Carolina]. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today is June 19th, 2013. Speaker 1: Alright. Story_ID: 28652 Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five, lightweight questions that we ask as kind of a warm up. And they only require a short answer. The first one is, do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Do I have a favorite food? I don't know that I do. I have a sweet tooth, so anything--candy is probably my favorite food. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Blue. Speaker 1: All right, a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Summer. Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Las Vegas [Nevada]. Speaker 1: Okay, and the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: "The more things change, the more they remain the same." Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 28653 Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna ask about your family history. I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side, but asking about 'em separately. Then we'll put 'em together. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So, can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: My mother is, her birth name was Lurline, L-U-R-L-I-N-E, middle name is Isylda, I-S-Y-L-D-A, and her maiden name is Brown, B-R-O-W-N. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Her date of birth is July 3rd, 1919 and she was born in Rosewell, in Jamaica. Speaker 1: Okay, so, sir, what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family? How far back can you trace her side, and what were they doing, and what were the stories about them? Speaker 2: I can only go back as far as her mother. She's the, her--my grandmother, my mother's mother is the only person I've actually met on that side of the family. She has a half brother who has, had four children. But that's about as far--as much as I know about them. I did visit my grandmother once in 1962 in Jamaica. Speaker 1: Now, what was your grandmother's name? Speaker 2: Her, my grandmother's name was Ritinella, R-I-T-I-N-E-L-L-A, last name Winter, W-I-N-T-E-R. Speaker 1: Okay, and is there a story behind her first name at all? Speaker 2: No, and it's the only person I know by that name. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's the first time I've-- Speaker 2: And everybody called her Ms. Ritti, that was her nickname. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And what did she do for a living? Speaker 2: She had a farm, so she was pretty much a farmer. Speaker 1: Now, where is Rosewell in Jamaica, you know? Is it near Kingston or is it--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: It's near Kingston. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay, so she had a farm. Was it a large farm or-- Speaker 2: (Unclear) medium sized. They had chickens and planted sugar cane and potatoes, so different kinds of vegetables. Speaker 1: Okay, now, had your grandfather been a farmer? Speaker 2: I never knew my grandfather. So I don't know of him, anything about him. Speaker 1: So, there are no stories about him or anything or-- Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: Okay, what about, did your grandmother have any stories about growing up in Jamaica? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: She would go back to the nineteenth century at least, right? Speaker 2: Go back to the nineteenth century. Speaker 1: Yeah, and when she was growing up, as well as your mother, it would have been part of the British West Indies, right? Speaker 2: That's correct. In fact, the time when I went to visit them in '62 [1962], it was still part of the British West Indies. So that was something we had to get used to with the time we were there, is the different money, English pounds, and that's what they used there. Speaker 1: Okay, now, were there any members of the family associated with the UNIA [Universal Negro Improvement Association], with Marcus Garvey's [Jamaican political leader; proponent of black nationalism and Pan-Africanism movements] movement? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. So, they pretty much were farmers and so this is about--can you tell us anything else? Speaker 2: No, that's really about it. Speaker 1: Okay, I mean was your grandmother educated? Speaker 2: No, in fact, in Jamaica, the only education you got was--the maximum you got was sixth, through sixth grade. Then if you're above that, you had to pay. And so nobody in my family went above sixth grade. Speaker 1: Okay, that includes your mother and father [Calvin Sylvester Douglas]? Speaker 2: Yeah, in fact, my father went through sixth grade, and my mother went as high as fourth grade. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 28654 Speaker 1: Now, did your mother [Lurline Isylda Brown] ever talk about, ever tell you about her aspirations as a youth, what she wanted to do? Speaker 2: She never really said what she wanted to do, but, you know, as a lot of other Jamaicans, their sort of dream was to come to the U.S., which she actually fulfilled. And so that's what she ended up doing. Speaker 1: Okay, so she actually consciously wanted to come to the U.S. in those days? Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Was, I know there was a lot of immigration in those days of Jamaicans to the United States. So, did she know people that already--or have family members who were already in the States? Speaker 2: Right, yes. So actually back in the times that she came, you had to have a sponsor. And her sponsor was my cousin. His name was Walter Blair, and he was already in New York. And my mother was sort of strategic in the sense that she had two children from, from a previous marriage. And she actually ended up having to leave her children with her mother [Ritinella Winter] so she could come to the U.S. because all three of them couldn't come. So she, her strategy was that she would come first, and then have her children come after her. Speaker 1: Okay, so what did your mother do in New York? Speaker 2: The first thing she did was, since she had learned to sew in Jamaica, she had jobs as a seamstress. She did piecework, a lot of odd jobs, worked as a cleaning lady. And she did pretty much a lot of odd jobs until she got a job as a school aide in New York City public school system. Speaker 1: Okay, so this is like some years after she arrived? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 28655 Speaker 1: Well, let's go to your father's side, and we'll try to get 'em together. So, can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: My father's name is Calvin, C-A-L-V-I-N, middle name is Sylvester, S-Y-L-V-E-S-T-E-R, last name Douglas, D-O-U-G-L-A-S. Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: His date of birth is April 9, 1922, and he was also born in Rosewell, Jamaica. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, same question, like how much can you tell us about your father's side of the family? Speaker 2: So my father is the oldest of ten children, some of which I've met, some of which I haven't. His father is Nathan Douglas. And his father was actually, as I said before, you had to have a sponsor. And his father had come to New York. My father was there with his mother and was in Jamaica, was back in Jamaica with his mother. And then eventually immigrated to New York, with my father--with my grandfather as his sponsor. Most of the relatives, his siblings were born in Jamaica, but the youngest two were born in New York. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 28656 Speaker 1: So your father [Calvin Sylvester Douglas] basically had what was considered by most people in Jamaica, a terminal degree, in terms of what the British system normally offered-- Speaker 2: That's correct. Speaker 1: --sixth grade-- Speaker 2: Sixth grade. Speaker 1: --before, when he came, and which is not that much different from what most African Americans have in those days. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: So, what did he, what did he do in New York? Speaker 2: So he also had a lot of odd jobs. He studied, he went to school to study television repair. And so for many years he worked for a company that repaired TVs. It was black and white back in those days. And he did that for many years, was down in Flatbush [New York], and after many years there, he eventually got laid off by the company and then started doing different odd jobs, opened a sort of jack-of-all trade business with a friend of his. And they did all kinds of--in fact, they called--the name of the company was "All Trades" because they would pretty much do anything. And so they did car repairs, they--TV repairs, they did carpentry, mason work, electrical work, pretty much anything. And so he did that for a while, and then got a job with the New York City Transit Authority. Speaker 1: Okay, so, now, is this where he served as a tower man? Speaker 2: Yes, he started off as a conductor, and then--it's civil service. So they had to take tests in order to get different jobs. So he studied for the test to become a tower man, and took that test and passed it. Speaker 1: Now, what is a tower man? Speaker 2: So, in the New York City subway system, they have control towers, and towers control the tracks. So when trains are going along--there's a lot of switches. And so they have switches in the tracks, and so they have to switch it because trains in New York City go to different places, even though they come down the same track. Some may go off to the left, some go to the right, they go to different areas. So he has to actually switch the track when they--so that, to send the right train to the right place. Speaker 1: Okay, so I didn't realize that was manually done. Speaker 2: It was back then,-- Speaker 1: And okay. Speaker 2: --it was back then. Speaker 1: Today, it's probably automated or something, I would guess. Speaker 2: I don't know how it is in New York. Actually, I was surprised when I lived in D.C. [Washington, District of Columbia] to find out the, that what they call in New York, they call "motormen," the guys would actually drive the trains. They actually drive the trains in New York. Then in D.C., the motormen didn't drive the trains. They just sat there, and everything was automated. And so there weren't, there weren't towers and there weren't conductors. Everything was done electronically by computer. Speaker 1: Yeah, the system in New York is much older, of course, than D.C. But that's, yeah. So in those days, so he was actually a tower switching--I just wonder how that worked, 'cause, you know, you've got a subway. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: So I'm just wondering where you could be in a tower to actually see the tracks, you know? Speaker 2: Some of it you actually see, but some of it is done, it's on a, sort of electronic board. So it's just lights, and you see the train moving by just seeing where the lights are. And the lights, so there's all circuitry in, on the tracks. And then as it passes each circuit, you'll see a light on the board, and it shows you where the train is. Speaker 1: Okay, that makes sense. So that solves that problem (laughter). If there was a tower, where would the tower be? Speaker 2: Yeah, so the tower is--there're elevated trains in New York too, so they, the towers are actually towers. They stand up and, but they also have towers on the ground. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So that's a good job in New York City, in those days for a working man to have, right? Speaker 2: He thought so. He thought it was one of the best jobs he had. But he was still, since he was a person who would like education, he wished it was sort of a--he wanted a bigger job than that. He wanted to work like--he was sort of disappointed that he was only doing trains. He wanted to be like, work like NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] and do, you know, spacecraft and things like that. Story_ID: 28657 Speaker 1: So your mother [Lurline Isylda Brown] and father [Calvin Sylvester Douglas] are from the same town in Jamaica, but they didn't get together until they got here from what you were saying, right? Speaker 2: That's correct. So they immigrated separately, but in the same year. My father came first, and then my mother came later in the year. And-- Speaker 1: Did they know each other? Speaker 2: They knew each other in Rosewell [Jamaica]. But they sort of re-met in New York because there was a Jamaican community, and people know each other from Jamaica. And so they knew each other, and they got married there. Speaker 1: Now, is there a story about how they actually were reunited and-- Speaker 2: I don't, yeah, there--I'm sure there is, but I don't know it. I don't know how they actually--I know they sort of lived in the same neighborhood in the Bronx [New York], and but I don't know how they actually reunited. Speaker 1: Okay. So they were living in Bronx then, at that time? Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now, and they got married in what year? Speaker 2: 1948. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 28658 Speaker 1: Now, when you consider your parents' [Lurline Isylda Brown and Calvin Sylvester Douglas] personalities and their dispositions, how they walked, how they talked, their senses of humor, what they look like, they--even the aspects of their personality that didn't agree with each other, who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: Very good question. So, except for the fact that my parents --I considered them to both be very nice people, they were almost exact opposites. And I have a sister, it's the only other sister that I had that had the same parents I, that I do, whose, except for the fact that she's female, it's pretty much a carbon copy of my father. And I'm half of each of my parents which is an issue because as I mentioned, they're exact, pretty much exact opposites. And so I remember as a child, I once said to them, you know, when the two of you argue with each other, and you've had enough, you can just walk away. And I can't do that. So whatever, the fighting that they have going on, I have this going on internally, and I just--I can't walk away from it because it's, I'm always, it's always with me. So I can always see when I hear them arguing, I can see both sides of it because I'm half of each of them. But-- Speaker 1: Well, what are the characteristics of these two contending forces? Speaker 2: So, for example, how they managed finances. So my mother was a person who was very frugal. She didn't like any debt at all. She managed money very well, and my father was even philosophically opposed to how she was. His, he used to have a saying that the best kind of money is OPM, "Other People's Money." (laughter) And he said, I have a friend at Chase Manhattan (laughter), and so borrowing money was no big deal to him. He, he would spend first and worry about how to pay it later. And it would--it just drove my mother crazy. Speaker 1: Okay, so how do you resolve those two-- Speaker 2: With great difficulty (laughter). Sometimes I feel like my mother and sometimes I feel like my father, and I think the answer is somewhere in the middle, and I don't know that I get it exactly right in the middle because, you know, I understand my mother's way of thinking, why she didn't feel comfortable with debt. But sometimes, I mean having no debt is not exactly the right solution. Like to save up money to buy a house is, may not be a practical thing. But on the other hand, my father would, can just spend money and not even think about it, which is also not a good thing. So, and so I have both sides of it that I have to keep in check. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Story_ID: 28659 Speaker 1: Now, you have the one sister, the one, complete biological sister-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and then you have like-- Speaker 2: Another brother and sister. Speaker 1: Okay, now, did they eventually move to New York as well? Speaker 2: No, my other sister [Hope Douglas], the sister that has the same parents as I do, was born in New York. So both of us were born in New York. My mother's other two followed her eventually to New York. Speaker 1: Okay, did they come after you were born? Speaker 2: They both came after my--I was born. My older sister came just about right after I was born, and then my brother came when I was seven. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So your household consisted, as when you were growing up, of you and your three siblings, right? Speaker 2: No, so-- Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: It was, my sister and I were there. And then my other sister. So there were three of us. And then when she got older, she left, and then there were two of us again. And then my brother came, and then there were three of us. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then he left, and then there were two of us again, and then we went our separate ways after that. Speaker 1: Now, did any other relatives live with your family? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We tried to get my mother's [Lurline Isylda Brown], or my grandmothers to move from Jamaica, but they just didn't wanna move. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 28660 Speaker 1: All right, now, do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: The earliest one I can remember is being on a subway platform on my way to a wedding with my parents [Lurline Isylda Brown and Calvin Sylvester Douglas]. Speaker 1: So were you dressed up? Speaker 2: Probably, I probably had to be (laughter). Story_ID: 28661 Speaker 1: So were you born in the Bronx [New York]? Speaker 2: I was born in Manhattan [New York]. Speaker 1: Okay, born in Manhattan, okay. And how long did the family live in Manhattan? Speaker 2: So, they lived in Manhattan until the year I was, till I was a year old. So they lived in the Bronx. My sister was born when they lived in the Bronx, but my sister and I were born in the same hospital. So she was born in Manhattan, even though my parents [Lurline Isylda Brown and Calvin Sylvester Douglas] lived in the Bronx. Then they moved to Manhattan, and then after I was a year old, they moved to Brooklyn [New York]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now, what neighborhood did you live in, in Brooklyn, or did you move to different neighborhoods? Speaker 2: Moved to, lived in two neighborhoods in Brooklyn. So when we first moved to Brooklyn, we lived in Bedford Stuyvesant. And then, so I was a year old when that happened. And then when I was ten, we moved to East New York. Speaker 1: Okay, now, East New York, is that the neighborhood that's near the polo grounds? Speaker 2: No, it's in Brooklyn, it's the eastern part of Brooklyn. It's at the, on the Queens border. Speaker 1: Okay, oh, okay. Okay, well, give us some idea of the flavor of growing up in New York. What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: I remember school a lot, those were probably my most vivid memories, going to elementary school and junior high school and high school and sort of a Brooklyn thing where you just thought you'd never leave Brooklyn because you were just--everything you did was Brooklyn. It was sort of like a big deal to even go to Manhattan once in a while. So I played a lot outside when we were allowed to. People in the neighborhood doing various things. I know when we lived in East New York, we played a lot of punch ball. I'm not sure if that's a New York game, but-- Speaker 1: This is when the ball's on a tether like, and you-- Speaker 2: No, it's actually, when you take the ball and you punch it, so it's sort of like a rubber ball, but you punch it, and then the rules are like baseball. Of course, first and third base were usually parked cars and home plate and second were manhole covers. Speaker 1: Did somebody pitch the ball actually? Speaker 2: No, so you just took it and punched it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so it wasn't a pitch. Speaker 1: No pitcher involved, just a punch. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay, other sights, sounds and smells? Speaker 2: Coney Island, I went there every so often, amusement park rides, Steeplechase Park, cotton candy. Other smells of sort of cooking. Since my family's from Jamaica, people used to ask me when I was growing up with did I have Jamaican food? I said, I guess so. We just call it food. I didn't know that it was Jamaican, but it was. But it was just sort of what you ate, and you didn't know any differently. Story_ID: 28662 Speaker 1: Now, this cuisine has become like popular now all over the U.S., and I mean just, I guess in the last thirty years or so, a lot of jerk chicken establishments everywhere, you know-- Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: --and people eating plantain and other, rice and peas and all the Jamaican, you know. So when you were growing up, were you in basically a Jamaican neighborhood or-- Speaker 2: No, there weren't, actually, there weren't many Jamaicans around. Bedford Stuyvesant was pretty much African American, and actually East New York was a Jewish neighborhood when we first lived there and then became African American after that. Speaker 1: Okay, so I know when I think of New York, I think of a lot of West Indian people, you know, especially Jamaicans, you know. But you say there weren't that many in Brooklyn in those days? Speaker 2: There were some, I mean but they weren't in the areas that we lived in. And then our relatives that lived in Brooklyn, we sort of had to sort of travel to get to them, weren't in the same neighborhood. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Story_ID: 28663 Speaker 1: Now what were you like as a little kid? Speaker 2: Very quiet, probably, hasn't changed much (laughter). I liked to learn. I was sort inherited my father's [Calvin Sylvester Douglas] unquenchable thirst for knowledge 'cause he always liked learning things and I always like learning things, probably a classic nerd. Speaker 1: Well, that's a term that I think started gaining popularity in the '80s [1980s] or something, but in those days, I don't know if there was a term-- Speaker 2: I don't know what they called them back then. Speaker 1: But you were quiet and you liked to learn and-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Could you spend a lot of time by yourself? Speaker 2: I did. Speaker 1: Reading and-- Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. Speaker 2: Read a lot. Speaker 1: Okay, now was there a good library nearby or did you-- Speaker 2: There were. There were lots of libraries, and so the New York Public Library and then there was a library in the neighborhood, and went to the library quite often. And then actually, when we moved to East New York, I still went back to the same library for a while. Speaker 1: Okay, Brooklyn [New York] has a lot of resources and it's--I think people don't realize most of the population of New York City is in, actually, in Brooklyn-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --which is, I think about 6,000,000 people or-- Speaker 2: I don't know if it's that many, but it certainly has more than any other of the boroughs. Speaker 1: Right. So, and so what about TV and radio? Did you have-- Speaker 2: So radio first, before we had a TV. We used to listen to radio a lot, mostly all those old shows that'd be getting on TV later. Things like Roy Rogers and I'm trying to think what other shows there were. Some of the comedian shows that later became a television--listened to radio all the time. Speaker 1: Okay, did your family--well, you said you had radios first, but your father is a TV repairman, I imagine he always kept a TV at home. Speaker 2: Well, it's one of those things that my mother [Lurline Isylda Brown] would complain about. He would do other people's things (laughter), and then we wouldn't have it. So we finished, I remember the day when we got a TV. It was a really big deal. And so, and I started watching some of those same things on TV that we used to watch--listen to on the radio. Speaker 1: Okay, so she would complain that they didn't have--you didn't have a TV (laughter) even though he was--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Well, or that--he did a lot of carpentry work except that things at home weren't working, and so it was always an issue (unclear)-- Story_ID: 28664 Speaker 1: Now, did you like to help your father [Calvin Sylvester Douglas], you know, with his repair work? Speaker 2: I didn't actually, and that was one of my mother's [Lurline Isylda Brown] complaints, that I didn't hang around with my father and learn the stuff that he knew how to do. You know, I was more interested in reading books. Speaker 1: Now, did you have a favorite subject in grade school or-- Speaker 2: Well, science pretty broadly. I didn't have a specific area of science, but I just knew I liked science. Speaker 1: Okay, so you had a pretty good science program in the school? Speaker 2: Um-hum, yes, we did. Speaker 1: Could you do experiments in, at school and-- Speaker 2: In high school, we did experiments. We had labs, did experiments. Speaker 1: Okay, I know that--did your grade school take advantage of the different science museums in the New York area and-- Speaker 2: Yes, they did. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so we'd go to museums. We'd also do, they would do the labs in, sort of the--in junior high school. We couldn't do the labs, but we could watch. They'd do demonstrations and we'd see it. Speaker 1: This is at the grade-school level? Speaker 2: Right, this is seventh and eighth grade. Speaker 1: It's like 'Watch Mr. Wizard' or something? Speaker 2: Yeah, that kind of thing. Speaker 1: He would show how you do something. Now, did you have a chemistry set? Speaker 2: I did have a chemistry set. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, it's one of the things my parents got me for Christmas because I needed it. I liked science and the chemistry set had all these different experiments that you could do. And so I tried doing them. Speaker 1: So you've alluded to the fact that your father [Calvin Sylvester Douglas] liked to learn new things, and was always trying something new. Did he, you know--and you said he wanted to work for NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] at one time. He, you know--so, what sort of information did your father bring to you or bring home? Speaker 2: Sort of the drive to learn. You know, he got, he sort of got frustrated at a point where he could no longer help us in school because he didn't know. But I would tell him stories about when I was a kid that he would help me with my math, and he would say, I don't remember that. That's impossible. How could I help "you" with your math? I said, trust me, I was there, you know, but so I think that was--so he was always experimenting and trying different things. And so that sort of rubbed off on us. We would experiment, try different things. Speaker 1: So was he good at math up until a, you know, through arithmetic and--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Up to arithmetic (unclear)(simultaneous). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I remember him trying to teach my sister, my sister and me how to convert decimals to fractions. And it was just over our heads. We just couldn't figure out what he was talking about. I remember one day, it just sort of dawned on me that it all made sense. And so that was a sort of interesting revelation. I tell him that, you know, when I tell him that story, he thinks I'm making it up 'cause he said, "How could I have taught you that?" But, yeah, he did. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so he actually was the kind of father that would help with homework and-- Speaker 2: Um-hum, yes, he did. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 28665 Speaker 1: Now, were you involved in other activities that, like Boy Scouts and-- Speaker 2: I did Cub Scouts when I was in elementary school, and that's about as far as I got. Speaker 1: Okay, now, what about the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] and that sort of thing? Did you attend-- Speaker 2: Didn't attend YMCA. Speaker 1: Or any Boys Clubs or-- Speaker 2: No Boys Club. Speaker 1: Okay, so did you spend like a lot of time alone? Speaker 2: I did. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, 'cause you told the story before we started that you learned, actually learned Fortran at home as a teenager (laughter). Speaker 2: Yeah, I did, I read--it was part of my reading. I read a book, and computers were sort of fascinating 'cause I didn't know a lot about them, and I sort of knew what the potential could be, although from what I see now, that it was nothing like what I was thinking about then. But I just figured I could read, and so I did, and that's how I taught myself. Speaker 1: Okay, now, so did you decide early on you were gonna be a scientist or-- Speaker 2: That's what I decided, although I didn't really know what a scientist was. (Unclear) I figured they studied science, but I didn't know what they actually did. But that was certainly my interest. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I figured I would study things that I liked, and then whatever I did for work may not be related to what I studied. So that's how I did it. Speaker 1: Okay, so you didn't necessarily imagine yourself as a scientist, but as someone who would take the time to pursue it as an interest, at least? Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: Do you think that's typical of the thinking from your neighborhood in terms of possibility? Speaker 2: I don't think so. I think there were people who knew what they--at least they thought they knew what they wanted to do. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know, I thought I might end up working for the New York City Transit authority (laughter), like my father [Calvin Sylvester Douglas], did. So I didn't really--which would have been okay. I thought it would have been okay. Story_ID: 28666 Speaker 1: So, now, did you get very much encouragement in school from your teachers? Speaker 2: Yes, I did. Speaker 1: Okay, I take it you were a good student? Speaker 2: I wasn't a really good student. It's sort of a paradox. I, I sort of did well in certain things, but not as well in others. And I didn't really, my grades weren't outstanding, but I did well enough to progress and well enough to learn lots of things. Speaker 1: Okay, was it, I mean so, what was the name of your first school? Speaker 2: It was the Lafayette School, it was Public School 25, PS-25. Speaker 1: Okay, and so, you started there in, was it kindergarten or-- Speaker 2: Started there in kindergarten. Speaker 1: Okay, this is 1957? Speaker 2: '56 [1956]. Speaker 1: '56 [1956]. Okay, so you were in the, well, you were in the first grade when the Soviet Union put up the first satellite, right? Speaker 2: Sputnik, um-hum. Speaker 1: Sputnik, right. Do you remember anything about that? Speaker 2: I don't remember it. I don't remember it. Speaker 1: Okay, teachers didn't talk about it. Well, at the--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I'm sure they did-- Speaker 1: --first-grade level. Speaker 2: Yeah, the first grade, maybe not. But shortly thereafter, you knew about Sputnik, and you knew about the space race. And so it was sort of right in the middle of it. Speaker 1: There was a conscious attempt on the part of the government to boost STEM [science, technology, engineering and mathematics] education. Speaker 2: That's correct. Speaker 1: They came up with the new math and some other, you know, other science-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --science fairs for the public schools. So, I don't know if you were aware of it as the state--being a student, but that's, you know, that's the kind of thing that they were trying to do. So, so you're at Lafayette how long? Speaker 2: So I went there kindergarten through sixth grade. Speaker 1: Okay, now this is Bed Stuy [Bedford Stuyvesant, Brooklyn, New York], I guess, right? Speaker 2: That's correct. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, Bedford Stuyvesant in those days, from what I remember, just was in pretty bad shape. Speaker 2: It was-- Speaker 1: Is that true for your neighborhood? Speaker 2: Yeah, it was, um-hum. Speaker 1: Okay. I know there were specials on television about Bedford Stuyvesant. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: How bad it was. So, when your parents moved when you were about eleven [years old], I guess-- Speaker 2: I was ten. Speaker 1: Ten, okay. And East New York you call it? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Yeah, a section of Brooklyn. Was it--so did you move into a better place? Speaker 2: Right, and so that's one of the reasons my--we moved is because of those stories you heard about Bed Stuy and all the things and how the neighborhood was and decided that was a good time for us to move and so then started junior high school over there. Speaker 1: Okay, so this is, this is what 19-- Speaker 2: '62 [1962]. Speaker 1: 1962, okay. Okay, so the junior high school, what was the name of that? Speaker 2: It was Berriman Junior High School. It was Junior High School 64. Speaker 1: Okay, now were there any outstanding teachers or teachers that took a special interest in you or were role models to you at this stage? Speaker 2: There was an English teacher. Her name was Ms. Scharff (ph.). And she was really popular with all of us, and so I think that was probably one of the influential people 'cause it's probably one of the few I actually remember from seventh and eighth grade. Speaker 1: Seventh and eighth grade, okay. Story_ID: 28667 Speaker 1: Was church a big part of growing up? Speaker 2: It was. My oldest sister--so I was baptized in a Presbyterian church in Manhattan [New York]. But my, my oldest sister went to a Lutheran church in Brooklyn [New York], and she was the one who took my sister [Hope Douglas] and I, would take us to church with her. And so that was, that was pretty good. Speaker 1: So did you, would you say that you became like a Lutheran at that stage? Speaker 2: Yes, that's correct. Speaker 1: And what was the name of your church? Speaker 2: It was called Christ English Evangelical Lutheran Church. Speaker 1: Christ English-- Speaker 2: English Evangelical Lutheran Church. Speaker 1: --Evangelical Lutheran Church. Okay, now, did you have like responsibilities in the church, in the youth committees and that sort of thing? Speaker 2: I was in the choir. I was in junior choir and then later was in the senior choir. Story_ID: 28668 Speaker 1: Okay, so you're in junior high school in '62 [1962]. In 1964, we were talking about the New York World's Fair--maybe I should, I'm going too fast here. Let's see, 'cause '63 [1963] is when [President] John F. Kennedy was killed too, right? Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Do you have any memories of that? Speaker 2: Just remember, just sort of walking home and heard that, you know, Kennedy had been shot. And (unclear), people thought it was not true, and so then found out it was true. And then that was sort of a big, sort of defining moment, you know, people were like "where were you when JFK was shot?" And we found out that JFK was shot, and so, of course, it was on the news all the time, and, you know, there was, then there was the, the Lee Harvey Oswald, and then he was killed by Jack Ruby, and so that was a big issue. And, of course, the Kennedy funeral was, sort of dominated the airways for (unclear), and so it was just, so it was a really, some event that sort of marked people's lives back then. Speaker 1: Now, were your parents politically oriented in terms of discussing the issues of the day at home and-- Speaker 2: Not polit--not really. They were Democrats, but didn't really discuss a lot of politics. Speaker 1: Did they have an opinion about the Civil Rights Movement? Speaker 2: Didn't really talk a lot about the Civil Rights Movement. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. I know the March on Washington took place that, the summer before John F. Kennedy was assassinated. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Do you remember watching that on TV or-- Speaker 2: I do. In fact, I have a cousin who was gonna go, and she was gonna take me with her. And for some reason, which I don't remember, we ended up not going. And so the irony of that was actually, well, that was my one chance to go to D.C. [Washington, District of Columbia] and I'll probably never go to D.C. (laughter). The irony is that I had been living in the area for twenty-five years. Speaker 1: Right, right. Story_ID: 28669 Speaker 1: Now were you, as a self-described nerd, even though the term wasn't being used in those days that much-- Speaker 2: I guess they called them egg heads. (Unclear) they called 'em egg heads back then (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So as a young egg head, were you interested in the space program? Speaker 2: Definitely. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Definitely, in fact, there was a time in my life where I wanted to be an astronaut, which is an irony, in that now is that I'm--I'm afraid of heights so that wouldn't have been a good thing. Speaker 1: Well, it could be overcome, you know, I guess--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: It could be, it could be. Speaker 1: But, so did you know the Mercury Seven [the group of seven Mercury astronauts selected by NASA on April 9, 1959; also referred to as the Original Seven and Astronaut Group 1], the names of the Mercury Seven and the-- Speaker 2: Um-hum, yep. So I was, studied like all the space craft, you know, from the Mercury, Gemini and Apollo and probably back then could have told you each of the missions and who was in it, and how many orbits they did-- Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite-- Speaker 2: Favorite astronaut? Speaker 1: Favorite astronaut or a favorite mission or-- Speaker 2: Well, you know, there was John Glenn that sort of, you know, did the orbits, and then I don't know, the missions, you know, sort of the moon landing was a big thing back in '69 [1969], the first moon landing. Speaker 1: Yeah, John Glenn went into orbit first, he was the first one to go into orbit. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: And so then, so you see that as a milestone, then the moon landing, right? Speaker 2: Um-hum, um-hum. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 28670 Speaker 1: This is at the height of, I guess space launches and that that, the World's Fair came to New York City, right-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --in '64 [1964]? Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: And, you know, most World Fairs showcase new technology and that sort of thing. So did you get a chance to go? Speaker 2: I did, many times, probably too many times for my parents' [Calvin Sylvester Douglas and Lurline Isylda Brown] (laughter) liking. But I can't even remember how many times I went to the World's Fair, but I did go a lot. Speaker 1: Okay, this is 1964. Did it spill over to '65 [1965] or-- Speaker 2: I think it--it was more than one year. I don't know if it was '63 [1963], '64 [1964] or '64 [1964], '65 [1965]. Speaker 1: Okay, so did you have a favorite exhibit there? Speaker 2: I think the exhibits, Ford had this sort of car of the future, Cars of the Future, and I remember thinking how nice those cars would be. Speaker 1: Did you see the prototype of anything that we have today? Speaker 2: I don't remember. I know that there were some cars--they probably, they were probably prototypes of things that might have been, you know, twenty or thirty years ago, but (laughter), yeah, there were--'cause the cars were very different. And, of course, now, we return to some of those like when the Volkswagen Beetle sort of made a comeback, and sort of looked like the cars did back in the '50s [1950s], the whole sort of design of car changed around then, a little sleeker looking. Speaker 1: Were you more interested in sleek cars or economical cars or what? Speaker 2: Both so there's, something called the Mobile Economy Run back then, and so Mobile would run--do these test cars, and they would publish which ones had the best gas mileage, and that was something that I looked forward to seeing their list on an annual basis. Speaker 1: Okay, now this is a singular kind of interests, (laughter) you're expressing 'cause I don't imagine a lot of teenagers would be that interested in that. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But, you know, I think they would advertise those figures, you know, for practical people that had kids and they're trying to save money on gas. But you were, you would follow it every year-- Speaker 2: I did, I did. Speaker 1: --and do this every year. Story_ID: 28671 Speaker 1: Now, did your parents [Calvin Sylvester Douglas and Lurline Isylda Brown] have a chance to go on many vacations in the car? Speaker 2: No, in fact, they may--went on very few vacations. I think in '59 [1959] we went to Massachusetts. That was, my sister and I and my parents went. I think that's maybe the only vacation that we went on as a family. In '61 [1961] when I went to Jamaica to visit my grandmother, it was just my sister and my mother and I who went. And then we started going to New Jersey, to Asbury Park, and that was my sister and my mother and I who went. And then later, my mother would go to Pennsylvania and go on vacation. So it wasn't, we didn't vacation a lot. My father thought that he was going on vacation every time he left the house. So. Speaker 1: So from what I gather, he had a keen appreciation of everything that was around him. Speaker 2: Um-hum, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, so, now, your trip to Jamaica in '61 [1961], you would have been like what, nine [years old] or-- Speaker 2: Right, and so that's one of the reasons we went is because, so my sister is a little bit older, a year older than I am, and she--it was because of the airfares, because we could both go for less than adult fare because my sister was still young enough. And so that was the last year. So that was the year that my mother decided that we should go to Jamaica. Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause if she had waited another year-- Speaker 2: Then my sister would have had to pay adult fare. Speaker 1: Okay, so, all right, so what impression did Jamaica make on you? Speaker 2: You know a lot of people go on vacation to Jamaica. I would never go on vacation (laughter) to Jamaica. It was, I mean saw the, you know, all the poverty side. And so that was, that's what struck me the most, you know. See my grandmother had a farm, but it was, there was really, there were dirt floors, and the house was pretty much a shack. And then there was, you know, a barn. And so it was, you know, even though things weren't really wonderful in New York, we lived in a house, and it was, it was a house. You didn't have chickens running in and out of the house and other creatures flying in and things like that. So that was sort of an awakening. Speaker 1: Okay, so you could understand why your parents left Jamaica? Speaker 2: Yeah, in fact, that was my father's thing. So people would go back to Jamaica or say they were gonna go back to Jamaica, a lot of Jamaicans (unclear)--maybe a lot of them thought they'd come to the U.S. and they'd make money and then go back. And my father would say, why would you go back? That's the reason you left there. So I think he had been in the U.S. forty years before he went back. And he had relatives there. Speaker 1: It seems strange to hear that when most people consider it a vacation spot-- Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly. Speaker 1: --but if you don't have the money there, it's not that much fun. Speaker 2: Yeah, no. Speaker 1: Okay, so, well, now, okay, anything else about the World's Fair? Now, but, you know, the trip in '61 [1961] in Jamaica, that's--you're actually going abroad for the first time. Did you learn anything about-- Speaker 2: Right, so that was the first time I had been out of the U.S. There was, as I mentioned before, the money was different, so that was unusual. People, although they supposedly spoke English, my mother had to translate for us. And so that was unusual too. Story_ID: 28672 Speaker 1: You went to Brooklyn Tech [Technical] High School [Brooklyn, New York]? Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Now, you have to test into that school, right? Speaker 2: That's right, um-hum. Speaker 1: And so when did you start the process of studying for the test or is there a heads up on when the test is coming? Speaker 2: There is, so, it's--there were three schools at the time that had the exact same admissions test. So it was Brooklyn Tech, Bronx High School of Science and Stuyvesant. But Brooklyn Tech was a four-year school, and the other ones were three. So in order to take the test to go to Brooklyn Tech, you had to take it in the eighth grade, and for the others, you did it in ninth grade. And so I don't remember a lot about studying for the test. I just knew that, that the test was coming, and that's what I wanted to do, and so I decided that I would take the test. Speaker 1: Okay. So you did pass, and you got in. Speaker 2: I did, yeah. Speaker 1: Now, were there any officials at your middle, at your junior high school that helped you, you know, make the transition to Brooklyn Tech? Speaker 2: Not really, but there were--the way they grouped grades in junior high school then was, they sort of divided it up into different categories. So they would put, they would sort of academically rank the classes, and then they would, they would number them, probably something today that people would say was a pretty awful thing to do. So they would--so like if you're in seventh--I was in a special progress class. So that was like Seven-SP, and there was Seven-1 was sort of the next level below that, and then Seven-2, and Seven--so they go that way. And so, because we were in Special Progress, we would get probably more advanced topics than the other seventh graders. And then that was true with eighth grade also. And so I think that was a good foundation for taking the exam. In fact, I remember--it was an all-boys school then, and so only the boys in eighth grade could take it. And I remember that I think everybody in my eighth-grade class took it except for one person. And the reason he didn't take it is because he didn't think he would pass it. And the rest of us who took it, we all passed it. And so he just sort of, probably felt badly that he--that he probably could have passed it too. So that was a lesson for me that, you know, you don't, sort of select out, select yourself out. You know, if you want, if you wanna do something, you try for it and let other people tell you that you can't do it, but don't say I think I'm not gonna make it so I'm not gonna try. Speaker 1: Now, were you encouraged pretty much to do this or by your school? Speaker 2: It's something I wanted, I wanted to do. In fact, my mother [Lurline Isylda Brown] always commented that she had never seen me want this as much as anything else. So she said she didn't know what I would do if I would have, didn't pass. Now, that might have been extreme, but she might have been a better judge of that than I was. Speaker 1: Okay, so this is something that you dreamed of doing, and did you know students at Brooklyn Tech? Speaker 2: Before I went? No, I didn't, didn't know anybody. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 28673 Speaker 1: So what was it like [Brooklyn Technical High School, Brooklyn, New York]? Speaker 2: It was pretty rough. You know, it's a, it was a school where you had to test into which means that once you got there, everybody there was pretty good. And the competition was pretty cut-throat. I was more used to an environment where people sort of helped each other. And there, it was sort of like every man for himself. Speaker 1: Okay, well, this is high school, so, now, were you, you know, do you think you were well prepared, you know, for it? Speaker 2: I do, I do. Speaker 1: Okay, and what was the highest level math you had in junior high school? Speaker 2: So eighth grade, well, I don't, back then I don't think you got above arithmetic in eighth grade. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so you might have been dealing with fractions or something on-- Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: --that level. Okay, so you didn't have your first algebra until-- Speaker 2: So ninth grade was algebra. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Elementary algebra was ninth grade. Speaker 1: Okay, so are there tracks at Brooklyn Tech? Speaker 2: There were. It was an engineering school, so they had engineering tracks and then they had what they called college prep tracts. And the college prep tracks were, you had to study a foreign language and so they were, you had either two years of language or three years of language. So I did the college prep for three years of language. Speaker 1: And what was your language? Speaker 2: German. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay, now why did you pick German? Speaker 2: The two choices were French and German. And I had studied French in junior high school. And so I wanted to do something different. Speaker 1: Okay, now, at this juncture, what was your awareness of computers? Speaker 2: Pretty much only theoretical. I hadn't really seen one. I hadn't worked with any of 'em, and even languages, I hadn't done foreign language--I mean computer languages, I had done by then. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and so as you were telling us, you studied Fortran in high school on your own. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Was this a, was this early in high school or later? Speaker 2: It was probably somewhere, I'd say later, probably my junior or senior year. Speaker 1: And what prompted this? Now, what made you, you know, wanna learn Fortran? Speaker 2: I just, I liked to read, and so there was a book, and I liked the idea of computers and the fact that you could write sort of code that make things happen, and so I just sat down and read the book and started writing in Fortran, never got to test it because I didn't have computer access. Story_ID: 28674 Speaker 1: What was your favorite subject in high school [Brooklyn Technical High School, Brooklyn, New York] in terms of sciences? Speaker 2: Probably physics. I don't remember his name, but I had a really influential physics teacher that I just thought made the subject really interesting, and felt I was very fortunate to have that. Speaker 1: Okay, let's see, so you liked physics, and did you--had you thought about what phase of science you wanted to go into in high school? Speaker 2: I did not at all-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --not at all. Speaker 1: Okay, so you hadn't decided to become a physicist though you liked physics, but-- Speaker 2: Right, what I learned in high school is that I didn't wanna be an engineer. And-- Speaker 1: And why not? Speaker 2: Well, so, so even though I took the college prep for three years of language, you had to take a lot of courses that engineers normally took. So we had to take, for example, we had four years of drawing, different kinds of drawing. So we had free-hand, and we had mechanical and we had architectural. We had shop, we had woodshop, a year of woodshop, a year of machine shop. Then we had electives (unclear), I took print shop. We had foundries. There was a foundry in the school so you had to make these cast iron molds and so there're all these things and actually, later on (unclear) this is pretty good. But I don't think this is something I really wanna do. So, and that was a good thing for one because I may have decided if I hadn't gone there that I wanted to be an engineer. And then I might have found out later that I didn't wanna do that. So learning it earlier, I think for me was a good thing. Speaker 1: Okay, so was, now, was there any special instructor at Brooklyn Tech that you remember above the others? Speaker 2: Just my physics teacher and all my math teachers were real--pretty influential [voice dropping]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, now, you're a quiet person, of course, but did you play hockey in the, in high school? Speaker 2: No, I didn't play any sports in high school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Well, I did intramural bowling. That was my, those were my sport in high school, but everything else is, I didn't play sports. Speaker 1: Okay, did you--now, you probably didn't, but did you run for office or anything? Speaker 2: I never ran for office, no. Speaker 1: Okay, now what about music? Were you in the band or anything like that? Speaker 2: So I played, I was in the band in junior high school. I played trombone, and actually auditioned for the band in high school, and I got into the band in high school, but just decided that I didn't wanna do it. So I didn't play. Speaker 1: Okay, and what was most of your extracurricular time in high school spent doing? Speaker 2: Astronomy Club, Math Club, I think those were the two big-- Speaker 1: And, now, I'm sure you had some sort of science fairs, right? Some sort--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I was horrible at science fairs (laughter). I remember, I think this was sixth grade, I did a science project, you know. It was pretty awful, and so that was disappointing. Speaker 1: What were your projects? Speaker 2: I tried to create a replica of the solar system. So that was a great idea, but not practical. Speaker 1: Okay, so how did you display the solar system? Speaker 2: I tried to do it with hanging clay balls from the ceiling, and it just didn't work. Story_ID: 28675 Speaker 1: Now, when you were thinking about college, then what were the, you know, significant factors that played a part in your selecting City University of New York [CUNY]? Speaker 2: So I won a New York State Regents Scholarship. So before that I didn't really know where I was gonna go or where I was gonna try to go. But once I won the scholarship, it could only be used in the State of New York. So I decided it was too good of an opportunity to pass up. And so all the schools I applied to were in the State of New York, and the City University of New York had one application for the whole university. So I was gonna go to, try to go to Brooklyn College 'cause I lived in Brooklyn and one of my high school counselors told me that, that I, that she thought I should try to go to City College. And so I don't remember who, don't remember why. I just for some reason said, okay, I'll try that. And then I ended up going. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So you started in 1964 then? Speaker 2: '68 [1968] in college. Speaker 1: Sixty--I'm sorry--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: '68 [1968] in college. Speaker 1: Oh, that's right, '68 [1968], right, right. Story_ID: 28676 Speaker 1: Okay, '68 [1968]. Now, this is the year Dr. King's [Martin Luther King, Jr.] assassinated, right? Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Was there any trouble in Brooklyn [New York]? Speaker 2: There was a lot of trouble, a lot of trouble in Brooklyn, the sort of backlash for that and people thinking, well, you know, maybe the peaceful way isn't the right way because that's the way he wanted to do it, and so there was some rioting in the streets. Speaker 1: I know, I didn't discuss Malcolm X, but he had a following in the West Indian community, considerable following-- Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: --was there, were you aware of him when you were in high school [Brooklyn Technical High School]? Speaker 2: I did, I was, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, and, of course, he was assassinated in '65 [1965]. Were there members of the Nation of Islam in your community? Speaker 2: No, not really, no. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 28677 Speaker 1: So, okay, City University of New York [CUNY], who--were there any special teachers there or mentors at City University? Speaker 2: So probably my math teachers. So one of the things that I found about college--I didn't know anything about college. As I said, my parents [Calvin Sylvester Douglas and Lurline Isylda Brown] had never gone. I was actually the first to go. And so this whole concept of a major was something that was alien to me. And I remember being shocked when I got to college and saying, that, you know, you have to pick one thing? I can't pick one thing. My interests are too broad. So I narrowed it down to four things, and then to sort of keep those four in play, I took the classes that those four majors would take, since I didn't know which one I was gonna pick or if I was gonna pick any of them. I just wanted to sort of keep my options open. So that's what I ended up doing. Speaker 1: Okay, what were the areas of focus? Speaker 2: So chemistry, German, math and physics. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so you went to the campus that's on St. Nicholas, right? Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Okay, this is like, it's in Harlem [New York]. Speaker 2: Yep, it's on 38th and Comet. Speaker 1: Right. So, was there a cultural difference between Harlem and Brooklyn [New York] in those days that you could-- Speaker 2: I'm sure there was, but, you know, I was pretty much in City College, and just sort of went there and came home. The, where my parents lived in Brooklyn, where my parents lived in Manhattan [New York] was 149th Street. And so it was near City College, and so even though I was a year old when I moved from there, it was sort of going back to where my parents used to live, the neighborhood, even though it wasn't the neighborhood that I remembered 'cause I was a year old. Speaker 1: Okay, about ten blocks away from that, right? Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Okay, so how were your grades at City University? Speaker 2: They was, so, so, enough to graduate, but not really great. Speaker 1: Now, did, did you do anything there that you, that you're proud of when you look back? Speaker 2: Nothing in particular. I think I was in survival mode, and I was just trying to graduate. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, was it tough? Speaker 2: Yeah, so it was tougher--well, not surprising, to me I guess it was tougher than high school was, and so I, I wasn't guaranteed, I wasn't sort of guaranteed that I would graduate, but I ended up doing it in four years, so it worked out. Speaker 1: You said you were sort of guaranteed that you-- Speaker 2: No, I wasn't guaranteed. Speaker 1: Oh, you wasn't guaranteed? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. All right, so did you, so your grades were so, so, you're saying. So had you decided to focus on any one thing after, I mean when you got to be a senior, I guess you decided on math, I guess--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Well, I decided probably before that. So, so I took chemistry and physics and math and German and, all my freshman year, and then my sophomore year, I started taking, so I sort of had to narrow it down, and so I had, I think by sophomore year, I had to declare a major. And I decided that I would take math and math was very hard for me. And I remember the, the summer after my junior year--'cause I always liked to analyze things, I figured out that I could do a double major in English and physics and still graduate in four years. And so I weighed that heavily over the summer as to whether I should switch out of math and do this double major in English and physics. And for some reason or other, I decided to stick with math, and so I made it through my last year. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 28678 Speaker 1: So what was your plan after--did you plan to go to graduate school or try to get into graduate school? Speaker 2: I didn't plan to go to graduate school, but I figured, why not, I might as well give it a try. I figured college was hard, graduate school would be even more difficult. People would say to me, oh, but graduate school is easier than undergraduate because you only study your major. And I said, yeah, but my major was like my worst grades because I took the hardest stuff (laughter). So I thought I would go to graduate school, and I said, I'd give it a try. And if I could get into a graduate school, I'd try. And then if things didn't work out, I'd say at least I tried. So that's when I went to graduate school. Speaker 1: Okay, now, did you go to grad school immediately after-- Speaker 2: I did. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so where did you go and how did you choose a school? Speaker 2: I went to Miami University in Oxford, Ohio. It was actually the only school I applied to. I, they had an early admissions program. And so I applied to that, and I figured well, if I got into that, I would go and if I didn't, I'd try something else. And so I got in and I went there. Speaker 1: So this is 1970 or-- Speaker 2: This was '72 [1972]. Speaker 1: 1972, okay. That's when you go, you get in, okay. 1972, all right. Now, how did you choose Miami University in Oxford, you know, from New York City? Speaker 2: I wish I could remember. You know, I had, living in New York my whole life, and I decided, don't know why I picked Miami [University]. I'm, I might have had a good reason. I don't know if I did or not, but I don't remember what it was. Story_ID: 28679 Speaker 1: Your major was just, was it a specific kind of mathematics you were majoring in or just-- Speaker 2: Just math. Speaker 1: Just math, period. So what was your thesis about? What did you focus-- Speaker 2: I didn't. So I took a non-thesis option which meant that I had to take more coursework, and I still had to take qualifying exams to pass. So, and you had to take them in real analysis and abstract algebra and then you had a third choice of either topology or mathematical statistics. Speaker 1: Okay, now once again, at--now, at Miami [University, Oxford, Ohio]--I mean did you like being in Oxford, Ohio? Speaker 2: I had a culture shock, but it didn't come until Year Two, which was sort of, I guess a delayed reaction 'cause you would think that after having lived my whole life in New York, I would go to Oxford [Ohio] which is completely different, and that it would be--but the first year, it didn't. And then sort of the second year, I realized, oh, my goodness. It's a big difference here. So it was a delayed reaction. Speaker 1: Is there any specific thing that happened the second year? Speaker 2: No, no, nothing in particular. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Miami [University] was called, at one time, the Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] of the West. I don't know if you remember, you ever heard that, but (laughter)-- Speaker 2: I did not know that. Speaker 1: Yeah, when it was, it is one of the oldest schools out in the Midwest, you know-- Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: --and as such and so--are there any instructors that stand out at-- Speaker 2: I had a lot of professors who actually, who up until recently, I would still run into recently. In fact, some of them I still run into. I remember abstract algebra, something I studied in grad school, that I never studied, I didn't study it as an undergraduate. I remember this professor by the name of Gary Gilbert who, who I thought was good because I--this was graduate-level abstract algebra, and I had never studied it before. And I actually did better in that class than I did in things that I--that followed what I did as an undergraduate. And the same thing with statistics. I had statistics from Vasant Waikar, and I had never studied statistics as an undergraduate, and I, and I did well. In fact, I remember one time I went back to Miami [University] to give a talk, and I ran into Professor Waikar, and he said--he had been there for twenty-something years and said that he kept grade books for every class that he's ever taught. And he said, well, (unclear), and I go like, oh, nah. He said, don't worry, you did, you did fine (laughter). So he brought out his--so then he started talking about people who we knew that were in my class and so, so that was good. Speaker 1: So your grades were better in grad school? Speaker 2: They were, they were. Speaker 1: Okay, now, did you have a chance to do any traveling in the, grad school? Speaker 2: Not much. Speaker 1: Okay, no special programs or anything? Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: And so when you achieved your master's degree [in mathematics] in '74 [1974], I guess, right? Speaker 2: Um-hum. Story_ID: 28680 Speaker 1: What did you plan to do next? Speaker 2: Then I decided to go for a Ph.D. [degree]. And I ended up going to Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts] and was there for two and a half years. Speaker 1: Now, why did you choose Boston University? Speaker 2: 'Cause it was in the East, 'cause it was sort of big school, good math department. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So Boston University. So you were there enrolled as a doctoral student, and I read here that you studied algebraic coding theory there. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Okay. And was that your, the focus for your Ph.D.? Speaker 2: That was. But one of the things that happened when I got there is decided that--I thought I had had enough of school. And I think it was time for me to go to work. The problem was, I had a lot of education, but no experience. So it was hard for me to find a job. So I actually stayed at BU [Boston University] until I found a job, and so then I left the program to go to work. Speaker 1: Okay, now, did you have economic pressure on you, had you--did you get married at that point or something? Speaker 2: No, I did not. Speaker 1: Nothing like that. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay, you just decided you were kind of tired of-- Speaker 2: Yeah, having gone to school since I was four years old, and full time, and well, not full time in kindergarten, but from first grade on, full-time student, and I was twenty-five [years old] by then, so I figured I could have worked for twenty-one years and retired (unclear), although it's not probably, not true now, but-- Speaker 1: Now, did you have a sense of the value of having a Ph.D. to pursue your career goals or-- Speaker 2: No, because again, it was one of those things where I, where I still continued the fact that I could go to school to do one thing and then maybe do something completely different once I, once I finished. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so Boston University. So, you just decided--how far did you get in your dissertation? Speaker 2: Well, I finished all my coursework, I passed one of my qualifying exams and then that was it. So I had a couple more qualifying exams to do, a language exam and then my dissertation. That's what was left. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, so you left in--and you were teaching, right? You were-- Speaker 2: Right, so I was teaching. I didn't, I was a student my first year. I taught my second year, had a teaching fellowship, and then the year after I had, I was a senior teaching fellow. So the second half of my first year of teaching and then my teaching senior season fellow, I actually taught my own classes. So I used to be a teacher's assistant, but then teaching assistant, but then I actually taught my own classes for that last year. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 28681 Speaker 1: And by this stage, by 1976, are you, I know you taught yourself Fortran in high school, but what--where are you in terms of computer science at this point? Speaker 2: So by then, when I was at Miami [University, Oxford, Ohio], they had computers, and so I would sort of play around with writing, doing, playing with computers there, still no personal computers yet. And so that, in fact, the reason I got my job was I went, started working for the U.S. Naval Underwater Systems Center. And during--I remember during the interview they asked me if I knew anything about computers? And they said, well, you know, 'cause we program in Cobalt, and I said, well, I don't, I don't really know Cobalt, but I did teach myself Fortran. And he said, well, yeah, you know, you learn one language, you learn--it's all pretty much the same. So actually, it's my, teaching myself Fortran that got me that job because the other, if I hadn't done that, they figured they would have had to start with, from scratch. Speaker 1: Okay, now this is a job with the U.S. Naval Underwater System Center. Speaker 2: That's correct. Speaker 1: Okay, and tell us now, how, what did you come--you came in as a mathematician, right? Speaker 2: That's correct. Speaker 1: And with some computer science background? Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: And how did things progress? Speaker 2: So actually, the interview I was sort of alluding to was one of the two times in my job, two times in my career where I've actually been hired over the phone. So they never, they didn't interview me in person. It was just a phone conversation. One thing in their favor was that the job that I was applying for was temporary, not to exceed one year. So I guess if things didn't work out, they could have just terminated me pretty, fairly easily or just let my appointment expire. But I went there, and pretty much did Cobalt programming. And so I learned, learned it on the job. And then since my year was about to be up and I did a pretty good job, so they were trying to keep me there, but they couldn't keep me where I was working. So they looked for other jobs, they would set up interviews for me at other jobs at the Naval Underwater Systems Center. And so then I did get another job at Naval Underwater Systems Center as a, as a computer specialist. Speaker 1: Okay, so this is by 1977? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay, now, so you could program a computer in Fortran, I mean--(unclear)-- Speaker 2: Um-hum, Fortran and then Cobalt, so that's when, in Cobalt we had the punch decks. You'd take 'em to the big computer room, and you'd do a run, and then it takes maybe overnight before you actually get your results back. And then you find errors that you made and then so it was sort of a batch processing, and so that's, that was sort of my first real working computer environment. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then when I went to work for the jobs that--the other job I had that was doing computer simulations for submarines and torpedoes. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So tell us, like what was then, so you were writing programs to test the limits and capabilities of these weapons-- Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: --that, okay. So is this like top secret job or-- Speaker 2: It wasn't. I think there may have been--there were some classified things, but there were like these target environment generators and so we would do these simulations of different systems. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, and you, at one time you started working with the Trident Submarine, right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And what exactly did you do with the Trident? Speaker 2: So I worked on Trident, as I said, that was the next job I had after Naval Underwater Systems Center, I worked in Trident, which is based, actually in the same general facility. And there're all different subsystems in Trident. And one of them was the data processing subsystem, and the participating manager of the data processing was, the headquarters was in the Washington, D.C. [District of Columbia] area, but they had to have an onsite rep at, in Newport, Rhode Island where the facility was. And so I was that, the onsite rep for that person. Speaker 1: Okay. And what was the difference between the Trident, the Trident and previous submarines? Speaker 2: So, well, it was nuclear. It was a defensive submarine. A lot of the other submarines were attack submarines. And so what you do if--submarines that are defensive are very, are very--is very different. For a defensive submarine, you don't want people to know you're around. So, for example, you don't use things like sonar a lot because sonar, while it's good for, for mapping your environment, it also tells people that you're there. So it was more of a listening mode than it was a finding mode. So you just listened for, for what was out there. Speaker 1: Okay, and in terms of defense, I mean what was it, was it armed with nuclear-- Speaker 2: Nuclear (unclear) [voice dropping]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Nuclear warheads, I guess you'd say-- Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: --or missiles. All right, so you worked with the U.S. Naval Water--Underwater Systems Center until 1983, I guess? Speaker 2: Well, till '79 [1979], and then Trident until '80 [1980], and then I went to work for the [U.S.] Army at Fort Monmouth, New Jersey. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 28682 Speaker 1: And what did you do with the [U.S.] Army? Speaker 2: So I was at the U.S. Army communications electronics command, and I worked as an operations research analyst. And there we did studies for the Army and the communications electronics equipment, life-cycle analysis, throw-away versus repair analysis, moving things from depots, in the fields, and so any time somebody wanted analysis, they would--of those kinds of equipment and logistics, they would come to our office and perform the analysis. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, are there any stories from those days of working with the government on these weapons systems and-- Speaker 2: No, not really, not really. Speaker 1: Now, did you enjoy doing this work? Speaker 2: I did, I did. I thought it was a really good experience. Speaker 1: Okay, so this is applied mathematics, right, basically? Speaker 2: It's very applied. It's very applied. Speaker 1: And you started off, I guess, would it be fair to say that you started off as a, in pure math? Speaker 2: Yeah, that's fair to say, although, you know, I did study algebraic coding theory which is sort of takes the algebra which is very pure and then applies it, and coding theory is applied. So, again, having these broad interests, I sort of was on the both pure and applied science. Speaker 1: Okay, and by the time you finished your stint with the, I guess it would be Defense Department-- Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: You're--it's definitely applied mathematics-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --at this point. Story_ID: 28683 Speaker 1: Okay, now, you started with the GSA [U.S. General Services Administration] in '83 [1983], right? Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: And what was, how did that come about? Speaker 2: So, I sort of had gotten back to, also--not back to New Jersey 'cause I hadn't lived in New Jersey, but New Jersey was sort of, it was close to home because it's close to New York, having lived in Ohio and Massachusetts and Rhode Island. And I thought I would just stay there because it was close, but then I started sort of looking at other opportunities, and, you know, a lot of them--being a federal employee, a lot of them were in the Washington, D.C. area, and I sort of resisted for a while, moving to D.C. I said, well, I can always move to D.C. later, and but all the interesting jobs I found were in Washington, D.C. And the job at GSA was the second that I applied for, that, where I was hired over the phone. I had applied for the job. They interviewed me over the phone, and they hired me, and they even told me that they were very reluctant to do that because they had never hired anybody over the phone before, but they, then compared my application to the other applications, they said it wasn't close. And so they, so then I moved to D.C., working at GSA as a computer specialist. Speaker 1: Well, you know, you hear so many stories about job discrimination of black candidates going to an interview, and when they find out they're black, they won't even interview 'em or that sort of thing. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: And then the government's not necessarily-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --at this stage, it's not, isn't known for doing that kind of thing. But here you get two jobs on the telephone (laughter). Speaker 2: Yeah, (laughter). Speaker 1: This is fairly lucky it seems, to me. So, now, what did you--you worked for the GSA as a computer specialist, right? Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: And so were you doing programming for the GSA? Speaker 2: No, I was actually doing planning. So back then GSA was the government's purchaser. So if you bought anything, you had to go through GSA. So whether you bought pens or pencils or telecommunications systems, you have to go through GSA if you're with the federal government. And so I worked then in office, called the Office for Advanced Planning, and our job was to do--was to look at emerging technology to see where it could be applied throughout the federal government. And that was a really interesting job because you got to do technology--technical analysis, technology assessment, just looking at new technology and seeing where it could be applied. Speaker 1: Okay, now, this is a time period when the whole computer world is changing rapidly, you know. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Some people are still using mainframes, some people--PCs [personal computers] have come out and-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Just talk about some of the changes and-- Speaker 2: So that was the first time I ever used a PC. It was a Compaq computer, and, you know, it probably has hundredth of the capability that my phone does now. But it was not large in the sense of a mainframe. It was sort of like a desktop now and it was actually things that you could write and program and have it actually do things. So, again, with my interest in computers, I thought that was something that I really enjoyed doing. Speaker 1: Okay, at this juncture, then, would you--the kind of programming you're doing, I guess would, you know, is PC-based, were you aware of Macintosh [from Apple, Inc.] computers at this point? Speaker 2: No, no, I wasn't. Speaker 1: Okay, and was the government--I guess the government was basically PC-based? Speaker 2: Right, um-hum. Story_ID: 28684 Speaker 1: So this is, these are the days when PCs [personal computers] were using Word Perfect, I think, and-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Yeah, so what language did you have to learn to program modern PC? Speaker 2: It was Basic was the language that was used then. Speaker 1: Okay, and where did you learn Basic yourself? Speaker 2: On the job, by reading manuals so-- Speaker 1: Okay, so you're at the cutting edge of this, I guess, on some level, right? Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Were they teaching computer science classes on--I mean what was the nature of the teaching of computer science in those days? Speaker 2: Yeah, see, that I don't know. I think that was about the time they started teaching computer science in school, but that was sort of after my time. And so I, I was still, in fact, all the computer--in fact, I think, I can't remember when it was, but it was much later than that. And I was thinking, I've done all this computer work. I've never taken a computer science class ever, you know. So it was, I think much later than that that I actually had any formal computer training. Speaker 1: Yeah, the people I know from the era even, and these were all African Americans, learned on the job like that. There's a brother that learned at Federal Reserve Bank how to program. You know, he'd never, I don't think he'd ever been to college. He learned how to program computers. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Another biochemist I know that had a Compaq, one of the little portable ones in 1986, and he was showing me, you know, what he could do with it. But, so this was how people were, people were actually learning on the job-- Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: --more than, more so than in school, I guess. So, okay, so you were at the GSA [U.S. General Services Administration] for about a year before you became involved with the National Science Foundation [NSF]? Speaker 2: That's correct. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 28685 Speaker 1: So you joined the National Science Foundation [NSF] as a supervisor, right-- Speaker 2: That's correct. Speaker 1: --of computer systems. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Okay, so tell us what you did actually for National Science Foundation? Speaker 2: So my first job there, I was head of the, their central computer system. So I supervised all the systems programmers in the Division of Information Systems. So that was where the people who wrote the systems applications, that maintained the computer room, all the hardware, maintained the operating system and so those were the people who created the environment that the application program was used. And so I had a staff of about six people, some data entry, some system managers and then I had to contract for the computer facility. Speaker 1: Okay, now, in those days, did you participate in any, I guess scientific programming in terms of, you know, for, in terms of software for computers at the National Science Foundation? Speaker 2: No, because those were--the application programmers did that. And so we just, we handled the operating system. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so now what types of operating systems were available to you in those days? Speaker 2: So when I got there, they had a Honeywell mainframe, and Honeywell had its own operating system. And we were in the process of converting to Hewlett Packard minicomputers. And they also had their own operating system. So that was the transition that happened while I was there. So that was sort of a big effort because we had to make sure everything that worked under the mainframe system worked. And so--and they're completely different as far as how they interact with the operators. So, yeah, so that was a big transition that happened when I was there. And then later we actually went back to an IBM mainframe, so things sort of come and go. You go from mainframe to mini back to mainframe. By then personal computers were--'cause at, when I got there, and they had the Honeywell systems, even with the Hewitt-Packard minis, that they were terminals. They weren't really, they weren't personal computers. They were just terminals that direct connected into the systems. And so whatever you did went directly into the system. It wasn't much later where they came out with personal computers that actually did emulation of terminals. So that came along later. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, I know there was a thought at some point that the future of computing was gonna be basically computer--smaller terminals hooked into a larger cloud in the Internet or something. I mean I think or it was, I think JAVA had an idea like that to-- Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: --to make computers smaller, you would, you know, you wouldn't have as much memory in the computer, but you would link it to-- Speaker 2: (Unclear) some, right. [speaking very low] Speaker 1: --an Internet connection. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Then you could make a smaller computer. Well, okay, do you have anything to say about that (laughter)? Speaker 2: No, I mean that's sort of what happened later, right, because in the olden days, it was sort of, you know, big, big iron. So the mainframe did all the, had all the horsepower, and then when personal computers came, they were sort of like trying to emulate mainframes or emulate terminals. And then the idea was that well, you know, where do you put the processor. So otherwise, (unclear) it's for the point of contention, where do you put the operating, you know, the horsepower? Do you put it in the central system? Do you put it on the desktop, and so it, over time things have gone back and forth. So, I mean, anyways now you have just sort of this connection which is the Internet, and then you have the processing power done, you know, sort of in the hand-held, and then using the backbone as a connection, where before everything was done centrally, and that's where all the horsepower was. And then everything just sort of radiated out from the center. And, of course, now, there's the whole cloud thing which is, you know, where do you store the data. So do you store it centrally? Do you store it on (unclear), now it's like back to storage it centrally but not on hardware, even though it is hardware so that you can access it from anywhere. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 28686 Speaker 1: Now, in 1988 at NSF [National Science Foundation], Dr. Walter Massey [also a HistoryMaker], who's a physicist becomes the first African American director of the National Science Foundation. And what does this mean for the National Science--or to you as someone who worked for National Science Foundation and I did not ask you--I should ask you to explain somewhat, what is the National Science Foundation, and what is its mission and goals? And what did Walter Massey's ascension to leadership mean? Speaker 2: So the National Science Foundation is a funding agency, federal-funding agency, that supports basic research. And so that's its mission, and then it also does things in science education. And so people submit proposals to NSF for different ideas under its purview, and then NSF makes decisions as to who to fund. And so it started in the '50s [1950s] and sort of grew out of that, that era. And it has become significantly, significantly larger since the '50s [1950s]. And so the director who's a presidential appointee, runs the foundation. There's a National Science Board which makes the policy. But the director is the one that oversees the operation of the foundation. Speaker 1: Okay, I think that typically a grant recipient is a researcher at a university, correct? Speaker 2: Typically, that's correct. Speaker 1: But who else gets, receives grants from NSF? Speaker 2: So non-profits do, small businesses do-- Speaker 1: For instance, small business, how would they connect to NSF? Speaker 2: So there's actually a program called "SBIR." It stands for Small Business Innovative Research and where the recipient has to be a small business. And so they propose basic research just like someone at a university would do, and there are different phases of SBIR. But, and then they can get their concepts funded. Speaker 1: Okay, so do school systems get--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Sometimes--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --money too? Speaker 2: --school systems do. Sometimes individuals do, that weren't--they aren't necessarily affiliated with, with any institution. But that's much fewer. Speaker 1: I guess you'd have to carry a lot weight for--to be an individual that would-- Speaker 2: Right. Correct. Speaker 1: --be eligible for-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --an NSF grant? Speaker 2: Now, there are fellowships which are designed for individuals. But, yeah, but for other grants, yes, it's very rare. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so what did it mean for you, I guess, at the time, or was it even special that Walter Massey ascends to the head of NSF? Speaker 2: So that was a first, all right. So that was significant. He was, you know, and he was--it wasn't just, you know, just putting somebody up there 'cause he was a pretty accomplished physicist, right. So it was, you know, to see that somebody who was an African American who was accomplished would get appointed by a president to such a prestigious position. Story_ID: 28687 Speaker 1: What was the climate of NSF [National Science Foundation] when you arrived, I mean racially and even, you know, and otherwise? Speaker 2: So there was sort of a, for lack of a better term, as far as this sort of cultural divide at NSF. So there are program officers who are, make the recommendations. They're either scientists, science educators, mostly university background of some kind. And then there are the administrative support staff. And for much of the time, the program officers were basically, you know, you could see the stark contrast. They were basically Caucasian and male, and the program assistants were some kind of minority and female. And it's not as bad now as it was back then, but it was sort of--you could, you could see that. And that wasn't exclusively like that, but it was, it was sort of striking that you would see that. Speaker 1: Okay, it was something that you saw so many times that you would assume that if you saw a white male and minority female come in that, what position they held in the-- Speaker 2: Right, that's right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And they come from different, you know, not just cultural, culture--ethnic cultures. They were, you know, they come from universities, and some people come from private industry or the government which is, cultures of those are very different. You know, I worked in the Defense Department, and even in the federal government, the difference between defense and non-defense, the cultures are very different, and then at non--among non-defense, at NSF versus other non-defense is very different. Mostly because all the program officers come from universities, a university background. Speaker 1: Okay, all right as opposed to military. Speaker 2: Military or other federal. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and so did things change when Walter Massey [also a HistoryMaker] was appointed? Speaker 2: I don't know if that was what changed things. I mean things sort of got better over time. But I'm not sure if that's specifically why. Speaker 1: Did he do anything in specific to make things, I mean to change the climate? Speaker 2: I don't think that he, I don't know that he did anything specific. I'm not sure, but I think it was just more of the fact that he actually--you know people get perceptions of the--of, well, you know, you don't look like a scientist. Well, what does that mean, right? And so if you see, you know, if you start changing what you see as a scientist, I think that, that goes a long way to sort of change perception. Speaker 1: Okay, you're saying that his visibility as a black scientist, an accomplished scientist, did something, you know, in and of itself, just because-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --he was there. Okay. So, who was, who else was there with you in terms of the African American community at NSF? Speaker 2: You know, there weren't a whole lot. Speaker 1: Was there any attempt to organize the African American employees or--(simultaneous)- Speaker 2: I don't think so (unclear) [speaking very low] Speaker 1: --to caucus together or-- Speaker 2: No, there wasn't, there wasn't. Speaker 1: Okay. Often that's the case, you know, Bell Labs, other places, the black employees would get together and, you know, talk about what's going on. So this never happened at NSF? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Do you have any thoughts as to why not? Speaker 2: I don't, I really don't. I mean I think, just sort of the, you know, sort of the big culture thing was the, was the program officer, admin sort of dichotomy. I think that that's what drove a lot of the things that happened at NSF. [low speaking] Story_ID: 28688 Speaker 1: Was there a typical kind of a project that was funded by NSF [National Science Foundation] in those days in terms of-- Speaker 2: No, I--actually, the NSF funding was pretty broad. You know, you take science, a broad view of science, and so a lot of things there were funded, and it's basic research. So it's not necessarily applied. So, yeah, it's--if you look at NSF funding it's all over the place. Speaker 1: Okay, how did the historically black college and universities fare with NSF in terms of-- Speaker 2: You know, if you look at how the funds were distributed, they didn't get a lot. They didn't get a lot. Speaker 1: And what would be some of the reasons? Speaker 2: Some of it was because they didn't apply. Some of it was because maybe the faculty weren't as well known, because it is an external review system. And so you do look at the merits of the proposal, 'cause there's a merit review. But one of the things you have to describe is, you know, what is your, what are your qualifications to do the work? And, you know, people don't know, and you don't necessarily say, well. And then it could be it's harder to get funding. Speaker 1: Okay, so you're saying that there's not as many applications coming from the HBCUs [historically black colleges and universities]? Speaker 2: Yeah, it's hard to say. I mean, of course, there aren't as many faculty from HBCUs here. And so, and then a lot of the HBCUs are, they're primarily, their primary goal is teaching, and they also high teaching loads. So to spend time to write a proposal, you know, it's just, sometimes it's just harder to do. They're mostly primarily undergraduate institutions. And so those institutions have higher teaching loads. There was some attempt by NSF to do the, research undergraduate institutions program to address some of that, the fact that people with high teaching loads can't be as productive as those with lower ones. There's since been an HBCU undergraduate program, HBCU help program that, to help students at HBCUs. So, you know, over the years, there have been some attempts to rectify some of the things that have happened. Speaker 1: Okay, and who, is there--how are minority, you know, directed projects driven at NSF. Is there a specific--I mean where does the drive come for those? Speaker 2: Some of them are mandated. Some of them just have someone who's a champion to have a solicitation that addresses this. Of course, you need funds for it, so it either has to be at the director level, the assistant director level or the division director level. And then, of course, you have to have support by the broad community because it has external peer review. So it's sort of the combination of those things. Speaker 1: By the "broad community" it means like the Congress or-- Speaker 2: Well, Congress because they fund, but also of those in the scientific community who look at the value of what NSF spends its money on. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: I was just trying to figure out how--so if NSF decides to do projects to give more opportunities to undergraduates in the HBCUs or--who would be pushing that? Where would the push come? Speaker 1: It could come from the director. It could come from the National Science Board. It could come from scientists who find that there's a need for this. And it could just come from people who submit proposals because NSF, although it has lots of programs, accepts unsolicited--what we call unsolicited proposals. So if you have a good idea that's under the purview of NSF, you can submit a proposal for it. Speaker 2: Okay, okay. I know that the NSF has funded quite a few projects that seem like they're generated in the schools, in the colleges themselves. Speaker 1: Yes, um-hum. Speaker 2: --by someone. I know they have like a Wesley Harris Science Foundation out of MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts], and I think that gets some NSF funding, and-- Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: --and a myriad of projects, summer projects, like Dr. [Diola] Bagayoko's [also a HistoryMaker] program at-- Speaker 1: Oh, he's at Baton Rouge [Louisiana], right? Speaker 2: Yeah, Southern University. Speaker 1: Southern, yes, I'm-- Speaker 2: He gets some NSF funding, you know, that's--I just wondered like is it, you know, what, how--what the dynamic is? Story_ID: 28689 Speaker 1: So the balance of your time at NSF [National Science Foundation], you were a computer programming specialist, right, and then a mathematician? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And did you--well, tell us what you were doing? Speaker 2: So, the last fourteen years I was there, I worked in the Division of Mathematical Sciences as a program officer. And so NSF is divided into divisions, sort of the way departments are at universities. And so mathematical sciences was one. And so if you had a proposal that you wanted to submit to the mathematical sciences, in the mathematical sciences, then it would most likely go to DMS, Division of Mathematical Sciences. So I was a program officer there. There were about twenty-five of us in the division, and we all handled different aspects of mathematical sciences proposals. Speaker 1: Okay, so--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: We make recommendation for funding, we organized review panels. We'd write up analyses of what we think about the proposals, so-- Speaker 1: Okay, so this is analogous to National Endowment for the Arts, except that it's more money (laughter). Speaker 2: Yeah, (laughter). Speaker 1: In a sense, you know, 'cause I know they have a dance program, a music program, and you know-- Speaker 2: Um-hum, um-hum. Speaker 1: --and they, you know, get proposals in and then they have to decide--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: --you know, the merits of these proposals and then monitor, you know, what goes on with the money. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: All right, so has--over the years has funding remained consistent with the National Science Foundation? Is the government as committed as it was when you started? Speaker 2: Yeah, it's--actually more. So the size of the budget had grown significantly from the time I was there. There have been some, some dips. But it's mostly been in the, in a positive growth area. You know, the last few years--well, it's been sort of interesting that there's been, because of the economy, there's been up's and down's because there were cuts, and then there was the whole stimulus package which sort of jumped everybody's budget up. And then sort of things went back to (unclear), and there's always contention of, you know, how do we trust the deficit and then there's, you know, there are political things because, you know, the president [President Barack Obama] and the Congress have to agree on how much NSF is gonna get funded. Speaker 1: What are some of the, I guess, most, more significant programs, I guess, that you remember being, you know, working on or seeing come through the NSF? Speaker 2: So the, a lot of their, a lot of 'em are research activities that have happened. And then there are some things that have sort of increased the capacity. So getting people interested in math, keeping people in the profession because there have been issues where people have sort of fallen to the wayside or moved out of the STEM [science, technology, engineering and mathematics] area or out of the, specifically, a math area, and there've been programs that have tried to bring them back. There was something called "Mentoring through Critical Transition Points" where if you were submitting a proposal, you have to identify what you think the critical transition points of, are in the math career, and what you're gonna do to address them. And so I think, you know, some of those have been successful. Speaker 1: Okay, now, do you have a favorite project that was funded, you know, that was targeting minority students? Speaker 2: Oh, there were, there were a couple. There's something called the "EDGE" program, and it's, EDGE stands for, "Enhancing Diversity in Graduate Education" and it was targeting women who were transitioning from undergraduate to graduate school. So that's one of them. There were programs like the Math and Theoretical Biology Institute that focused on trying to get minorities, mostly Hispanic into math areas in graduate school. There have been things like the Model Institutions for Excellence program that have tried to keep minorities, attract them to the STEM fields and then keep them in the field going through to graduate school. Story_ID: 28690 Speaker 1: Now, in your last few years at NSF [National Science Foundation], you were the president of the employees' organization, right? Speaker 2: One year, for one year I was. Speaker 1: One year, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. I was on the board for several years, but I was one year as president. Speaker 1: Okay, this is the National Science Foundation Employee Association, right? Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Okay, tell us about that and what you were doing? Speaker 2: So, the organization is made up of NSF employees. And so what it does is try to do activities the employees would be interested in. So they would do fairs and they would do events, organize events, do sporting events, have athletic teams that compete out in sort of the local areas like, at the time, NSF was in, and still is in Arlington, Virginia, so like in the Arlington Rec League or the District of Columbia Rec League, so it was just something for, for employees that, to get them active in doing certain things. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, now, you, I guess you left NSF [National Science Foundation] in 2005, is that, did you-- Speaker 2: I left NSF actually 2008. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So this is, and I know you either, you went to the University of Nevada-- Speaker 2: Reno. Speaker 1: --afterwards or while-- Speaker 2: No, actually during, so in 2007, I went to the University of Nevada, Reno, and during that--for a year after I went there, I had what's called an expert appointment at NSF. So they would bring me in to do certain activities as an expert. And I did that for a year while I was at UNR [University of Nevada-Reno]. Story_ID: 28691 Speaker 1: You're at the University of Nevada [Reno, Nevada] for a year, and, now what--but you were at NSF [National Science Foundation] until 19--until 2008. So what happened that you would leave NSF? You were there a long time, and it seemed like you were very comfortable there. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: And you could have stayed there forever, right? (laughter) Speaker 2: I could have stayed there forever. I could still be there now (laughter). But I thought it was time to do something different. So I started looking at other things to do. And so that's when I went to UNR [University of Nevada, Reno as the assistant to the vice president for research]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And this is where we are today, right, University of North Carolina-- Speaker 2: At Greensboro [North Carolina]. Speaker 1: In Greensboro. Tell us something about the university. How old is it and-- Speaker 2: So it was founded in, get this right, 1891. It was founded as the Normal School. So it was actually a teaching school. And it was women only. In fact, later it became known as the Women's College for the State of North Carolina and actually didn't become coed until, I think the mid-'60s [1960s], till the 1960s. I think because of that it's prominent--predominantly female but that's probably true about a lot of universities these days. So it is historically a teaching institution that has over the last several years tried to be more of a research institution. Speaker 1: Okay, so UNC-Greensboro is, is it part of the state system, I guess in those days? Speaker 2: Yeah, it's one of the sixteen campuses in the University of North Carolina system. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Story_ID: 28692 Speaker 1: You came over [to the University of North Carolina at Greensboro] as--what position were you hired in? Speaker 2: So I came here as the assistant director in the Office of Sponsored Programs. And so sponsored programs is the one that actually submits proposals on behalf of the institution. So it's--some people call it pre-award, although that's not technically a correct term because there are some things that you do in sponsored programs after an award. But it's sort of, it's for the beginning of where proposals come out of. And so proposals are submitted by sponsored programs. So you work with faculty to get the proposals together and get them submitted, look at the requirements from the sponsor to make sure that the proposal sort of meets all the requirements. And then get submitted and then you wait for the results. Speaker 1: Okay, so as an experienced grants officers, I guess, coming out of the NSF [National Science Foundation] background, you're able to shepherd through the proposals of faculty members and to make sure that they meet the requirements that are, that they have to meet in order to maximize their impact, I guess? Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so, and so you've been doing this since 2007, right? Speaker 2: 2008 is when I came here. Speaker 1: 2008, okay 2008, right, right. Well, what are some of the, I guess the more significant proposals, I guess, in (unclear)? Speaker 2: So we got, one of the things we got funded was a programs, an NSF program called, it has the acronym GK-12. And what it is, is having graduate students in STEM [science, technology, engineering and mathematics] fields, work in the K-12 [kindergarten through twelfth grades] school system. So traditionally graduate students, you know, did their research, and then they became in some cases faculty. But they never worked in the school systems. And so this, this was an NSF program that tried to get graduates to work in addition to doing their research, to help them work with the K-12 teachers. And UNCG [University of North Carolina at Greensboro] did receive one of those. And it's still, actually still going on now. Speaker 1: Okay, and how old is that program? Speaker 2: The GK-12 program, well, this is--here it's fourth year, but it started at NSF maybe thirteen years ago. When Rita Colwell was the director of NSF, this was her program. So that's one of the things, this is how programs, some programs start at NSF, as I said before, you know, (unclear) stems with the director. And this was Rita Colwell's idea. And so it's something that she started, and so it's still going on. Speaker 1: Okay, now, this is, I can--I'm starting to see the wisdom of this, of bringing you over here because you know NSF already (laughter). Speaker 2: I do know NSF. Speaker 1: You know the people over there. And, so-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --you're able to, you really know how this ought to be done or what's gonna be effective and what isn't gonna be and how to proceed. So, is this a trend on college campuses to bring someone in that has that kind of knowledge and background? Speaker 2: No, it's not. That is unusual. Speaker 1: So this is the particular genius of University of North Carolina at Greensboro on some level in this case? Speaker 2: Um-hum, um-hum. Speaker 1: Right. And was there like a--so how did you find out about this position? Did they contact you or did you-- Speaker 2: No, it was advertised-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and applied for it. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Story_ID: 28693 Speaker 1: Has your position [at the University of North Carolina at Greensboro] changed any since 2008? Speaker 2: Right, so that--and I came as the assistant director. And so there was a director and associate director, and I was the assistant director. When the associate director left, I became the associate director and so sponsored programs. And then last year, I became the associate director of the Office of Contracts and Grants. And the contracts and grants office manages all the fiscal aspects of all the external funding that UNCG gets. So once an award comes in, and we work with the faculty, the principal investigators to, you know, make sure, you know, things are managed well fiscally, and, you know, the budgets are what the sponsor thinks they should be, you know, for the right categories. And all the costs that are charged are allowable by the sponsor. And so it's a, it's more of a hands-on, fiscal management of the projects. Speaker 1: Now, I've often heard about the size of some of the grants that come into schools like UC Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley] and other places. And I just wondered like if some of the researchers can handle that kind of money (laughter), I mean--really, is this one of the concerns at the University of North Carolina (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Well, you know, I mean some better than others, right, because a lot of people don't go to school to study that stuff. They go to school to study other things, right. And so just as I did, some people learn it on the job. Others have no interests in it, and so--but it has to be done, right. So somebody has to do it, so it doesn't necessarily have to be the principal investigator, but there should--needs to be somebody either in the department or, you know, where we get involved. So it's an institutional responsibility. And so it sort of varies as to who does it, but it has to be done by the institution. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, and how much in grants from--now, you handle grants from a variety of sources, not just from NSF? Speaker 2: That's correct. Speaker 1: But how much grant money comes through University of North Carolina at Greensboro? Speaker 2: So it varies. But last year we were about 32 million [dollars]. Speaker 1: Okay, right, that's a lot of money to manage. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's a lot of money. Speaker 1: Right. So, okay. Now, I see the need for this office. Are other schools moving toward this model of how to-- Speaker 2: Yeah, well, it's interesting that all universities that are in the business of getting grants, pretty much apply generally speaking to the same places. But they all do it, in some sense, differently. So you'll see different models at different universities. So here, at Office of Sponsored Programs, Office of Contracts and Grants, when I was at the University of Nevada, Reno, it was the Office of Sponsored Programs Administration which had both functions in the same office. And so, and then you'll go, you know, somewhere else where it's just organized differently or it's broken down the way people handle 'em. Some people do it, okay, if you're a specialist, you're a specialist by department on campus. And some say, well, you're, the specialist spot, whatever sponsor, so you handle all the NSF, you handle all the NIH [National Institutes of Health] and you handle all the NEH [national Endowment for the Humanities] and NEA [National Endowment for the Arts]. And so, and there's all these different models and depending on the university. Speaker 1: Okay, now, this is your first job with a university since you left graduate school, right? Speaker 2: Well, University of Nevada, Reno-- Speaker 1: Yeah, Nevada, Reno-- Speaker 2: --and then here. Speaker 1: --of course, then here. But do you like a university setting? Speaker 2: I do, I do. Speaker 1: And do you have any thoughts about becoming a university president or provost or anything like that? Speaker 2: Not at all (laughter). Speaker 1: None-- Speaker 2: No, I think this is, you know, administration, you know, maybe being a director of a sponsored programs office or a contracts and grants office, but not-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --president or provost or anything like that. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Story_ID: 28694 Speaker 1: Well, tell me now. Now, you're, you were the first vice president of the Mathematical Association of America [MAA]. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Tell us about that. Speaker 2: Okay, so I currently, I still am. It's a two-year term, it's an elected position. My term expires the end of January of 2014. And so the Mathematical Association of America is an organization of roughly 20,000 people whose primary mission is math at the collegiate level. And so it encompasses people all over and in different areas, different kinds of institutions. And so that's its focus. And so there's a president. There are two vice presidents, and there's a secretary, associate secretary, treasurer, associate treasurer as far as officers are concerned, and so and there's an executive committee and a board of governors that sort of runs the, manages the organization and there's an executive director that does the day-to-day operations. So it's a pretty big organization. It has a large scope. There are annual meetings. Twice a year they have big math meetings, and some jointly with other math associations. So it's, it's a big job. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, now, you're also on the board of trustees of the Mathematical Sciences Research Institute. Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm currently on the Human Resources Advisory Committee. And the purpose of that committee is so the acronym is MSRI for the Mathematical Sciences Research Institute. It's in Berkeley, California. Speaker 1: And what's the difference between that and the Mathematical Association of America? Speaker 2: So the Mathematical Association of America is a professional organization. So it's just, it's a collection of people who have common interests in math at the collegiate level. The MSRI is a, is a math institute. I think there are currently, well, I'm not sure. There're more than eight now, but there may be thirteen math institutes throughout the country where they focus on doing research in math or--and so MSRI runs programs. And they run programs in different areas of mathematics. And they have workshops and then they invite people in that area, in that mathematical field to get together and discuss issues, to discuss their research. And the Human Resources Advisory Committees, our primary goal is to address the, the participation of underrepresented groups at those workshops. And so sometimes when people put workshops together, it's a matter of well, who do you invite and who you know and so our committee sort of makes sure that when they're putting these workshops together, that they broaden their invitations to people who are in the underrepresented groups. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Story_ID: 28695 Speaker 1: Now, are you a member of NAM, the National Association [of Mathematicians]-- Speaker 2: I'm not a member of NAM. Speaker 1: Okay, and is there a reason why not or-- Speaker 2: No, maybe just haven't got around to it yet. I'm a member of lots or organizations and things get spread thin a little bit and so-- Speaker 1: Okay, and NAM's the National Association of Mathematicians-- Speaker 2: Of Mathematicians. Speaker 1: It was founded, I guess in the '70s [1970s], right? Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: And are you--what are some of the other organizations that you're a part of that you, you know, that you would like to mention today? Speaker 2: American Mathematical Society, the Society for Industrial Applied Mathematics, the American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS), Association for Women in Mathematics. So those are the math organizations, and then because I'm a research administrator, I belong to things like the National Council of University Research Administrators and Society of Research Administrators International. So that's a lot of organizations. Speaker 1: Right, and it does seem to be quite a few of them. Story_ID: 28696 Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done so far in your career, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could? Speaker 2: No, actually, I wouldn't. I feel fortunate that things have worked out well and I figure if I tweaked anything, it might not work (laughter) out so well. So, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And at this juncture in your career, when you look back, is--what today would you consider to be your professional legacy? Speaker 2: I think I've helped a lot of people. I think--and that's what I like to do. I was, I remember when I was sitting at my, in my office at the University of Nevada, Reno. So the American Math Society [AMS], a few years ago started this thing called 'Programs that Make A Difference'. And each year they name two programs they think that have made a difference. And I remember when I was at the University of Nevada, Reno, I just, the AMS notice had just come out, and they were talking about all these programs that had made a difference. And the two programs that they mentioned, (unclear), you know, those are two programs that when I was a program officer at NSF [National Science Foundation], that I helped support. And, you know, some of them were controversial and because I was a supporter of them, they got funded. I said, let me look back at the other ones. And I looked at--and this was, that was the third year of that AMS program. And I looked at the ones the year before, and I said, there were two. I said, those, those, two other ones that I had funded when I was NSF. I looked back at the ones just before that, and there were two more. So all six of them are ones that I had, had funded that, and there was some controversy among them. Now, there've been some since, and you know, that I haven't been, so, but so I was like, sort of surprised. I remember sending it to my colleagues. I said, now, if you look at the AMS notices, you'll notice that there are things that the division has supported. And these were just programs they thought had made a difference in general. They weren't like NSF programs. I mean they were just talking about, they looked across the country and they looked at what programs there were that they thought actually made a difference in people's lives. And then so, and there they were. So I'm, so I felt good about that. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Story_ID: 28697 Speaker 1: You are interested in hockey. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: I gathered that from the photos. When did you first, as a recreational, avocational thing, how did you first get involved in hockey? Speaker 2: So, it was long before I actually played. So I remember--and I told you I grew up in Bedford Stuyvesant, I actually--and then East New York. So there was a--when I was a freshman at City [University of New York], there was a guy who I had gone to high school with and with, junior high school with. And that's rare because, you know, sort of people sort of split off afterwards. So, and he lives in my neighborhood, had lived in my neighborhood, went to high--junior high school together, went to high school together and then we were in college together. And he asked me if I had--actually, a ticket for a hockey game, and do you wanna go? What do I know about hockey? I didn't know anything about it. So he took me to the game with the New York Rangers at Madison Square Garden. And it was just great. So I just almost like instantly fell in love with the game. Now, I was a freshman in college at the time. I had never skated in my life, and so there was that, never even thought of playing hockey. I just, just was interested and started following the sport. And it wasn't until much later that I started, I sort of developed, well, you know, maybe I should--and in fact, the reason I started is just sort of ironic because you know the end of the story. But I played a lot of, I played lacrosse in college, I played a lot of softball and soccer and volley ball, and all these things that I did, I said, well, you know, I can't do this my whole life because, you know, you get older and you just can't do these things anymore. So I said, well, what kind of things do people do when they get older? I said, well, people skate 'cause you see when people skate when they're in their eighties. So I said, but I didn't wanna wait until then, until I started skating. So I started taking skating lessons as a thirty-three-year old. And it was probably one of the hardest things for me to do in my life 'cause I was just like too old to start. And so I started taking skating lessons and then, for a couple of years. And I said, well, you know, now, I might (unclear), never played hockey because I couldn't skate. And so now maybe I could play hockey. So then I went to a league that had beginners. They had training, and then I started going to hockey schools in Canada, to learn how to play. And then ever since then, I've been playing, and still playing. Speaker 1: Okay, that's a kind of unusual way to come to it-- Speaker 2: Yeah-- Speaker 1: --in some ways. A lot of hockey players start when they're kids, you know. Speaker 2: Yeah, I remember going to a hockey school in Ontario, and there was a guy I had played with in Maryland, and he was--we were talking about when we learned how to skate and there were these two Canadian guys that sort of looked at each other and I'm like, what's the problem? They said, we don't remember learning how to skate (laughter) 'cause, I don't remember learning how to walk either. It's the same kind of thing. They were just so young they just, they just never remember learning how to do it. Story_ID: 28698 Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: Oh, I hope things get better. My concern is that people don't have the, the drive of--you know, when I think about mathematics, there were people who--so it's sort of hard to say mathematics because, you know, it's sort of the whole egghead, nerd thing where you--even now, people will not have an issue with saying how bad they are in mathematics. You know, it's, I was never good at math, whatever, and nobody would ever--it's almost like they brag about it. And so nobody would ever brag about being, not being able to read or write, but sort of, you know, not wanting to do mathematics. So I think, you know, of course, not everybody's gonna do mathematics, but I think that they sort of cut themselves off, sort of by taking the attitude of, you know, not wanting to learn mathematics. And so I, so--but, you know, I've--so that's a concern of mine, but I have hope. And so a lot of these programs that I've talked about have been encouraging, you know, minorities to go into the mathematical field. And there have been some great successes. So that's a concern of mine, but I am hopeful. Story_ID: 28699 Speaker 1: You're saying mathematical skill isn't something that or aptitude isn't something that should be taken lightly then? Speaker 2: Not at all. Speaker 1: And would you say a lot more people have it than get a chance to exhibit it? Speaker 2: Yes, definitely, definitely. Speaker 1: Would you, is there anything that you would--if you could do anything you wanted to do with the educational system today, what would you do in terms of math and science? Speaker 2: Sort of, you know, transmitting the love for math or at least an appreciation of it. Not everybody's gonna do it, but ideally, I would like to have everybody's last math experience be a good one. I mean if they decide that they don't wanna do it as a career, I don't want people running away from it because they don't like it. So okay, I like it, but I wanna do something else. And that's fine, 'cause then we have, they have an appreciation for it. Speaker 1: Okay, not just to be intimidated by it? Speaker 2: Right, right. Story_ID: 28700 Speaker 1: Did you have, when you review grants and even those from the faculty today and those at NSF [National Science Foundation] on the other side, you know, as they came in, do you, did--what was your operating philosophy, I guess, in terms of what you thought would work and what would not work? Speaker 2: Those that told a good story. You know, these are grants, and they're proposals, right? So you don't know if it's gonna, actually gonna work or not because if you did, then, you know, you'd just do it, and not--and so these are proposals. So I think one that tells a good story, and then--and that's really hard for a lot of people because they don't go to school to be storytellers. They go to do whatever they're gonna do. But I think I would tell people at NSF, then I said, well, the science--the review process is not scientific. And it's sort of a hard thing to get across to scientists who go, what do you mean it's not scientific? It's in your National Science Foundation. I said, but no, it's about convincing people that have opinions to give you money, right, so you don't have to be correct. You just have to tell a good story. And so, so that's what I tried to do with people at (unclear), that's what I try to do with people, you know, working at university is, work with them to how they get the story across because, you know, they can do the work. But it's the storytelling what gets you funded. Speaker 1: So, now, this is a--I've heard this from other scientists that they, it sometimes harder for a scientist to communicate to a non-scientist what they're actually doing or going to do, and-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --it seems to become, I think Alan Alda [actor, director, screenwriter, author] was on '60 Minutes' [news program]. He's now working with people at Queens College in New York to explain, you know, with a scientist too, in terms of how to explain their science so that they can attract money-- Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: --and support from the community. So is this, does University of North Carolina, Greensboro, invest any money in training scientists to explain their activities or their proposals in a way that, you know, that it has more of a narrative kind of punch to 'em-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I tried to do that when I worked in [Office of] Sponsored Programs because, you know, 'cause having been on the other side, I recognized, you know, how important it is. In fact, one of the things that I would tell people when I was there and here is that, you know, have somebody else look at it, you know, even if they're not in your discipline. And, what's sort of ironic, I would get a lot of pushback from people that said, well, you know, I don't know. I don't want other people looking at my proposal. What do you think NSF does to your proposal? I said, this--it's free when you have somebody go, even, you know, your spouse or your friends, somebody just to, just have them read it and then try to explain it to them. I said, because fields are so specialized that even through a scientific review process nobody is gonna be an expert in your particular area. You're the expert in your particular areas, so they're not gonna know why what you're gonna do is important. And you have to tell them. You know, even if there're other, if you're a mathematician, and these are other mathematicians, yeah, they don't know what, you know, your work. And, you know, you have to tell them, and you have to make the case. So even among, you know, other mathematicians, you have to make the case. Then it gets even worse if you're going interdisciplinary proposals or if you're doing something that engages the community, you know, the community or the school systems, you, you know, if you don't tell a good story, it's just not gonna get funded. And so it's something that, you know, just have as many people look at it as you can before you submit it, and they say, well, explain this to me. And then, you know, it's not clear. Well, I thought it was clear. Well, maybe it's not as clear as I thought it was. So, yeah, I think that's very important. Story_ID: 28701 Speaker 1: Well, tell us a little bit about your family. Now, you don't have any children, right? Speaker 2: No, I don't have any children. Speaker 1: Never got married? Speaker 2: I've been married twice. Speaker 1: Been married twice, okay. Speaker 2: But no children. Speaker 1: All right, okay. So, well, tell us about, you know, your extended family or what you consider your family today? Speaker 2: So there are my siblings who are still alive. You know, my sister [Hope Douglas] that has the same parents that I do who lives in New York, and I have my other sister who also lives in New York, and then my brother lives in Georgia. And, you know, we don't see each other a lot. But we get together every so often. My brother and I don't have children. But my sister has a son, and my other sister has two children. So that's pretty much the family. Speaker 1: Now, were your parents [Lurline Isylda Douglas and Calvin Sylvester Douglas] proud of your, you know, career? Speaker 2: Yeah, they were. My father wanted me to be an engineer. So that was a disappointment, but he got over it. So, yeah, they were very, very proud. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Story_ID: 28702 Speaker 1: Sir, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: I'd like to be remembered as somebody who did their best to help others 'cause I think that's what I seek in all the jobs that I've had, how could I do the most for other people. Speaker 1: Okay, well, thank you very much. Speaker 2: You're welcome. Story_ID: 28703 Speaker 1: Okay, so go ahead and tell us about this picture. Speaker 2: So this is me, Lloyd Douglas, when I graduated from college in 1972. Speaker 1: From City University-- Speaker 2: From the City College of New York. Speaker 1: Okay, this is my Aunt Margaret's wedding, and this is, on the left is my grandfather, Nathan Douglas, and my Aunt Margaret Burchett (ph.), and my father, Calvin [Sylvester] Douglas. Speaker 2: Okay, so that's me, that's a picture of the class that I was in at the Western Development Management Center in Aurora, Colorado. Speaker 1: That's you here? Speaker 2: That's me, yes. Speaker 1: And this is the ledger (unclear). Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: And that's me playing hockey. I'm the one with the number 14 on the back. Speaker 2: What was the name of your team? Speaker 1: I'm not sure which team this is. I guess the Admirals. Speaker 2: That's me playing hockey with my team, the Comets. Speaker 1: So that's a picture of my class in hockey school in Canada in 1999. Speaker 2: And that's another picture from hockey school that I went to in Canada. Speaker 1: Were these in different places in Canada? Speaker 2: Yeah, they're all in--those were in Ontario, but I think this was Peterborough, a hockey school in Peterborough, Ontario. Speaker 1: That's another picture of my hockey school in Ontario. Speaker 2: And that's a picture of my softball team that won the Arlington, Virginia Rec League championship in 1984. Speaker 1: That's a picture of my parents' wedding, Lurline [Isylda] Douglas and Calvin Douglas. Speaker 2: That's a picture of me from my college yearbook, City College of New York in 1972. Speaker 1: Okay, that's it. Speaker 2: Okay...