 Story_ID: 17595 Speaker 1: I want you to state your name and spell it for us and your birth date. Speaker 2: Okay. My name is David C. The C. is for Clyde. "C l y d e" David C. Driskell. I was born June 7th, 1931 in Eatonton, Georgia. Speaker 1: And I'd like to also have today's date. Speaker 2: Today's date is June 23rd, 2001. Speaker 1: And the location we're at, your house and give the address. Speaker 2: We are interviewing at 4206 Decatur St., Hyattsville, Maryland. Speaker 1: Okay. And I want to have your profession. Speaker 2: I am a artist, an art historian, curator, or consultant, but I guess it all adds up to being an art educator, an art professor. Story_ID: 17596 Speaker 1: I ask five questions of everyone. They're sort of People magazine-ish but we--You know, we go there. What's your favorite food? Speaker 2: Oh! I don't know if I've ever thought about my favorite food because I like so many. I guess the favorite thing that I like to cook is gumbo, what I call geeche gumbo with all of the ingredients. Because my paternal grandfather was from the Georgia Islands Coastal Region. And they were very much into gumbo and things of that nature. Other foods I guess would include corn bread. I love fried okra. And there are many other such dishes. But those are amongst my favorites. Speaker 1: And what about your favorite color? Maybe you don't have one as far as-- but what is your favorite color? Speaker 2: I think it's pretty much like the foods. I probably don't have one. But most people say, "Gee, you use an awful lot of blue." So perhaps that's it. Speaker 1: Favorite time of year? Speaker 2: I would say the summer, because I get to go to Maine and work in the studio somewhat undisturbed. But more importantly probably is to work in the garden and enjoy the fruits of the garden. The vegetables, the flowers and go fishing in the little trout brook on the property, catch a few trout and things of that nature. Speaker 1: And your favorite vacation place? I bet its Maine. Speaker 2: It's--yes-it's Falmouth, Maine where I've gone for the last 40 years. Speaker 1: And do you--a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Favorite phrase or saying. I like to quote somebody who admonished us as students at Howard [University], whose name was Howard Thurman. [unclear] walking around-- (aside) Speaker 1: Yeah, a little bit. Speaker 2: Okay. Howard Thurman had just left Howard University when I came. I think he'd gone to Boston University. It may have been Boston College. But one of the Northern schools in Boston. And he came back to the Rankin Chapel to speak one day. And he was telling us about our potential. He said, "Don't let anybody tell you that you can't be anything you want to be." And it echoed the words of my mother. Because I had grown up in segregated Georgia and North Carolina. In Appalachia to be exactly in Western North Carolina. And she always said, "You can be anything you want to be. You're as smart as anybody. And you're smarter than most people. So don't let anybody tell you, you can't be what you want to be." So, Dr. Howard Thurman was a great minister and an eloquent theologian. He was talking about people who don't live up to their potential. And I probably paraphrase him just a little bit. But for those who didn't, he said, "Go thine own way and do thine own thing so God won't have to forgive himself for letting you be born." Story_ID: 17597 Speaker 1: Let's start actually talking about your mother. And I'd like to have her name and if you could talk about her background. Speaker 2: My mother's maiden name was Mary Lou Cloud--C-l-o-u-d. It was a Cherokee name. They were part African and part Cherokee. And she was a quilter. She, of course, married my father when she was about 17. And she became very much absorbed in his career which four years later would become the ministry. So she more or less kind of supplemented his ministry by being Sunday School teacher, mother to four children, as I said quilter, house maker, farmer, etc. But she was a very wise woman beyond her years of education which was sixth grade growing up in rural Georgia, segregated Georgia. There was very little opportunity for an education in those days. And she championed my going to school. It was a farming community in the foothills of the Appalachian Mountains. Speaker 1: So go on. You were--you were-- Speaker 2: So she was the catalyst. I mean my father was the disciplinarian. He was the one who always said, "You gotta be somebody, yes. But you got to do the right thing." Because he was the moralist. He was the religionist. He was at that time a Methodist minister. And we moved from Eatonton, Georgia to North Carolina in 1937. No, 1936. And that's where I first attended school. They had a little one-room school up in the mountains. Speaker 1: Can I go back? Did she talk about her growing up at all? Speaker 2: Yes. She talked--My mother talked about growing up in Georgia, and how difficult it was. And, you know, the usual "I want my children to have a better chance than I." But she recognized the difficulty of the situation, particularly where we were living. It was not the most pleasant community racially. Her mother and two other sisters--three other sisters had moved to that community with their families. And that's why we moved there. We were following them north in our little migration pattern. And I guess the most important thing to say about her upbringing was that she seemed to have had a kind of prophetic voice. Almost a spiritualist of sorts. She could tell you things were gonna happen and they would happen. I was in awe of that. A very interesting, dynamic woman who kind of ruled the church. And she was there until the age of 84. Speaker 1: Okay. Did you know anything about her Indian? And, you know, the Cher-- Did she know much about the Cherokee and black comb--? Speaker 2: She knew about it but she wouldn't talk about it. Which I think was kind of characteristic of the people of her era. She was born in 1907. And she'd just say, especially as I--when I became aware of that connection. She'd just say, "Oh you don't want to know about that." You know. And she'd kind of dismiss it. She'd say, "Well, you know your grandmother." And she called her Haan. Haan Cloud. And, of course, you couldn't have much more of an Indian name than Cloud. The-- there were ten children. The oldest daughter's name was Good Cloud. And of course when it wasn't fashionable to be connected with those kinds of names, she became known as Essie Cloud. And the oldest son was Sat Cloud. And so he changed his name to William, moved to Far Rockaway Beach New York and melted into the general population. We assumed married into a white family. Never came South again. But there was very little talk about our family history. They just didn't--My grandmother-- I can remember the paternal grandmother, Grandma Haan as we called her. My father took me fishing with him one day up in the mountains and the Broad River. And he stopped by the house where she was living with one of my aunts on the way back. My Aunt Mae. And my grandmother--I must have been six years old. Just moved to North Carolina. She picked me up. And she was a little woman. She picked me up and she put me on her knee. And she looked at me and she moved--turned my hands over and looked at them. And she turned to my father and she said, "This boy is not gonna be a farmer. Send him to school." She said, "He does not have the hands of a farmer." And so I guess my father kind of rallied in that concept. Because whereas my sisters would stay at home, chop the cotton, pick the cotton, he would send me to school. And then I remember seeing a letter once I learned to read. That my paternal grandfather, who was a very erudite man who taught school in Georgia even though he had only finished the fifth grade. But wrote with a beautiful hand--penmanship. We called him Grandpa Putt. His name was William Driskell and he was born a slave in 1862. But he didn't know anything about it other than what they told him. And my mother would tell me these stories. I have in the basement her paternal grandmother's wash pot that she said her--'cause she was partly raised by this grandmother who was a slave also. And she said that she would tell her the stories of how they would put the wash pots over their heads and pray for freedom. And that kind of thing. So it was a family on both sides I think that were very much interested in freedom, in the political situation, of course, in religion and so forth. And this--My paternal grandfather who was very much concerned about education wrote to my father in the early '40's [1940s] just as I had learned to read. And I, of course, being nosy took the letter and read it. And it would be a very sexist letter today. But he said, "Educate your son. Don't waste your money trying to educate your daughters because they'll just get married ." But I wasn't supposed to have read that letter. Story_ID: 17598 Speaker 1: I wanna go to your father. But how many kids--? What were the--your siblings and what order? Speaker 2: My oldest sister, Myley, who was named for my grandmother on my father's side. And she lives in Washington DC now. And then Myley Eugene. She was named for both grandmothers, actually. And then she was born in 1924, I think. And then there was Verdi, my second sister who was born 1926. And she's deceased, died in 1986. Then my youngest sister, Georgia, who lives in Charlotte, North Carolina was born in 1928. Speaker 1: So you're the baby. Speaker 2: I'm the baby. Speaker 1: The boy and the baby. Speaker 2: Yes. And I was born in 1931. Speaker 1: And so what was your father like? What was he--? You know. And I mean more has been talked--You've talked more about that, you know. His side of the family. Speaker 2: [simultaneously] Um-hmm. Speaker 1: But what was he like? Speaker 2: Well, he was--my father was a first of all a very kind of stern religious person. No nonsense but loving, kind, generous, very prudent. Not wasteful in any ways. If you got a plate full of food, you had to eat it. Because people were starving in other places around us and so forth. And the food was hard to come by. And we grew most of our food. We had a small farm about thirteen acres. After he had been a sharecropper for a number of years. And he preached in the pulpit politics and purchase of land. He'd say, "Buy land. They aren't making any more. And register to vote." Even as difficult as it was for black people in the South to register. In this county that we were in, a fairly liberal county in Cleveland. We moved between Cleveland and Rutherford Counties. I never heard of blacks being barred from voting. But I never heard of any great mass going to the polls. In Rutherford County in particular, very kind of strange mountainous community where people had to live together to get along. And most of our neighbors were white. And at one time we were the only people in the neighborhood with a car. So they were all very respectful of my father. 'Cause they'd come borrow the car to go to town to do grocery shopping on Saturday. And it was that kind of amicable relationship that you never hear much about in the South that was highly enforceable there. Because people had to survive amongst themselves. And so he was highly respected in the community. Everybody called him Preacher. I suspect that was a way of not having to call him Mr. Driskell or Reverend Driskell because the white minister was reverend and so forth. Story_ID: 17599 Speaker 1: In that particular county, Rutherford County, the schools were a little more liberal. Most of our teachers had master's degrees. Because the state of North Carolina paid based on degrees. Whereas they would not allow African Americans to attend the University of North Carolina or any other schools or the private schools. Where they could get an education. They--the state would pay them to go out of the state, any place they were accepted or wanted to go. So our teachers went to Columbia [University], to [University of] Michigan, to schools in the north. And they were well informed. I still stay in touch with a woman who lives in Charlotte, North Carolina. She didn't teach me. But she was one of the teachers at a school where my father's church was in Polk County. She's 95 now. And she had a master's degree in education from Michigan State University. And so these were the kinds of teachers teaching elementary school. So we were perhaps better qualified to go to college from a four room high school than some of our fellow white students from across town from a 100 room school. Because the standards that these teachers gave. And they pounded education. You have to go to college. In our little class of twenty-four people, eighteen of us went to college in 1949. Story_ID: 17600 Speaker 1: Do you remember much of your time in Eatonton, Georgia at all? Speaker 2: [simultaneously] I remember a good bit of it as a kid. Interestingly enough, I was in Columbus Ohio at the University of Ohio two months ago lecturing. And a lady came up to me and she said, "I see you were born in Eatonton, Georgia." And I said, "Yes." And she said, "Do you remember anything about it?" And I said, "Oh yes. I moved away when I was five-and-a-half, six but I still remember." Because when the people from British Television asked me about it, I told them what I remembered. They went down two weeks ahead of me in 1989 and found everything that I told them except the house that I lived in which had been torn down and the old school. So I remember a few things. I remember, you know, the city--the town being, you know, that typical southern square. And I remember some of our relatives. And this lady asked me if I knew a family by the name of Montgomery. And I said, "Oh, Mr. Montgomery had the fish market. And it was the only fish market in Eatonton. So blacks, whites, Native Americans everybody bought fish from Mr. Montgomery." And she said, "Well, that was my grandfather." And his fish market was in the little black section over near Ebenezer Baptist Church which is now a historical landmark in that area. So, I remember a good bit about the place and the era. Story_ID: 17601 Speaker 1: How did your parents meet? Speaker 2: How did they meet, oh gee. I think they were going--attending the same school. And my father was about 18 when they got married. He may have been 19. Either my mother was 16 and he was 18 or something like that. Speaker 1: Now that's what I'm curious what-- your father though was from North Carolina? Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] No, both from Jasper County, Georgia. Speaker 1: Okay. But the grandparents. But your fa-- Speaker 2: [simultaneously] They were all--this is all taking place in Georgia. Speaker 1: Oh, I [unclear]. Speaker 2: But then my grandmother moves. The maternal grandmother moves to North Carolina. And that's where the whole Appalachian Scene comes in. We were about 40 miles southeast of Ashville in Rutherford County. Speaker 1: But when it says that your--you know, your grandparents on your father's side spoke [unclear]. Yeah. That's Georgia. Speaker 2: Georgia--okay, that's right, Georgia. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Um-hmm. Speaker 2: That's right. Now, tell us about just those early years of sort of growing up there. You know, besides--you know, you talked about the school part but other--you know, other parts of things that formed you as a young-- Speaker 1: [simultaneously] In North Carolina? In North Carolina. Speaker 2: Well, I attribute my formative years of growth and interest in the arts and education period to one teacher. A woman by the name of Edna Freeman, who taught in this little one-room school. And she saw I think my potential early on. And decided that I was the artist for the school even at grade three. And she had moved me up to grade 4 because I could read everything in third grade and do all the math and everything. And a part of that was they all told me how smart I was. And, of course, I gloried in that. But a part of that was that I sat there in that one room school all day and listened to everybody's work from grade one through seven. And I knew it all. I was computerizing all of it. And when my sisters couldn't remember it I'd tell them what it was. And they would joke and say, "Well, he got all the brain." And, you know. But I was sitting there listening to everything the teacher said. Absorbing it. I could recite the poems that they were reciting in the seventh grade. I could recite them in the third grade. Let me live in the house by the side of the road where the race of men go by and all of that. I knew all of that. And when they didn't remember it, I would tell them. So it wasn't that I was smart so much as I was listening. I was absorbed in that. Because there was nothing else to be doing. You made your own toys. The teachers called on me to do all of the illustration for the books and for everything. So I was kind of encouraged that way early on. And my job as a youngster at home was to be the water boy because they were working in the fields and so forth. And I knew where all of the little spots were along the way for the clay and all those kinds of things. And on Saturday night, I would have to whitewash the Hearn, what we called the Hearn. Go down and get the clay and whitewash it. And then I'd get down immediately and get charcoal out and start drawing on it. And, of course, my parents would chastise me for doing that. They didn't provide me with drawing paper or anything like that. So I would draw in my father's theology books. In those blank pages. Houses, cars, people. And my father--I'd seen him drawing. And I have two of his drawings. The angel over here and then another one of a little lady. So I would imitate--He was always drawing angels hovering over churches and things like that. So one of the things I did as a kind of homage to him in 1996 was to do a serigraph, a silk-screen, rather, in which I did this angel hovering over this little church. Actually, the church, the parsonage where I was born in Eatonton, Georgia. Story_ID: 17602 Speaker 1: What kind of child would you say you were, though? I mean I know-- Were you quiet? Were you an introvert? Were you spoiled 'cause you were the youngest? Were you rambunctious? Were you a dreamer? What-- Speaker 2: [simultaneously] I was a dreamer, a little spoiled. Because my sisters, especially my older sister, she was kind of like the person who watched over me. And she kind of spoiled me. Nobody should touch me. Nobody should disagree with me or what have you. My parents weren't like that. They disciplined me. But she spoiled me, you know. And she would take on anybody who tried to pick a fight with me at school and protect me and so forth. But I was kind of quiet to myself because I liked my own time. I was introspective and very creative and very much to myself. I could entertain myself all day without anybody interfering. And I still enjoy being alone.. Speaker 1: And what would you think about during those times? Do you remember? Speaker 2: Oh, I dreamed about travel, far away places. I would draw, and I would write sometimes poetry. And it didn't have the best of grammar but I remember a little poem I composed. And 'cause I thought poetry just had to rhyme not necessarily be good grammar. And I think I was in the third grade and I was philosophizing on life. My father had given me a book when I was either I would say about seven. No, about eight or nine called The basic teachings of the great philosophers. And I was reading that book in the fourth grade. Socrates and Plato and so forth, Aristotle. I still have the book. And I wrote after reading that book, I wrote this little poem: "Life is like a play that show how one may come and two may go. How some may leave forever to stay beyond the reaches of yesterday." And so I was writing early. I was painting, drawing. And my teachers saw that in me and they admonished me and, you know. "That's good. Keep it up." Speaker 1: You were in third grade when you did that poem? Speaker 2: I was in about--I would say-- I may have been in the fourth grade. Because I got promoted from the third. I never stayed in the third grade. I went like from second to the fourth. Story_ID: 17603 Speaker 1: Now since your father--now he was a Methodist-- Speaker 2: [simultaneously] He was a Methodist minister at that time. Speaker 1: Methodist minister. Okay but what an AME or just Methodist? Speaker 2: AME Zion. Speaker 1: AME Zion. Okay. Speaker 2: But you know how Methodists are about their Methodism. When he moved to that part of western North Carolina, there were no AME Zion churches there. And rather than-- the closest Methodist church was the CME church. Which at that time was called the colored Methodist Episcopal. I think they later changed it to Christian Methodist Episcopal. And rather than join that church, he became a Baptist. So we more--even though I was Christian Methodist, I grew up a Baptist. Speaker 1: So he became--so did that change the whole--You know. 'Cause-- Were you Baptist? Was he Baptist in the true-- Speaker 2: [simultaneously] Very fundamentalist and-- well, in the sense of his preaching tactic, it was, you know, African Methodist Episcopal Zion were more spirited than AME. So he was closer to the Baptist in tradition anyway. He had the cadence in his preaching. And would pause for the audience to echo and say you know the call and response and they'd give the amen. So that was the tradition that I grew up in. But I was-- Some how I was always questioning and saying, "Does it have to be this alone?" And he would never discourage me from that. We had these heated debates about the Bible when I was a kid. And I would just say, "I believe this but I don't believe that. And how could that have happened?" And his point of view was, "It's in the Bible, it happened, it's right and you don't question it." I said, "Well, I don't believe it." And he wouldn't chastise me. But he let me have that element of freedom. And I think a part of it was the fact that he wanted me to have that inquiring mind. But he didn't want to-- He didn't want to encourage it to the extent that I would be blasphemous or anything like that. But he did encourage this kind of--for me, not from the others. Not from the girls. Speaker 1: Do you think it's because you were blessed? Because I'm telling you that's not even typical of Baptist ministers. Speaker 2: No, it isn't. Speaker 1: I mean it's not that encouragement. Speaker 2: No, it isn't. Speaker 1: It's not-- Speaker 2: But I think he was so proud to have a son. Story_ID: 17604 Speaker 1: --preacher's kid in many ways. Speaker 2: No, I don't think so. Even though--No. I think I'm closer to the tradition of respect than most preachers' kids. You know, because the preacher says, "Don't do it," they go out and do it. And so--I was never like that. I adhered to most of that. I refused to take a drink or to smoke or do any of that. My father who always said--even though he smoked but didn't drink. But he said, "You're better off if you didn't." And he said, "It'll pay off one day." And then I looked around at my classmates who were smoking and drinking and always into trouble. And I decided, "No, that's not what I want to be like. I don't want to go in that direction." So I stayed away from them. And some of them have come to me even in recent years and said, "I wish I had followed your advice. I don't have an education, I don't have this, I don't have that." And they'd say, "Look at you. You go off in the summer and you live well. And you travel all over the world. And I just wish I had done what you told me to do." Well, you know, that's water over the dam now. Story_ID: 17605 Speaker 1: My mother [Mary Lou Cloud Driskell] told me an interesting story. We were living at this little parsonage at the church called Hunt's Chapel in Eatonton, Georgia. That's where I was born. And there was a slave cemetery right in back of our church. And I went to that place with the people from British television. They took me through there and so forth. But they were still burying there. They actually buried there until 1979. And so this little house is no longer there. But the pile of rock where the--rocks where the chimney was is there. So I took them there to show them the exact place where I was born. And she said when I was three days old; my father [George Washington Driskell] took me out of her arms. I was born on a Sunday, June seventh that Sunday 1931. So on the 10th, he took me out of her arms, wrapped me up and took me--walked me into the church in the little chapel, Hunt's Chapel. And she said he told her that he offered me up to God and gave me a name. Now nobody knows what the name was. But when he came back, he told her the name was King David. And, of course, when I was old enough to know that he said the name was King David, I immediately said, "I'm taking it off." You know. But it turned out it wasn't on my birth certificate. So I didn't have to take it off. And I was actually born David Cloud "C l o u d". Which is my mother's maiden name. But because the men--and this shows you the mind set. The men, my mother's brothers refused to spell their name that way because they didn't want to be characterized as Indians. So they changed their name to Clyde "C-l-y-d- e". And even though I didn't look like them, you know, they were fair skinned with, you know, a different texture of hair and all of that, I wanted to look like them. So I would try to straighten my hair and pretend that I was one of the Clyde Boys, you know. So I changed my name officially to David Clyde Driskell so I would have the brothers' name. But on my mother's tombstone Mary Lou Cloud Driskell. So she--we never knew what if it were an African name or what that was about except that he took me in and he offered me up. And he said I would always be blessed because he had given me to God. Story_ID: 17606 Speaker 1: Tell us about your father and African traditions. You know things that you learned later in life that were really, you know, African traditions-- Speaker 2: --Right. Speaker 1: --that maybe you didn't recognize. Speaker 2: As a child yes I didn't recognize a number of things that I now know are African traditions. For example the way he built our house. It was typical shotgun style. But in the back of it, it was a six-room house. He built everything from scratch. He went down to the creek and lugged all the rocks, the boulders built out of these stone. And you entered in the front typical shotgun style, go all the way to the back. And in the back, there were these other two rooms, which he used, one as a study and one as he called his dressing room. And I don't know what that's about. But I know this study was a combination where he had his library and everything. But before you got to there, there was this room with no floor. It was a dirt floor. And I learned later that that was very much a Yoruba tradition. Oh, not just Yoruba but all of that whole of West Africa in there. But I saw those kinds of houses when I went to Nigeria. Where the first part was the formal part and in the back there was this dirt floor. His father, we called him Grandpa Putt. His name was William Driskell. And he was the one that spoke with the Gullah accent and so forth. We called him Geechie 'cause he was a very little man--rhythmic speech. But he was the one who taught school. He was very smart, wrote with such a beautiful hand. He was a craftsman in the African tradition. And he wove beautiful things for the table, doormats and what have you. For the horses, the ornamental things, the collars out of bark from the poplar tree. He would take the outer bark off and put the inner bark in a stream for 21 days. And then he would separate each piece. It would be as thin as a layer of paper. And then he'd come back and do it in a five system of braiding. And then make these beautiful ornaments. I found later when I went to Ghana, especially up in the region of Kumasi--first of all these old men looked so much like him. Short and sitting around under this tree and so forth doing the same kind of weave. But they never--even though they obviously knew a lot about their tradition, they wouldn't talk about it. I would try and ask my father questions. What did he know about the African lineage? And he'd say, "Well, I don't know that much." He said, "And you know they were heathens. And you don't want to know that much about them." And that was, of course, his Christianity coming out. You know, he had been thoroughly indoctrinated that African religions didn't count. But I think he knew more about them than he talked to me about. And certainly my grandfather did. Now my grandfather was also a Methodist minister. But he was never ordained I understand. Because they--the story is he liked his nip too much. And they wouldn't ordain him. But he continued to preach. He preached anyway. He preached and taught school. And his favorite sermon was Nicodemus--Christ said to Nicodemus you must be born again. And I think my father was a little--was pretty much in that same tradition. So he--not of the nipping. Oh, he couldn't stand the drinking and so forth. And he wouldn't let my father--my grandfather preach when he came to his church because he figured my grandfather was smarter than he and would find out a way to get a nip. A little moonshine or something like that. So he wasn't gonna have him staggering over in his pulpit. But he would let him get up and make a little talk. And he spoke very clear with this Gullah dialect 'til the day he died. And I remember, you know, in 1948, the last time he came to visit us in North Carolina. My father had him get up and make a little talk and he talked about Nicodemus you must be born again. You know. So it was an interesting--He was the one who brought the tradition into the family of the carving and the weaving and all of that. Story_ID: 17607 Speaker 1: I have one question and that--because you said your mother had a gift. Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: Did that work well with your father? 'Cause a lot of times, you know--if there's a person--I mean its been used different ways in the black family-- Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: But sometimes its been perceived as something that, you know. Is part of that evil or that-- [simultaneously] Yes. Speaker 2: --or African part. And I'm just-- Speaker 1: Right. Well-- Speaker 2: Just because he's-- Speaker 1: My mother--My father [George Washington Driskell] didn't believe in the conjurers, sorcery and those kinds of things. But my mother [Mary Lou Cloud Driskell] did. But she didn't practice it. She said, "You know it was nothing pertaining to witchcraft or anything like that." But she believed in conjurers. And she said that her youngest sister had been fixed by another woman. Meaning that she had been given something that she would never overcome in life. And that some how or another, she would not meet a good end. And regrettably my aunt we call her Aunt Nan, she died in a car accident long before my mother did. And she would make these kinds of statements and predictions. And my father wouldn't--he kind of revered--he didn't want to legitimize it. But he would say, he called her o'lady. He said, "Now don't go messin' around with what ol' lady says. 'Cause you know it'll come true." So that is as close as he would get to legitimizing her predictions and her prophecy. And she could tell you, she'd say such and such a thing is gonna happen. It would happen. And I don't know. She seemingly just had another sight about things. Speaker 2: I know-- Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] Now as she got older, she tried to deny that. She, you know. She'd kind of "Oh, I don't know nothing about that." You know. Story_ID: 17608 Speaker 1: Was there anything not--mischievous about you? Not-- Speaker 2: Hmm. Speaker 1: Besides your drawing [laughs] in your father's books or drawing on the fireplace? Not really? Speaker 2: Not really. I was pretty much the community model, I guess. In many ways. Speaker 1: And so it was always assumed that you were gonna go on to college? Speaker 2: Yes. Yeah. Speaker 1: Hmm. Do you think--and I--that was-- Speaker 2: And nobody knew how but 'cause we had no money. Speaker 1: But it was also--how many did you say went to college from-- Speaker 2: Eighteen out of 24. Speaker 1: That's amazing! Speaker 2: And I was the class salutatorian. And I was furious because I was not the valedictorian. Because I thought I was smarter than the young lady who--And she went off to college and stayed one year. And, of course, I finished. And at first I was like "Goody, goody, goody, see." You know. But--and then out of all that group, everybody didn't finish college. But I was the only one who became a professor. Speaker 1: Now, did you--did anyone else go off to Howard [University] like you did that year? Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: Out of the eighteen? Speaker 2: But a young lady before me had gone to Howard and that's how I heard about Howard. But we had to learn all of the eleven black colleges in North Carolina 'cause the assumption was that you'd go to one of them. And many of our teachers had gone to undergraduate school in Charlotte, at Johnson C. Smith University. And so from the very beginning the teachers were my model. I knew at the age of seven that I wanted to be a teacher. Speaker 1: And your parents--because your father [George Washington Driskell]--you were his son. You know. And this was--you know being a teacher was really esteemed also. Speaker 2: Oh, that was the big thing. Speaker 1: So this was something that was promoted and supported. Speaker 2: Oh yes. Speaker 1: It's not like he said you have--you know--did he ever want you to be a minister? Speaker 2: He did. It was very obvious that he wanted me to be a minister. But I convinced him that by being a teacher, I was a minister. That I was ministering to people. And he accepted that. Speaker 1: [Laughs]. Speaker 2: It was almost like I couldn't do no evil. Speaker 1: [Laughs] so he was like so proud. I could see him. Speaker 2: Oh yes. Speaker 1: [Laughs] see him with his chest-- Speaker 2: He would in his late years, the year he died rather early. He was 68 when he died. But I remember two years before he died; I was chairman of the Art department at Fisk [University]. And chairman wasn't a word that he liked. So when he introduced me at his church, he said, "He's the principal of the Arts at Fisk University." Chairman was not big enough. Principal [Laughs]. Speaker 1: [Laughs]. That's cute. So you--how do you end up choosing Howard besides some one else had gone there? I mean you could have easily gone to a place-- Speaker 2: Well, they told me--even the teachers told me. They said, "Of all the schools--" And we didn't talk of anything but black schools. "All the schools in the cou--Howard is the best." And I said, "I wanna go to the best." But I made a application to go to Shaw University because that was in Raleigh. It was--they were the only one that had accepted me at that time, and had given me a $90 a year scholarship, $45 dollars each semester. So I signed on to go to Shaw. And my Aunt Mae, the one I mentioned earlier she had a little party for me to celebrate my going away the night before. My parents came and we had, you know. Throwing the ring over the bottle. And no dancing or anything like that. Because that was not permitted. And we had lemonade and banana pudding and all the good foods. And she lived in a predominantly white community. So she went up the road to her nearest neighbor who was a white gentleman by the name of Mr. Jesse George Jones. And they were two brothers who--and they were sharecroppers living on these--And so she said to Mr. Jones, "My nephew is going to college." And up until that time I'm going to Shaw University. And so the local newspapers covers in local news of the colored people. And I still have the little article, you know. "David Driskell is going to college," and so forth." And she goes up to Mr. George Jones and she said, "I want you to take my nephew to King's Mountain to get the train tomorrow and here's three dollars." And we're about 30 miles away. A Model A Ford. So I crawl in the back seat with my trunk and we go off to King's Mountain. Gets me there about 4:00 [a.m.] and the train comes at 6:00 [a.m.]. And I get on the train and I go to Howard [University]. I go to Washington [D.C.]. And so I told them, "I'm not going to Shaw. I'm going to Washington-- Going to Howard." And I arrived in Washington the next morning, unannounced. Luckily I had a sister living at 309 A Street Northeast, knocking on her door. My brother-in-law comes to the door and they all welcome me. They said, "Oh, you came to get a job?" I said, "Oh no I came to go to college!" Had $45--Well, I started out with $45 in my pocket, and had spent $11 on the train coming up. And next day, this is mid September now. Howard had started like late August. Next day I go to Howard, present myself and say, "I'm here to go to college." And they looked at me like I came from Mars [chuckling]. And they said, "You don't just come to college. You make an application!" I said, "Well, I'm here give me one!" And I had my report card and my salutatorian and like, "How dare you not admit me." And they said, "Well, school has been going on for three weeks. You can't just come to college like that." And I worried those people sick. I went up there every day. I sat in on classes and they finally just let me sit in on the classes. And I wrote home that, "I'm in college now." And hadn't paid a penny, hadn't registered or anything. So finally they said, "Look--" they were on the quarter system at Howard then. They said, "If you come back in January, we'll admit you. Even though you're not really ready." Because I hadn't had geometry and a couple of other things. They said, "We'll admit you on condition. Just come on." I didn't stop going to classes. I very selectively went to history classes and so forth. And come January, I went up and registered. And that was the beginning of my college days. Well, I really wasn't well prepared. But I was able to hang in there. I didn't write well. I hadn't had all the math I should have. And there was a gentleman who took me--one of the counselors, who took me under his wings, Dr. Lawrence. I'll never forget. And he built up my self-esteem by encouraging me. Now there must have been at least 5,000 students at Howard at that time. But they had the will to encourage, to work with people. And he would have me write essays. And my writing was terrible! My speech was awful. And he sent me to speech classes with Miss Coleman. And Miss Coleman was a little lady about this tall and she had that deformity in her back. And we would--If she saw you walking down the hall with your hat on, if you said, "Good morning Miss Coleman." She'd look the other way and she'd say, "I don't speak to gentleman with their hats on." So they were teaching us manners and all of these things. So Dr. Lawrence would give me this encouragement to write. And he would correct it. And he'd say, "I'm gonna send this off to an essay contest. You might win." Oh, I--It just built up my confidence. I learned how to write! I learned to speak! And Miss Coleman said, "You gotta get rid of that voice you have. You can't talk like that up here." And I don't think I changed my speech pattern. But she just gave me good grammatical skills and so forth. Speaker 1: Now do you think you were talking Gullah in the Gullah-- Speaker 2: I think I had some. Speaker 1: You had some of that. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Did you hear when Clarence Thomas said--you know, when he was recently-- Do you think that there's validity? I mean 'cause I just looked like--I was like, "oh no." When he said it. It just didn't come out-- Speaker 2: Well, they may have--the kids may have made fun of him. But what we did was we made fun of kids who spoke well. We didn't make fun of kids who didn't speak well. We said they were proper. And we said they must have been up North some place. So I think--I was a little leery about what he said and the way he said it. Story_ID: 17609 Speaker 1: I mean, this is pretty bold of you what you've done anyway [deciding to attend Howard University without ever applying]. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: Totally bold. Speaker 2: Just come up there without any--Come in on my sister without warning and demand a place to stay, and eat and sleep and go to school. But I did get a job for the remainder of that semester. And that paid for my tuition and so forth. And they were very generous and kind and didn't charge me for room and board. I had my own room. Speaker 1: Was this your oldest sister? Speaker 2: My oldest sister. Speaker 1: Oh the one who loves you-- Speaker 2: The one who-- Speaker 1: [Laughs]. Speaker 2: --And still loves and defends me. She calls almost every day. She called yesterday and wanted to know how I was doing and so forth. And so she still looks over me. And my mother was protective 'til the day she died. My--both of my daughters live across the street. And my mother would come to visit us in 1990, 1991. She died in 1991. And she'd see me going across the street and she'd say, "Be careful now. Don't get hit by a car going across the street." You know, [laughs]. Speaker 1: [Laughing] that's cute. Speaker 2: "Don't get hit and killed by a car [laughs]." Speaker 1: [laughs]. Speaker 2: And she had all of her old ways, you know. There are certain things she wouldn't eat, wouldn't mix. And if I ate bananas and drank milk she was very, very concerned. She said, "Aren't you afraid it will kill you?" You know, there were old sayings. You didn't eat--You didn't drink milk with fish. You didn't eat watermelon with certain things and so forth and so on. And they had all of these anec--So she had all of those 'til the day she died. And she would just look at you very strangely if you did those things. And like, "I don't know about that." But she believed in me 'til her dying day. I mean she was--we dedicated the window with--I designed the windows at the People's Congregational Church and she came in April. We dedicated one of the windows to the memory of my father in 1991. And she was there to celebrate that. So just this past April we rededicated the window to her as well. But, you know, it was so blatantly obvious that she believed in me more than she did her other children. Speaker 1: You were the blessed one. Story_ID: 17610 Speaker 1: Howard [University] is more than you've really even bargained for. Speaker 2: Oh, yes. It was a new community, a new environment, a new culture. And I had to relearn the whole atmosphere. The whole scene. And there was another woman who came on the scene. I've always been kind of mothered by these strong women. And Miss Millie Basket. And Aunt Millie as we called her. She really wasn't my blood aunt but she'd come from Georgia. From Savannah, Georgia. And she was a woman of culture. She had taught school and she loved the fine things in life. And that's what got me into being interested in objects and things. Because I saw all these beautiful things in her house. And when I went to live with her, I lived with these things. And I say, "I wanna live like this." And she would eat out of beautiful fine china, silver. She'd set the table. She kept her table set all the time with beautiful silver. With napkin rings and things. And she was an excellent cook. And so she kind of mothered me along even into graduate school. In and out of--And she was the one who said to me, when I got my first job teaching at Talladega College in 1955. She said, "Now put away $50 every month regardless." And I was only making $300 a month. She said, "Regardless put it away. Act like it's not there." And she said, "You'll look up one day and you'll have a nice--" What'd she call it? An egg or something? Speaker 1: Nest egg? Speaker 2: Nest egg. And so I put this money away. And 1961, I was preparing to take my graduate exam. My final exam in French at Catholic University. And I read the Christian Science Monitor because I used Mary Baker Eddie's sermons in English and in French down here 'cause I knew the Bible very well. So I'd look down here and I would interpret it in French. And that's how I learned and passed my French exam. From this--And that was also on the home forum page in which there were articles about art. A woman by the name of Dorothy Ablo, an art historian and critic wrote about artist. And she was the first mainstream critic I ever knew to write about black artists. She wrote about Romare Bearden, Jacob Lawrence, Henry O. Tanner. And so I would read her criticisms. And that's in part how I learned to write art criticism. So I was getting two things for one there. I was learning how to write and I was learning my French. This is a twelve-page examination. It was given not only to MFA students but to Ph.D. students as well. And you had to pass that exam one semester prior at Catholic U to matriculating. And so I read it for that reason. But then I was reading the classified adds when I came back from the Skowhegan School [of Painting & Sculpture, Skowhegan, Maine] in 1953. And I said to Thelma, my wife, I said, "You know all famous artists go to Maine this summer. So some day we have to have a summer home in Maine." So I was also reading, looking to see if I could buy a summer place. So in 1961, there is this ad that says, "Two room cottage, Falmouth, Maine. Six acres of land, trout brook in the pines." And I was painting pine trees and things like that. And I said to Thelma, "We should look into that." Five thousand six hundred dollars. So it was Aunt Millie who drove us up. And I went to the bank and got a part of my little nest egg that she had told me to save. And took it with me and we bought the place in 1961. And it turned out it was seven acres. Now we've since built a permanent house there and a studio and all that. We couldn't probably--probably we couldn't buy a quarter of an acre there now if we tried because of the value. But that's how we got to go to Maine. That's the wisdom of Aunt Millie. And then finally I came in contact with this woman by the name of Mary B. Brady who was director of the Harmon Foundation. And she kind of took me under her wings. And I'd go to New York City and she'd tell me all about the city. She'd take me out and dine me. And she didn't drink. So it was no wining with the dining. But her father had been a territorial governor in Alaska. And she lived in Putnam County, New York. Interestingly enough, I was born in Putnam County, Georgia. And she just thought that was such a coincidence. And she was gonna teach me the ways of life and so forth. So she took me under her wings. She literally sponsored me. Sent me to Europe my first trip, in 1964. She called me up one night. I was teaching at Howard and she called my whole name, "David C. Driskell you've been teaching about the Parthenon, the Pantheon and all these places. And the Acropolis and all. Now it's time for you to go to Europe and see them. And I'm gonna give you a purse with $500 and a round trip ticket and a U-Rail pass. And I'm going to my friends at the Rockefeller Foundation and ask them for money." And she did. And they gave me $2,500. I also got a fellowship from the Dutch Government that summer. And that's when I studied at Rijksbureau [voor] Kunsthistorische [Documentatie, The Hague, Netherlands] Story_ID: 17611 Speaker 1: When you come to Howard [University], you first stay with your sister. Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: Then you go and live with this aunt. No? Speaker 2: No. In between I got a place on my own. But I was living with another family. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then I go to live with the aunt. Speaker 1: Aunt. Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then I came back to live with the aunt in graduate school. Story_ID: 17612 Speaker 1: You start by really wanting to be, you sa--you know, you were going to be a teacher-- Speaker 2: --Yes. Speaker 1: --and in history? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. So what--what happens along the way? Speaker 2: I was gonna major--gonna major in history and minor in art. So I'm in James Wells' class in the spring of 1952, taking a course. And along comes James A. Porter. And he stops and he looks down at my work and he looks at me. And he was such an eloquent, you know, well-dressed gentleman who spoke almost like an Englishman. And he said, "? What is your name?" And I told him. He said, "Are you an art major?" And I said, "No." And he looked at my work. And he said, "What is your major?" And I said, "History." He said, "You don't belong over there. You belong here." I said, "Okay." And I went and changed [laughing] my major. And I've been in art [laughs] ever since. Speaker 1: --Talk about him. I mean you've talked--but can you just talk about him-- Speaker 2: Well he was my role model. He was my mentor. And, of course, I could never be as tall as he. 'Cause he was six feet tall and like I said. Dressed impeccably. He spoke beautiful English. And I said, "I wanna be like that man. I wanna have Aunt Millie's things. I wanna have the kinds of things on my wall that Professor Haring has." All the artists and so forth. But I want to be like James Porter. I want to be able to get up and lecture. He would teach from his own book. And I said, "I wanna teach from my own book." You know. And he would use no notes or anything. And my ideal was to be a teacher like James Porter. I wanted to get up and lecture without looking at a note and be the authority. 'Cause he was the authority. And so when I left Howard University and went to Talladega [College] to teach, he came to Talladega to visit me. And he was very pleased with my manner and my teaching and so forth. And I knew he was gonna invite me back to Howard as soon as there was an opening. So in September of 1962, when I came back, he was ill at the time. And he had me come over to his house. He said, "You must have known from the day you left as an undergraduate that you were coming back here to teach." Because Howard was still the Mecca. I mean everybody wanted to go back to Howard. And I said, "Well, it's always been my dream." So he said, "Now here you are." And he said, "Some day I want you to step in my footsteps. I want you to take the mantel." Speaker 1: Now what was his background? Speaker 2: He was born in Baltimore. And he came from a very well known family. The Porters and the Cifaxes. And Cifax is from Virginia. I think his mother was a Cifax. And his father was a minister. And education was a big thing with them. And he trained as an artist at Howard first under Professor Porter, I mean Professor Haring. And then at NYU. And he wrote the first definitive book on African-American art history. And I wanted to supplement that. And he all but said to me, "You know, you're the only student I've had that I can entrust this responsibility with." And he would kind of literally pass the mantel to me. And I started doing these shows at Talladega, at Fisk. And by the time--and, of course, he invited me back to Howard. So by the time I came to Maryland I was--he was deceased. And so I was like the spokesperson for African American artists at that time. Story_ID: 17613 Speaker 1: What I'm trying to understand was he [James A. Porter] valued and was it valued on-- Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] He wasn't greatly valued. But he was respected and valued on Howard's campus. He didn't get promoted to the rank of a full professor until nineteen years before he died. So in certain ways it wasn't at the top of the Howard's list. But he was recognized. And that was a very important area of study for them. Because James Haring, his mentor, had founded the Art Department at Howard in 1920. So this was this ongoing tradition. And so he was revered and respected to a great extent. And his wife was head of the Moreland-Spingarn collection [at Howard University]. And so they were really an institution to them selves at Howard. But there weren't that many students who really knew their importance or sought to key into it. And I was one such person. Of course, Dorothy, his wife was the type of person who did not really think anybody could measure up [laughs]. So she was always on you. And lucky that she did that to us. 'Cause we were trying harder to please Dorothy. And Professor Porter would kind of dismiss it at times--at times and just say, "Well, they're doing their best." But that wasn't good enough for Dorothy. And so this team of scholars inspired so many people. But it wasn't recognized in the field that much. And that's why I think he told me that I had to continue defining the field. Speaker 1: Now, what motivated him do you think to do the book at the time that he did it? And-- Speaker 2: Well it was his master's thesis for one. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But James Haring had done research Alain Locke had been his teachers. And he took it beyond where they had it and really got into the research. You know. Went to all the prominent places. And he was interested in the roots and African culture. Story_ID: 17614 Speaker 1: The gallery that--that was there. Speaker 2: The Barnett Aden Gallery? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Who was-- Was it a gallery like in today's terms gallery? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: Okay. I'm-- Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] It was a gallery in the home. It was just like you'd come in here in this house. And actually my house is set up very much like it. 'Cause that was one of my models. And I worked there as a student. And that was that, "I wanna live like this. I wanna-- I wanna have books available. I wanna have art available. I wanna have antiques. I wanna have fine china. I wanna have people come in my home." That's where I first met Langston Hughes when I was a student. Georgia Douglass Johnson and people like that I met at the Barnett Aden Gallery when I was a student. And all these people impressed me. I was never interested in partying and all of that kind of thing. I really wanted to make a mark from the beginning [Laughs]. And these people were making marks as far as I was concerned. Louise Jones. And she took me under her wing. James Wells and so I had my role models. I was as happy as a lark. Because I had these people guiding me and directing me. Speaker 2: the only rea--you know, I ask these questions because it's almost like they were salons. You know, in the old-- Speaker 1: They were in a sense. Speaker 2: But traditionally you don't have that any more. Speaker 1: We don't have it. Speaker 2: So that-- What I'm trying to understand is for me--you know. Can you describe what it was-- I mean--I only know it, you know, myself from what I read about the Harlem Renaissance. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: You know that--and it's--it seemed like such a rich period. Be--I'm trying to understand, you know. If you could sort of--what was it like? People just-- I mean they came to-- Speaker 1: People would stop by very often unannounced. Would come in when I was working at the gallery and in impromptu--impromptu conversations would erupt. And somebody would get on the telephone and they'd call somebody else. And they'd come by. And this would happen over and over again. And I remember I just happened to be working late at the Barnett Aden Gallery one night. And Mr. Aden who was the cofounder--they founded this gallery in 1943. Mr. Haring and Mr. Aden. Mr. Aden had been the first curator of the Howard University Gallery. And was really the first scientifically trained black curator in the country. He studied at the Albany Institute of Science and Technology. In the '30s [1930s] and in Germany. He was in Germany in 1936 when Hitler was on the rise. I have letters upstairs in my archive that Professor Haring gave me. That he wrote to Mr. Haring with the swastika on the stamp and so forth. So these two gentlemen, they were at the forefront of art period in the Washington [D.C.] community. Duncan Phillips of the Phillips Collection would come to visit them. Last week when I lectured at the Phillips, I talked about meeting Mr. Phillips at the Barnett Aden Gallery as a student. And, of course, meeting Jacob Laurence there. Romare Bearden and people like that. And so this was like you say. A salon of sorts. When I--as a student I met Langston Hughes. But I didn't know who he was. They--he and Georgia Douglass Johnson were competing. Reciting poetry and Mae Miller Sullivan and all of them. And--But I was enamored by this atmosphere. And Mr. Aden was an excellent cook. And I guess a part of the reason why I was hanging around was to eat and get a free meal. And he'd make crabmeat salad. And I made one yesterday. It remind--and reminded myself that I had learned to make this salad at Mr. Aden's place. And I remember Georgia Douglass Johnson with this head rag on her head sitting on the steps. She wouldn't sit in a chair. Sitting on the steps going up stairs reciting that love poem that she had written about. "I want to love you 'til I die. And if I love you this way--" And so forth and so on. And then Langston comes along. And he recites something else. So it was like this--and it was a Spanish poet there. And I can't remember his name. And, of course, he didn't speak any English and he reciting his in Spanish. And it was like a salon. Those sessions. And Morris Louis [Bernstein], one of the most immanent abstract painters of the Washington Color School was teaching at Howard at that time in the '50's. Nobody acknowledges that in his biography. But he was my teacher when I went to Skowhegan [School of Painting & Sculpture, Skowhegan, Maine]. And he would come by. And I remember bringing paintings. And Mr. Haring would tell me to go and get the painting and put it down stairs. 'Cause they didn't particularly like abstract paintings. So it was those kind of experiences. Those kinds of exchanges. I got to know a number of people. And if I didn't know them, I would write them. Because I was working at the Barnett Aden Gallery. So when Mr. Aden died in 1961, I wrote Mrs. Eleanor Roosevelt to tell her that Mr. Aden had died because she had been there. And she wrote back this beautiful letter saying how sorry she was to learn that he had passed. And the great contribution he had made. I would write to movie stars. Edward G. Robinson and say, "Why don't you give one of your paintings to Talladega and you'll have a lot and blah-blah-blah." And he'd answer you know. And he'd say, "Unfortunately it isn't that easy. I'm in a divorce and blah-blah-blah." But they would answer. So I had this gumption. This kind of guttiness about me that I had learned from these people. When Langston Hughes came later I was teaching at Howard. The next time I remember meeting Langston was like 1963. And Owen Dobson had a party for him at his house. And Owen introduced me. He said, "You see the art here I bought from this young man?" He said, "This is an up and coming young artist. You oughta keep your eyes on him." And so Langston invited me to lunch the next day. And then he took me to Georgia Douglass Johnson's house. And it was an interesting situation 'cause you went in a hallway like that. And you were to come into the living room. You couldn't get in because of the newspapers stacked as high and the books. And you couldn't get into the--you had to go into the kitchen and then come back through. And it was a very interesting scene. So I met a lot of important people that way. Through these kind of salon type settings. Speaker 2: And they weren't-- It wasn't like the beatnik type thing-- Speaker 1: Oh no, no. Speaker 2: It wasn't like the poetry slams? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: It was--it was very cultured? Speaker 1: Cultured atmospheric. It was designed to be enlightening, enriching and to pass on information.This was a legacy that they knew they had. And they wanted to share it. But they were very selective-- Speaker 2: Of who they let in. Speaker 1: --of who they let into it and who they shared it with. Speaker 2: Okay, okay. That's interesting. Now did--and so people like--but this-- Were artists considered, you know, part of the [unclear]? Were they considered sort of off the beaten tra-- you know, path? It was-- Speaker 1: No. They were accepted. Speaker 2: It was accepted. Speaker 1: They were accepted as a part of the whole. The painters, the sculptures, the poets, the musicians. They'd all get together from time to time. Story_ID: 17615 Speaker 1: You had mentioned some collecting during that time period. Was there collecting going on in the-- Speaker 2: There was collecting yes. And that's where I learned about collecting. My teachers said to me early on, "If you don't collect, you shouldn't expect anybody to collect you." And so they were using that as a two edged sword. Lois in particular. Because she wanted you to buy her work. We weren't able to. Now some of my fellow colleagues bought her work. $300 for a painting. Now a-days, you know, it's worth a lot more than that. But I couldn't afford $300. I bought her book. I have her first edition book up there. But I felt compelled to buy it. That if I didn't buy it, she wasn't gonna like me. But $30 was a lot of money in 1952. But I broke down and bought it. And so it was that kind of exchange. Now, James Wells I bought, I think my first original piece by a black artist from James Wells. And then Professor Haring who had a very broad universal concept of art, collected Asian art, African art, African American art, European art, European American you name it. He gave me and my wife, Thelma, a Kandinsky print for our marriage present gift. And we kept it for a number of years until 1962 when I came to Howard to teach. And we lived in their house in the Barnett Aden house. Mr. Aden was deceased. And Mr. Haring went to Talladega to take the job I had until they could get another teacher. So we lived there at the Barnett Aden Gallery with our two little daughters. And we continued the tradition of having the salons. You know, Madam Evontee (ph.) would come, the Porters and Mr. Wells and all of them. And we would have exhibitions from time to time. But it was mainly like a salon. You know, people would come in. And so our daughters grew up in that atmosphere. I have pictures of them with Madam Evontee and with the Porters and people like that. And so that's kind of how our house has been over the years. When we moved to Fisk [University], Jake and Gwen would come. The people of the community would come in. Aaron Douglass and Arna Bontemps and Alberta and Gladys Ford. And all of these people would come in. And then when we moved to back here to Maryland, the tradition has continued. And we can't get rid of our graduate students. We can't get rid of the old students. They still come back. Because we've always had that kind of welcoming atmosphere. I've had graduate students from New York come to me and say--first of all they say, "How many people live in this house?" And that's when my grandson was living here. I said, "Three." They said, "Three people in an eleven room house? Do you know how many people live in a house like this in New York?" And I said, "I don't wanna know." And they would say, "I've never been in a professor's home before." And so, you know, it's hard to get rid of people like that. They stay with you for life. They keep in touch with you. And one of my students, Muriel Lovelace O'Neal is chairman of the Art Department at Berkeley. I mean she's a full professor there. And she was a student from the '60's [1960s]. That I had to grill and pound confidence into her. She was a little girl from Mississippi. She just didn't think she had any talent. She couldn't make it. And now she's chairman of the Art Department at Berkeley, UC Berkeley. And I--and I can't get her to say David. It's Mr. Driskell. "Mr. Driskell." You know, it's that kind of, you know. And over the years these students have become valued friends. You know, and they come back and the tradition goes on. Speaker 1: Now Alain Locke too--he had that salon tradition didn't he also? He invited students over. Speaker 2: Yes. They said his was a little more bizarre. Because they--they talked about for example, when his mother died how he sat her up in the chair and it was a tea. Not a wake. And [laughs]. And Mrs. Brady told me about it. Dorothy Porter told me about it. So it really happened. So he would say, "Mother is acc--is receiving you." And she'd be sitting there dead as a doornail with a cup of tea [Laughs]. And so I never knew him that well. He lectured on Fridays in the chapel and we'd go to the lectures. And we'd go back. And he and Haring didn't get along. And we would--if somebody died on campus and there was a funeral, if Dr. Locke didn't see us, he'd say, "You weren't at Mr. So--Dr. So-and-so's funeral. He was a very important man." And we'd say, "Well, Mr. Haring wouldn't let us out of class." And Dr. Locke would say something like, "Well, it's too bad it wasn't Haring's death." And we'd go back and tell Professor Haring, "Dr. Locke said too bad it wasn't your death." And Haring would say, "You go back and tell that so-and-so-and so I'll bury him." And we'd go back and forth with news. Carrying the news back and forth and just fla--fanning the flames between the animosity between these two gentlemen. So when Locke died, and I wasn't there. But Haring and other people told the story. Haring came in dressed in his finest linen white suit. And--with his hat on and wouldn't take it off. Went up to the casket and just kind of tipped his hat and--with his cane and walked out and said, "I told the bastard I'd bury him." [laughs] They were intellectually competitive. They didn't have any other place to go. Because nobody else would hire them. They were the greatest--some of the greatest minds in the country. And they were at war with each other. Because Princeton [University] didn't want them. Harvard [University] didn't want them. Yale [University] didn't want them. So John Hope Franklin kind of broke the spell when he went to Brooklyn [College]. But that's not an ivy school. He later went to [University of] Chicago and so forth. And Nathan Scott who went to Chicago. But Nathan Scott was one of my humanities teachers. Great religion scholar. And we would sit there and laugh at 'em. Because, you know, they talk proper. You know. We didn't know these were great, eminent men and women. And-- Speaker 1: But why were they competitive. [unclear] because what-- Speaker 2: Well, for students. And they wanted the brightest. Everybody wanted the brightest students. Like [James A.] Porter said to me even in that department. He said--he pointed his finger in my face one day. He said, "You are my student. Not Lois [Mailou] Jones' student. And you are not to go to her private studio to study lessons." And I didn't. She had what she called her atelier in Brooklyn. And they would dress in their smocks and their berets and pretend like they were in Paris. And he said, "None of that romantic nonsense for you." He said, "You are my student. You are not to go there." And I didn't go. Story_ID: 17616 Speaker 1: Now what was she like? Speaker 2: Ahh! Lois [Mailou Jones]. She was romantic. Serious as an artist, as they say serious as a heart attack. Because she was a no nonsense person when it came to art. And she said, "Art is my marriage." And, of course, she later got married late in life. And she said, "You gotta be married to your art. That's gotta come first if you wanna be successful." And you know, to a certain extent she was successful in Europe before she was here. And we wanted to go to Paris. We wanted to be riding around in those little cars and wearing berets and things 'cause we though that was what art was about. We learned later that it was more than that. But Lois had inculcated this atmosphere of the Parisian scene. And they would have their exhibitions every spring. And I wanted so much to be in those exhibitions. Porter said, "No. You are my student." But she loved me just the same. She would always call on me. Lois was a sweet woman, but she used you as much as she could. I mean that was the way she was brought up. But she was a gentlewoman. A New Englander. She was a proper Bostonian. And--but she was the one who sent me to Skowhegan, which connected me to the art world. Speaker 1: Now how did that--how did that even come about? If Porter is saying, "You're my student." How did-- Because I know she taught you. But how-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Well personally I don't think Porter thought I was ready to go to Skowhegan when I was a junior. And Lois did. And Lois was a friend of the founder of the school. Two New Englanders and it was she who came to me and said, "I want you to go to Skowhegan [School of Painting & Sculpture] this summer." And I was afraid to tell Professor Porter. So I wouldn't tell him. So I went to the Chairman Professor Haring. I said, "Miss Jones said she wants me to go to Skowhegan this summer." And Haring was stern and he would never give you a compliment about anything. I first met him when he came into the classroom and looked at a painting. A portrait I was doing of this Cherokee girl who went for black. But she was from Nashville, North Carolina in my class. And I was painting her portrait. And she was wearing a blue sweater. And he came to me and he looked down at my painting. And he said, "Oh that's a beautiful seascape there. You'll never paint a better seascape in your whole life." And then he walked away. So I said, "Who was that old mean man?" And [Laughing] they said, "He's the chairman of the Art Department." So that's how I met Haring. But he came to love me, to cherish my work, to take me and my wife under his arms and to really be a great mentor for us. But he was stern and, you know. When I went to him and said, "Miss Jones said she wants me to go to Skowhegan." He said, "Miss Jones doesn't run this department." He said, "We'll have to think about it." And so a little later-- It had to have his stamp. Of course, a little later he said, "I'm going to send you to Skowhegan." Forgotten all about Miss Jones, you know. "I'm going to send you." And so I went. Speaker 1: And that was a won--that was an experience that opened up-- Speaker 2: Oh! That was--first of all it was the crme de la crme of art students from around the world. Only 65. And they still only take 65. Speaker 1: And she was one of the founders? Speaker 2: No, she wasn't a founder. But she was a friend of one of the founders. Willard W. Cummings. And,so Lois knew everybody who was somebody in the art world. Even though, you know, she was still not totally accepted because she was black. And she connected me to Skowhegan. And Haring went along with it. So Porter came and he said, "You didn't tell me you wanted to go to Skowhegan [School of Painting & Sculpture]." But I knew he didn't think I was ready. 'Cause they guarded that scholarship, you know 'cause they had to have standards. And I went up there and did better than anybody else. Won a prize. Met Leonard Beaucour (ph.) who was a paint manufacturer. Became a friend for life with him. He supplied paints for me for the rest of his life. Story_ID: 17617 Speaker 1: I'd like to just touch upon your experience at Talladega [College, Talladega, Alabama] because you got that--how did you get the position so quickly? Speaker 2: Again, James Porter mentored me about writing my letters and he was the one who said write these schools and I wrote Talladega, I wrote Florida A & M, I wrote Tuskegee, I wrote to schools in North Carolina, and the one school that responded, was strangely enough, was Talladega, but I had written the letter and said Talladega, Florida, you know, but they sent it to Alabama and the president wrote back and said, "Regrettably I don't have an opening but we'll keep your letter on file in the event something should come up." And Porter had helped me compose the letter and everything so it was a very well-written letter. His secretary had typed it for me and so a month later I got this letter from the president, Arthur D. Gray, who had been a minister in Chicago at the Church of the Good Shepherd, was now president at Talladega and was a Talladega graduate and he said, "Our art teacher has resigned to move to California and I'm sending along an application and if you'd like to fill it out we'd like to consider you for this position." I filled it out. He was so impressed with my letters of recommendation from Porter and people like that he didn't even ask me for a personal interview. He offered me the job-- Speaker 1: So you went there--sight unseen. So what was this experience like because you're going from student to-- Speaker 2: To college professor, well I was ready because I had imitated Porter all my life. I'd get up the students would laugh because when he'd leave the classroom I'd get up and take over and I would lecture without looking at the book and so forth and they would call me 'Little Jimmy Porter', you know, so I was ready. And they asked me, they said, "Can you teach ceramics, first can you teach art history?" And I said, "Yes," because I had taken an art history course. "Can you teach art education?" "Yes," happened to taken an art education course the first. "Can you teach print making?" "Yes," had taken one printmaking course with James Wells. "Can you teach ceramics?" "Yes," hadn't had a ceramics course, but I learned and I went forth and in one of the photographs in there with my students I'm handing out awards where they'd won this and that in their art classes and so forth. So I had gall as Ms. [Georgia] O'Keeffe said to me when I kind of lectured her about how nice it was to give a collection to Fisk, [University] a little black school in the '40s [1940s], I said, "But you didn't endow the collection," and I said, "and that's unheard of." I said, "What did you expect was going to happen?" And nobody ever talked to her like that. I said, "Now those works are in disrepair." And I said, "You know, that was not the best policy." And she looked at me and she said, "You know what," she just kind of like looked at me from head and she said, "I like you. You have guts." And she said, "I'm going to give you $50,000. Can you go out and match it?" And I said, "Yes." And I went to John Spence at National Endowment of the Arts and he matched it and that's how the works first got conserved. Some were *(inaudible). Walter Leonard said I took them and so, of course, when the works came back he never apologized as I said, but-- Speaker 1: So you were at Talladega how long? Speaker 2: Seven years. Speaker 1: Seven years, okay. Speaker 2: And I got my masters while I was there, MFA at Catholic University. Speaker 1: While you were there you got your-- Speaker 2: I worked during the summer to get my masters and then I took off one year and finished it. Speaker 1: Oh, I see. Oh, I didn't understand. Okay, okay. So you were going the summers in Washington [D.C.]? Speaker 2: Summers in Washington at Catholic U. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, okay. Speaker 2: And then I took off one fall to finish up because they let me kind of accelerate. I was so far advanced over most of the students and my professor said you really don't need the core structure, you need the degree so just do what you have to do. Story_ID: 17618 Speaker 1: Thelma you married in 1952-- Speaker 2: In January 1952. Speaker 1: You met her at Howard [University]. Was she-- Speaker 2: I was at Howard but she was not at Howard. She was working and she was attending a night school for a clerical board. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The Cortez Peter's School. Speaker 1: But you didn't meet around art? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No. No, I met her through my roommate, my college roommate. He was dating her sister. Speaker 1: But she shares your love for the art or she-- Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes, and I was always a little shy about, you know, I wasn't outgoing and was not a social butterfly. I didn't dance and, you know, I could do a little dancing, but I didn't consider that a priority and so, you know. Story_ID: 17619 Speaker 1: When she married a artist was that what attracted her to you? Speaker 2: She didn't know I was an artist then. I was just, see, in 1952 I was still a history major and I don't think that, you know, was a part of, you know, she didn't look upon it as being neither here nor there at the time, but I changed my major later that year to art. Speaker 1: Okay, so I understand, okay, I didn't know you were going back and forth and then you end up then back at Howard, then that's when you get offered-- Speaker 2: I was invited to Howard [University] the fall of 1962. I had already signed my contract to go back to Talladega [College], that's why Professor Herring kind of stepped in and relieved me so there'd be no legal obligation because, you know, Howard was the Mecca. You don't turn Howard down if you get an invitation, but the president, Arthur Gray, was still--and he wasn't very pleased that I was leaving Talladega like that when I had signed my contract to come back. I'd just been promoted to associate professor and just received a raise making $4,700 a year, I mean, that was big money, you know, back then. Speaker 1: So they really mentored you and looked after you-- Speaker 2: Oh, yes, yes. Speaker 1: --because that's--okay. Speaker 2: Definitely, I mean, if they were on your side, you were moving, you were successful. Speaker 1: So you go there and this is really sort of the cat's meow for you in many ways because here you're back at the institution that has really made you? Speaker 2: Yes, indeed. Speaker 1: And is Porter-- Speaker 2: And I take over as chairman, acting chairman when Porter goes away. Speaker 1: And did Porter go away immediately, no? Speaker 2: He went away in '63 [1963]-- Speaker 1: Okay, that's when-- Speaker 2: --to study in African. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I've become chairman of, you know, this is the largest art department in African American institution and everybody welcomed me. I think Lois was a little, like, oh, and she said a few things. The dean called me and she denied them all, but she still loved me and, but Lois wanted special favors because she said I was always her pet and she reminded me of that, that I was her pet and she expected favors in return. Speaker 1: So what was it because you've mentioned that it--what was that about? What kinds of things does she want done for her special-- Speaker 2: She wanted me to look out if she knew that I had by that time gained some influence in the art world with collectors or with lecturers too. She wanted me to always mention her in the lectures and I remember six years before she died I was lecturing at the Hirschhorn Museum [at the Smithsonian, Washington D.C.] on William H. Johnson and she came up to me afterwards and they were good about pointing *(inaudible) she said, "David, you have to stop leaving me out of these lectures." Now, the lecture was on William H. Johnson. I had also included her because I knew she was going to be there. I had all but erroneously included her in and showed one of her slides, but that wasn't enough. She wanted some more and that was the way Lois was. I mean, she was sweet, she was gentle, but she could never get enough of Lois, and we understood that and she made no bones about it, but she loved me as though I was her own son and she then, in her last years, she wanted me to be her personal representative for estate and then appointed me a trustee, so--over her relatives and she said--and she had a rather sizeable trust, and she said, "I did it because it's a matter of trust." And those were her exact words. So, I mean, she loved me dearly and she, you know, she knew I would be fair and honest about it and I wouldn't be trying to get anything for myself and so that was a part of what she was all about. Speaker 1: But now how old were you when you take over as acting chairman? You're like in you-- Speaker 2: I'm 32, I guess. Speaker 1: And she's like in her--is she 50? Speaker 2: She's 50--oh, yes. She's way beyond--she's in the 60s. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Would she have thought that--was it any sexist-- Speaker 2: She wanted to be chair, but she knew it was sexism, that they would never appoint her because she said, "Why not me?" And the dean said, "This young man is the person." And then he called me in later and he said when I went to Fisk [University] he was very disappointed. He said, "I wanted you to succeed Jimmy Porter here," and then he called me back and he said, "I want you to succeed me as dean," and I said, "No, no, no," because there were no searches in those--at Howard in those days and even at Fisk we were having searches and I said, "I don't want to come to faculty where the faculty didn't vote me in." And so I turned the position down. When he was literally on his death bed at Freedman's Hospital in November of 1970, because he died in '71, Porter died in February of '70 [1970] and he was in the hospital, *Lawson was, and he called for me to come up from Fisk and he said, "I want you to succeed me as dean." And he said, "Everything is in the works." So it was in 1972 that they called me at Fisk and said you've been appointed dean of the college of fine arts and I asked about the search and he said, "What search?" And I said, "No, I can't accept on those conditions." He said, "Well, come anyway and take a look." I came and the vice president just confirmed the fact that I shouldn't take the position when he told me some of the people that I needed to get rid of immediately and I thought well, I won't be dean if somebody else is telling me what to do, so I wrote a very nice letter and said thanks, but, you know, I'm comfortable in this position and I'm this and I better stay here. Speaker 1: So, but none of that was based on your experience there where you were just appointed, you know, acting chairman, was any of your reticence based on your experience at Howard, you know, when Porter left? Speaker 2: Some of it was. I thought that at the time the faculty was pretty much the same it had been and there wasn't room to bring in new experimental things and the growth of the department, whereas as Fisk I could do that still even though on a small scale. Speaker 1: Okay. So you were at Howard how long? You were-- Speaker 2: Four years. Story_ID: 17620 Speaker 1: How did Fisk [University] come up then? Speaker 2: Here again, Ms. Brady intervened and got to Aaron Douglas when she knew he was retiring and said invite him to come to Fisk. This is the man for Fisk University and I have all these letters, six page letters, and so forth and Ms. Brady writing saying this is the person. If the President of the United States were to call on me, then who would head up so and so and so in art I'd say David C. Driskell. I mean, that's the kind of confidence she had in me and so Aaron invited me and the acting president then followed through and I had them write a bill of sales, if I come--because they only had one and a half persons so to speak, one part-time person. I said I'll have to start with three full-time people, I'll have to have a gallery, I'll have to have so and so and so and I'll have to establish a new art curriculum including African-American art history and they agreed to everything. And so I left Howard and they were tearful when I left and I think I may have included photograph of that my kind of going away ceremony and so that's how I went to Fisk and then they invited me back in '72 [1972] to be dean and I said no and they still, some of the older timers, remind me oh, we weren't' good enough for him. He went Maryland but he wouldn't come back to Howard, you know. Story_ID: 17621 Speaker 1: Fisk had--they had this, they had the coll-- Speaker 2: Stieglitz Collection-- Speaker 1: --Stieglitz Collection, they had-- Speaker 2: --they had the African American Collection, they had the African Collection, they had the General Collection, they have the Baldridge Collection, I mean, Fisk is almost as rich in collections as Hampton, but the thing that was so enticing about Fisk was you had the chance to do whatever you wanted with those collections. At Howard it was a little more rigid. The line had been drawn. At Fisk you said I want to do this, if you could get the financing, do it and so that's how I brought Jacob Lawrence's exhibition around Toussaint L'Ouverture, Romare Bearden, the Charles White exhibition, Palmer Hayden, Richard Hunt, Walter Williams, Sam Middleton, Alma Thomas, all these--I mean, and during time these were the only publications out there on these artist. They weren't large publication, but Richard, of course, had catalogs and things, but most of them didn't. So Fisk kind of became the center where things were happening in the visual arts and so then the nation kind of started looking. So in 1974, when the Los Angeles County Museum with the advice of Charles White, Leon Banks, Aurelia Brooks and others decided to do a big Centennial exhibition jumping ahead of everybody else celebrating blackness, I understood they called almost every black expert in the country and interviewed and brought them and when I went out as the last person I thought I was the first one, the only one going and as it turns out I guess they had kind of pushed everybody else aside and I went out with like a twelve-page proposal, this is what I would do because I'd been doing it all along and they were very impressed. There was one woman on the board of trustees, a wealthy woman from the Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Company, she was Mrs. Goldwyn and she said to me, she said, "Professor Driskell," this was in the summer of 1974, she said, "I read your proposal and it's very enlightening," she said, "but I'm Jewish and I would not want to do a Jewish exhibition for the Bicentennial." And, you know, I was young and feisty then so I struck back *(inaudible) I said, "Well, if you know your history, Mrs. Goldwyn, you shouldn't want to do one because Jews have always been in the forefront of American culture and I'm bringing you something that you don't know, so you're going to learn this experience." And she was, like oh. So Charlie White, we've been friends for years, you know, so Charlie said, "I think you understand," he was very groggy, "I think you understand now why I've been so insistent that you bring David Driskell out here 'cause he's the one." So they offered me the position of guest curator for the next two years and during that process some of the mainstream curators, in particular curator of modern art, didn't speak to me the whole two years that I was there and threatened to resign if they did the exhibition, but obviously he wasn't serious about because he's still there and maybe there's no where for him to go, but he is still there and we did the show and it became a landmark exhibition, two centuries of black American art. And it put black art on the-- Speaker 1: It pretty much put black art-- Speaker 2: --put black art out there? Speaker 1: --out there, yeah. Speaker 2: Now, I have one other curious question about Fisk, how were the repository of those collections? I mean, that's-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --I think that's important as sort of understand because I-- Speaker 1: Oh, yes. Well, Fisk has always been at the center of culture, as far as a definition of what culture should be and ought to be, and as early as the 1870s, Fisk was collecting African art and had a museum in one of the old--in Bennett Hall, I think it was called, at that time and in the basement and I think only Hampton preceded Fisk with a museum and I think the Fisk museum was started in 1871. So they collected what they call ethnographic materials from Africa and other places and so they had had this exhibition, I mean, this museum concept over the years, then in the 1930s and 1940s eminent teachers including Charles S. Johnson and others would go to Africa and bring back loads of things and so many of these things were never cataloged in boxes and what have you and so that was one way. In 1928, one of the Rockefeller sister's gave the Baldridge Collection to Fisk because she had commissioned Cyrus Baldridge to go to Africa to sketch in Ethiopia and places like that. So there's this wonderful collection of drawings, then the (unclear) Rice Collection who Rice had been Aaron Douglas' teacher. When Aaron came there he was influential in helping them get that collection. And then Aaron was invited there in 1931 to do the murals in the *Carveth Library and so then in 1949 Georgia O'Keeffe through the friendship of Carl Van Vechten and Charles S. Johnson gives the [Alfred] Stieglitz Collection, including and then Van Vechten gives X number of books and photographs and so forth. So over the years these were building up and so when I came, I continued the tradition of going after these collections, even though we didn't have adequate housing. I would still go and get them and part of the Harmon Foundation Collection came there under my jurisdiction and so this is how Fisk came into *(inaudible). Speaker 2: But can I ask another question, do you think it's because--I mean in the case of like this--is it Stieglitz-- Speaker 1: Stieglitz, the Alfred Stieglitz Collection. Speaker 2: --Stieglitz Collection? Was it because it was a multicultural--was it-- Speaker 1: Well, African art was there-- Speaker 2: African art, was it because-- Speaker 1: --yeah, but mainly European and white American. Speaker 2: Okay, was it because others wouldn't have wanted it or I'm just-- Speaker 1: No, it was Georgia O'Keeffe's way of, perhaps I shouldn't say this but, thumbing her nose at people, whites who thought they were in the vanguard and her attitude was okay, since you're going to stay in your little world and be segregationist and racist and so forth, if you want to see good modern art you're going to have to come across the railroad track and so she placed at Fisk, not at Vanderbilt, but at Fisk and they resisted for years. The entire time that Aaron Douglas was there they wouldn't come. When I came they changed their minds and everybody--so Fisk became the center of art in Nashville. It had always been the center of music, with the Fisk Jubilee Singers and the choir and all of that. Speaker 2: Okay, you know, 'cause you're wondering why people make certain decisions, you know? Speaker 1: Yes, and also because Jean Toomer and Georgia O'Keeffe were very good friends and Jean Toomer--and I'll leave it at that, and Jean Toomer's papers were at Fisk at that time and he had some influence in decisions about it. Story_ID: 17622 Speaker 1: You're teaching and things like, how is that leaving you much time to work on your art too? Speaker 2: Well, I was strong as a horse in those days. I was young. I would stay up until 3:00 in the morning painting and writing and teach all day and family would be in between and so forth and you were young it was a vibrant community, Earl Hooks was there, Stephanie Polk, Martin Puryear, Fred Vaughn, and Carlton Moss the eminent black documentary filmmaker. I had hired him to come back and forth from Hollywood to do a film course once a month. It was a community of dedicated, devoted people and we just interacted. We'd stay up until 2:00 in the morning hanging the exhibitions on the Saturday night before they opened on Sunday. And Thelma and the other wives would bring over and we would go straight through until time to go and shower and come back to the exhibition. It was like nonstop. The students would be there with us working equally hard. And some of them have gone out and made names for themselves, like Terry Atkins and people like that, so it didn't go unnoticed. Johnny Simmons became one of our--he was our first cinematography student. We started out with an eight-millimeter camera and he was the first African American to get a MFA in cinematography from USC and he's now a professor at UCLA and USC and so from that little group I got a little grant from the American Film Institute. I would go out and say, look we need this, give it, you know, and they would listen, it would happen. Sometimes they were intimidated. I was quiet, but, you know, I carried a big stick. I would rap them over the head and say, "Do you want me to call you a racist? I know you gave it to Vanderbilt, why you can't give it to Fisk?" And they would respond. Speaker 1: And Fisk, we're in 19-- Speaker 2: The 1960s. Speaker 1: --'60s [1960s] and even-- Speaker 2: '68, '69, '70 [1968, 1969,1970]. Speaker 1: In the South, no less? Speaker 2: In the South. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And our audiences at openings on a Sunday afternoon in 1966, 1967, 1968, would very often be half and half, white, black. The news reporters they would accuse the critic of being biased towards Fisk because she would write such glowing reviews. Speaker 1: Well, what else was there to write about, you know, and so I go to Nashville now and it's like, you know, I'm walking on water or something. The community just comes out in force. Speaker 2: That's fascinating, wow, okay. So then, well I would like to have you tell the story of--that's, okay that's--that says a lot about, you know, a HBCU too? Speaker 1: Oh, yes, yes. I think that's one of the great secrets in the educational world that people really haven't pursued. I mean, to conserve a legacy just kind of--tip of the iceberg of what is really there and the nurturing, the caring, the loving, the kindness that comes out of those schools. Speaker 2: Bill Cosby and I were talking about it at the dinner table one night and his brother-in-law had attended a predominantly white institution and I think Bill just cut right through everything and got to the point and he said, "How many of those classmates of yours do you keep up with? How many of them do you know what they're doing?" And Eric couldn't respond to--he couldn't think of anybody. And he said, "As you just heard David talking about so and so and so, after forty years they're still in touch and their students are in touch and their students are in touch," and he said, "Don't you think you missed something by not going to one of those schools?" So, there is--people talk about is there a need for them? Yes, there is a need for them because you're not going to get that kind of nurturing, that kind of mentoring any place except an HBUC. Story_ID: 17623 Speaker 1: In the fall of 1976, I secured an NEA grant to help with the conservation of the collection at Fisk University. And it was that time that I thought it important to remain there. So I was--I had secured an NEA grant to help with the conservation of the works at Fisk. And I wanted to stay until that was over. And so I stayed until December of 1976. And I left in January of 1977, to come to the University of Maryland to assume my position as professor in the department and to establish courses in African-American art history. Speaker 2: Now, I wanna go back. That's where I was trying to go back to 'cause this was sort of a big deal. This was something you wanted to do with the NEA grant? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: And I'm wondering what the--you know. What you were trying to really accomplish there? 'Cause-- Speaker 1: At Fisk? Speaker 2: [Unclear]. Speaker 1: Yes. I wanted to make sure that the works were left in good condition. Over the years there had been no conservation of the works. Actually they hadn't been moved from the spot that Ms. [Georgia] O'Keeffe chose and put them in the Carl Van Vechten Gallery, since 1949. They were in those same places. And there was a lady, who used to come around and kind of dust them off with the wrong kind of instrument and so forth. So, I was trying to bring more sound scientific techniques to the gallery and to the preservation of the works. And by having secured a grant from Ms. O'Keeffe of about $50,000 matched by the NEA, we were able then to conserve a number of the works that were in bad condition. You must remember at the time we had no air conditioning, no humidity, no climate control, or any of those things in the gallery. And it's amazing the things lasted as long as they did. Speaker 2: Hmm. Speaker 1: But that was the time in which we lived. Speaker 2: Now the other thing--In your book there is, you know, a snapshot of the letter that Georgia--one of the letters that she wrote. Where she's saying that, "She doesn't believe in works traveling." Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Because--and I was just--I was cur--you know. I was just curious about that being her view because--so I--you know. I was wondering if there was any discussion about that? Speaker 1: Oh, there was discussion. As a matter of fact, I had written to her stating that, "I wanted to do a benefit for the collection to help preserve it." And that was her response. You know. "The [Alfred] Stieglitz never fail to works improve travel." Something to that effect. And so--But it's interesting as later-- I think that letter was dated what? 1968, or 1969. Well in 1970, I get the letter from her wanting to borrow one of her paintings for the exhibition at the Whitney Museum. And I responded by saying, "My dear Miss O'Keeffe, I must remind you of the stringency of your gift. The works really can't travel until such time that there is a new agreement." Well, she then asked me to come and visit with her in New York. And she always stayed over at the Stanhope Hotel across the street from the Metropolitan Museum. And I went. And that was really my first meeting--time meeting her in person. And I obviously was gonna concede and let her borrow the works. But I wanted to let her know how it felt. You know, she said, "They couldn't travel." They can't travel. No exceptions. But she then said to me, "This may be the very last time that I will have a retrospective in my lifetime. And I would prevail upon you to lend Radiator City, 291 Radiator City." So I knew I had a chance to communicate with her in a real way at that time. And I said, "Under the conditions, you know, I think this changes the whole era." And she agreed. And thereafter, we were looking at the works totally differently from what we had in the very beginning. Not with just lending them out to people, who--anybody who wanted them. But you're talking, you know, major works a Blue Period, Picasso work of art, Renoir, Czanne, Toulouse Lautrec. You know. And Major American masters, Marsden Hartley, John Meyer and of course, Georgia O'Keeffe and others. So, I mean, this is perhaps the most significant holding that of modern works, European and American to be found in any African-American institution. And certainly at any college of comparable size in the United States. Perhaps it's the pinnacle of such works. And interestingly enough very few people know that those works are at Fisk. But one of the joys of being there was my office was in the Carl Van Vechten Building. And each morning as I walked in, I would see a Blue Period Picasso, Renoir, Czanne, all of these works there that were major. Now the other side of that is we were living in a time when no one talked about security. Nobody was that interested in it. People just didn't take works of art. Or if they didn't know they were at Fisk, you know, we didn't have to worry. But then the publicity got around and what have you. And we had to take more stringent measures. And after that, of course, it was deemed necessary to put in security. Not during the time that I was there. Climate control, air conditioning, security cameras, and vaults, etc. So it's very well equipped now. Speaker 2: Now, how large was the collection? I mean, how many pieces would you say the whole collection [unclear]? Speaker 1: Well, the whole collection I don't think has been totally, fully catalogued. But I'm sure it's way over 2,000 works. The Stieglitz Collection is small. Its about 1--101 works in the Stieglitz Collection. But you have the Harmon Material that the foundation--Harmon Foundation gave. You have the Baldridge Collection, as I mentioned earlier. The Winold Reiss. You have the general African American Collection, the General American Collection. So it's a vast collection. Story_ID: 17624 Speaker 1: I have a question about the role of white patrons and, you know, and your views about that with African American arts. You know. I mean Carl Van Vechten was very well known during the Harlem Renaissance. Speaker 2: Hmm. Speaker 1: You know, The Harmon Foundation played an extremely important role. And I'm just wondering what your views--You know. It's been a must have-- But his-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: There's also been some conflict. Speaker 2: There's been conflicts there. I think perhaps one of the first notations of that came from Romare Bearden when he wrote about it, in 1934. And he--Romare Bearden wrote a rather stinging criticism in 1934, about the role of the Harmon Foundation and such organizations. White patrons, who really wanted--he said, "Wanted to call the shots and not let it be up to the black artist to do that." And I think that was probably the beginning of that kind of outlook about, "Let's evaluate these patrons." Prior to Miss Brady they had been Charlotte Osgood Mason, who had all but helped to finance the Harlem Renaissance. Langston Hughes, Zora Neale Hurston and people like that and the controversy surrounding all of that. And Miss Brady, I think was never quite as intrusive as Miss Mason--Mrs. Mason. Who literally told them what to do. Aaron Douglas told me that she was a dictator. He said, "They called her The Godmother." Because if things didn't go her way, she would cut off your check. You just--You had to follow her pursuits and her formula. So this has--this is not something that the black community overwhelmingly welcomed. But it was necessary. Because there were only so many people literally patronizing the arts. And Mr. William E. Harmon was one such person through the inspiration that Miss Brady bought--brought rather to the foundation. And she did purchase works. And then, of course, as I said, Charlotte Osgood Mason. But Carl Van Vechten's role was dual. He was a patron. But he was also a critic. So he wrote about it. And so he helped to promote it to bring the attention of the arts to the mainstream. And so it's a Catch-22 situation in many ways. Because you're damned if you do and you're damned if you don't. I think the larger issue is getting the work out to the American public regardless of what the audience is. But the audience very often in those days was a white audience. And you must take into account the economics. African Americans didn't always have the means to buy. But I think over the years the market has improved and the trend for more African Americans will become collectors is there. But I think they were handsomely endowed or at least encouraged to do that by white patrons. Speaker 1: Are there some stories of white patrons and black artists that, you know, are sort of legendary? Speaker 2: Well, I guess the most legendary ones would be the ones centering around Langston Hughes and Charlotte Osgood Mason and Zora Neale Hurston and how they kind of interacted in-- Speaker 1: 'Cause they actually lived with her. Right? Did-- Speaker 2: I'm not-- Speaker 1: I think they lived with her. Speaker 2: --sure that they lived with her. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But she gave them a monthly allowance. Speaker 1: Now--but your views--your views as, you know, an African-American art curator are that this was sort of a necessary? You do-- Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Yes. I think it was necessary. Because you didn't have a buying public from the African-American community just waiting in line. A few people bought things but very few. They couldn't always afford to do so. The economics of living were the most important things before them. So that came before art. But they were as I noted in the book, 'The Other Side Of Color', There were artists, African-American artists, who patronized African-American artists from the 19th century. So it was not a new tradition. It's just that you didn't have a large number doing it. Story_ID: 17625 Speaker 1: You're at Fisk and this offer comes from the University of Maryland. Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: Okay. And up until this point, you're whole really exposure except for--I wanna stress in Maine . Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Your exposure in Maine. And then you were at the Hague also, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And I had taught for one semester at Bowdoin College during my tenure at Fisk. Speaker 1: Okay. But you--This is a white institution-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and yet--and they're talking about wanting to do, you know, allowing you to build an African-American-- Speaker 2: Curriculum. Speaker 1: --curriculum. Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: So what does this--? Are you skeptical at all? Speaker 2: At first I was a little skeptical. But you remember that this was the era immediately following the Cultural Revolution of the '60's [1960s], the Black Cultural Revolution. When people were a little more open-minded about the approach to learning across racial lines and what have you. And the demand was still great for these courses. The inclusion of these courses in the curriculum. And so I think Maryland wanted to be out front. And it's interesting when you survey the large universities around the nation. [University of] Maryland has always been at the top in the last twenty years. From the point of view of trying to promote diversity in just about all areas. And I think much of that has been due to the leadership that's been there. Beginning with the leadership that was in place when I came like Robert Corrigan and arts and humanities. That I mentioned, is now president out at San Francisco State University and others. It took a certain kind of leader, a certain kind of mind to tolerate that. And even with people, who had taught courses over the years that included black studies. The white professors, who were very much aware of the importance of this, they-- there was something about the sensitivity of the subject that was difficult for them to put their hands on. And really related to say a black audience. A majority black audience. The way perhaps a black professor could. And I experienced some of that when I came to the University of Maryland. There were the conditions always of most of the white professors, who taught in these areas. And they would say things like, "When there is a black art, it will be so-and-so-and-so." And I remember being in a session once with some of the professors. And it was Corrigan who responded and said, "What do you mean when there is? There is. There has been all along." So it was this kind of dialogue that made it healthy even when somebody misspoke. When somebody was thinking that they were doing a good deed by talking about this. There was always the balance from both racial sides. Somebody would challenge somebody and somebody else would come along and make the equation very understandable. Speaker 1: And with--so what did you set about? You know, you're back at Maryland. What did you set about doing when you realize that this is really a real offer? You know, what do you set about doing to put--putting this program? 'Cause once again, I mean really for the second time in your career, you're given sort of carte blanche. Speaker 2: Yes. Well, actually I had been well prepared for it at Fisk. Because even though Fisk University interestingly enough as early as 1938, had what was called a 'People's College' out on Jefferson Street. And that's why, you know, I'd say to the students, in the '60's [1960s], "You know, you haven't read history." Talking about black subjects and black--bringing the learning to the people. This is nothing new at Fisk. Go back and read the history of Fisk 'cause Charles S. Johnson had won such college for those people who didn't want to come on the campus in 1938. And, you know, this very imminent sociologist from Chicago, who was way ahead of his time. And so there wasn't a hard-core element against the reintroduction of those courses. But the, you know, what I call the great white hope had ensued with Hutchinson and others out at the University of Chicago. The assumption was that this new liberal arts curriculum that was introduced in the '30's [1930s], was just gonna revolutionize everything. And they wouldn't have to be views on ethnicity and things like that. And so a number of the black colleges just bought into that. Talladega, Fisk Howard. And they kind of sidestepped their own histories and backgrounds. So it was necessary to bring them back into the fold, so to speak. To reintroduce these courses. Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] Hmm. Speaker 2: 'Cause they had been there all along. You had Lorenzo Turner, who had taught at Fisk, who had taught at Howard. Who then went to--not Loyola but the other school out in Chicago and [unclear]-- Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] DePaul? Speaker 2: DePaul and places like that. And really made a big name for himself. By introducing Gullah Studies and things like that. And so the idea was for the black schools, which were imminently qualified to pick up on this and do it. And it was the same mandate that [unclear] Lock had asked for in the '20's [1920s]. When he said, "We should be teaching the courses in African art. Because we have the blood line the lineage. We have the ancestral background, so forth and so on." And so it took a Cultural Revolution, a Black Cultural Revolution to reawaken that kind of spirit, and that kind of interest. And so we started teaching these courses again. Now I had had some of those courses all along at Howard. But I was at times the only student sitting in James Porter's class. And I said at his memorial service in 1970, "That he taught that course that he called Negro Art, as though--" I was the only person sitting there. "But he taught it as though there were 100 students in the course." It was that kind of dedication that was that--And these people at Howard liked Leo Handsbery, Frank Snowden--oh. The imminent sociologist, E. Franklin Frazier, all of them. They had taught these courses at Howard early on. They had taught them at Fisk. And then as I said, they became a little slow and they relaxed their situation and they bought into the liberal arts curriculum by way of Columbia University and the University of Chicago. And they kind of let go of the traditional African and African-American studies. So they had to reintroduce them to make them vital. And that's what happened. And I was given a chance to do that at Fisk. And I came with a mandate to do it. Then when I went to Maryland it was very easy to do it. Because all I did was reach over there and get my curriculum, kind of dust it off and made it applicable to Maryland. Because they had no su--now they did have one course in African art history. But I introduced two undergraduate courses in African-American. And later on introduced a graduate course. So it was then about that time that we started drawing graduate students, who wanted to do a history. Yes, the history of American art. But they wanted African-American emphasis. And so we kind of led in that regard, University of Maryland. And perhaps produced more students with a pure emphasis in African-American art history than any other institution. Story_ID: 17626 Speaker 1: Tell about the people that you recruited to be part of your, you know, your team. Speaker 2: Oh yes. Well I, recruited Keith Morrison who was associate dean at the Circle Campus, University of Illinois in Chicago. And Keith also had a same--similar background to mine in being an artist but also, a writer and a critic. And he was quite capable of teaching the same kinds of courses as I. And to buttress that from the practical side I invited in Sam Gilliam, as a full professor. Stephanie Poe came as an associate arofessor and she later became a full professor. Martin Puryear was there. And so we had this cadre of artists that was really crme de la crme anyway you look at it. And people were really looking to Maryland for something very special. And I think we delivered something very special. Speaker 1: Now at the same time that you're bringing these--their careers are really, I mean like Sam Gilliam-- Speaker 2: Soaring. Speaker 1: Soaring. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. 'Cause especially Sam Gilliam-- Speaker 2: And Sam and Martin Puryear indeed. Yeah. And I don't think Maryland necessarily did anything to enhance it. It was their hard work and their artistry that did it and reinforced it and so forth. And so they, of course, just buttressed everything that was going on from the point of view of art history. And so people started inquiring and looking from afar. And we started getting some of the best students from around the country. Speaker 1: Hmm. What are you most proud of the things that you did there? You know, you've accomplished in the University of Maryland? I just realize it's like ten minutes away from here, right? Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: It's just-- Speaker 2: Just ten minutes away. Yeah. Well, I think the fact that we were able to convince the faculty that African American art history was just as relevant as any form of European art history. And they--that they bought into that and allowed us to pursue a program. Which not only prepared students on the undergraduate level but on both graduate levels. Master's and Ph.D. So I think that's a mark of high calling. And secondly, I think that, that program received the emphasis that it did to endow the interest in the formation of a permanent center. That would mean that not only that aspect of the culture of African Americans would be saved but also the total picture of the arts. Because the center will deal with more than just the visual arts but the whole of the African diaspora. Speaker 1: And that center is gonna have your name? Speaker 2: Yes. It's gonna have my name which I'm proud of. But also which leads me to believe that they are serious about making African and African American studies an important part of the curriculum presently and in the future. Story_ID: 17627 Speaker 1: As I was hearing you talk about what, you know, that the HBCU's were losing, you know,-- Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: --as they tried to liberize their curriculum or [unclear] losing what that they probably were best at. And then I was thinking of a lot of the other African-American studies departments around the country. And how they're just like--they never, you know-- Speaker 2: Peripheral. Speaker 1: --peripheral, not realize their potential. I mean--and so I'm wondering-- I mean, how--'cause--I mean, Skip Gates has done okay there at Harvard. Speaker 2: Um-hmm-- Speaker 1: But the others--I mean, he's attracted money. Speaker 2: Yeah. And--but when you compare even without trying to denigrate what is going on there. If you compare what is going on at Harvard now to what was happening at Howard University in the '40s [1940s] and the '50's [1950s], there is no comparison. There is no Alain Locke on the scene. There is no Leo Hansberry There is no James Porter. There is no Frank Snowden and--it just--and I don't know if it can ever happen again. And--but it is important that it continues. And I think it's best that it is continuing the way it is then for it not to happen at all. Speaker 1: But it's--but--Is that the model that you like--that's the caliber that you're aiming for? With-- Speaker 2: That's--yes. With the center we wish to invite in visiting scholars from all over. Not just from the United States. But from Africa, from South America, from Caribbean, etc. All who have vital contributions to make to the African and African diasporic studies. And that's our goal. And to preserve as much of that history and culture as we can through archival, documents, film, however. Story_ID: 17628 Speaker 1: One thing that stands out in your background is that you were trained. Wasn't that in Netherlands at Ha-- You know, you were-- Where were-- Speaker 2: Yes. I--when I--well, first of all the importance of this subject was brought to my attention by Miss Brady, Mary [Beattie] Brady of the Harmon Foundation. And it was she who said, "You've got to learn about archival materials. About preservation." And even though she did--she was just skimming the surface really. Early on she would talk about the use of proper materials for conservation and acid free mats and things like that. And keeping these things in a safe place. But when she learned that I was going to [unclear] in the Hague, she then said, "This is a good chance for you to really see the study storage ranges throughout Europe to see how they preserve. What they preserve, the methodologies and so forth." And we spent a considerable amount of time looking and viewing that in private and public collections in Holland. And so when I came back to Howard that was high on my list of things to get done. I couldn't get it done. I was only there for two more years. But I couldn't get it done at Howard. So when I went to Fisk, I had a chance to just kind of lay out the model of what I wanted. And that included the publications, the preservation. I even introduced courses in conservation and preservation of art materials. I mean we had a methods and materials course. We had someone come in from the museum in town to teach. Story_ID: 17629 Speaker 1: My question on the curatorial, do you think that you see a move now for more focus on that within the African-American community? You know, and I'm talking about both from the academic sense and, you know, whether on the, you know, gallery side and also, you know, as well as on museums, you know. Because is that expertise increasing within the-- Speaker 2: Well, with the increase in the expertise in the field, particularly in historical studies, you will automatically buttress that kind of enterprise because you're going to find a people with a Ph.D. in Art History who may be capable of teaching but they may decide to just go into a museum and work or just decide to become independent curators and so forth. So you will have a larger body to draw from and those institutions that have been hiding behind their racism and so many other things by saying, well, we don't know where they are; we don't know that there's anybody. They can't say that any longer because these people have the same credentials as they and, in some cases, better credentials because they are schooled in the subject and very few of them have been schooled in a subject which included African American. A case in point being in 1985--1984, I was invited to lecture at a museum in the state of Washington, and I gave an historical overview of African American art. Well, the gentleman who was director of the museum had a Ph.D. in American Art History from the University of Washington, and when I finished lecturing, he said "I really feel like I've been cheated. Why don't I know about all of those artists that you just talked about with such great detail?" He said, "They're as good as any I've ever studied". He says, "Why don't I know about them?" And I said, "Well, you know, you've answered your own question, the question of omission." The paucity of literature in American art history is abominable. I mean, specifically on African American subjects, and so it's happened that way because somebody designed it to happen that way. They overlooked it, and they're not going to go back and rewrite history. They don't like to be revisionists. And so, if you include African American art history in the curriculum, then you stand out as being too liberal, too sympathetic. So that's why I said the people at the University of Maryland deserve some credit for having the foresight to do that. Instead of these noble institutions, like Northwestern [University] who pioneered with Melville Herskovitz and folk like that in cultural studies, Columbia [University] in the old days, you know, had been a pioneer with anthropological studies. That's where Zora Neal Hurston studied. And yet they fell behind. They didn't pursue it, and who's going to pick up the mantle? So now that we are producing more of these young scholars, I think there will be just almost automatically a larger pool to choose from, and they can choose more equitably what it is that they want to do. Story_ID: 17630 Speaker 1: What is your view on the AfriCobra movement within the whole--I just was very curious--because I don't see those artists represented, and I was--you know, well, anyway--I mean that question just came because-- Speaker 2: Well, AfriCobra was one of the important movements of the late '60s [1960s], early `70s [1970s] that helped to reestablish the grounding of the visual arts in what might be referred to grassroots communities, and their aim was really to bring the art to the people. And so that was good,but you see, I think a part of what they did was to formulize it because you worked within a particular style, you worked a certain way, you worked with certain subjects; you almost had to be figural, even though there were some elements of abstraction there. And if there's any criticism to be made it was probably because it didn't have the capacity to reach out to all elements of the black community: Barbara Hugo Jones [Barbara Jones-Hogu] and others, Nelson Stevens, Jeff Donaldson, and then they added others later. But by that time, I think the strength of the movement was beginning to wane and many of them had dispersed and gone to academic institutions. But I think when they began, there was a strength there that was powerful. They spoke with a voice of unity, and they were among the first to say we must inculcate all elements of African-American art into this thing and not just look at one side, yet their stylistic approach to it was one sided. And that doesn't mean that that was the worst thing that happened, it simply means that there was some double talk going on because you need the freedom to express the subject anyway you feel that you can get it done. So you don't put abstraction down. You don't put non-objective art down. You embrace it and make it a part of your own purview. But I laud the movement because they brought about an awareness, perhaps, as Claude Clarke said, this was our first black manifesto in art, and whether you like it or not, it had an impact, and I happen to think it had a positive impact. The downside may have been if you get X number of people, like at Howard, teaching at the same institution, all with pretty much the same point of view. Then you have the AfriCobra school at Howard [University]. Now, there's nothing wrong with having the AfriCobra school at Howard, but what about those students who don't want that? Are they going to be able to get something else? But I think it was an important movement, still going on sporadically, but I don't think it'll go down in history like the Harlem Renaissance, but I think it'll have its place. Story_ID: 17631 Speaker 1: If you look at the [William H.] Cosby collection, how old is that collection? I mean, they've been working with you how many years you said? Speaker 2: They've been working with me 24 years, but they were collecting before they started working with me, maybe 18 years prior. Speaker 1: Okay, so it's 34 years. Okay, so it grew really but may have started in the '70s [1970s] then-- Speaker 2: Well, it started in the late '60s [1960s]. Speaker 1: Sixties, late '60s [1960s], okay. So my question is, what do you think some of the forces were, you know, at work that are now starting to create? You know, you could say economics, you know played a role, but what other forces were really sort of at work from an art historian role, you know, to create collectors *(inaudible)? Speaker 2: Well, I think a part of it was we are now reaping the benefits of the fruits of the '60s [1960s], which has taken 30 years for it to come around; because you'll remember those were the youngsters in those days who were carrying the signs and rebelling and carrying on. For example, I mentioned Mary O'Neal, who was in my class; Stokely Carmichael, who took an African name later--they were all in my class at Howard in the '60s [1960s]. And there are others, Ed Brown from Atlanta and people like that who later became collectors or became promoters of the arts or became administrators of the arts. And so it took perhaps that long for these people to season, to become the persons who could buy, who could support, who could patronize. And so I go back to the black cultural revolution as the groundwork for that and so by now we have cultural awareness and what I like to call social emancipation, meaning that we not only have social awareness of the importance of these works by way of our culture, but we are able to buy them and sit down and talk about them and to say that this is an important part of my history. It took a number of years for that to happen and so now that it is happening, we have the outsiders coming in, taking the credit; some by way of agents, some by way of museums, some by way of consultants, et cetera. And why do I call them "outsiders?" Because they were there all the time when there was the need to promote these artists in the '50s [1950s] and the '60s [1960s] but with the exception of very few, in particular in the white community, they didn't show their heads. Now it is fashionable to be out front, and we have big-name galleries in Chicago, big name galleries on 57th Street in New York, some in particular who want to control the whole market, who get very upset if you, you know, act like they don't. They will even say they are writing the history. We are the marketers. We know more about it than they do. You know, there's still this paternalistic notion but because they have the means, they have the economics, the money and so forth, they can promote. They become the agents. Are they agents for good? They do some good, but I think they also do some damage. They don't always allow black agents to apprentice with them, to learn, and it is a skill to be learned. You can't just go out there and open a gallery. And what is your collateral? Are the banks going to listen to you? And they don't tell you all of these skills. You have to learn the hard way. And when a black agent comes on the scene, they are looking and breathing down his or her throat every minute to find something wrong with them. And I literally know prominent dealers on 57th Street who, yes, promote African American art annually with their big shows, but they go out and say look what we are doing for them. So here again, it's a very tenuous situation when it comes to who is the agent, who has control, what are they doing. They're promoting themselves. They get 50 percent, sometimes 60 percent. And Bill Cosby once said to me, you know, "You artists, you visual artists must be the craziest people in the world to make something and then turn it over to somebody and say you can have 50 percent of what I made simply because they say they are promoting you." He says "It's altogether different in show business." So we have accepted the model. Now, I think things are changing a little. You're getting more black dealers. Many of them are more understanding. They know the ropes. They know the road, and they will ask you what is it that you expect. What is it that you want? You tell them. They can't do it, they won't. But you have prominent galleries, like the June Kelly gallery in New York. You have the Stella Jones Gallery in New Orleans. But this is not to leave out the white galleries because there are some that are really doing a great job of promoting African American artists, have been there all the time, and will continue to be there. But you do have some that are very, very patronizing in a the sense of look what we do for them, and they are not always appreciative they say. I mean I've heard that on numerous occasions. So this whole thing about the agent I guess is a necessary evil in certain ways. You need them to promote, to give you the patrons lists and so forth because you don't have time to make the art, to sell it, put it out there, and promote it and all of that. But there must be a more humane way of doing it. What it is, I don't know. Perhaps it's as simple as more African Americans studying the market, the economics of trade and so forth and getting in there and trying to do, you know, what is right by the artist. Story_ID: 17632 Speaker 1: Do you think that the African American market is becoming more sophisticated? And the reason I'm asking that question is just like, you know, you talk about--well, you didn't say it in these words, but you know, a people's movement or a grassroots movement of the `60s [1960s], there's been a lot of move to--you know, some people, well, you go in their homes, and I was in one this week, where they think artwork is prints. You know, and I'm not talking about lithographic prints. I'm talking about-- Speaker 2: Yeah, that's a real sore point with so many visual artists who feel that they have all been taken by this thing that everybody is saying, yes, I bought some black art. I bought some black art. It turns out they bought a very poor reproduction, a print, as you say, that's not even an original numbered edition. They caught on to the marketing skills. You see, we've taken a lot of these bad attributes along with us. You know, I only did 500 of these and you have ten of 500 and you have a low number, it doesn't matter what kind of low number you have; they're all the same, and they are worthless, really. You pay more for the frame. But now I do believe in the philosophy--you know, I call it the Booker T. Washington philosophy--it's you let down your buckets where you are. If you can't afford to buy anything other than a reproduction, okay, buy one. But don't buy ten, because you could go and get an original. And look at what you're going to invest in framing those, and you're going to buy them 9 times out of 10 to match your couch. You're not buying them for aesthetic reasons. I mean, you know, you're buying to show off and so forth. So there is a developing African American market out there, which is really moving in the wrong direction and misleading the illiterate, the uninformed, and telling them that you're doing this--you know, most of them start off as frame shops and the next thing you know, they've got some black art. Somebody glaring their teeth and raising their fists. Well, you know, white people can glare at their teeth and raise their fists. They don't call it white art. So we have bought into this thing, that ethnicity is something so special to us, it centers around mainly emotion, and we act like we can't be intellectual with our art. We can't pursue the same course. We were trained. Why not? We were trained by the same teachers. I mean there is no separate African American school, per se, in this country. We've all been trained at the same places. So if we find our niche, it's because we have a certain kind of art history that celebrates our belief in African ideals in certain African American concepts. It's not because we're going to develop a style that nobody else can imitate, and so I think we get caught up in that thing of the black subject belongs to the black artist. No subject belongs to any artist. If you can draw and paint well, it's your subject. So we very often feel that it has to be a certain thing to be real, and we're being sold a bill of goods by the so-called agents, some so-called dealers, and unfortunately, that's so misleading that we don't grow when we buy into that. So it's fine, yes, that the print market is booming and all of that, but just don't fool yourself to think you have art. You don't have art. I mean I have reproductions. I have. But that's what they are, and I don't try and sell them for $300, you know. I sell them for pretty much cost, $25, $30; and I don't pretend that because I sign it it's worth much more. Now, if somebody else says that behind my back, fine, but I didn't say it. Story_ID: 17633 Speaker 1: Talk about how you came to work with the Cosbys. How did that come about? Because out of the one show that you did, "Two Centuries" really put you on the map as a curator. That was sort of your legitimacy and your legitimacy in the larger white world. And is that when you started, you know, really--well, that's a little different than advising, you know--I mean or brokering on someone's behalf. But did you-- Speaker 2: Well, more people learned through two centuries of black American art, 1750 to 1950, the historical lineage, which they perhaps did not know at that time. They didn't know that we had portrait painters in 1790. They didn't know that we had competent landscape painters in the 1840s and the 1850s. They didn't know that we had competent sculptors in the 1860s, like Edmonia Lewis and others. And so this kind of reinforced their interest, piqued their interest, and so they started looking to becoming more aware or what was really out there. And so, as you said, this kind of legitimized the parallel history of the black artist along with the white artist, and you could no longer say, well, but they didn't do anything. Here they were building the great mansions of the country. They were making portraits. They were doing the same kinds of landscape paintings. They were doing the great crafts traditions in their hands. So they were doing all the things and, in many cases, most of the things that European artists were not doing, and so somebody had to look up and say, gee, we've overlooked a lot. So a few museums would start calling on me to lecture, you know, The National Gallery, the Museum of Fine Arts in Boston, The Art Institute in Chicago, the L.A. County Museum and so forth and so on. So the word kind of gets around. Why does the word get around? Because I know, being realistic, I'm safe. I've studied it. I know it. I'm not going to get up and start dissing white folks. And so I'm going to give them the history that they will applaud because they'll feel close to it because there's the parallel lines of what they know. They're not going to always say, oh, gee, that's wonderful, but they'll simply say, oh, I didn't know that and move on. So as I, to use your phrase, "legitimized" myself that way in the mainstream tradition, more and more institutions will start thinking, well, this is something that we ought to take a look at; and they not only call on me, but they'll start calling on other scholars as well. Now, I always preface this by saying I never felt that I had the lead on this. I was simply following Porter's mandate to help define the field. He said to me, which was a great compliment, he said, you know, you can't just--he said, you know, you're a good painter. He said but you can't just afford to paint. He said you have a good mind, and you have to help define the field. He said I'm counting on you to do that. So I felt that I had that mandate to follow through, even at the sacrifice of my own art history, because I haven't promoted myself. I mean I know where almost everybody's art in the world is except mine, and I have literally gone out there and made a sacrifice to do this, because I think the larger issue is the promotion of the body of work that has been done by the race, not just my work. And so it become incumbent upon us to look at how this whole thing developed, how people--why do they call on you? What is it that they want? And I said I know I'm safe because they're not expecting me to start a riot talking about the art and so forth, and so I will be accepted into the art circles. I will be invited to come on the board of the College Art Association of America. I will be invited to join the board of the American Federation of Arts. I'll be invited to join an NEA board and so forth and so on. So little by little, this all adds up to legitimizing the AfricanAmerican experience, because when I come, they know that's what I'm coming for. I have no other agenda. Yes, I know American art history, but my emphasis is African-American, and that's what you talk to me about. And purposefully, I can talk over most people's heads because they don't know about it. So I have a product. I have something they want. So the Cosbys, somebody gave them "Two Centuries," and Bill Cosby called me in October of 1977, and he said," I have the black Bible here on art that you wrote." And when he first called me I thought it was my brother-in-law, because we would joke and call back and forth and imitate voices and rest his soul. He just died two years ago--two days ago, this young man. He's younger than I. And we would call each other--Walter Scott was his name, and we'd call each other and kid, and I'd say, "Oh, this is Bill Cosby, and I'm calling for so and so and so." You know, and he would call back and say this is so and so. And so when he called me, when Bill called me, I was like, "oh, yeah. Yeah, okay, and I'm the King of Spain, and blah, blah, blah." And he said "No, we have your book, your book on art. "And I said to myself, no, Scott does not read my books, so that can't be Scott. And I just reiterated that story to him when he was visiting a month ago, and we were laughing about it. So then Bill says, you know, "My wife and I have started collecting, and we understand you're the person that we should be in touch with, and can you come to advise us." And I decided that I would play hard to get and, no, I can't just come to advise you. I have other clients. You have to wait in line. And you know, his notion was he doesn't wait for anybody so can I come now, and I said no. And I said call me back in two weeks, and he said two weeks, you know, like I don't wait for anybody for two weeks, you know. So he called back in about two days, and he said let me speak to your wife, and so he kind of buttered her up and said, look, we want you all to come and spend Thanksgiving with us at the home in Massachusetts, and we want you to see what we have, and you tell your husband and so on and so on. So I pretended no, I'm not interested. I'm not going. We are family people. We spend Thanksgiving at home. We got on the train, of course, and we went and as they say lived happily ever after. But that's the way, you know, we kind of met and developed not only a working relationship but a friendship over the years, and we understood each other from the very beginning. I had something he wanted, and I wanted his patronage, and we respected each other. And we, over the years, have honored that kind of relationship. Speaker 1: Now, did you start out by talking about what he wanted to do with his collection? I mean is that how you approached your client relationship was that what he was--I mean you obviously looked at his collection. Speaker 2: Yeah, I looked at his collection. I asked him why he had only works by Charles White at that time mainly, and he said because he knew Charlie White and Belafonte had also influenced him and so forth. So I said, well, that's fine, but you know, there are so many other artists out that you ought to be collecting, and we kind of grew from that. Now, they collect other American artists as well, and one while they were collecting American artists with black subjects, but that's not the only range that they collect. Speaker 1: And because I know Belafonte--doesn't he have a large Charles White collection? Speaker 2: Large Charles White collection. Speaker 1: Okay. But he's never consulted with you. Speaker 2: Oh, no. Story_ID: 17634 Speaker 1: This has been a good marriage. It hasn't happened much, you know, the match. Especially the matching of money with the trust and trusting of someone who knows what they're doing and who's black. Speaker 2: Right. Very, very rarely happens. As a matter of fact, at the Metropolitan Museum on April 12 when I lectured and presented parallel works from the [William & Camille] Cosby collection to the works in the Metropolitan Museum, even though I think mostly the Cosby works were superior in many ways, Bill got up afterwards--because I didn't tell the audience he was coming because it was a madhouse even before, and had they known that he was coming, I mean people would have been standing in the street to get in. So they had to, as I said, they had to turn people away as it was. So he got up and we joke with each other, and as I started the lecture, I said my lecture will be brief and I will do--and he was the only one in the audience that said (clapping), and I said for those of you who can't see, that's Bill Cosby clapping. And so we went on and I talked about he trust and the exchange between the two of them, and I don't leave Camille out because she is the one who is the driving force very often behind the whole scene. People, you know, "Can I get Bill Cosby to do this?", and "Will Bill."--I said "You need to be asking can you get Bill and Camille to do this," you see. So when he got up and went on stage, he said something to the effect that he wanted to tell people why they had the trust that they had in me and that we had worked together all of these years. And he kind of solidified the whole thing because someone came up to the two of us once, they saw us out having dinner, and said, oh, "You are the person who works for Bill Cosby," and Bill stopped and said, "No, no, we work together." So to win that kind of approval means that there was respect, and he talked about that respect in his talk at the Met. Speaker 1: Do you think other people who have--I'm going to ask this question. I have another one about the book. But do you think other people will come along or have they come along behind the Cosbys to approach yours? It's sort of an exclusive relationship you have. Speaker 2: It's almost an exclusive relationship that I have, and I think they all but know that. Those who would have--well, I'm not sure that somebody would have the kind of money. Certainly Oprah would have the money and a few others, but even in Oprah's case, I mean she will call me to come and advise her about something but then that relationship stops there until the next time. So it isn't an ongoing kind of thing. So I'm not sure that there will be those kinds--and you know, with me because first of all, I don't have the kind of time and because as curator of their collection, I could spend 24 hours a day just doing that. I don't do it. I don't ever intend to because I have other things that I want to do. But not only that, I curate their collection but I'm also a cultural advisor. So they will call me, and particularly Mrs. Cosby, about educational issues, about cultural issues, sometimes even family issues pertaining to the children and what have you. So it's a relationship which goes beyond the art. When the kids were young, I used to travel with them, take them into the museums in France, in Egypt, and Saudi Arabia and place in England and places like that. Now they are grown up, you know, and Africa and places, we don't do that any longer, but that was all but an assignment for years. Speaker 1: You know, it's just a wonderful combination. I mean it's to their credit, that it is a wonderful--but it doesn't happen enough. Speaker 2: Well, it very seldom happens and it almost never happens in the African American community. Story_ID: 17635 Speaker 1: I'd like you tell the story of the Tanner that you told earlier, because I think it's just such a wonderful story. Speaker 2: Well, people ask how did they come about buying "The Thankful Poor," which is Henry O. Tanner's second best-known work of a black subject, and it's actually the same subject as "The Banjo Lesson," which is the best-known one at Hampton. And I'll tell you anecdotally in relation to that same story after Bill had received "The Thankful Poor" for Christmas and he said what about that other painting, the companion painting to it. And I said, you mean "The Banjo Lesson?" He said yes. I said what do you mean what about it. He said can we get that one too. I said no, it's at Hampton. It's not for sale. And he said how much is Hampton. So there's, you know, a little fun along the way too. So I was called by Mrs. Cosby when she learned that "The Thankful Poor" was going to be on sale at Sotheby's in 1981, December of 1981. It actually was to be auctioned off December 10. And she asked me if I would go to pursue it, but she didn't want Bill to know about it, so we were trying to protect the painting and not let him know because it was going to be his Christmas gift, and they very often give each other gifts of works of art from time to time like that. And so I agreed to go, and this was a painting which had been in the basement, I understand, of the school for the deaf in Philadelphia for more than a half century, and very few people knew about it. But somehow or another, I was reading "Mohammad Speaks" in 1972 and there was this reproduction of this painting, and it turns out that this was a painting that had all but been lost over these years. People had just forgotten about it. And I, you know, tried to seek it out to find out where it was and all of that, but it was not my work which brought it to market. I guess they decided it was worth some money and they'd sell it. So they brought it to Sotheby's and it was auctioned off on the 10th of December, 1981. And as I said, Mrs. Cosby asked me to go to auction and pursue it, and I did and to kind of keep things balanced so. Because when I would show up at auction, people generally knew I was there to buy for Cosby. So I asked a mentee of mine, a student at the University of Pennsylvania at the time, Stephen Jones, to go and bid because I was told that the bid was going to be high. And I told him, I said I'd like you to bid up to $50,000. He said, "$50,000? You mean it's going to go for that?" Because it was listed for, like, $20,000 or something like that, $15 or 20,000. So I said yes, you bid up to $50,000, and I told him about the bidding process, and he's a person who reveres history. He said my goodness, I'll be bidding in history. And then I called a friend, Harold Hart, who I was director the Martha Jackson Gallery at that time, and I asked him if he would take over at 100 [$100,000] and go up to 100, at 50 go up to 150 because I had been told that it was going to go beyond that. So then I would take over at 150, and I did and there was a gentleman from New England who was bidding against me, and I think that he was very disappointed that he didn't get the painting, but you know, I knew he had a limit. I didn't and Mrs. Cosby had said to me the night before--she was out in L.A.--she says, "I want the painting." So I said, "I'll deliver the painting." And as the bidding went along, you know, it got very hot and high and I prevailed and brought the painting home for Christmas. Speaker 1: And then remember how you said it wasn't a surprise it turned out? Speaker 2: It turned out it wasn't a surprise because the dealer who had sold Bill some works from time to time was very upset because he didn't get the painting, so he called him and told him and said something to the effect that you had to know about it because no wife has the authority to spend that kind of money for a painting. And of course, Bill told Camille and that ended their buying relationship. Speaker 1: So are there any other anecdotal stories of your relationship together, the two of you? That's been a very significant relationship there, right? Speaker 2: Yes, it has and, you know, all but seeing the children grow up, helping advise him about where to go to college. I took Ennis to Morehouse [College]. I took Erin to Spelman [College]. I advised Erica to go to [Univeristy of California] Berkeley for her MFA and advised Ensa to go to Howard [University] to study in the college of fine arts, and so it was like a growing relationship over the years and they occasionally would come here to visit and some of them would come to Maine to visit, occasionally. Erica did attend the Skowhegan School, so it's been an amicable relationship over the years of growing in depth and common understanding. Story_ID: 17636 Speaker 1: How did the book come about? Speaker 2: The book, the book. I think the book came about--because I had been pursuing this over the years saying, Camille, we really should do a book on your collections, you know, because they're very private. They don't want to boast or anything like that. So we were on one of those trips. We had been to Egypt, to Saudi Arabia, to Yemen, and we were back in Paris and we had gone to the Louvre and we went, I think, one of our last visits was to the Muse d'Orsay. And so Erica, the oldest daughter, was on the trip with us and she was over in the English book section in the museum, the Muse d'Orsay, and she saw another one of my catalogue books, "Hidden Heritage, Afro-American Art, 1850-1950." Add she pulled the book out, and she said mom, here's Dr. Driskell's book. And I think I noticed a difference in Camille's countenance about oh, Driskell's book at the Muse d'Orsay. So about a month or two later, Camille said to me David, I've been thinking maybe we should do a book on the collection. Now, I know that wasn't the only reason. I had just been on her and on her and on her until she was probably tired and just said okay, let's pursue it. So it was really the mid-'90s [1990s] or so that we seriously said, okay, let's pursue it and sought out to. And it took me, you know, a long time to help them because I didn't do all of the selection by myself but to boil down the images and work it with my assistant and (unclear) Daphne. So the book was a long time in the making because we wanted to make a major statement; and without bragging, we don't think there's another book out there on an African American collection, including my own, that makes that kind of statement; and we think it might be a long time before there'll be another one, because they pulled out all the stops. They financed everything up to the day when we had to turn it over to the publisher, and it took a lot of money to do that. I mean the photography alone, everything was shot in 8x10 color negatives, color transparencies, rather. And moving from one house to the other to do that, the house in Massachusetts, the house in Philadelphia, the house in California, the house in New York, and there was a lot of work involved in taking a photographer each place and so forth. Speaker 1: And I thought it was interesting, the divisions, you know, the thematic divisions *(inaudible). I thought that was--I was wondering-- Speaker 2: Yes. Well, those, well, I guess that my historical background in consort with them, saying we really ought to deal with it this way. I hate that title "Outsider Art," and so I said I'm not going to write anything that's complimentary about these artists as outsiders because they are artists like everybody else. They are intuitive, they are untrained, but they're making their contributions, so why call them "Outsiders"? Outsiders to what? And so when I discussed my topics, they *(inaudible) and they said sure, fine. Cultural emancipation, yes. You know, the black cultural revolution of the '60s [1960s] and so forth, the naming and all of that. So they pretty much left everything up to me, but they, you know, surveyed and agreed, yes, that should be an important. Story_ID: 17637 Speaker 1: Was there a call, an outside call, that, you know, let's have your collection represented? Did that get, sort of, the juices going with your own? Speaker 2: It was more of an outside call. This really came from the university. They said they wanted to do something special in celebration of my retirement almost three years ag. And so Professor Juanita Holland, along with the then-gallery director, Terry Gibbs, said why not feature Driskell's own collection?--and they had been here to see the art, you know, and not this particular art because there's still a lot in storage. And they said, why not make a selection? And when they said they'd do that and I said, well, do you want to just do the African American or do you want to do African and African American? And they decided it would be too much to do the African and African American because there's also European, there's Asian, et cetera. So they said let's just boil it down to the African American because that's more of your specialty. For example, you know, this is a Rembrandt, a print, a portrait of Rembrandt that I bought in 1964 when I was in Europe for $10 because the art dealer didn't know what it was. I mean he was really an antique dealer, and when I had it looked at by the curator at one of the nation's leading galleries--well, The National Gallery, to be exact--and he said to me, he said, well, this is a finer print than the one we have. And I took it to the British Museum and you know how haughty they are. [In British accent] "Well, we can't, you know, we can't give you an appraisal, but if you want to sell it, we'll tell you where to go." So I said that's an appraisal enough for me. They know it's original. And the Jacques Colleux (ph.) drawing and a number of other pieces, you know, that--there's a Matisse in the hall that I bought at a flea market, called the "Thieves Market" in Alexandria in 1962 that turns out being the portrait called "Nina," and you often see it featured on the web site for sale for as much as $45,000. I paid $2.98 for that. There's a small [Auguste] Renoir in the hall and so forth. But it all goes back to what I call a good classical training, academic education at Howard University. And the reinforcement of learning to see things properly, to look, and having a good eye,and those teachers were well endowed to disperse that kind of information and to dispense with it. And so that's how I, you know, go back and measure my accomplishments, and so I have collected across the board the way my teachers did and so have the Cosbys. But the emphasis was to show my African American collection, and one of my colleagues from Los Angeles who founded the California African American Museum came for that opening. It was a big, significant celebration that evening, and we had a dinner at the president's house, and then people came by here and I had made gumbo and things. And so one of--and she knows me well enough because I stay with her when I Aurelia Brooks is the lady that founded the museum, and she whispered to one her colleagues who had come and she says, "Oh, God, we're going to have to by that house and see bare walls now because he got everything up here." And she came in and she saw all of this and she said,"My God, where did this--where did this--you mean we don't miss anything. Because we put, you know, these other things up, and in many ways they're just as significant as what's in the show. Speaker 1: How large is your collection? They have the Cosbys at two thousand--how large is yours? I mean how many pieces would you estimate? Speaker 2: Well, I don't think I own two thousand works but I would say maybe one thousand works. But the African American collection alone I would say is maybe 400 pieces or more, and that's without counting my own work. Story_ID: 17638 Speaker 1: Where do you want to go from here? I mean, you-- To heaven. Speaker 2: Well, I think you'll be guaranteed--you know what? I think Porter's guaranteeing you a role in there, but I think he has a space right there for you. Speaker 1: I've got a mansion in the sky. Speaker 2: But no, but what do you want to--because you're still very young and vibrant. Speaker 1: At 70, young and vibrant? Speaker 2: Well, I don't know. It doesn't-- Speaker 1: Well, I want to continue very selectively doing certain projects or doing things in the arts that I've been doing over the years, but I want to gear down. But I want to write, but not as much as I've been writing because there are young, promising scholars out there now who can pick up the mantle and run with it. But I want to spend more time on my own work now, painting; because I think, as a friend of mine said, there are still a few paintings left in me, and I want to get them out there before my hands become a little too weary, and I want to be very, very, very selective about where I lecture, what I do, where I go, what shows I might tend to curate if any. Speaker 2: And you know, I'm going to just ask this real quickly, if you don't want to do this, but are there artists--you know, the people like Elizabeth Catlett, John Biggers, Roy DeCarava, you know, Aaron Douglas, Sam Gilliam is--I know you see your collection but he is definitely, you know--he is a non-portraiture artist. Speaker 1: Right, an abstract. Speaker 2: But are these like--oh, you can't say anything that's more significant than the other or--do you have any favorites in the bunch? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: No, not really. I guess the notion that favoritism is something that's all encompassing for me, and I would have to name so many. I'd have to name Jacob Lawrence, Romare Bearden, Lois [Mailou] Jones, Elizabeth Catlett, Sam Gilliam, you know, Keith Morrison, on down the line and I'm fortunate, I'm blessed to have all of them in my collection. And I think in so many ways I am inheriting that, whatever that blessing was that my dad used to hold me up and offer me up, not only to God but to the world. And I don't think that I can, as long as I have breath, move in any other direction because that, too, was a mandate: to go forth and do good and to help make this a better world through my own sensibilities, be they teaching, lecturing culture, cultural advice. So as I said to him as a kid, you know, that's my calling, and I think that's why he saw the larger vision and accepted it, because I thought he was going to see the lineage of these three ministers, his father, himself, me. I occasionally preach, but I do it in my own way. Story_ID: 17639 Speaker 1: How old was [James A.] Porter when he--I mean how old were you when he passed away? Speaker 2: Let's see, he was 64 and he was born in 1905. So in 1970, I was 39. Speaker 1: So were you at Fisk [University]? Speaker 2: I was at Fisk when he passed. Speaker 1: You were at Fisk, okay. What do you think he would say if he saw you? Speaker 2: Oh, I think he'd be very proud. I think all of the teachers--well, Lois was the only one who lived a long enough life to see it and say--and *that she gave me the kind of compliment that I never heard her give anybody. She says, oh, you've surpassed me. A compliment like that coming from Lois [Mailou] Jones was like a smile from heaven, and I think they're all smiling. They're all looking down, you know, including the teachers who believed in me from grammar school--my mother and father, as well as those, really, pioneers at Howard [University] who believed in me. Because I don't think all of the strength has come from inside. I think it has come from those. Some of the strength has come from those who've helped me along the way, and I stood on their shoulders over the years, and I shall be eternally grateful for them taking the time to help lead me along. Speaker 1: And your legacy, what do you want it to be? Speaker 2: I think perhaps the larger issue of trying to show that people of all races are endowed with the same creative abilities to rise beyond the narrowness of culture, ethnicity, and race and just be beautiful human beings expressing their creative souls. And I hope that if it hasn't happened through the expression in my own art making that certainly my attempting to define and redefine history as a revisionist, particularly American art history, that it will be revealing there that people will, in years to come, look back and say this was a good thing to have happened, that it was not done in vain...