 Story_ID: 658909 Speaker 1: I'll begin by slating. My name is [HistoryMaker] Harriette Cole. I'm the interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Today is July 20, 2017 and we are in California in-- Speaker 2: Palmdale (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) Palmdale, California which is in the desert. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: I would love for you, please, sir, to say and spell your name. Tell us your birthdate and location of birth and your occupation. Speaker 2: Okay. My name is Henry Dixon, D-I-X-O-N. I was born December 17, 1939. Speaker 1: And where? Speaker 2: In Detroit, Michigan. Speaker 1: And what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm retired singer, retired bus driver. Speaker 1: Okay. And you're--you are known as Hank, correct (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Hank, yeah, Hank, [HistoryMaker] Hank Dixon, yeah. Story_ID: 658910 Speaker 1: So we'll start with what we call People magazine type questions. They're easy-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --quick questions. What's your favorite color? Speaker 2: You know, it used to be blue but I think it's lavender now. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And your favorite time of year? Speaker 2: You know, all year is fine, all day is fine with me. Everything is--I'm blessed every day. Speaker 1: Food? Speaker 2: I don't know what to say about that, you know. I come up at a time when food wasn't that plentiful, so I was like used to a certain thing then but, now everything is so out there you don't know what you like now, you know. So I don't know. I guess a good soup is good. Speaker 1: Any particular kind of soup? Speaker 2: Bean. Speaker 1: Bean soup? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Vacation destination? Speaker 2: Hawaii. Maui. Speaker 1: It's a good choice. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite saying or phrase? Speaker 2: I got several that I've heard over the years, you know (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You can share more than one. Speaker 2: My mother [Melvia Thomas Dixon] used to always tell me, what did she tell me? God bless the child that's got his own. She used to tell me that and don't come to mind right now but I've got several that I like. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, if you remember you can tell me when it (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, okay, all right. Speaker 1: --when it comes to you. Story_ID: 658911 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now we're going to talk about your family. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And we'll talk about both sides of your family. So let's start with your father. Can you tell me his name, when he, when and where he was born and a bit about him? Speaker 2: Okay. My father was George Henry Dixon [George Dixon, Sr.]. He was born--I'm not sure where my dad was born. I heard he was born--Louisiana [sic. North Carolina], I think he was born down there. Speaker 1: Do you know when? Speaker 2: No, I don't know too much about my dad, even though he was there every day, you know, he--we just didn't talk, yeah. Speaker 1: Um-hm, he was quiet? Speaker 2: Quiet guy, very quiet. Speaker 1: So you're born in '39 [1939]? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Do you have any sense of how much older he was than you? Speaker 2: Oh, my dad must have been--he was twenty-one years older [sic.] than my mom [Melvia Thomas Dixon]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So he was up there, yeah. Speaker 1: So he was, he was a grown man. He was an ol-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: --older man (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, oh, yeah. Speaker 1: Um-hm. And what was his work? Speaker 2: He worked at a brick company. He made cinderblocks. That's what he did. Speaker 1: In? Speaker 2: Detroit [Michigan]. Speaker 1: In Detroit? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And did he have siblings? Speaker 2: Well, just us. That's all I know (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, did he have brothers and sisters? Speaker 2: Oh, brothers and sisters. Yes, he had--oh, I'm sorry. Speaker 1: That's okay. Speaker 2: Yes, he had one brother, Wayne [ph.], and two sisters. Speaker 1: And where was he in the birth order? Speaker 2: I think he was the oldest. Speaker 1: Um-hm. And, so were they all born in Louisiana [sic.]? Speaker 2: I think so, I think so. Speaker 1: Do you know anything about his parents? Did you know your grandparents? Speaker 2: Well, I knew my grandmother. Her name was Donetta [sic. Mary Abernathy Dixon]. That's the only thing I knew about her. I didn't know where she was from or anything, yeah. Speaker 1: So how far can you trace back your father's family? Speaker 2: That's about it. Speaker 1: That's it? Speaker 2: That's it. Yeah, you know, we were come back in the age where you didn't talk, especially when somebody else was talking, you know. You be quiet. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Do you know when your father moved to Detroit? Speaker 2: No, I don't. Story_ID: 658912 Speaker 1: What's your mother's name? Speaker 2: Melvia [Melvia Thomas Dixon]. Speaker 1: How do you spell that? Speaker 2: M-E-L-V-I-A. Speaker 1: Okay. And what--Melvia-- Speaker 2: Melvia Thomas was her, was her maiden name. Speaker 1: And where was she born? Speaker 2: She was born in Alabama, Evergreen, Alabama. Speaker 1: And do you know her birthdate? Speaker 2: I know it was May 11th. The year I don't know. Speaker 1: Okay. But was she young when she had you? Speaker 2: I would imagine she was pretty young. Yeah, um-hm. Speaker 1: Do you know anything about her family? Did you know your grandparents [Minnie Aarons Thomas and Charlie Thomas]? Speaker 2: I knew my grandmother. Speaker 1: Well (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And her sisters, her sisters I knew of. She had, one, two, three, four, about four or five sisters and three, two or three brothers. That's what my mother had, yeah. Speaker 1: And were they, were they all born in Evergreen? Speaker 2: I would believe so because they came up to Detroit [Michigan], you know, to make a living I guess. Speaker 1: Did you ever go to Evergreen? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I've been there once, once or twice. Speaker 1: So what's Evergreen like? Speaker 2: It's a country town, you know. They have cotton fields there, you know. It's a country town. Speaker 1: And did any of your mother's family work the fields? Speaker 2: My--her brother did. My mother's brother did. But not my mother. Speaker 1: Can you trace their family back to slavery? Speaker 2: No, I can't. Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: No, my dad [George Dixon, Sr.] never did talk about anything like that, you know. I imagine there was though, pretty close anyway. Speaker 1: Well, and if they're cotton fields-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So even in your mother's generation, one brother did work the cotton fields (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Did work, did have cotton on his, on his property, yeah. Speaker 1: But it was his property? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. And did your mother say when the family moved to Detroit? Speaker 2: No, she didn't. Speaker 1: Do you know how your parents met? Speaker 2: I really don't know. I really don't know. Everything is like a blur back then, you know. We didn't know too much. Speaker 1: So you said your father is twenty-one years older [sic.] than your mother, had he been married before? Speaker 2: You know, I don't know for sure, but I heard he did, but I didn't know. Speaker 1: But you don't know of any (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No. Speaker 1: --children or-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --anything? Speaker 2: No. Story_ID: 658913 Speaker 1: So where in Detroit did you grow up? Speaker 2: Detroit, Michigan. Lafayette [Street] and St. Antoine [Street] down in that area, in the Bottom. They call it the Black Bottom [Detroit, Michigan]. Speaker 1: Okay. That's a famous neighborhood. And you have how many brothers and sisters? Speaker 2: Oh, I got--I had five [sic. six] brothers, six [sic. four] sisters. Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And where do you fit in? Speaker 2: I'm number two in the boys, yeah. Speaker 1: So when you think back on your childhood all the way back, what's the earliest childhood memory that you have? Speaker 2: The earliest childhood memories is when my dad [George Dixon, Sr.] was pushing my brother or my sister in a stroller and I used to stand on the back, you know, to catch a ride. Yeah, that's the earliest I remember. Story_ID: 658914 Speaker 1: When you think of your neighborhood and the Black Bottom [Detroit, Michigan] and your home as a young boy, what are the sights, sounds and smells that you remember? Speaker 2: Well, it was a, it was a good neighborhood, you know. I know the streets are very large, you know. I could remember, remember that, you know. It seemed like the streets were so huge when you tried to cross them, you know. I don't know about smells or anything. I guess so. I don't know. I can't remember that. Story_ID: 658915 Speaker 1: What did you like to do as a boy? Speaker 2: Played with my brothers and sisters I guess; and mom [Melvia Thomas Dixon] used to get us all together around the piano and we used to sing. Speaker 1: Your mom played? Speaker 2: Yeah, she played for church. Speaker 1: What church did you go to? Speaker 2: It was a Metropolitan Sanctified church [Metropolitan Church of God, Detroit, Michigan], I know that. Speaker 1: Okay. And you were very active in the church? Speaker 2: Well, she made us go every day. Speaker 1: Every day? Speaker 2: Every day 'cause she played piano and we had to go. Speaker 1: So when did you go? Speaker 2: Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday, every day and Sunday. Speaker 1: At--right after school? Speaker 2: Well, you know, at--when she had to be at church, you know. She had to be there so we went with her. Um-hm. Every day. Every day they had church we were there. Speaker 1: Every day they had church. And what were you doing? Speaker 2: Just sitting there, you know, listening to the preacher, you know. Speaker 1: Did any of your siblings become preachers? Speaker 2: No. No. That kind of chased us away really. Yeah. Speaker 1: Did you learn to sing in the church? Speaker 2: Yeah, I used to like to sing with my mother on the piano, you know, because she used to play. And she used to get all the boys and girls together and we used to sing. Yeah. Speaker 1: What kinds of songs did you sing? Speaker 2: Oh, spiritual songs, most spiritual stuff. Speaker 1: What do you remember? Speaker 2: (Singing), There is a God like the lonely Jesus, no, not one, no, not a one. He knows all about our trouble. That song ['No, Not One'], something like that. Speaker 1: And, so there were eleven or twelve? Speaker 2: Eleven. Speaker 1: Eleven children (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Eleven, eleven. Speaker 1: So if you were all singing together with your mom that was a choir? Speaker 2: It sure would have been, it sure would have been. That's the only thing I think about. I don't know why we always look to others, you know, for your, for your being able to do things instead of at your own family, you know. If I hadn't looked at my own family I probably could have been a Jackson 5 [The Jackson 5] or something, you know. Yeah. Speaker 1: Your mother was having you sing together? Speaker 2: Yeah, in church. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 658916 Speaker 1: Where did you go to elementary school? Speaker 2: George Washington Carver School [George Washington Carver Elementary School] in Ferndale, Michigan. Speaker 1: And how far was that from your house? Speaker 2: That was just across the field, you know. We all lived pretty close to the school. In the projects like--um-hm. Speaker 1: And, so this--you're growing up in the '40s [1940s], basically (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. Speaker 1: You were born in '39 [1939]? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: What--is this an all-black school? This is a-- Speaker 2: Yes, it was all black. Speaker 1: And were your teachers black? Speaker 2: Yes, they were black also. The principal was black, yeah. Speaker 1: What kind of student were you in elementary school? Speaker 2: Not that good of a student, you know. I was just, my mind was always wandering, you know. So I wasn't that good of a student. Matter of fact I didn't finish high school. Speaker 1: No? Speaker 2: Not that school, you know. I went to the ninth grade then I got my GED [General Educational Development] in the [U.S. military] service. Speaker 1: Okay. So before we get there--so where did you go to junior high school? Speaker 2: George Washington Carver. Speaker 1: Oh, so this-- Speaker 2: Wait a minute, they both, they both were together. Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's--like went from kindergarten to the ninth grade-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that was it. Speaker 1: And, so you went through to the ninth grade (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 1: --but then you didn't go on to-- Speaker 2: No, I didn't. Speaker 1: --high school? Speaker 2: No, I didn't. Story_ID: 658917 Speaker 1: Deciding to go into the [U.S. military] service, how did you make that decision? Speaker 2: Well, it was so many in my family we were all sleeping, you know, boys were sleeping in the same room, you know. I just want--need some space, you know, so as soon as I got old enough I got out of there. Yeah. Speaker 1: And you were the second one? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: What--did your eldest brother have to stay to help take care of the kids or was that-- Speaker 2: No, my brother, I don't know what he did. You know, he, later he went with The Spinners. He got with the group The Spinners. Speaker 1: And what--which was his name? Speaker 2: George Dixon [George Dixon, Jr.], yeah, he was with The Spinners right when he first started. Um-hm (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. Any other of your siblings go into entertainment? Speaker 2: No. No. Speaker 1: Just you two. Speaker 2: Me and him were the only ones, yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Uh-huh. Story_ID: 658918 Speaker 1: Talk about your house for a second, you were saying the boys were all in one room, girls in another, what--describe your house [in Detroit, Michigan]? Speaker 2: Well, we had about like one, two three bedroom house. All the boys is in one room, the girls in another room. Speaker 1: And your parents had a room? Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah. It was pretty crowded (laughter). Speaker 1: Did you have a backyard? Speaker 2: Yes, but it wasn't--I think we had a barbeque pit back there, that was about it. Yeah, um-hm. We were, we were pretty poor. Speaker 1: And, so your father [George Dixon, Sr.] was making the cinderblock bricks (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 1: And your mother [Melvia Thomas Dixon]? Speaker 2: Mother, she was just a housewife, you know. Speaker 1: She was taking care of the kids? Speaker 2: Yeah, she had her hands full. Speaker 1: That was a big job (laughter)? Speaker 2: Yes, it was. Um-hm. Speaker 1: And was she, was she cooking and doing all of the cooking in the house? Speaker 2: Yes, yes, and my dad did most of the cooking, though. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's where I got it from. Mom, she wasn't that good a cook, but she did it all, she did all right. Yeah. Speaker 1: What were the favorite meals that you had? Speaker 2: From her? Speaker 1: From just growing up (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, oh, I guess Thanksgiving dinner, that's what--that was the biggest one. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 658919 Speaker 1: So going into the service, tell me about your experience of signing up? Speaker 2: Okay. Well, I tried a couple of times. You know, first I was too young. I think I was like sixteen or seventeen. That didn't work out, but soon as I got old enough I went in the service. Speaker 1: And which arm of the service (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) [U.S.] Army, Army. Speaker 1: In the Army? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And where did you go? Speaker 2: Fort Leonard Wood, Missouri, and that was my first stop. Speaker 1: So, now you--I think we need to talk about your wife because before you went into the service you got married, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: What's your wife's name? Speaker 2: Ella [Ella Dixon]. Speaker 1: And tell me about Ella and when, and when you met? Speaker 2: Well, my brother, he first met her, and I don't know why, but I just decided to go with him one day and that's when I met her too, you know, and we kind of touched it off, you know. Speaker 1: How old were you? Speaker 2: Sixteen, seventeen something like that, yeah. And we went together for a while and then we got married. Speaker 1: So as she shared the story, she said that before you went into the service, you made sure you got married before that. Speaker 2: Right, right, right. Speaker 1: So tell--do you remember that story? Speaker 2: No, not too much. She probably remember, remembers more than I do. But that's about the way it was though, yeah. Speaker 1: And, so was she able to go with you right away or-- Speaker 2: Not right away but after I was there for a while 'cause I was in the service for the first year and then I went overseas and that's when I sent for her. Speaker 1: Where did you go? Speaker 2: Germany, um-hm. Speaker 1: And what were you doing there? What was your role? Speaker 2: I was a bridge specialist. We built bridges and stuff like that, yeah. Speaker 1: So you were taught that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was an engineer. Speaker 1: So you were taught to be an engineer while you were in the service? Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes. Speaker 1: Where were you in Germany? Speaker 2: Karlsruhe, Karlsruhe, Germany, Karlsruhe. Speaker 1: Do you know how to spell that? Speaker 2: No. It's--I got it wrote down somewhere. Speaker 1: Okay (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah, Karlsruhe. Speaker 1: And how long were you there? Speaker 2: I was there about three years. Um-hm. Speaker 1: And what happened after that? Speaker 2: That's when, let me see, I was getting close to the end of my stint of service because I was like in the service about seven or eight years, so after I left Germany, that's when we got out. That's--that was that, you know. I was a civilian (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And you came back to Detroit [Michigan]? Speaker 2: Right. Um-hm. Story_ID: 658920 Speaker 1: You didn't do any--you weren't in any combat? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: So coming-- Speaker 2: I was lucky I missed all that. Speaker 1: Coming back you come back as a veteran into Detroit [Michigan]? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: How are you supported in looking for work? Speaker 2: Well, work was pretty good back then, you know. You had all the factories still working then, you know, so I was lucky enough to get with a company called Detroit Diesel [Detroit Diesel Corporation], and I stayed with them until I decided to go off into the music industry. Speaker 1: So tell me what was your job at Detroit Diesel? Speaker 2: I was a tool and die maker. They built diesel engines, you know, so we worked the machines, yeah. Speaker 1: And was that something you learned there or had you learned it in the [U.S. military] service? Speaker 2: No, I learned it there. What I learned in service didn't-- Speaker 1: It didn't translate to that (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no. Speaker 1: So do you, do you remember what years you worked at Detroit Diesel? Speaker 2: Oh, wow. No, I don't. Well, I got out of service in 1965 I believe or '59 [1959], no, '65 [1965] that's when I got out so it must have been--'65 [1965], '66 [1966] something like, somewhere like that. Story_ID: 658921 Speaker 1: So you get out of the [U.S. military] service in '65 [1965] and you're coming back into the states. The Civil Rights Movement is exploding here-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) when you come back. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: How are you affected by that? Speaker 2: I wasn't affected at all because I was with Motown Records. We used to go to Motown all the time to do background work and sing and make records for that company. Speaker 1: Right away, as soon as you got back? Speaker 2: Well, it was after I met Walter and Freddie [Freddie Gorman] and the other guys. We all got together and went to Motown. Speaker 1: Okay. So tell me that story when you come back, you're working at Detroit Diesel [Detroit Diesel Corporation], when do you start singing? Speaker 2: Okay. As soon as I met Walter really. Speaker 1: Walter who? Speaker 2: Walter Gaines. Okay, he had a group. Walter Gaines, C.P. Spencer, myself, at that time Lamont Dozier, David Ruffin, I think he was part of it too, you know. We just all, just got together with Motown, you know. They had a bunch of guys there that was into the music scene, so we all just hung around there. It wasn't anything at the time but later it developed into something. Speaker 1: Because Motown had started in 1955 [sic. 1959]. Speaker 2: Fifty-five [1955]. Speaker 1: And, so they were on a role by the time you got back to Detroit [Michigan]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And were they the biggest thing in Detroit other than the automotive industry when you come home? Speaker 2: They were. They were. Speaker 1: So you're hanging around Motown. [HistoryMaker] Berry Gordy is on the scene. It's his company. How did they discover you guys? Speaker 2: Well, we were--they needed some guys to sing background for the-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --the different artists that were there, and we had a pretty good sound, so they told us we just go in there and just do it. Speaker 1: So who--which artists were you singing background for? Speaker 2: Jimmy Ruffin, 'What Becomes of the Brokenhearted,' we was on that one. Stevie Wonder, 'For Once in My Life,' we was on that one. Bobby Taylor with the Vancouvers, 'Does Your Mama Know about Me.' Just about everything now. I'm trying to think of the hits though. We were on a lot of songs, but the hits are very few. Yeah. Speaker 1: And, so what was it like hanging around Motown back then? Speaker 2: Oh, that when we was top of the world hanging around the stars, you know, doing things that the stars do, [HistoryMaker] Smokey Robinson and all them guys, you know. It was, it was really the thing to do, the place to be. Speaker 1: But, so, you know, a lot of people didn't get to be there and see it. Can you-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --can you describe some of the moments that you remember? Speaker 2: Yeah. A lot of the moments was the alcohol and the parties, you know, and, you know, they would, they would party, have alcohol and girls and women just the good times, you know. That's what it was about. Speaker 1: And, so there was all the music that was being made (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --in the studios. How much time were you spending in the studios? Speaker 2: (Sighs) I guess we would spend six, seven hours a day sometime in the studios. Speaker 1: So you had to leave the diesel company in order to do this right? Speaker 2: Well, yeah, we did that on the side. I was working the diesel and then we were going to do this also. (Cough) When I had to make a, when I had to make--I had to come out here that's when it was the big opportunity for me. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Then when I decided to leave diesel, that's when we all said that we were coming to Motown. I left Detroit and came out here in California (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now they left in '72 [1972], right? Speaker 2: Yeah, something like that. Speaker 1: Um-hm. And pri- prior to their leaving is when you were doing all of this backup singing? Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: And when they decided, when Berry Gordy decided to bring Motown to L.A. [Los Angeles, California] to purse the film industry, you know, they took the whole thing (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right. Speaker 1: Had they, had you been invited to be a part of Motown at that point? Speaker 2: We hadn't been invited. We just decided to go. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because we knew that when they left Detroit there wasn't gonna be nothing there. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: So we decided to-- Speaker 1: Now at this point, what we--this is '72 [1972], did you move right away? Speaker 2: We came out here in '75 [1975]. Story_ID: 658922 Speaker 1: You're married [to Ella Dixon], you got married young. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Do you have a family already by then (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, oh, yeah. Speaker 1: So tell me about your family? Speaker 2: Well, that's one thing I hate about me being in the music business is that I didn't spend the time with my family that I should have. I was busy, you know, looking for the pie in the sky, you know, the brass ring whatever you call it, so that's the only thing I don't like about that. Speaker 1: But tell me who are your children? Speaker 2: Tony, Anthony Dixon [ph.], my oldest son, Tammy Dixon [ph.] and Terrie Dixon, which sing with us now. Terrie does. Speaker 1: Okay. And, so when you moved your children were little? Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah, they (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And-- Story_ID: 658923 Speaker 1: Were you The Originals by then? Speaker 2: Yes, we were. Speaker 1: Tell--how did The Originals form? Speaker 2: The Originals, that's when I got out the service, you know. We met up with Walter [Walter Gaines], C.P. Spencer and Bobby Gaines [ph.], his wife, thought of the name of The Originals, and we'd been doing cabarets and stuff like that all around Detroit [Michigan], and we finally started doing background for Motown [Motown Records] and then Marvin came through and-- Speaker 1: Marvin Gaye? Speaker 2: Yeah. And then wanted to know who were we and he wrote a song for us what became our biggest hit. Speaker 1: And what was that? Speaker 2: 'Baby, I'm for Real.' Speaker 1: And how long did you work with Marvin? Speaker 2: Oh, we was with Marvin for about two or three years, yeah. Yeah. Speaker 1: Can you describe what working with him was like? Speaker 2: It was, it was beautiful. It was all beautiful, really. He was just a different type of brother, you know. I don't think he got along with Berry too much, you know. Him and Berry (hiccups) wasn't the best of friends you know. As a matter of fact I think that we got a hit, Marvin did a hit on us just to show Berry that he could do it on us, you know, you know. Speaker 1: When--prior to your working with Marvin, how, how were you received by [HistoryMaker] Berry Gordy? Speaker 2: Well, we don't know really because they were just getting started on St. Antoine [Street], you know. Berry had his group, him and Smokey [HistoryMaker Smokey Robinson] was together and I think there was a guy there named Billy Davis [HistoryMaker Billy Davis, Jr.], he was there and he had another portion of the group--groups, you know. So everybody was just getting started. Nobody was really, really there yet, you know (simultaneous). Story_ID: 658924 Speaker 1: So The Originals, which you formed after getting out of the [U.S. military] service, were you doing live gigs at clubs around Detroit [Michigan]? Speaker 2: We were doing cabarets mostly. Speaker 1: So cabarets. Speaker 2: Cabarets just to get started, you know, to get our talents together. I think we did start working at the 20 Grand. Speaker 1: And what's the 20 Grand? Speaker 2: 20 Grand is the nightclub in Detroit that all the big star Motown [Motown Records] acts go to. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And we got good enough to start taking shows there so that's when everything really started. Speaker 1: And that was about what year? Speaker 2: Oh, I'm not sure. Sixty--let's see, that's '69 [1969]. Speaker 1: Sixty-nine [1969] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sixty-nine [1969], '70 [1970]. Story_ID: 658925 Speaker 1: So your, your debut album was 'Green Grow the Lilacs,' right? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Yes, it was. Speaker 1: How did that come together? Speaker 2: Oh, wow. We had several writers on that. We had Tom Beard [Tommy Beard], he was on that one. I'm trying to think of--I don't know they just, anything that they thought we could sing, they gave it to us, and we put it on the album, you know, that's why it's so different, you know, it's not just one type of music. It's all types of music that we did. Speaker 1: And how was it received? Speaker 2: Well, not that good. Maybe a couple songs on it which was received well. But that was about it. Speaker 1: And did you, did Marvin Gaye help you with that one? Speaker 2: Marvin Gaye-- Speaker 1: Was, 'Ba-'-- Speaker 2: Well, he did 'Baby, I'm for Real.' Speaker 1: That was on that album? Speaker 2: Yeah, right. Speaker 1: Yeah, um-hm. Speaker 2: But he didn't write any of that album. No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Who-- Speaker 2: That was about, that was different, different writers at Motown [Motown Records]. I guess there was just some people that Berry [HistoryMaker Berry Gordy] was trying to give a job to so he--, "Do something on The Originals, do something on The Originals." Yeah. Speaker 1: And then the following year you released 'The Bells'? Speaker 2: Um-hm. That's another Marvin Gaye song. Marvin Gaye was our Moses as you call it, you know. Yeah, he was the reason for us. Speaker 1: And that got good air play? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, oh, yeah. Story_ID: 658926 Speaker 1: So then '72 [1972] is when Motown [Motown Records] moves to Los Angeles [California]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: (Pause) You come out in '75 [1975]. So what do you all do, what do The Originals do between '72 [1972] and '75 [1975]? Speaker 2: Seventy-two [1972] to '5 [1975]. Well, we were just around working. Like I was at Diesel [Detroit Diesel Corporation] still, you know, and we used to do shows around Detroit [Michigan], you know. And then we just got it in our heads, hey, let's go for it. So we just come out where Motown was. Speaker 1: And did you, as you were performing, you know, at that time styling was very specific, there were usually choreographed dance moves. Did you, did you have a stylist and a choreographer and all that? Speaker 2: Well, Cholly Atkins, we had worked with him a little bit but not as much as The Temptations would have or Gladys Knight would have because they were the artists that they had the most--they liked them better than everybody else. They put big--it was their time. It wasn't our time, you know, so they had, that had to be paid for you, for you to write, for you to work with Cholly Atkins, and they wouldn't give us a budget to work with him. Speaker 1: So you only worked with him a little? Speaker 2: Just a little. We did most of the steps ourself. Speaker 1: Where did you practice? Speaker 2: We would practice at each other's house in the basements, you know, stuff like that, um-hm. Speaker 1: And the--who made up The Originals? Speaker 2: The Originals was made up with Walter Gaines, C.P. Spencer, Freddie Gorman and myself, [HistoryMaker] Hank Dixon. Speaker 1: And you sang what? Speaker 2: Lead, lead. Speaker 1: You were lead, and what were each of the other-- Speaker 2: Well, I was like the second tenor. C.P. Spencer was first tenor and lead singer. Walter Gaines was baritone singer and Freddie Gorman was the bass singer, um-hm. Speaker 1: And who was the band? Speaker 2: We didn't have a band. Speaker 1: No? Speaker 2: We just used the band that was, whoever was there, you know. Yeah, we didn't have a band. Story_ID: 658927 Speaker 1: When did you start working for the transportation service? Was that after you moved out here-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) to California? Speaker 2: Yeah, that was 11/9/80, that's when I got hired in. November 9, 1980. Speaker 1: Was when you got hired for the MTA [Los Angeles County Metropolitan Transportation Authority]? Speaker 2: MTA, yeah. Speaker 1: And you had moved to, to Los Angeles [California] in '75 [1975]? Speaker 2: Seventy-five [1975], uh-huh. Speaker 1: When you came out here to--because this is where Motown [Motown Records] was, did you end up working with them right away? Speaker 2: Motown? Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: Well, well, yeah, they put us on salary, put us on the salary for a while, um-hm. Speaker 1: And were you doing the backup singing here too (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, we didn't do any backup work out here. We were just here, um-hm. Speaker 1: So they put you on salary but you weren't making music? Speaker 2: No. No. They were just trying to find out what to do with us, you know, yeah. Speaker 1: Did you ever make any more music out here? Speaker 2: Well, Lamont Dozier did an album on us, and he did an album. He was the only one. Speaker 1: What was that album called? Speaker 2: Lamont Dozier, 'Another Time, Another Place'? 'California Sunset,' I'm sorry. Speaker 1: 'California Sunset' (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) How could I miss that? Speaker 1: (Laughter) That's all right. Speaker 2: 'California Sunset.' Yeah. Speaker 1: And, so you're out here. They put you on salary which is great because you've come across country. Talk about what it was like for you, you know, you're here, you're wanting to make that music. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And it's not happening exactly the way you want it to (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No. No. Well, it's just, I guess it's just like a dream you got, you know, you just wish things would happen because we knew the family very well, [HistoryMaker] Berry Gordy and the whole family because we all come up together but it just, it didn't happen like that, yeah. So that is why I had to get a job. Speaker 1: Did you perform out here? Did you all find places to perform? Speaker 2: Well, we worked maybe a couple of places, just a couple of places, yeah. But it wasn't like Detroit [Michigan], yeah. Speaker 1: It's a much bigger city. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: And did you get connected in with the black entertainment community? Speaker 2: No, not really, not really. We never did get connected really, yeah. Speaker 1: That must have been disappointing. Speaker 2: Yeah, it was, it was. We didn't have the back- the background, the backup (laughter). Speaker 1: What? Speaker 2: She trying, she trying to tell me something. Speaker 1: So the four, the four of you correct? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: You all living in the same community? Speaker 2: Yes, um-hm, um-hm (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Uh-huh. And, so you and going to the MTA to work, what do the other guys do? Speaker 2: You know, Freddie Gorman went back to the post office [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service]. He was with the post office, so he went back with the post office. And Walter [Walter Gaines], he never, he didn't do anything but just lay around. Yeah, he's lucky. His wife [Bobby Gaines (ph.)] took care of him (laughter). Speaker 1: What did, what did she do? Speaker 2: She worked at the bank. Yeah, she worked at the bank, yeah. Story_ID: 658928 Speaker 1: But you all did perform because-- Speaker 2: Once in a while we might have did the, what is it, Total Experience [Los Angeles, California], I think we worked there and that's about it. We didn't do too much because we wasn't really entertainment entertainers, you know. We wouldn't really work at it, you know, we just got lucky at one time and got us a hit record ['Baby, I'm for Real'] and that was it, you know. It didn't feel like they had to do anything. So I can't blame it, I can't blame it on the company, I blame it on us, yeah. Speaker 1: You stopped the practicing all the time and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yep, yep, yep. You know you really gotta--if you're in something like that, you gotta live it, eat it, and you gotta work for it. And we didn't work for it. Speaker 1: Now you had described yourself as the forgotten ones? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Best known secret. Speaker 1: Best known (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Best--now what did I say? The well kept, the best known secret of Motown [Motown Records], yeah. That's what they used to, that's what they called us, yeah. Story_ID: 658929 Speaker 1: Over the years did you ever go back to [HistoryMaker] Berry Gordy to see if you could reignite? Speaker 2: Oh, no, no. No, we went from Motown [Motown Records] to Fantasy. Speaker 1: So what's Fantasy? Speaker 2: Fantasy Records is another record company that they had out here. And (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And what year was that? Speaker 2: That--what year was that? I'm not sure, but anyway as soon as we got there, the same people that worked at Motown came over there. So that kind of knocked us out the pocket. And they were doing a lot for us also. Speaker 1: Fantasy? Speaker 2: Yeah, Fantasy was but after a while they just (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But they brought on like the same A and R [artists and repertoire] people and-- Speaker 2: Right, right and that stopped us again, yep. Speaker 1: How long were you with Fantasy? Speaker 2: Must have been a year. I say about a year and a half. Story_ID: 658930 Speaker 1: Each of you except for your lucky friend [Walter Gaines] (laughter), take up your jobs so that you can take care of your families-- Speaker 2: Right, right (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and your lives. What happens to the dream of performing and singing? Speaker 2: Well, the dream is always there especially when you got a couple of big hits like 'Baby, I'm for Real' and 'The Bells' and 'Down to Love Town' and a couple of things that's still out there. Now the Hispanic people love that stuff, and they wanna see us, so we get together and do things for them. Speaker 1: So even though you didn't have many hits, the hits that you've had, have continued to be popular (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, oh, yeah, oh, yeah. Speaker 1: And you say the Hispanic people love the hits? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, they really love 'Baby, I'm for Real' and 'The Bells,' you know, yeah. Because we worked with Alan Beck out here in L.A. [Los Angeles, California], and he has the oldies but goodies shows ['Underground Oldies'] going all around so we on that quite a bit. Speaker 1: So tell me about that, the oldies but goodies shows with Alan Beck? Speaker 2: Alan Beck--I'm trying to think about a disc jockey's name. What's his name Edna [Dixon's wife, Ella Dixon]? Speaker 1: (ELLA DIXON): Art-- Speaker 2: Art Laboe show ['Art Laboe Connection']. Yeah, he has the oldies but goodies shows. Speaker 1: And are these live performances? Speaker 2: Yes, they are. Speaker 1: So where do you do those shows? Speaker 2: San Diego, San Bernardino, all around California, Sacramento and places like that, you know. Speaker 1: How often? Speaker 2: Well, about three times a year. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And when did you start doing those? Speaker 2: Oh, we've been doing those for at least about ten, fifteen years. Story_ID: 658931 Speaker 1: You are the only living member-- Speaker 2: Yes, I am. Speaker 1: --of the group [The Originals]. When did your partners pass on? Speaker 2: Oh, I'm not sure. Edna [Dixon's wife, Ella Dixon] got the dates on that. You got the dates when Walter [Walter Gaines] died, Edna? Speaker 1: (ELLA DIXON): Unh-uh. Speaker 2: When Freddie [Freddie Gorman] died? Speaker 1: (ELLA DIXON): Unh-uh. Speaker 2: I have to get those to you, yeah. Speaker 1: But as they passed away, you've re- recreated the group (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, right, exactly. Speaker 1: Did you do that right away or-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, we didn't stop really, you know. Every time something come up we just replace it. Replaced him with somebody we know. Speaker 1: And now you have your own-- Speaker 2: Daughter, Terrie [Terrie Dixon], we got Jim Gilstrap. We got Defrantz Forrest, which--whose--his daddy's the Duke of Earl, Gene Chandler. He sings with us now, um-hm. Speaker 1: And is it still--you're doing this three times a year with the oldies but goodies-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --but are you doing other things as well? Speaker 2: If they come up. You know, if somebody wants something, we'll do it. Speaker 1: Are you working with a manager? Speaker 2: No, no. We take care of our own. Speaker 1: They come to you directly? Speaker 2: Right, um-hm. Speaker 1: And you being the one who's part of the original group, do you serve as the lead of the group? Speaker 2: Yes, yes, um-hm. Speaker 1: Do you ever add any new songs? Speaker 2: Well, if we get that much time to do we will, but most of the time they just wanna hear 'Baby, I'm for Real,' 'The Bells,' 'Down to Love Town,' the hits, you know. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: But if we had a longer show then it wouldn't be no problem to put songs in, yeah. Story_ID: 658932 Speaker 1: The oldies but goodies show, is it in California only? Speaker 2: Yes, as far as I know of, yeah. I wish they would extend it, yeah. Speaker 1: So it's still fun? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. I get excited when it's time to go. Speaker 1: When's the next one? Speaker 2: I'm not sure. We haven't heard anything this year, but if it is it'll probably be September, yeah. Right now, I'm do- I'm doing things at churches now. I sing at churches myself, yeah. Speaker 1: As solo? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Singing your hits or other things or (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, just singing for the Lord. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And, so I know for--that is in itself a job for many people. Is that, is this a paid gig for you? Speaker 2: For, singing for the Lord? Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: No, no, no, no. Speaker 1: Well, some people, you know, they-- Speaker 2: Yeah, some people do but not me. If they want me to I just do it for them, yeah. Speaker 1: All around California? Speaker 2: All around California, yeah. Speaker 1: So is this almost every Sunday? Speaker 2: Well, if I'm, when I'm at church, at my church I do. Yeah. Speaker 1: Where's your church? Speaker 2: True Vine [True Vine Gospel Church, Palmdale, California]. It's at--right here on Sierra Highway and 10th Street, yeah. Speaker 1: Are you in the choir or it's-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --just you alone? Speaker 2: I'm not--just me alone. I just get up and do something, you know. I don't, I didn't wanna join the choir. Yeah. Story_ID: 658933 Speaker 1: Tell me about your kids, what they're doing? Speaker 2: Well, my daughter, my youngest daughter she sell houses. She sell houses. I don't know what my other daughter, Tammy [Tammy Dixon (ph.)], doing, but she's doing all right. Speaker 1: And she's the one who sings with you when-- Speaker 2: No, the one singing with us is selling houses. Speaker 1: Oh, that's Terrie [Terrie Dixon]. Speaker 2: Terrie, yeah. Speaker 1: Terrie, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Tammy, she's doing all right, and my son [Anthony Dixon (ph.)], he's back there. He's here. Speaker 1: He's with you? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So, you still have your baby boy at home? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah. (Laughter) That's the way it go. Story_ID: 658934 Speaker 1: Now what made you choose this area of California to live in, Palmdale? Speaker 2: You know my wife [Ella Dixon] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This is, this the desert, right? Speaker 2: Right. You know, my wife, she, I guess she got tired of all the Hollywood stuff, you know, and wanted to get away from it really. So we came out here, and we could afford it better out here than we could--you know. Speaker 1: And you built this house right? Speaker 2: Yes, um-hm. Speaker 1: So when you came to L.A. [Los Angeles, California] originally, you know, pursuing that dream-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --the Motown [Motown Records] dream-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --where were you living? Speaker 2: When we came to California? Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: In Glendale [California]. Motown moved us in an apartment in Glendale. Speaker 1: So they took good care of you? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, oh, yeah, at the time. But, you know, people start dying off and (mumbles) like that and we just gotta adjust yeah, yeah. Story_ID: 658935 Speaker 1: As one who, you know, you did pursue your dream, what would you tell young people who are thinking about, you know, dreaming about getting into the music industry and wondering, you know, is it worth it? Speaker 2: Well (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What would you tell them? Speaker 2: Well, if you are talented, and you are a writer, and you can write your own stuff, and you're good at it, I would say go for it. But if you wanna make a living and live well, you better go to school and take something up that's gonna make you some money. Yeah, that's what I would tell them, um-hm. Speaker 1: Do you think that for you going into the [U.S. military] service was a, was the wise thing to do? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. That was the best thing I could have done 'cause I don't know why a lot of the kids don't go in now, and they can get a start anyway, you know, yeah. Story_ID: 658936 Speaker 1: Being part of a big family, when you came back home, you were already married [to Ella Dixon], but how connected were you to your family? Speaker 2: Well, I wasn't very connected. They were connected to me, but I wasn't that connected to them because I was away from them. I had a new family which was my group, The Originals, and I was really about them. I wasn't even thinking about my family too much, which is a shame, you know. Speaker 1: So your father [George Dixon, Sr.] was much older. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: When did he pass away? Speaker 2: Dad must have passed away about fifteen years [sic.] ago. Speaker 1: Oh, he lived for a long time. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Do you know how old he was when he died? Speaker 2: He was about ninety [sic.] I think, about ninety (unclear). Speaker 1: Did you stay in touch with him? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, every day. That's when I was in Detroit [Michigan] a lot, when they were here. Now all I do is call. Call back there now. Yeah. Speaker 1: Is your mother [Melvia Thomas Dixon] living? Speaker 2: No, she's gone too. Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: So who's in Detroit now? Speaker 2: Just my sisters, one brother, that's it. Speaker 1: And how--there were, there was such a big family, are there a lot of children and grandchildren? Speaker 2: I'm sure there are but I don't, I wouldn't know them if I walked down the street and walked past them, you know, because I been out here. Yeah. But I'm sure there is. Story_ID: 658937 Speaker 1: So, you know, there are a lot of artists who get a chance, not that many who make a few hits, you know. There are more people who have that dream, and maybe they try it out a little bit in high school but don't go that much further. You went for it. Speaker 2: Yes, we did. Speaker 1: You went for it. When you look at that and that you went for it and the success that you have, what legacy do you think you are leaving? Speaker 2: Well, they're gonna always remember those hits that we did. That's gonna always be there. So I think that's about the only legacy that I've got, yeah. Story_ID: 658938 Speaker 1: So as you said, you would tell young people, "Go for it but get an education?" Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly. Speaker 1: And would you say delay going for it if you're, if you-- Speaker 2: Well, if you know that you got it, if you know that you got something, you go for it, but if you don't, you better get an education. Get something that you can do well, um-hm. Speaker 1: When you look at your life and your career, do you have any regrets? Speaker 2: Well, the only regrets I have is not spending enough time with my family, you know, 'cause that could have made them better people by spending more time with them, you know. By me going for the music thing, that didn't work out the way I wanted it to, so my kids [Anthony Dixon (ph.), Tammy Dixon (ph.) and Terrie Dixon] are not that great either, you know what I'm saying. Now if I had been there with them, they--I would have given them the chance to be where I think they should be. That's my only thing, yeah. Story_ID: 658939 Speaker 1: Looking at how the music industry works today, you know, it's so different. There're no-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --there's no new vinyl, I don't think (laughter). There, you know, we went from vinyl to-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --tapes-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --to CDs [compact disc] and, now a lot of it is electronic. As you look at the industry and how it's changed, do you think it's possible for artists coming up to make a living? Speaker 2: Well, if you know the business and if you know what to do in the business, sure. You could proba- probably make it. But back when I came up it was someone had an idea, and they took the idea and made money on it but, now that chance is not there no more. You got to do something else. So I don't think it would be a good idea for them to come up making music now, to tell you the truth because it's too hard. It's hard unless you know what you got. Speaker 1: That's a hard thing to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: --to know. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You know, you think you know (laughter). Speaker 2: Right, right, right. You gotta have time, you gotta have youth. If you're young enough you could do it, yeah. Story_ID: 658940 Speaker 1: For you today, you know, you're still performing? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah. Just because of what I did in the past, you know, that's something that's gonna always be there, yeah. Speaker 1: Do you imagine that with the new group [of The Originals] that you formed that you would ever record again? Speaker 2: No, I don't think I'm gonna record again because I done did the best I could (laughter). It's gone. I'm just living off the benefits now. Speaker 1: Well, but, you know, even--so the biggest artists they're--when they perform, they're doing the greatest hits (laughter). Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: They may have a few more-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --but it's still, you know, you go to see them, they do--they're doing those greatest hits (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right, right. Speaker 1: Right? Speaker 2: That's true, that's true. Story_ID: 658941 Speaker 1: Thinking of living out here in California, you know, you grew up in Detroit [Michigan], you had the opportunity to travel abroad. You've been in California for a long time, have you continued to travel, you and your wife [Ella Dixon]? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, we try to do a few things, you know. We been to all the--Bahamas, Jamaica, Hawaii, that's about it. Speaker 1: You said Hawaii is your favorite vacation. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, we like that, we like that place. Speaker 1: What do you like about it? Speaker 2: I like the weather, they're friendly--the people are friendly. It's just a beautiful place to be, um-hm. Speaker 1: Do you have plans for traveling in the future? Speaker 2: Yeah, we'd like to go back, go back one more time. Story_ID: 658942 Speaker 1: When did you retire from the MTA [Los Angeles County Metropolitan Transportation Authority]? Speaker 2: Two thousand four [2004]-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --two thousand four [2004]. Speaker 1: So you've been retired for-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --a while. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Talk about that because you--about the job. That, you know, you said you're pursuing your dream, but you have to be practical too? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And so you got a job out here like you had a job in Detroit [Michigan] working for--driving a bus, correct? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Tell me about having that job, and you were in that job for many years, yeah? Speaker 2: For twenty-three years, yeah. Speaker 1: Twenty-three years? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Talk about that. Speaker 2: Well, I'm very lucky to have--did that job and got out of it without being hurt because you got a lot of crazy people out there nowadays, you know. A lot of people with no jobs and when you try to tell them to pay money and they ain't got no money, you can't make 'em pay so you got to just let them ride, you know, and that's what I did. I guess that's why I didn't get hurt, you know. Speaker 1: You were driving in Los Angeles [California]? Speaker 2: Yes, um-hm. Speaker 1: And, so just for context the public transportation system in Los Angeles primarily is a bus system and, but most-- Speaker 2: Got the trains now, too. Speaker 1: Now, but most people drive, so who is riding the bus? When--at--for these twenty-three years that you're driving, who are your passengers? Speaker 2: The working people mostly, yeah. We got a few people that's just trying to get from place to place too, you know, yeah. Just the people ordinarily, yeah. Speaker 1: And Los Angeles has a large Hispanic population. Did you have-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: --a large Hispanic-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Did you learn to speak Spanish? Speaker 2: No, not fluently. Maybe a few words that's about it. Story_ID: 658943 Speaker 1: So from 2004 to 2017--you retired [from the Los Angeles County Metropolitan Transportation Authority] in 2004. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: What have you been doing with your time as a retiree (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Just enjoying God's grace. Just sitting out, and just enjoying His grace you know that's all. I ain't do- I ain't doing too much. Speaker 1: And your wife [Ella Dixon], what was her work? Speaker 2: She was a respiratory therapist. She at the hospital, yeah. Speaker 1: And when did she retire? Speaker 2: Right after I did. She didn't let me retire too long, about two years, about 2006 I guess. Speaker 1: So to have so many years retired and still being able to enjoy your life-- Speaker 2: Oh, it's beautiful. I'm telling you it's--I mean, my good God's been good to me, yeah. Story_ID: 658944 Speaker 1: What would you like to share with people who are hearing your story of you and The Originals? Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: What would you like for them to know? Speaker 2: I would like for them to not worry so much about what's gonna happen with them in life because it's all been planned already, you know, and God's working it out. He's a friend. He got your back. So I would say just relax and enjoy life. Speaker 1: Excellent. Very good, thank you. Story_ID: 658945 Speaker 1: I want you to take me into Motown [Motown Records]. You know-- Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) you were part of the earliest years-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --of Motown with The Originals and, you know, some of the biggest groups in American history came out of Motown, and you were there in the midst with everybody. And, so I'd love for you to tell me about the--you were mentioning The Ink Spots? Speaker 2: Well, The Ink Spots with Harold Jackson that was the last living member that I remember that he was over here at our house not too long ago. He died though, yeah. Speaker 1: But when you, but tell me about The Ink Spots from back in the day? Speaker 2: Well, I don't know anything about them. I just-- Speaker 1: No (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) finally met him. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: I just finally met him. Who I come up with are The Temptations, Eddie Kendricks, David Ruffin and Dennis Edwards, all them guys. Speaker 1: So what was, what were they like? Speaker 2: Oh, that was--they were beautiful. We went on the road with them. Speaker 1: Did you? Speaker 2: Yes, we did. Speaker 1: Did you open for them? Speaker 2: Yes, we did, um-hm (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Where did you go? Speaker 2: We went back east, Washington, D.C., Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], New York [New York]. We went all back with them. Speaker 1: Do you remember what venues you played? Speaker 2: No, I don't remember that. Okay, we were moving so fast like one night-- Speaker 1: Did you do the Apollo [Apollo Theater, New York, New York]? Speaker 2: Apollo, oh, yes, oh, yes. Speaker 1: With The Temptations? Speaker 2: Not with The Temptations. We did that by our self. Speaker 1: Oh, good. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And, so do--when, around when was that? Speaker 2: That was '71 [1971], '72 [1972], something like that, yeah. Speaker 1: What do you remember about the Apollo? Speaker 2: Oh, the Apollo was--we was shaken up our self, you know, it was the first time we were out in public, you know, doing our songs so we were kind of nervous our self, you know. So-- Speaker 1: Did you rub the stump? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, oh, yeah, oh, yeah. I, you know I don't remember too much about that to tell you the truth. I know I should, but I don't know. Just, it's not that vivid to me now, you know. Speaker 1: Do you remember meeting Diana Ross and The Supremes? Speaker 2: Well, Diana Ross, yeah, we come up together. You know, we were at Motown. We had Motown in the family. Speaker 1: What was she like? Speaker 2: She's a beautiful girl, you know. Every time I remember she'd give me a compliment, she said, "You sing that song and you touched my heart," you know, so that made me feel good, yeah. I won't forget that. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 658946 Speaker 1: You know, Motown [Motown Records] was famous for styling and, you know, they really prepared their artists. Speaker 2: Right, um-hm. Speaker 1: Do you, do you remember that going on? Do you remember seeing that, how people dressed? Speaker 2: Yep. Well, you know, we wasn't in that part of it like The Temptations, Diana Ross, Gladys Knight and the Pips, we come like after them. We were trying to get to they--their position but we never did, you know. Maybe a couple of hits, that was it, but they didn't really prepare us for anything. Speaker 1: But on--in the offices of Motown--can you describe the offices? Speaker 2: Well, it was, it was a big house, and each one had they rooms, you know. They had people at the typewriters and--doing their thing, you know, like [HistoryMaker] Martha Reeves. I think she used to be a secretary at Motown, yeah. It was just, it was a big family, yeah. Speaker 1: Did you know [HistoryMaker] Freda Payne? Speaker 2: Freda Payne, yeah, yeah. I met her. I don't really know her that well, but I met her, her sister, Scherrie [HistoryMaker Scherrie Payne]. Speaker 1: Who else? What other groups were there when you were there? Speaker 2: Glady- Gladys Knight and the Pips, that was another group we talked to-- Speaker 1: Did you ever perform with them (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) Temptations--no. Never performed with them. They had Shorty, they had some of the acts that didn't make it like Shorty Long. Do you remember him? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: Yeah, Shorty Long, he come there a, did a song called 'Here Come the Judge' ['Here Comes the Judge'], yeah. Story_ID: 658947 Speaker 1: Well tell me about your touring? You toured with The Temptations? Speaker 2: The Temptations that was our biggest tour. Speaker 1: But were there others? Speaker 2: No, no. That was the only time we really worked, and we worked pretty good, was with The Temptations, um-hm. Speaker 1: And that was an East Coast tour? Speaker 2: Right, um-hm. Speaker 1: What about 'Soul Train'? You performed on 'Soul Train' (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: When was that? Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: When was that? Speaker 2: Oh, wow. When was that? I don't know. It's been so long ago. Speaker 1: At--so was it in L.A.? Where was 'Soul Train' being filmed when you did it (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That was in, I think was in Philadelphia [sic.]. I think-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Los Angeles [California]. Speaker 2: Los Angeles (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Los Angeles. Speaker 2: When it was out here? Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And, so do you remember Don Cornelius? Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: Tell me what you remember of that experience? Speaker 1: Well, you know, we did one of Don Cornelius shows when he didn't have 'Soul Train.' He was trying to get to that part of it when 'Soul Train' was coming. So we did a radio show for him. But, you know, again, you know, you just, if you ain't got the hits, you don't get them shows. Speaker 2: But you--there's a picture of you on 'Soul Train.' Speaker 1: I know, I know, I know. Speaker 2: So you did get that show (laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah, we did. We got that show, yeah. But it wasn't like The O'Jays, you know, like The O'Jays, they did several times, several shows with him. Speaker 2: Did you know The O'Jays? Speaker 1: I met them once, yeah, but we really didn't, we didn't have anything going like-- Story_ID: 658948 Speaker 1: So you were doing mainly local stuff? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: And did that earn you a living when you were doing the shows around town? Speaker 2: No, well, our jobs gave us the livings, you know. We--the entertainment thing didn't give us no living, you know, we just did that on the side, you know. We wanted to be able to make a living, but we never did make it to that point, yeah. That's why I can't really tell you how it was with them because we wasn't really in the mix, you know what I'm saying. We wasn't really in there. Speaker 1: But when you describe--I understand what you're saying, you weren't--there was some artists who were growing faster than you were (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, exactly. Speaker 1: --who had different opportunities. Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: But especially when they were in Detroit [Michigan], you said you were hanging around, you were there, you were, you were on the scene. What, but what did the scene look like? How did people dress back then? What were they-- Speaker 2: Well, you know, everybody liked to dress especially in Detroit, you know, and we would go to the clubs, to the main club that we would hang out at. We just have a good time, you know. We young and out there, you know, just having a good time. Speaker 1: (ELLA DIXON): (Unclear). Speaker 2: What did you say? Speaker 1: Edna [Dixon's wife, Ella Dixon]? Speaker 2: I heard her say-- Speaker 1: Did you say something Edna? Speaker 2: (ELLA DIXON): Can I say something? Speaker 1: Sure. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: (ELLA DIXON): In Detroit during that time, we dressed, we were wearing bellbottoms, and we had our Afros. Speaker 2: So hold on one second. Can I bring her around? Speaker 1: (ELLA DIXON): Oh, I don't want to be on camera. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Speed. Speaker 1: So tell me about--we were talking about styles. So what kind of cars were you driving back then? Speaker 2: We were driving Grand Prixs [Pontiac Grand Prix], Cadillacs, anything. Speaker 1: You were styling? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah. We--Rolls-Royces. David Ruffin had a Rolls-Royce he'd drive in. He'd come by the studio in this Rolls-Royce, yeah. Speaker 1: And in terms of dress? Speaker 2: Well, we dressed. We had bellbottoms then, you know, the big hats, and we were sharp. Speaker 1: And for The Originals, because I was asking you about style and, you know, because the male groups often had a look (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 1: What was your look? Speaker 2: Well, our look was we all had different colored suits, had our own style suit. We wasn't dressed alike. Each one of us had a-- Speaker 1: What colors? Speaker 2: I had blue, pink, beige and something else, you know. Speaker 1: Was this like a three piece suit? Speaker 2: Yeah, but it was sharp though, you know. So I think the, one of the groups now dress like that--Dramatics [The Dramatics]. I think they took that from us, yeah. Story_ID: 658949 Speaker 1: You had your full time job [with the Los Angeles County Metropolitan Transportation Authority]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So your--what time are you getting off from work? Speaker 2: About two, three o'clock. Speaker 1: And what did you do when you got off work? Speaker 2: We got dressed and went down to Motown [Motown Records], and we would do background work for the writers that needed us. Sometimes we would be there 'til twelve, one o'clock in the morning. Then we'd have to come back home get up and go to work, get off and do the same thing. Go to Motown, um-hm. Speaker 1: And this you did, this was in Detroit [Michigan]? Speaker 2: Yes, um-hm. Speaker 1: And how long of a period of time were you doing the backgrounds? Speaker 2: Oh, we were doing that from until we went to California so I guess about two or three years. Speaker 1: And how many days a week? Speaker 2: All depends on how often they needed us. Sometime three or four times a week, sometime two times a week, yeah. Speaker 1: And did they always bring the whole group? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: All of The Originals (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, 'cause we were singing with The Andantes, the girls group that was also doing the background work. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So we would sing with them. Speaker 1: And what were they called? Speaker 2: Andantes. Speaker 1: So it was the two of you? Speaker 2: Yeah, the girls' part of it and our part of it, um-hm. Speaker 1: And remind me who is some the artists you were doing background for? Speaker 2: Jimmy Ruffin, David Ruffin, The Supremes background. We did--who else we did? Speaker 1: So wait The Supremes they already had-- Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: --Diana Ross and The Supremes. So you were background to that? Speaker 2: Yeah, to that. Speaker 1: On recordings? Speaker 2: On recordings only yeah, um-hm. Stevie Wonder, Shorty Long, everybody at Motown really. Anybody they wanted voices on, they called us. Speaker 1: And so you're recording with them, are you, do you also have a relationship with them? Like what was your relationship with Stevie Wonder? Speaker 2: Just business, you know. Just recording, you know. Speaker 1: Did you all talk? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. He wrote a song for us also, The Originals. Speaker 1: What was that? Speaker 2: 'Keep Me.' I think it's a song called 'Keep Me' that Stevie did on The Originals, but it didn't go over that, big you know. Speaker 1: Did you ever work with [HistoryMaker] Smokey Robinson? Speaker 2: No, never have. Smokey's been there. He's still here, ain't that something? We used to laugh at him. Speaker 1: Why? Speaker 2: Stevie--I mean Smokey Robinson. The way his voice sound. And we would make fun of him, that's what I hate to say, and he's still here. Speaker 1: Still recording. Speaker 2: Yeah, ain't that something? Speaker 1: It sure is. Speaker 2: Wow, yeah. Story_ID: 658950 Speaker 1: Motown [Motown Records] became famous for making so many hits over a short period of time, but also the artists had style. They had a look. It was a refined presentation. In Detroit [Michigan], what was the impact of Motown that you saw on the community? Speaker 2: Well, I know the Motown was a big name, you know, and I knew that we meant style, and we meant precision and things like that, but I really didn't think about it at the time, you know, but there was a lot of people responsible for that at Motown also. But we didn't get that--those people behind us. We had to do our copy and really offer them to make our self look like that, yeah. But those guys had classes that they would go to to make them look like women or the men to be smart, to be together, you know, yeah. Speaker 1: Were The Jackson 5 there when you were there? Speaker 2: We never really met them. They were, we were like, not--no. They were there when we were there but we didn't have anything to do with each other, no. Story_ID: 658951 Speaker 1: What were your interactions like with [HistoryMaker] Berry Gordy? Speaker 2: Just when you have meetings, when you have something you wanna talk to him about it, he'd be there. That's it. We didn't have no--nothing going with him. Speaker 1: But as a businessman, what did you observe of him? Speaker 2: I don't know. I wish that he would look at us that way in a business sense, you know, but he never did. He never took us that serious I guess, yeah. Speaker 1: And that's why working with Marvin Gaye helped to give-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: --you a little bit more leverage (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, oh, yeah, they gave us a lot of leverage when he did those two hits on us, yeah. I wished he could have still been around, you know. Maybe we would have went farther. I don't know. But he was the only one that paid attention to us that put that type of interest in. Marvin did that for us. Speaker 1: How did you meet Marvin? Speaker 2: Marvin--well, you know, that was Berry's sister's husband. My brother, George [George Dixon, Jr.], he--him and Marvin had a thing going because my brother used to take him to church, Marvin to church and that's (unclear)--my brother had a better relationship with Marvin than I did but as a group he met us by walking through Motown [Motown Records], hearing us doing background work and wondered who we were. So when he found out who we were, that's when he wanted to do something on us. Yeah, which turned out good (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And those are the hits that, that you are still-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --living with today-- Speaker 2: Still living with today. Speaker 1: --so many years later. Speaker 2: 'Baby, I'm for Real' and 'The Bells,' yeah. Um-hm, and, you know, I wanted to see about my kids too. I'm not--I don't wanna put them down or anything but my son [Anthony Dixon (ph.)], the truck driver, and my daughter [Tammy Dixon (ph.)] is a secretary and my other daughter [Terrie Dixon], she sell houses, so they doing okay. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: But they could have been, I think they could have been better if I had, if we had been there to guide them more so, you know, yeah. Speaker 1: But they're doing all right? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, they're doing all right, yeah. Speaker 1: That's important. Story_ID: 658952 Speaker 1: For your performances with your group [The Originals] outside of the tour with The Temptations--were most of the performances in Detroit [Michigan]? Speaker 2: Yeah, Detroit. Speaker 1: When you came to L.A. [Los Angeles, California], did you find clubs where you could perform? Speaker 2: Well, we had a couple of clubs. Like I was telling you about, what's that club I was telling you about, Total Experience [Los Angeles, California]? Total Experience. Speaker 1: That was a club? Speaker 2: That was the club to be at, yeah, out here in L.A., yeah. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Unclear). Speaker 2: And that's the only one we really did. Speaker 1: And what was the different between the L.A. scene and the Detroit scene? Speaker 2: Oh, wow, the weather for one thing, and it seemed like it was beautiful out here, you know. The trees, you know, it was just beautiful. Speaker 1: And the social scene like what-- Speaker 2: Yeah, friendly. Everybody's friendly, you know. Speaker 1: Was it integrated in L.A.? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) 'Cause--and Detroit was black, wasn't it? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, but it was nice. It was nice there too. It was nice here. Speaker 1: But what--I want you to tell me more so not that it was nice, but what's the difference? Like on the East Coast people are known for dressing up-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --you know, like Sunday best or-- Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: --club best, you know-- Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: --you know, stockings, heels-- Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: --jewelry, makeup. Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: The West Coast was known for being a lot more laid back. Speaker 2: Yeah, it was, you could just go out in a shirt and pair of pants, you know. Everybody go out to the beach, you know. It was--I don't know, I don't know what you call that. Speaker 1: Casual. Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah, it was ca- very casual in California. Speaker 1: So for artists, did the styling change when the artists came out here? Speaker 2: Well, you know, I imagine it did because I look at Earth, Wind and Fire, I look at their dress, they're different than the groups in the back--back east. So I guess it all depends on who you're talking about, yeah. Um-hm. See I wasn't (clears throat), I was a married man and I wasn't too much into street life and stuff like that, you know. Otherwise I probably could tell you some things, but I wasn't into that, yeah. Speaker 1: But just where the, where the artists went, I mean the environments that you were in. Did--were they different in L.A.? Speaker 2: Well, I--when I come to California it was, it blew my mind to go to a club and watch them snort cocaine on a table. See what I'm saying? Stuff like (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And that didn't happen in Detroit? Speaker 2: No, I never seen that in Detroit. I seen that in California and a lot of other things you see in California, you know. Speaker 1: Well, and, so at this point, this is in the '70s [1970s], and drugs are getting really big--became an issue for a lot of artists, in fact (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, oh, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, and, so you saw firsthand-- Speaker 2: Um-hm, oh, yeah. Speaker 1: --people doing drugs in public? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Then after a while people started dying from it, you know. It really, it really changed I tell you. It really changed from where I was and to where they are now. Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: It was--did you find L.A. to be a more permissive environment (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes, L.A. was very permissive, yeah. Yes, they were. Story_ID: 658953 Speaker 1: Did you ever go to the Playboy Mansion [Los Angeles, California]? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: What was that like? Speaker 2: That was something else too. Look out there at the pool and see the buck naked girls (laughter), that's crazy. She went with me. My wife [Ella Dixon] went with me. Speaker 1: So most people have never been to the Playboy Mansion, so walk me in. Tell me, come on, describe it. Describe what you saw. Speaker 2: It's a beautiful place. It's got peacocks on the grounds that struts around the grounds of the Playboy Mansion. You got people in different rooms doing different things, and you got people in the swimming pool that's swimming. It's just a free house. It's free, you know. It's beautiful, free, and I don't know. Speaker 1: And who was there? Speaker 2: Well, you know (laughter), it could have been anybody there. I didn't really know who was there, you know. It could have been anybody. Speaker 1: But I mean weren't there a lot of celebrities there? Do you remember? Speaker 2: Not at the time. I can't remember them, I can't remember. I don't know why I don't remember, you know, but I imagine there were, yeah. Speaker 1: Did--were you invited there? How did you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah we were invited. Speaker 1: How long did you stay? Speaker 2: We stayed a couple of hours, yeah. Speaker 1: So it wasn't the scene for you? Speaker 2: No, no, I had, I had--we had to get out of there, yeah. Speaker 1: Did you meet Hugh Hefner? Speaker 2: Did we meet Hugh Hefner? Speaker 1: (ELLA DIXON): The second time. Speaker 2: The second time we went, yeah. We did meet him, yeah. Speaker 1: (ELLA DIXON): They had the auction. Speaker 2: They had an auction, yeah. Speaker 1: What was the auction for? Speaker 2: It was about, about pets. I think-- Speaker 1: (ELLA DIXON): Betty White-- Speaker 2: Betty White was there. She liked the pets and stuff, the animals, yeah, yeah. Story_ID: 658954 Speaker 1: So that social celebrity scene-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --that was going on in L.A. [Los Angeles, California], so you were in it a little bit. You would go to things here and there? Speaker 2: Yeah, I didn't involve myself too much, though. I just liked to look, you know-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --a little bit (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, so what did you see? Speaker 2: (Laughter) I don't--oh, wow. I can't even remember. I've seen everything I guess. I don't know. I can't say what I've seen. I don't know. I didn't see anything that was dis- degrading or anything like that. I just saw, I was just there, you know, looking at everything, you know. I didn't really concentrate on one or two things. Speaker 1: But like coming from Detroit [Michigan], which is such a totally different environment--I mean I remember coming from the East Coast out here and--well, you see a lot of celebrities just walking around-- Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah. Speaker 1: --and, you know, the way people are dressed is different, when you're in that social scene, there's a whole lot of paparazzi and--what--did you see that? Did you see a lot of cameras and-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, oh, yeah, oh, yeah. It was all beautiful. Telling, I'm telling you it was all beautiful. I was--I guess that's why I liked it so, you know, it was just specialness--that you felt special. Story_ID: 658955 Speaker 1: This is my grandmother, Minnie Thomas [Minnie Aarons Thomas]. This is my mother's mother. She used to make the best cookies out of Karo syrup. Oh, my goodness. I wish I could have gotten the recipe. Speaker 2: And where is she from? Speaker 1: She's from Alabama, Evergreen, Alabama, um-hm. That's as far as I know. She might have been from someplace else but-- Speaker 2: And both of her parents are black? Speaker 1: You know, I don't know, I don't know. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I don't know. Speaker 2: And this is my mom and dad. Speaker 1: And what are their names? Speaker 2: This is George Henry Dixon [George Dixon, Sr.] and mama--my mother Melvia Dixon [Melvia Thomas Dixon], um-hm. Speaker 1: And this is my mother again when she visit us out here in California. Speaker 2: Do you know about when that was? Speaker 1: Huh? Speaker 2: When was this picture? Speaker 1: Oh, wow. Speaker 2: (ELLA DIXON): Nineteen seventy-eight [1978]. Speaker 1: Nineteen seventy-eight [1978]. Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy-eight [1978]? Okay, all right. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): This is like my wife (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The encyclopedia (laughter). Speaker 1: Yep. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Unclear) I remember. My wife always speaks up and reminds me. Speaker 1: That's--those are The Originals. That's--those are the fellows that I hooked my wagon to to come out to California. Speaker 2: And you, can you say left to right their names (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) From left to right, that's Freddie Gorman, that's me, [HistoryMaker] Hank Dixon and Walter Gaines and C.P. Spencer. Speaker 2: And this was taken when? Speaker 1: Oh, wow, that was (makes sound)--I don't know. It was a long time ago. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: This is WCHB [WCHB Radio, Royal Oak, Michigan] radio station disc jockeys. This when 'Baby, I'm for Real' come out. They loved this record so much that they couldn't stop playing it and that was a big hit. Matter of fact they broke, they broke 'Baby, I'm for Real' in Detroit [Michigan]. Speaker 1: (ELLA DIXON): (Unclear) high school. Speaker 2: When you were in high school? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: (ELLA DIXON): This picture was taken in high school. Speaker 1: This picture was taken in high school your wife said. Speaker 2: Oh, was it? Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: In high school (laughter)? Speaker 1: Oh, this is The Originals with Ty Hunter. This is--Ty Hunter used to be with the group called The Glass House. He was with us a long time ago. We were called The Voice Masters and, so he's--was with us back then. We was at Fantasy Records here, um-hm. Speaker 2: Oh, this is me and my wife, Ella [Ella Dixon]. We were Karlsruhe, Germany. We was in NCO club [non-commissioned officer club], yeah. Yeah, that was a long time ago. Yeah, um-hm. Speaker 1: And these are The Originals on 'Soul Train' with Don Cornelius. That's Walter Gaines from left to right, Hank Dixon, Ty Hunter and Freddie Gorman. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. So you guys were always in the same order? Speaker 1: Just about (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Simultaneous) Or is that just coincidence? Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, um-hm. Speaker 2: And this is me and my baby girl, Terrie Dixon--just did a show. I think we were at Hunter Center [ph.], yeah. Speaker 1: And she is now a part of The Originals? Speaker 2: She is, she is with The Originals, yeah. Speaker 1: And these are The Originals with [HistoryMaker] Janie Bradford's Heroes and Legends [Heroes and Legends Awards]. She give us an award for the occasion. Yeah, um-hm. Speaker 2: And these are The Originals in Detroit where they named a street in our honor, Originals Parkway [ph.]. This was a big honor for us, um-hm. Speaker 1: And this is the group now, um-hm. Speaker 2: (ELLA DIXON): Backstage. Speaker 1: Back- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Backstage, yeah, backstage, uh-huh, um-hm. Speaker 1: This is the write up on us, yeah. Motown [Motown Records], yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. This is another write up. I think this was where they honored us in Lancaster [Pennsylvania]. It was good. Speaker 1: (ELLA DIXON): Last year. Speaker 2: Last year 19--2016. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So this lists you as part of Motown from 1959 to 1971. Speaker 1: Yeah, this is our first picture that we ever taken professionally right, um-hm. Speaker 2: And this here is Freddie Gorman, Wah Wah Watson, C.P. Spencer and Sonny Sanders. He's on there somewhere. Speaker 1: (ELLA DIXON): Writer. Speaker 2: He was a writer? Speaker 1: Yeah, he was a writer, uh-huh. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Which one is he? Speaker 1: Which one is he? Speaker 2: The dark red, bottom, bottom right, uh-huh, um-hm. Speaker 1: And that's the night where I was honored. They did a painting of me on this here, um-hm. Speaker 2: This is Ms. Ross in Las Vegas [Nevada], yeah, with my baby daughter. My grand- granddaughter, Brittany Bailey [ph.]. [HistoryMaker] Scherrie Payne (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Simultaneous) Can you name them? Speaker 2: Scherrie Payne and-- Speaker 1: (ELLA DIXON): Shoshana [Shoshana Payne Phillips]. Speaker 2: Shoshana, right, um-hm. Speaker 1: (ELLA DIXON): (Unclear) Scherrie's daughter. Speaker 2: Scherrie's daughter, um-hm. Speaker 1: And Diana Ross is holding your grandchild, correct (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, she sure is. Speaker 1: And your granddaughter's name? Speaker 2: It's Brittany Bailey. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm, and this is our group today. And (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And say who the names are, please? Speaker 2: That's Hank Dixon, Terrie Dixon, Defrantz Forrest and Jim Gilstrap, um-hm. Speaker 1: This is [HistoryMaker] Freda Payne, Hank Dixon, Freda Payne, Walter Gaines and Freddie Gorman. Speaker 2: This here is Freddie Gorman, Hank Dixon and one of The Ink Spots. The last living member, Harold Jackson (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (ELLA DIXON): (Simultaneous) (Unclear). Speaker 2: Skip Williams [Lester "Skip" Williams]. He had this jacket made for me with all the Motown acts on it. Speaker 1: And you're at the top right? Speaker 2: Right, um-hm. Speaker 1: And that's me when I was working with MTA [Los Angeles County Metropolitan Transportation Authority] driving a bus, driv- driving the bus. Okay. Speaker 2: This is me and my wife at Motown par- not a Motown but a MTA party. Speaker 1: (ELLA DIXON): (Unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, MTA, metropolitan transportation company. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Unclear). Speaker 2: And you were married since when? Speaker 1: Fifty-seven years. Speaker 2: And you got married in 1959? Speaker 1: Yeah, '59 [1959]. Yeah, '59 [1959]. Speaker 2: And this is my family. Speaker 1: Can you tell us from left to right? Speaker 2: Okay. From left to right that's Gigi, Gianna [ph.], Tammy Dixon [ph.], Ella Dixon, Terrie Dixon and at the bottom is--there's my great-grandson, Zion, Zion Henry Dixon [Zion Dixon (ph.)] and my son Anthony [Anthony Dixon (ph.)] and at the top is--is that Brandy? Brandy [ph.] and Brittany. Speaker 1: (ELLA DIXON): They're sisters...