 Story_ID: 6401 Speaker 1: I'm Merri Dee from WGN Television in Chicago [Illinois]. I am director of community relations. Speaker 2: And today's date--. Speaker 1: Manager of WGN-TV Children's Charities and today's date is July 25th, 2000. Speaker 2: Okay, and please spell your name for us. Speaker 1: M-E-R-R-I and D-E-E. Story_ID: 6402 Speaker 1: 'Cause, you know, I bet some people find it easier to call you by both your first and last names. You know, because--. Speaker 2: (simultaneously) I expect it. I don't answer to Merri, as a matter of fact. Speaker 1: (simultaneously) That's what--because you know I found myself-- Speaker 2: I don't answer to Merri because I think it's Mary and it's M-A-R-Y and it's very common. And everybody is named Mary just like John. My great grandfather's name is John. My grandfather's name was John. My father's name was John. My brother's name is John. His son's name is John. His son is name is John (laughs). Speaker 1: Is that true? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. They like those Johns. Speaker 2: And the Marys go the same. So people go like, "Merri," and I never look. Speaker 1: That's interesting. Because that's why I was thinking, oh she's called by first and last--. Speaker 2: Merri Dee. That's what I'm called. That's what I'm known by. That's what I answer to. Story_ID: 6403 Speaker 1: What is your favorite food? Speaker 2: Favorite food, rice. Speaker 1: Favorite color? Speaker 2: Pink. Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Home. Speaker 1: Favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Summer. Speaker 1: And favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: If it is to be, it is up to me. Speaker 1: That's nice. I haven't heard that one. That's sort of self-empowerment. Story_ID: 6404 Speaker 1: I start out by asking people about their parents, mother, father and grandparents, and since you sort of started talking about that, you know, I'd like you to talk about who they were, their names, and you know, growing up. Speaker 2: Agnes Francois, and John Blouin from New Orleans [Louisiana]. Completely--real Creole family. Goes back as far as I can remember and past that. Real combination of French and all that it entails being Creole. My mother was an identical twin and died when I was two. She was at the age of forty-two and her identical twin out lived her a lifetime and a half. My father--very military gentleman, and I do say gentleman with dignity and grace. Passed away when he was in his seventies. Went to the fifth grade like my grandfather, and when he passed away, he was a CPA [certified public accountant]. Speaker 1: And what about your grandparents on your mother's side. Do you have any--can you talk about them? Speaker 2: Never knew them. Speaker 1: How about on your father's side? Speaker 2: On my father's side I had Nanny and Pappy who were two lovely people. My grandfather taught me about volunteerism. He always said, "If you can't be a good neighbor, which is a good volunteer, then you're just not worth the salt of the earth." And I didn't know what that was, but I knew that he said it and it didn't sound good. So I always thought, I'm a good volunteer. My grandmother was this very Creole, lovely lady who never spoke over a whisper, and I remember her letting me comb her hair because she had this white hair that had turned yellow like corn silk. She's such a lady. I learned about being a woman from my grandfather and my father, and I learned about being a lady and how important it was from my grandmother and my father. Speaker 1: So let's share--now where are you in the family? How many kids were there? Speaker 2: I'm the youngest of six. Speaker 1: Six, okay. So can you talk about growing up? I mean what--I'd like you to tell who your siblings are in order. Speaker 2: From the oldest, I have a sister Doris and my brother Ernest, my sister Thyra, my brother Buster--John, named after my dad and my granddad and my great granddad and all the way down the lines and we had a lot of Johns. My brother Alphonse who has passed away, our only sibling that we've lost was the one next to me. And then there was me. Story_ID: 6405 Speaker 1: Talk about growing up, because you were the baby of the family. But what is your earliest, you know, childhood memory that you have? Speaker 2: Being in New Orleans [Louisiana] as a little girl and kind of riding the City of New Orleans train, and that was because when my father [John Blouin] remarried, the desire was to move to Chicago [Illinois]. And, of course, I'm saying it backwards. He wanted to bring his family to Chicago, and they met here and they remarried. Speaker 1: So, you didn't really grow up in New Orleans at that point, you know--. Speaker 2: We came to Chicago--I'm the only child of the six children that was born in Chicago. I was born here because my mother [Agnes Francois] was on the City of New Orleans train coming to Chicago. So, I was born in the house that my father was purchasing because she didn't get to the hospital. And then we just went back and forth all the way through high school. Speaker 1: So, tell me what--share some sort of childhood memories, you know, about those early years about growing up. You know, it could be family. It could be friends. It could be, you know, your grandparents. I could be your aunt. Speaker 2: I remember family vividly. I do remember it was heartbreaking for my family to break up, because when my father remarried, he sold the house and the children scattered. I went with he and his new wife and--as did my brother who was next to me. So, the two youngest went with them, and that was very scary, and it was also rather sad for me because my dad became very ill and she [stepmother] became the leader in the household. And she was, as I relate to her, the Wicked Witch of the West, who thought that there should be no girls. And girls were not good. So, she became my abuser. And to make sure that my sisters and brothers did not get an opportunity to be with me, she adopted me so that she could change my last name. And at that time, the law prohibited anybody from coming anywhere near me. Speaker 1: And this is your stepmother? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: That was my grammar school days, and I remember--and that was all the way until age twelve years old when I graduated and she thought she was hurting me by letting me go back to New Orleans to a nunnery, where I entered and lived in a boarding school where--this was where women came in to become nuns. It was the Holy Family Order in New Orleans and I lived there. Speaker 1: So, in those early years in Chicago, it was you and your brother [Alfonse Blouin], right? Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: And your father, but your father became ill. Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Yeah. Speaker 1: So, was she--would you say it was a strict house? Did she dote over your brother, is that what--. Speaker 2: Oh, no. Speaker 1: Okay. She just didn't like really kids. Speaker 2: Girls. Speaker 1: Girls. Okay and did you--. Speaker 2: Now she didn't dote over my brother. He just got away with everything. He was the good kid no matter what. Speaker 1: Okay. And how do you think--so, growing up it was very strict? Would you say it was extremely strict? Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was not much fun. Speaker 1: Not much love. Speaker 2: For me it was fun to go to school. Speaker 1: Now where did you go to school? Where did you go for elementary school? Speaker 2: Carter Grammar School [Chicago, Illinois]. St. Anselm [School, Chicago, Illinois]. And graduated from Carter School. Speaker 1: And what would you say the young Merri Dee was like during that time, you know, before you went to the nunnery? What were you--you know, because that--. Speaker 2: Adventuresome. Adventuresome. Talkative. Inquisitive. Very much the volunteer. Very loving of family, even though I wasn't around them, I had my memories before then. So anything before seven years old, I remembered and I kept them close to me. I always knew that if I closed my eyes, I could vision anything. And so I would envision them. Speaker 1: And why did that happen that the family got--was it just your father felt it was too much or--who raised-- Speaker 2: He remarried. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And she wasn't going to take care of all of us. Speaker 1: So, who took care of your other siblings? Speaker 2: They were older, they just went. Speaker 1: Okay. Oh, so they were older enough that it didn't-- Speaker 2: they weren't--did they--. Speaker 1: (simultaneously) Well, sixteen, seventeen. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Fourteen. Story_ID: 6406 Speaker 1: Let's start at the time that you were, you know, in the nunnery [Holy Family Order, New Orleans, Louisiana]. Explain what that whole experience was going back. You had been--you know, New Orleans is a different place than Chicago [Illinois]. So, I'm wondering how that whole, you know, what that was like going back. Speaker 2: It was a new learning experience. Even though I had been there often as a younger child, it wasn't the New Orleans I knew as a younger child. It was behind walls. And I wasn't allowed to go out to see any family that would have been there or any people that I had met. Those were her rules and so it was very different. It was school. It was education. It was discipline. It was a learning experience. Story_ID: 6407 Speaker 1: And you said also that your family was very much a Creole family. Can you describe what that is? You know, not as--I mean outside of New Orleans [Louisiana] not much has been said or written about Creole culture. Speaker 2: Well, the culture of Creoles is a very staunch. They are learned people. Very cloistered. They stay pretty much to themselves. In my era, the ladies didn't work very much and what they called work was babysitting, keeping the kids. It was always taking care of children in the neighborhood, in the block. There was never, that I can remember, anything ever said about not looking after someone else's children. That was never a question. I don't remember the women working. I do remember the men working. The women were always ladylike--cooking, great food. Always nurturing. Speaker 1: Someone once told me that the Creoles were actually--they considered themselves, not a separate race, but almost--a separate whole culture, and I was wondering if you were raised according to that? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Okay. I didn't know you--. Speaker 2: But that's true. They do consider--at that time, even more so than today. Much more so then. They did consider themselves separate and above others. Speaker 1: Okay. And do you know anything--I mean--so you weren't really tremendously impacted by Creole culture growing up in many ways? Speaker 2: Only my family. Story_ID: 6408 Speaker 1: What were some of the other lessons or things, you know, that came out of your family? I know that you know we've already talked about your grand--you know--your pappy, Pappy as he was known, who, you know, who taught you about volunteerism. Were there any other lessons that kind of came out of this whole period or things you remember people saying or experiences that--. Speaker 2: I remember always being told that I could do anything to--but I was on my own. I would always have to look after me. I learned how to cook very early. As a girl you needed to know, by seven, eight years old you needed to know how to cook for the family, and that was worn like a badge of honor. And I remember them telling me to go to school. I don't remember anyone ever talking about go to college. It was that I would finish grammar school, and I would go to high school, and I would work. That's all I ever remember. My family were not college graduates. They--most of them did not graduate from high school, but there was always a dignity and a grace and a loyalty that was taught without words. Speaker 1: And your name at that--what was your last name? Speaker 2: Blouin. Speaker 1: Blouin. Okay, that's right you did say Blouin--B-L-U-. Speaker 2: B-L-O-U-I-N. Story_ID: 6409 Speaker 1: With the nunnery [Holy Family Order, New Orleans, Louisiana]. So what you were there from age twelve to what? Speaker 2: Fourteen. Speaker 1: Fourteen. Oh, just--so were there other--any experiences there either with the nuns or things, you know, I know you said it was pretty cloistered, but any other experiences that, you know, impacted you? Speaker 2: Experiences that impacted me? Absolutely. Yes. There were nuns and it was a different culture. They were not necessarily all from that area. They were very strict, very strict. And it was all about education. It was all about becoming a lady, becoming a woman, getting your education, and moving on in life. Many students came, there were many students who were day students who came in, and so we learned a lot from the kids that came in. Those of us who stayed there pretty much stayed to ourselves. I don't really remember very many things like that. What was always hovering over was my stepmother. When the kids were given privileges to be able to go adventure someplace, I was not able to go. That was her rule that I would not have fun. Story_ID: 6410 Speaker 1: So what happened at age fourteen? Speaker 2: During the summer of the age between thirteen and fourteen, I went during the summers to the Lafond Boys Home [New Orleans, Louisiana] where Louis Armstrong [musician] was left as a child. And I ran the nursery for them. And at the age of fourteen, I returned to Chicago [Illinois]. She [Dee's stepmother] told me that I could come back to Chicago because she would not pay for me to be in school there anymore. So at fourteen I came back, got a job, got a second job, a place to live, paid rent. I didn't know where my sisters and brothers were. There was some family here still. My grandparents had passed away, and they were the closest to me. And there was still some family here, but I needed to live. So that's what I did. So at fourteen I was out on my own working two jobs, rooming and paying rent. Speaker 1: Separate and apart from your parent's household, I mean, you know, from your mother's--. Speaker 2: Oh, yes. There was no more household. Speaker 1: So, how did you deal with that? You know a lot of times now--I know my father, you know, he always tells the story about how he took a trip as a hobo person across the country at age twelve. And we're like, "Oh Daddy, please." But I've heard all the stories. But how was that whole--you know because people are sheltering kids a little bit more this time, but how was that whole experience you know, to sort of come back and sort of be on your own? Speaker 2: Horrifying for a moment and very interesting. I learned three very important words during that time period. I need help. My granddaddy used to say, "If you need anything, just ask somebody. Somebody will always help you." And I began to use those three little words, and people just started to reach out and help. It's how I found a place to live with a family so that I wouldn't be rooming someplace, you now, where it wasn't a good place. I lived with several families and paid rent. Went to school. I enrolled in Englewood High School [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Now what is happening with your father [John Blouin] all this time? He's still ill but still living there? Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Um-hmm. Speaker 1: But he--was he participatory at all or did she just sort of-- Speaker 2: No. She just ruled everything and everybody. The neighborhood, the neighbors, everything. Should have run for president. Speaker 1: Is she still alive? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. You know those stepmother situations sometimes could be traumatic, now--. Speaker 2: It was traumatic. Speaker 1: Right, right. Story_ID: 6411 Speaker 1: Describe the Merri Dee, who's, you know, fourteen at this point. You know are you--you know, did you have dreams? Did you have aspirations? Were you just sort of trying to find your way, you know, in life? Speaker 2: I was living day to day. I didn't have any dreams or aspirations that I could remember except that I needed to live the best I could live, and be the best person that I could be. And always reach out and help somebody else and somebody would always help me. I didn't think about going to college and having a special position and any of that. No, it was all about living day to day, being able to earn enough income, have enough education to pay my rent. Speaker 1: And what were the jobs you were working? Speaker 2: I worked at a place called Dell Farm Food Stores, which was eventually bought by Jewel food stores. I think that was one of the places that eventually came into Jewel food stores. Very interesting, Jewel food store was my very first sponsor when I came into this business. Speaker 1: And were there any mentors around this time period? People who mentored you or--I mean, how was high school as an experience, you know--at Englewood [High School, Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: Actually, no, no. I don't remember any. I was pretty close to my sister, Thyra, and her children. I stayed with them from time to time. Story_ID: 6412 Speaker 1: Did you grow up on the South Side of Chicago [Illinois]? Speaker 2: I did. Speaker 1: Around what addresses? Speaker 2: 67th [Street] and St. Lawrence [Avenue]. I was born at 5640 Indiana [Avenue]. So, all in about the same area. Speaker 1: And what would you--how would you describe Chicago around that time period? What was sort of the neighborhood that you grew up in? Was it, you know, were you pretty much contained within a, you know, small area and didn't venture downtown or what was that? Speaker 2: It was then a black neighborhood, as it is now that I can remember. But very close knit, we knew people. We knew people, and you could talk and have conversation, be helped. I don't remember successful people. Bernard Shaw [journalist] recently and I had some conversation about him growing up right there too and pretty much came out with the same thing. You had your family, you stayed with your family. You went to school, and many kids went off to college, or went to school in the area or you just went to work. Speaker 1: Now what--would you say--did you have a--you had a sense then of just your neighborhood in many ways. Speaker 2: You know, because--. Speaker 1: I had a sense of downtown because at that time we had a lot of parades, and I loved parades. So, somehow, and I don't remember how, I would venture off and walk down Michigan Avenue, heading toward downtown from 57th Street, maybe nine, ten miles and walk, just venture out going to find the parade to watch and turn around and come back. So I had a sense of downtown. That was about it. I didn't know very much about anyplace else in the city. We lived near Washington Park [Chicago, Illinois]. So we had Washington Park--that was beautiful. It was always very, very pretty. The grass was always green and the trees and people kept up as much as they could. There were big beautiful houses that today we look at as old mansions. Story_ID: 6413 Speaker 1: You talked in your other interview [from 1993] I'd done about a woman named Mrs. Robinson, I think, who you said had a--. Speaker 2: My fifth grade teacher at Carter [Elementary] School [Chicago, Illinois]. She had quite an impact on me. She was always one of those people that was there for me. I could always talk to her. I could always say whatever I wanted or ask any questions and never feel that she would laugh at me or make me feel that I was asking something and I should have known already. Mrs. Robinson was that teacher in grammar school that I went to one day when my stepmother told me a word--introduced I should say--a word to me, and I was all excited about good grades. And I said, "I have no idea what I'm going to be when I grow up, but I'm going to think about it." And very casually she said, "Probably be a whore." And then she didn't say it as though it was something really bad, so I thought well maybe she's being nice. So I went to school and we were supposed to tell in class what we were going to be that day. And of course my hand was always up for whatever it was, and very proudly I said probably going to be a whore, in class. And I remember Mrs. Robinson walking from her desk back to my desk, putting her arm around me, asking me to stand up, and she took me with her arm around me up to the front of the classroom and suggested that I go to the third floor to the library, she said, "And I want you to look that word up. I want you to write it down what you find and bring it back to me." And she, too, said it like, "Wow." So I went to look for it. And I found H-O-R-E, like a child would find. Horehound cough drops by Smith Bros., which made me be totally confused now. So I remember reading it over and over because I knew I had to be right when I went back to my classroom. And I kept reading it before I wrote it down, and I thought, well, I guess I'll write it down. And then I started to think, well maybe I'm going to make them. Maybe I'll work for them. Maybe that's what it is. And I just remember her looking at what I wrote down and smiling. Probably wanting to laugh out loud. She just smiled very graciously and she said, "You're going to be a marvelous lady. You're really going to be somebody." Story_ID: 6414 Speaker 1: Let me ask you, what do you think was going on in your stepmother's head? What kind of--what do you think was--she was just a sick sort of person? Speaker 2: Yeah. You know, it's interesting how life changes around. I met a young man in Los Angeles [California] much later in my life after growing up and being married and having my child. My brother had an automobile repair shop in Los Angeles, and the policeman came in and he saw my picture up on the wall, and he started reading about me and told my brother that he had a mother who lived in Chicago [Illinois] and she had passed away, but that he had been to Chicago, but only briefly. And they got into this long conversation and come to find out it was her son. She had four sons we never knew anything about. I'm not really sure my father [John Blouin] knew. These children live in New Orleans [Louisiana], 'cause she was from New Orleans. Can't really tell you very much about that. He said he didn't know her very well, but he did know that she did not want the children. And that was it. Story_ID: 6415 Speaker 1: And I don't know how I survived that time period [living with her stepmother during childhood]. Speaker 2: I don't--right. Speaker 1: I don't. Because as I look at what happens to children now, and the way they are, I don't know what it was--I've been asked over and over, what was it that kept you together? What--every time she did something or said something bad, I would hold my head up. I was haughty about it too. Like when I found out about the word whore. I was like, how could she think that about me? But, you know, you don't know what it is that keeps you going. Faith, I can give it to. Being able to look around and see other people around me going to work and dressing nice and being clean and women smelling good and having their hair combed. I saw all those things and I wanted to be all of that. I was everybody. People would say, "Well, did you have a mentor, and did you look at a kind of woman that you might want to be?" I was every woman. I was a little bit of all of them, and I was fascinated by those Creole women. I was fascinated by them and their dignity, and my grandmother and how she sat, and how she walked down the street and they held their heads up high and shoulders were thrown back. I speak about that now when I speak to children and immediately I say, "Sit up in your seats." I want them to get what I got. It wasn't money that gave me that. It wasn't anybody telling me how wonderful I was. Somehow because of all of those people, I became who I am now. I saw that as my opportunity to volunteer for the world. That was it. I always felt that I was better than most. And many times the kids would say, "Oh, you just think you're better than everybody else." And most times I wouldn't answer, because I was the skinniest kid going, and I wasn't a fighter. And if you couldn't fight your way through, you were in trouble. So I would always give wonderful, nice answers. But in my head, if I were not afraid to answer them, my answer would have been, yes. I do think I'm better. And I'm always going to be better. Speaker 2: Now, in--you were telling the story about--I think you were sort of finished--the story about the four sons [of her stepmother]--I think you had sort of finished that. Now with--in Englewood High School [Chicago, Illinois]--. Speaker 1: Where I was, was making a statement. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Out of everything bad comes something good. And I have to give her credit, as mean, as bad as she was. The credit that I can give her is for teaching me how to shop. Teaching me to be thrifty. Teaching me that a nickel can go a long way. Teaching me, take care of your money, it'll take care of you. Speaker 2: Now how long were she and your father [John Blouin] married? How many years? Speaker 1: After I left, she didn't pass away until I was nineteen, and they were together. Speaker 2: And then he lived how long? Didn't you say he just--passed away when he was in his seventies right? Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. He lived a long time. He lived with my brother and my sister-in-law. Story_ID: 6416 Speaker 1: Englewood [High School, Chicago, Illinois]. What--was high school--was there anything memorable about high school--about that experience, except that you were taking care of your self? Was there any other memorable part of that? Speaker 2: Home ec [home economics]. I loved home ec because it allowed me to learn how to take care of myself. I learned to sew, and I already knew how to cook so I could contribute and help my classmates. I learned about household. It helped me survive. Speaker 1: Now what about friends at that time? Who were your friends? Speaker 2: Oh, I had one girlfriend, Magga (ph.). I remember her. Magga Worthington. Very special. She had brothers and one of her brothers taught me how to drive a car. He also taught me how to fix a car. I was very much a tomboy. Story_ID: 6417 Speaker 1: I remember when my grandfather passed away. I was so disappointed because I loved him so much. But I was also being very selfish, because my grandfather had promised to take me to my high school graduation. And my high school [Englewood High School, Chicago, Illinois], he was going to be my escort. He was going to take me to my prom. We were going to dance together. We practiced. He wore spats and a hat and a white shirt and a tie. And though his shirts were frayed around the edge, we clipped those little frays off and she would iron. They were such proud people. I think about him a lot. I talk about him a lot now. I bring him up a lot. He was a funny man. He helped me with sense of humor. Speaker 2: And he taught you a lot. Speaker 1: He taught me. He did. He busy-bodied all through the neighborhood, and I remember my grandmother telling him one day, "You just go get a job. You're too busy doing nothing." And for her to say that--this is a lady, I said, that never spoke over whisper. I was like, "Whoa." And so he did. He went at the age of eighty-three and got a job riding a bicycle delivering Western Union telegrams. And at that point, he could ride all over the neighborhood and busy-body in everybody's business. He told people how to raise their children, how to raise their gardens, how to take care of their houses, how to save money, "How to economize," he used to say. Speaker 2: Interesting. Speaker 1: How to be the best you can be, and how always to love the Lord. Story_ID: 6418 Speaker 1: So was church--was religious upbringing very predominant? Speaker 2: Yes, we were Catholic, Catholic, Catholic, Catholic, Catholic (laughs). Through and through. I was put out of St. Anselm School [Chicago, Illinois]. I went to Carter Grammar School [Chicago, Illinois] because I had to. All of the children went to Catholic school, and I remember I was put out of school in the fourth grade because I talked back. But I was following what my stepmother had told me. She had actually said that--and I don't remember the incident--but whatever the incident was, the nuns had told me something to do and she said "If she makes you, then just slap her." And, of course, I couldn't do that. I mean, my own sensibility was that you don't do something of that nature. But I did talk back to her and I was put out of school. Speaker 1: So that's why--and she probably used that against you that you were a difficult child. Speaker 2: Yes. Story_ID: 6419 Speaker 1: Did you graduate from Englewood [High School, Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: I did. Speaker 1: And when you graduated, what were your thoughts about at that point, get a job? Speaker 2: Well, I had been working already, so it was just continue what you're doing. I mean it was a continuation of--you have to get a better job now. You have an opportunity to get out because you have a diploma. It was never go to college. Speaker 1: And so what did you do at that point? What job did you have at that point? Speaker 2: Gosh, I was still working at Dell Farm Food Stores, but I was also--I had moved over to Jewel Food Store. I started there as a bagger. I begged if I could have this job. But in order to do that, I went to the store and I watched, and I would watch them bag groceries. And I learned that if you put the cans on the bottom and not the eggs, the eggs would be fine. And that you never wanted to bruise the fruit. I remember my grandparents saying that. And I just watched. And then I went and told the general manager that I needed a job, and he told me there was no way. He said, "We only have boys here as baggers." I said, "But they're not bagging in the right manner." And I explained to him what I had observed, and he politely told me that that was the way that they were trained to do it, and they were doing just fine, I needed to go someplace else and find myself a job (laughs). I paid no attention to that. I paid no attention because I needed the job. And I knew I was right. So I told him I would work free, and he let me. But when he observed not only was I bagging correctly, but the people liked me and they would say "thank you" and they started telling him about me, and the cashiers would say, "She's great. She's getting the other ones just like her and she's teaching them what to do." And one of the ladies said, "She's watching me a lot, and I bet she could do this cash register." So, I was hired and I became a cashier in the break time so I could fill in for them. And pretty soon I knew all of that. I felt I could run the store. I could do ordering. I could do all of that, within a year. I remember doing that. I was fascinated by that business. Just absolutely fascinated by the grocery business. It was a thriving business, and everybody came there. It was like a funeral home or a hospital. That was where the money was. Everybody was doing it. You could see everybody in your neighborhood in the grocery store. It's very interesting. Story_ID: 6420 Speaker 1: I ventured out to get a job at Spiegel's [department store]. I remembered hearing that they were hiring and I got on the bus, and I rode probably two hours to get to Spiegel's. And when I got off the bus and walked in, I remember seeing all of these young white women. And they were dressed nice and they were laughing and had their legs crossed and they were talking to each other and they just kind of looked at me and no one said anything. And I remember walking up to the window and this lady was behind the desk and it was a big window. She asked me, "What did I want." And I told her I had come to apply for the job, and she said, "There were no openings." I said, "Well, they told me there were some openings." She said, "There's no openings." And I turned around and I went back and got on the bus and went back home. It was not true. I did eventually--. Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Did you understand at that time? Speaker 1: I did not until--no. My sisters and neighbors told me. I did not understand that. I didn't think about that. I didn't hear that a lot. I didn't hear about being prejudiced and you can't, you can't. They didn't tell me what I could, but they also didn't tell me what I couldn't do. I remember going to Commonwealth Edison [energy company], applying, and I didn't get that job. But I did get a job at the gas company. And I worked for the gas company. Speaker 2: For how long? Speaker 1: Probably about a year and a half. Speaker 2: And what time period are we talking about now? How old were you at this point? Speaker 1: Seventeen. Speaker 2: Seventeen. Goodness. Speaker 1: Well, I put my age up. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I looked extremely young, but I put my age up. Story_ID: 6421 Speaker 1: And then when you left the gas company, what did you do? Speaker 2: I worked for Attorney Gene Wood. There were two criminal attorneys in the City of Chicago [Illinois] who were the Johnnie Cochrans of the world. And both of these attorneys were black men, and they had all the cases. One was in the Loop [downtown Chicago] and one was on the South Side of Chicago at 47th Street. And I went to--I had heard that there was a job opening, and I went and he said, "Come right on in." And I remember working for $50 a week. I worked long hours. He let me go to court with him, and I learned on the job. I took care of everything. I ran the office as an office manager. There was--this attorney, his son, who is an attorney now, and a gentleman who became the first black president of the Chicago Bar Association, Attorney Theodore Crowley. And the Russell Dubow who later became a judge. These were the men I worked for in that office. Speaker 1: So how was that experience because they gave you introduction to a different world in some respects? Speaker 2: It was enchanting. Enchanting to me, because I met people. I met people from all walks of life. They were white, they were black, they were Asian. They were everything. And they came in. They dressed nice. They were all in trouble. It was very interesting. I remember them coming with bags of money and paying in cash. And I remember him winning his cases a lot. I remember one man who was killed on the Dan Ryan Expressway [Chicago, Illinois] whom he represented, who was my first experience with the word 'gangster.' Who came and paid--and I remember him coming in one day, and he laid a suitcase in front of me, and I was so naive. Gosh, I was naive now that I think about it. He sat a suitcase in front of me, and it was a little window they'd come to, and my typewriter was here and he sat this suitcase up here and he said--he opened it toward me and he said, "Count that." And I said, "Oh, no. I'm not supposed to touch any money, and he'll be back soon. And you just have a seat." And he looked at me and said, "Count it. I don't have time to wait." And I said, "I'm sorry, I can't do that. I mean rules and regulations of my boss are what I obey." And he said, "Don't bother. I'll be back very shortly, and just have him have a seat." And at that point, he took a gun out and he sat it up on the side and said, "Count it." And I counted it (laughs). He closed the suitcase back and told me, "Go lock it up." And I locked it up, and he left. They were from all walks of life. Some of them were like him. Some of them were like him, some of them were, you know,--and when I say like him, this was a man who dressed nice, who carried himself very well. He was a businessman of a different kind. He was a family man. I saw his children's pictures and his wife. They lived in a lovely home. He was an upstanding man in the community. He took care of people in the community. I remember that they said he had come out of his house and gotten in his car and drove down the expressway to avoid any altercation in his home to keep it away from his children and his wife, and he was killed on the expressway. I do remember that. Speaker 1: Gun shootout or something? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So now how long did you work for that law firm? Speaker 2: Probably three or four years. Story_ID: 6422 Speaker 1: So during that time your mother died--I mean your stepmother died, right? Speaker 2: My stepmother died. Yes. Speaker 1: Now when did you--how did you feel about her dying? Speaker 2: Happy. I was very happy. I remember I had not seen her in a--you know I came back to New Orleans [Louisiana] at fourteen. I had not seen her and had no reason to contact her nor my father [John Blouin]. I wanted to see him, and I would call to see how he was and talk with him, but she didn't want me to come to the house. So I wasn't able to see him. And I remember my aunt coming to my office where I was working for the attorneys, and telling me that she had had a heart attack. She was very sick. They didn't expect her to live, and she wanted to see me and would I please come and see her. And I remember saying, "No, no, no. And finally, she cried and I said, "Okay. I'll go with you." And I remember going and sitting down in that same living room with all those bad memories and her asking me to forgive her for all of the meanness and all of the things that she did. She just said she didn't want to die with all of that on her conscience. And I remember listening, and very angrily said, "You should die with it on your conscience. You deserve to. I will forgive you, but only when you're gone." And I felt vindicated. I felt that I had won. And it was--when she died, I was free. I just felt like I had sprouted wings. She was gone. She didn't want anybody to know that she had died. I--actually, I had left the attorneys and got a job with IBM [International Business Machines]. I have to smile, because I had no education for any of this. It was always just me being very bold and saying I can do that and somebody saying, "Fine, I'll let you try it out." I had gotten a job with IBM when she eventually died. She lived a while after that. And I remember someone calling. I had come in off a trip, and my job with IBM was traveling around the country with computers, in the early years of the computer age coming on. I came back and the phone rang, and by this time I had married because I was nineteen. I married, and I heard she had died, and I remember saying, "Whew." It was like just freedom. That's the only way I can describe it. But the voice on the phone said, "She did not want any of you children to know when she died, but here is where she is laid out." So I immediately called my sister and one called the other one and we went--we went to see her. And in her casket all she needed was a broom. She looked--she was dressed nice and her hair was fixed and everything. She looked like a witch, which is how I came out with the Wicked Witch of the West, and that's how I began to refer to her. And in my speeches I refer to her that way now. And as I think about her now, I say a prayer for her still. There was some good, but there was probably a lot of bad in her childhood, alot. She just couldn't have grown up to be the kind of person that she turned out to be without her life being horrible. I just never knew what it was. Now, an amazing thing was that at St. Mary's Academy, the two years that I had spent in high school in New Orleans, her granddaughter went to school with me. Came up to me in my second year there and said, "You know, I've met you before. I told my mother you were here." And I said, "Well, you met me last year?" And she said, "No. I met you in Chicago [Illinois]. I'm the girl that came to visit my grandmother and she sent you away." Speaker 1: All these coincidences. That's amazing. Speaker 2: My life as been a coincidence. It's been filled with coincidences, and I, of course, have learned that there are no accidents. Story_ID: 6423 Speaker 1: You worked at IBM [International Business Machines] during the early years. Speaker 2: Oh yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Early years. Speaker 1: And so were you doing sales or were you doing--. Speaker 2: I was one of a few people chosen to represent the company at insurance conventions and large conventions of that nature to introduce those machines to the companies because they were just coming out. I think about IBM 360 [mainframe computer], which was one of the first big machines--and they were big machines--and, of course, no one bought those machines. They were all rented. I can hardly do e-mail today (laughs). I'm learning. But I was there in the very beginning. Speaker 1: So how was that experience? You know, you've had your jobs at the beginning and then you had--you know, you had your job with the law firm, and now you're--that's your first introduction in corporate America in many ways. Speaker 2: The experience with IBM was so rewarding. Not only was I paid extremely well, which I could come back to my neighborhood and say, "You'll never believe this." And people were just in awe. And most of them, of course, didn't believe me. But I--IBM taught me how to grow up and how to live well. They paid for everything. We lived in great hotels. We ate in restaurants. I saw ladies with their hats and their gloves going out with their husbands and boyfriends and I observed all of those wonderments that young women observe and feel like if you could just reach out and touch it, you'd like to, but it's not yours. I emulated a lot of that. I remember one of my first paychecks going to buy a brand new pair of gloves. Not the ones that had the fingers sewn up. A brand new pair of white gloves, short. And then I saved my money and I got a long pair--mid-arm. That was special. Story_ID: 6424 Speaker 1: Are you married at this time still? Speaker 2: I was married, yes. Speaker 1: Now your husband, what was he like? Speaker 2: A nice guy. His mother was a woman who was head of the Dearborn Real Estate Board and started room rentals in Chicago [Illinois]. Big. She had her office on 47th Street right where I used to work for the lawyers. And South Center Community Department Store. I remember it being on the corner there, 47th and South Parkway, which is now Dr. Martin Luther King [Jr.] Drive. That was where her office was and she was such a well-respected woman. We shared birthdays very close to each other. And we were very much alike. So I think he married his mother, which was quite a compliment. She was quite a lady. Very entrepreneurial. Always thought she could do whatever it was and thought she was better than everybody else, and dared to dream and dared to do, and dared to speak up and speak out the same as I did. Story_ID: 6425 Speaker 1: In between traveling with IBM [International Business Machines], I would come home because I would only travel like four days and then I'd come home. I started a modeling school with Marguerita Ward Cosmetic[s Company] firm. They had all the cosmetics and it was a perfect thing, a perfect place for me. I remember teaching the young women how to walk and how to carry themselves. All the things I had learned, and I think that I learned an awful lot of it in New York City [New York] because my home office for IBM was New York. So I would have to travel on a plane, which people in my neighborhood didn't do. And I could observe all the women, and I remember wearing my gloves and when everybody would get together to go out to dinner I would say, "Oh, I'm too tired." And I would go to my room, and change my clothes and dress up and go walk down the street so I could walk with them. And so I taught all those young women in my neighborhood how to do that and that was an interesting period of time. It was very rewarding. Speaker 2: And you think you had--because you had been trained as a young--I mean what--you were obviously attractive. You know, you knew how to put things together. Had someone--okay--someone had approached you to do--you're saying Marguerite--. Speaker 1: Marguerita Ward Cosmetic firm. No, it was just there. I approached them and asked them if I could do that, because I really wanted to manufacture my own cosmetics. So I thought that if I was close enough, I could learn from them what you had to do. Story_ID: 6426 Speaker 1: You said your husband was a nice guy. Would you say you guys were sort of on the same pathway, or was he a nice-- or you know, did you have dreams of being more and he was satisfied where he was or what? Speaker 2: I had dreams of being everything by then. I had my baby at twenty-one and my sister [Thyra Blouin] kept her when I traveled. So that was very, very special for me. But he was not ambitious. He was fine being who he was and doing what he did. I was always looking for something else to do and how to grow. I look back now and realize that we were married for eight years, and it was probably seven years longer than it needed to be, but we were Catholic and Creole and you just didn't get divorced. And I remember telling my sister this secret that I wanted to get divorced. And I remember her looking around like don't say that. No one in this family has been divorced. Looking at me all indignantly and rolled her eyes at me and I thought, oh my goodness, okay (laughs). So I stayed, traveled, saved my money. He spent it. I saved. He spent it. And finally I just came home one day, called my sister ahead of time. I had ordered tickets to see 'My Fair Lady.' I remember getting off the plane, coming to her house, getting her and we took a cab and she said, "This is going to cost a lot of money to go all the way downtown." I said, "That's okay. I've got it." Making $700 a week from $50. I was rich. And I thought she takes care of my baby. She had five children of her own. She deserved this outing. So I took her to the theater and in the middle when the curtain came down at intermission, I leaned over and said, "I'm not going back." And she said, "You mean backstage?" I said, "No, silly. I don't know anybody backstage. I'm not going back home." Story_ID: 6427 Speaker 1: Here I'm talking to my sister [Thyra Blouin]. I said, "I'm not going back." And she said, "You mean backstage?" I said, "No. I'm not going back home." And she looked, and she got so excited. And I thought, oh, she's changed. She said, "The kids love it when you spend the night. So you mean to tell me you're going to--well you know you'll probably have to sleep in the sleeping bag." So, I said, "I don't mean that. I mean I'm not going back home." She said, "Right." I said, "Ever." She said, "What do you mean ever? You can't just leave." I said, "Sure I can. I'm not going back." And she just looked so shocked, and then all of a sudden she just calmed right down and she said, "Well, Daddy always did say you were crazy." And I remembered looking at her. I said, "Not crazy, just different." I never went back. I didn't have a toothbrush. I left everything. Just didn't go back. Well, he said that I would--he wasn't worried about it because I would be back. How could I leave? I had made this money and I had saved it. I was always saving. And I went to my bank account and it was absolutely empty. It was all gone. He had spent it on whomever. Lessons learned. So, I started life anew again, but it was old hat by that time. It just wasn't--it wasn't traumatic. The only thing that I was concerned about was what will I do with my daughter [Toya Monet]. The next day I went shopping. I bought clothes for myself and my daughter and the things she needed and we went on with life. Took me a couple years to get divorced because he wouldn't give up. Said he would never divorce me. That didn't work and I just moved on. Speaker 2: So are you twenty-six at this point? Speaker 1: Somewhere around there. Yeah. Speaker 2: And your daughter is how old? Speaker 1: Well, she had to be four. Four or five. Somewhere around that age. Speaker 2: Was your sister helping help take care of her? Speaker 1: Oh, yes. My sister, Thyra, was so good with that. I mean from infancy she was always there to assist me in taking care of my baby. Story_ID: 6428 Speaker 1: So now what do you do? You're still working for IBM [International Business Machines] or you are--. Speaker 2: I was working for IBM. I stayed with IBM for seven years, and decided that I should come home. It was about six, six and a half years. And she was starting school. I wanted to be home. So I used to tell everybody, "I'm coming home to play mommy," and I left IBM not knowing what I would do. I didn't have a job or anything. I just knew that I had to come home. So I did and a friend of mine--I had met a gentleman, and he said, "You know you've got a great gift of gab. You can sell anything. You can sell anything. You could sell cars." And I thought, wow, that's a vote of confidence. He said, "But I think you should go back to school, if you can. You should go to school. And you should go into radio and TV." And I remember looking at him because I was waiting for the rest of whatever he was going to say, and he said, "I mean that. You should go into radio and television." I said, "And do what?" He said, "Radio and TV. What do you do in it?" I said, "I don't know anything about that. I mean why would I want to do that?" He said, "You're going to do it and you'll be very good at it. You'll be very good." And I remember laughing hysterically. I thought that was the funniest thing I had heard. I actually--I believed him, but I disbelieved him because I didn't have any thought about that. So he said, "Why don't you go to--" and he told me Midwestern Broadcasting School [Chicago, Illinois]. A friend of his was running the school, and he thought that I should go down there and investigate. So I did. I enrolled. Went back to school. I remember I had a teacher named Chan, Mr. Chan. And he said, "The first thing I want to do is change your name. I'm going to change your last name. You can't go into radio or television with that name. That's a Swedish name." And I said, "I can't change my name." He said, "Sure you can. We'll call you--your last name will be Dee. D-E-E. You'll just shorten your last name." And I said, "Okay." And I remember it--students saying my last name and I would sit there and not answer. And they would say, "Okay, Merri Dee." And I'd say, "Yes." So I practiced on my, on my--the students in my classroom, my classmates. And I was in school and my first job came while I was in school. And my first sponsor was General Motors [Corporation]. Same gentleman helped me to get it. Encouraged me tremendously and told me, "You'll be good. You can do it. They say you're very good in school and very good. He talks about you all the time and we'd like for you to do some commercials." And I thought, wow. Well, the interesting thing--that I had to earn a living while I was in school. So, I remember going to Shirley Hamilton Modeling Agency, and I registered there, thinking maybe I could do some speaking roles, and ended up being the first African American woman to--excuse me--the first black woman to do the auto shows. And then I had a girlfriend who had gone to Columbia [University] in New York [New York]. There's a school on the West Side of Chicago [Illinois] named after her because she was killed in the United Airlines flight that was coming here during Watergate [American political scandal]. Her name is Michelle Clark. And Michelle and I worked together. And then there were--there was Tasha Johnson and Dorie Wilson. These were names of young women. We were the few black women who were in the modeling agency and who were working, and work we did. We got a lot of work. I did the auto show and I thought, this is--I can't believe I'm doing this. And as those cars would go around, I would talk and memorize that whole spiel. And I did that, and I did all the other jobs that kept coming. So, we just worked. Speaker 1: Now who was the gentleman and what was your name at that time, your married--you said it was Dee--it was--. Speaker 2: I was Merri Dorham. Speaker 1: Merri Dorham, okay. Speaker 2: So I became Merri Dee. Speaker 1: And who was the gentleman that you said--. Speaker 2: Automobile dealer. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And he owned Al Abrams Pontiac--very influential in my life. Speaker 1: So you got started. So you're doing these auto shows, you're signed up with Shirley Hamilton-- Speaker 2: And the Playboy Modeling Agency too, because they had lots of jobs and there were only a few of us. Speaker 1: And those were very good and prestigious, right? Speaker 2: Oh, yes. It was high level. Story_ID: 6429 Speaker 1: How did your world change at that point [after getting modeling jobs] because that's a whole different lifestyle, you know, your access to people in a way? Speaker 2: My life changed in that I was always a saver and I wanted to save and do good for my family, and I found that my working--my ability to work and to work consistently allowed me to be the family member that could always be the one that everybody could fall back on, even though I was the youngest. I became, at that time, the oldest. And I looked after everybody. The kids had to go to school. The kids had to have--and I had lots of nieces and nephews. My oldest sister [Doris Blouin] by this time had seven children. My sister [Thyra Blouin] that kept my daughter had five children and there were other kids. My brothers had three kids. So it was--it was wonderful because it was part of what my grandfather always said, "You have to volunteer. And when you give it out, you clean out your closet. And when you clean out your closet, it'll just come back to you. You'll always be very wealthy." And so I always thought of myself as wealthy when I could volunteer. I had a wealth of knowledge. If I could give it away--so it wasn't about money, even though I mention money. I have to mention it all the time because I was always working and earning it. I remember working all the time. Story_ID: 6430 Speaker 1: I finished school [at Midwestern Broadcasting School. Chicago, Illinois]. I was in both radio, TV, and engineering. And finished in all of that. I remember Mr. Chan telling me, "You'll be in radio and television because they will not allow you to be an engineer. You're a girl," he said. "You're a girl. It's too early. Maybe later. You won't be able to be an engineer now. So, don't waste your time." I said, "Sure I can." He said, "Well, go try to get this job." And I remember being turned down. But it was nice. It had grown a little bit. It was different. It wasn't Spiegel [department store]. And I remember laughing and I came back and I told him I said, "They looked at me like I was from out of the country--that I didn't even belong here." He said, "I told you." My first job was as a radio disc jockey. WBEE radio in Harvey, Illinois, and I became Merri Dee the Honey Bee (laughs). What a moniker. I loved it. I had no idea that I would actually fall in love with my business. I went on the air the first day. They had not told me that I was going to be in the showroom window of an automobile dealership. I did not know that. They just told me to come out and learn and I remembered coming out and telling the young man who was Lon Dyson [Chicago, Illinois disc jockey]. I said, "I have--I mean this is--I learned in school, but this is really foreign looking." He said, "Well, you got the job and you're going to be out there and you're doing a remote and you'll just have to do it." And I said, "I'm doing a remote? What do you mean? Outside here?" He said, "No." And he told me where it was going to be and everything. I remember my heart just beating so. I probably looked down to see if I could see it through my chest. I got so frightened. But I only had--this was on a Saturday. I only had Sunday. So, I mentally prepared myself. I pulled out what I was going to wear--and it was during the Dodge Fever Rebellion [advertising campaign], and I was the model from the modeling agency, and I wore a white cowgirl outfit, and a cowgirl hat. I changed it to cowgirl instead of cowboy, and I remember I thought, I'll wear this. And I went to work. And people came by and I'd say, "And when you're passing by, stop and wave and say hi." And horns were blowing and people--and I thought they're listening. Wow. They're really listening. And people pulled over and parked their cars and came in to say hello and my life began. My first sponsors stayed with me for the six years I was in radio, which was General Motors [Corporation] and Jewel Food Stores. Speaker 2: So, were you selling sponsorships or someone else sold them at that point? Speaker 1: They sold the sponsorships themselves for radio. Story_ID: 6431 Speaker 1: In my very first year [at WBEE, Harvey, Illinois radio station], I discovered TV and decided I wanted to try it out. I went to WCIU [Chicago, Illinois television station], Channel 26, and I introduced myself. And he suggested that I might be the weather girl. And I thought, well, that's a way to try it out. And I remember them telling me that I would make $75 a week. And I thought, okay, well, why not. So I went and I learned what I had to do and did it and I lasted about three weeks. And I had met a young woman who was so beautiful. I thought she was the prettiest brown woman I knew. She reminded me of Lena Horne, and her name is Janet Langhart who is currently married to secretary of state? No. The--I'll have to think about what he is to the President of the United States right now. Defense--Secretary of Defense [William Cohen]. I thought she was so beautiful, and I remember saying to her, "You're modeling and everybody likes you and here's a job. You can go on television. And all you have to do is just--you know, learn this part of it. I could teach you that little bit and you can--go on and don't tell them that I'm not coming. Just go on and when I don't show up, they'll have to take you, because they won't have anybody." And Janet went on the air. She then became the weather person for another--a major television station and the first black woman do to so. Speaker 2: So you worked for six years at WBEE and then what after? Speaker 1: WBEE and WSDM-FM [Chicago, Illinois radio station], the station with the girls. All female voices. And WGRT [Chicago, Illinois radio station], which eventually became down the line from one to the other, WGCI [Chicago, Illinois radio station]. John [H.] Johnson [publisher], Johnson Publishing [Company] bought it. Speaker 2: So were you there when he bought it? Speaker 1: It was WGRT. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. I stayed there a very short period of time and since I was doing both radio and TV, I went into television. I produced my first show in my very first year on the radio, actually. So, by the time I finished radio in that six years, I had good experience. I had been the engineer, the producer, the director, the host and the booker. My first show was a one hour, Saturday evening, eight p.m. prime time entertainment show. My first guest were the black and white comedy team of Tim and Tom, which was Tom Dreesen, who was the opening act for Frank Sinatra and Tim Reid from 'WKRP in Cincinnati' and 'Frank's Place' [television shows]. They were both from Harvey, Illinois where I had done radio. And I had Cannonball Adderley [saxophonist], Sammy Davis, Jr., Ramsey Lewis [pianist]. Everybody. There wasn't any place else for them to go. So they loved the idea that I was a disc jockey and I knew music. I knew their music, I knew their histories. I knew the record companies. I introduced myself to them and I did liner notes on albums. So, for me to be able to interview them meant that I would get everything for them and they would call. It was the era of the Beatles and "Hey Jude," which was their big song. Speaker 2: That's interesting. So you learned--you really--you found your niche. It was like a fish finding water at that point. Speaker 1: Had no idea that I would be doing what I'm doing. None. It was not intentional at all. I was a late bloomer. Speaker 2: Did you ever go back to your mentor, the car dealership owner and-- Speaker 1: Absolutely. Speaker 2: So now how--so you did that for seven years and then what happened at that point? You were at--I mean you--you know, went--when Johnson bought and made it WJPC, right? Speaker 1: Yes. At that point, I was hired by Channel 44 [TV station.] Speaker 2: It wasn't Hispanic then. Speaker 1: Oh, no. They had not changed over then. And I did--I worked with a weatherman that was a pilot, Jim Tillman, who was also doing a show over at Channel 44. Story_ID: 6432 Speaker 1: And I did my show from there [Channel 44, Chicago, Illinois] and had a break in the action when I was kidnapped from the television station with a TV guest. Made to drive a long way to a forest preserve and at the end of the night, laid in the forest preserve with two .38s [bullet caliber] in my head next to my guest who had been murdered. Speaker 2: Now that happened at Channel 44? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Oh, I didn't know that. Now what was the format of Channel 44? I mean who owned it. It was a UHF--. Speaker 1: It was a UHF [ultrahigh frequency] station. I remember Ed Morris, who is still around, he's at Columbia College [Chicago, Illinois]. I don't remember who owned. I don't. Speaker 2: So that experience, I know you told that story untold times, but what was that--I mean who was the guest? And why did that happen? This--. Speaker 1: The young man who did the kidnapping and the shooting had been in jail. Had been incarcerated six times prior to [shooting] me. Had stalked. Had been out of jail seven days when he came up there. Why he did it? I don't know, I don't know. I just know that it happened. How I survived? Supposed to. Who was the guest? He was an interior designer. And interestingly enough, he was not my guest. I had finished my show. My daughter was away, and whenever I would finish my show I would always leave, but there was a young lady named Nancy. Nancy lived in the neighborhood, and Nancy came around to the station and she found herself a mentor in me. And that evening Nancy had some problems at home with her mom and needed to talk. So I told her after the show, "I'll stay. My daughter is away with my brother and my sister-in-law in California and I'll stay and just chat with you afterward." So Nancy waited. And it was late in the evening and I stayed to talk to Nancy. In the meantime, this man had been on another show and he came out with his secretary and I remember him saying, "Oh, I'm so glad you're still here. I wanted to do your show. You have a different kind of show and a different kind of interview. You're so in-depth in your interviews." And I said, "Yes." And we had some conversation, and that's how I met him. So he really wasn't my guest. He was just in the wrong place. Speaker 2: And this person was just--because they didn't have much security, he was just able to get out and--. Speaker 1: Not much security? There was no security. We were kidnapped from right in front of the television station, right outside. That experience changed my life. It made me a cautious person. Before then, I was innocent, relatively trusting, extremely loving and believing that the world was there for this wide-eyed wondered kid that was still six years old every day. It changed me into a precautionary person and very cautious individual. My hands stopped going out so easily to say hello and shake hands with people. I watched out for children a lot then, because I just remember what toll it took on my family, on the children in my family, the boys in my family. They were just--they felt lost. They wanted to protect. They were men, they were young men. They were supposed to be able to protect Auntie Merri. And it was just devastating. Tore everybody apart. It made us all look at life differently. Story_ID: 6433 Speaker 1: You said it took you a year to recover, and you were, you know, and one big change which is only human nature that you were extremely cautious, but you also had then been the breadwinner for your family and so what did that do career-wise? Were you afraid of, you know, going back on the air, and, you know? Speaker 2: I was very cautious about going back on air, but I begged to come back to work. I always thought that when things go wrong, you get busy. I had learned that, and that's what I did all my life. So, all I wanted to do was to go back to work. And I begged to go just one hour. And I remember the first time I went in and put the headset on my head. I couldn't handle the sounds going into my ears through the headset. Remember now, I had two .38s [bullet caliber] that had grazed the brain on one side, and caused me to have loss of hearing on one ear, and some--and loss of eyesight completely, then came back. I just worked at it hour by hour, day by day. It was like infancy. Crawling and learning all over again. Speaker 1: And so you stayed with--you were still at Channel 44 [Chicago, Illinois television station] at this point? Speaker 2: Yes. Story_ID: 6434 Speaker 1: Did you move from Channel 44 [Chicago, Illinois television station] to WGN[-TV, Chicago, Illinois television station]? Speaker 2: The next year when he [Dee's kidnapper] was incarcerated. Right after he was incarcerated, because I had bought two one-way tickets. I was leaving the country if he was not convicted I was not going to stay here. So the two tickets, of course, were for myself and my daughter [Toya Monet]. I had told me sister and I had swore her to secrecy that she would not know where I was going because I didn't tell her either. He was convicted, and shortly thereafter, I was hired at WGN-TV. Speaker 1: And I just have one more question about him. How was it going through that trial then? You know, and testifying? Speaker 2: The [Illinois] state's attorney's office today has grown in stature, has grown in sensitivity. At that time I was told by my attorneys that I had, for personal business dealings, that they were no longer going to be my attorneys. That my attorney would have to be the state's attorney. When I spoke with them, I was told that I did not have to come to court. That I should not be asking any questions. That everything would be taken care of, and that I should not worry them about it. I remember making calls and saying, "Well, how did it go in court?" I wasn't brought up to date. I didn't have access to anything. The only way I would know is maybe a neighbor would go, or a family member or somebody was there and they could come back and give an actual eyewitness account. But there were no--as a victim of a horrendous crime like that, you really didn't have any rights. You just survived. And if you lived, you lived. And if you didn't, you died. That was the attitude. What came out of that was a desire to change the laws. And change the law I did. I met Jesse White, who was a [Illinois] state representative then, and I remember saying to him how dirty it made me feel as a victim that I had been re-victimized by the system. That the manner in which I was treated, the manner in which my family was talked to, I just thought it was absolutely awful, and I never wanted to see anybody else, no other family members, no other people who had become victims of crime to be like that. So first thing I needed to do was not to refer to myself as a victim, but as a survivor. When people would say that I was a victim, I would immediately correct them because I truly learned very quickly that you are victimized and so you are a victim. But when you survive, you are a survivor. You are no longer a victim. You take your attitude into a whole other area. You step up a level as a survivor. You step up two or three levels if you're smart. And you treat yourself queenly and kingly, and you make sure everybody else does the same thing. I fought for a victims' bill of rights for the state of Illinois, and the first one in the world came right here in Illinois. So we have a lot to be proud of. It has changed a lot. But the one thing that I wanted was the impact statement that we now have. I wasn't allowed to speak. I wasn't allowed to ask any questions. And I remember saying--Jesse asking me, "Well, what do you want in this?" And the young man who was the state's attorney at that time is now the mayor [Chicago mayor Richard M. Daley]. And between he and White and another gentleman, that bill went to the state legislature and it passed. Lot of in-fighting, of course, that's politics, but it passed. So I give them tremendous credit because it actually came out of the state's attorney's office at that time. Speaker 1: So how did that make you feel? Speaker 2: Like the queen I thought I was. It made me feel that I could do anything, just my grandfather and my dad said. I really could make a difference in peoples' lives. So it took awhile, so you have to fight. So what, was my attitude. You can win. You can win at anything was how I felt. I felt like the world's hero, because I knew it would not stop just here. I knew that it was something that we had to spread around. And I remember speaking in Chicago and in that audience were three people from Ohio, and they were from an organization--well, two of them were from an organization called mothers... Speaker 1: Was it against drunk driving? Speaker 2: (simultaneously) No it wasn't against drunk driving. It was--it was Parents of Murdered Children. That was it. And they approached me to come to Ohio and to speak at their conclave that they were putting together. And when I did that, the state's attorney's offices and attorney general's offices all over everywhere began to call. Washington [D.C.] called. Everybody--and I began to go and speak just--I wanted them to pay my way. A lot of them couldn't afford it, so I paid my way, and I would go. And all I wanted to do was to empower people. Empower them not to be afraid to understand that if you are--if you become victimized or a family member of a victim, remember if that person is gone, to remember the good times. And if they survive, remember they are survivors not victims. Help them over the area where they have to go. Love them, hug them, touch them, and listen to them above all. Listen. Let them talk. And I just began to spread that message. And it was spreading a message of love really. It was spreading a message of go back to where I was as a youngster with my grandparents. Go back that--to that area and talk to each other, and don't be afraid to correct your neighbor's child. Don't be afraid to walk the kid to school. Don't be afraid to help the person who's blind trying to cross the street. Go back. Those were good times. Those were wonderful times. We touched each other. We loved each other. And even when we didn't love each other, we dared not let anybody else do anything that was wrong to whomever that was. We were neighbors. Neighbors. Special people. I spoke all over the country. '60 Minutes' [television program] came in when the law passed and the question was, "How did you do that? Why did you do that?" That was easy to answer. Speaker 1: And how has the legislation been used? You know, how long ago was that time--that was in--was it in the '70s [1970s]? I would say--. Speaker 2: It was early and I don't remember what year. Speaker 1: Was it early '80s [1980s]? Speaker 2: But those were early days. Speaker 1: (simultaneously) Early '70s [1970s]? Speaker 2: I'm going to guess that it had to be around '83 [1983]. Somewhere around '82 [1982], '83 [1983] maybe. Story_ID: 6435 Speaker 1: As the young man who created this havoc in my life was caught, went to trial, was convicted, given a 120 year sentence, was out in twelve years. At that time, they were letting them out because they were overcrowded--so very quietly letting them out because no one asked about it. No one said anything. And he was one of them. Speaker 2: So when you found out he was out, what was your reaction? Speaker 1: Outrage. Absolute outrage. You see, I knew that he was up for parole, and my daughter [Toya Monet] just took it upon herself to get petitions and they--petitions were everywhere. Everywhere I went, people were saying, "I signed the petition." There were all kinds of people from all walks of life to keep him in. And when he was paroled, I was absolutely outraged. I was also frightened. I was frightened for my family, for myself. I was frightened for my daughter, because she had grown up and become this outspoken, like my mother-type person, who would not sit down and wasn't going to take a backseat and who would not let go. And I was very, very frightened for her. She was working for a mayor, and so she was very public. Speaker 2: So did you advise her to just keep it cool, don't do this? Let sleeping dogs lie? Speaker 1: Sleeping dogs lie, yes, which did nothing. She was a grown woman. She said, "Okay." And that was the end of that. It's like, "Okay. I respect you. You're my mom, and I know I was taught to respect you, but I have to do what I have to do and so, therefore,"--and she just went on. Went on from there, which was not a bad thing. Speaker 2: No, it's not a bad thing. Speaker 1: Not a bad thing. I was very proud of her. Speaker 2: So at that time, you're at WGN [-TV Chicago, Illinois television station]? Speaker 1: I came to WGN when he got out, yes. Story_ID: 6436 Speaker 1: You've been here [WGN-TV, Chicago, Illinois television station] for how many years? Speaker 2: Twenty-eight years. Speaker 1: Twenty-eight years. And how is this platform been here for you? Speaker 2: Very interesting. I have grown with the company, and the company has grown with me. I remember coming here in a very prejudicial time period when there were no black folks or if there were, they weren't doing much. And I came here with notoriety. It was after all the newspapers and all the TV. Everybody had covered this television person across the country. So I came here after a whole lot of publicity. So, it was a good thing to have me. I also came during a time period then the FCC, the Federal Communication Commission had their rules and regulations and you were counted. And I remember saying, "I'm wearing a Star of David. Do you think you'll count me as black and Jewish too?" (Laughs). That didn't go over very well. By that time, I was very bold. I felt I could get a job anywhere. I felt that my career was not so much a job, but my career was doing whatever I wanted in a day. And I knew that I was right and good. I didn't ever think about hurting people or doing anything wrong. So I just figured everything would be fine. Things would work out well always. I remember people talking to me--some talking to me and some not in the hallways, and some people would pass me in the hallways and hold their head down. I was always this person early in the morning. I had to be here very early in the morning, because when I first came here, I was a newscaster. And I remember preparing myself, not just for the newscast, but for the people who were rather cold, indifferent. I had to be a big girl. I had to really be a survivor. And so all of my life's experiences had really prepared me for being here. Speaker 1: Because this is really--the ['Chicago] Tribune' [newspaper, owner of WGN] is really known as a white bastion. I don't know if it's--it keeps saying it's changing, but it's pretty deep to the core. Speaker 2: It's still that way, but we have grown in that there were no women. I remember when I first came here that women could not wear pants in the building. Could not wear slacks. And I remember when I heard that, it was the first day I came here and there was a young man named Norman Mark who worked for, I think it was the ['Chicago] Daily News' [newspaper]. He did an interview with me, and I remember in my innocence saying to him, not thinking about what he would print, "Can you imagine? Women can't wear slacks. They can put them on outside and in below zero weather, they can come inside, but they have to go the ladies' room and take them off. Only men can wear slacks." And he printed that. Oh my gosh. I thought, well my gosh I got hired, and I'm going to be fired immediately. I was chastised, but I wasn't fired. But they changed the rules. I remember saying I can't work here then because I work at a radio station during the day, and I wear jean suits. I wear nice suits, but they are pantsuits. And in the evening, I go to a television station and I dress like nighttime. I'm doing a nighttime talk show, and I really don't have in between. I don't do anything else in between. I go home, I'm a mother. That's it. And the law changed fortunately. Story_ID: 6437 Speaker 1: What were your roles here [WGN-TV, Chicago, Illinois television station] then, the roles you've had--you were a newscaster for--. Speaker 2: Newscaster. I was editorial spokesperson. Speaker 1: How long a newscaster? Speaker 2: About eleven years. Speaker 1: And you did a lot of the telethons, right? Speaker 2: I did all of the telethons. I loved it. I thought this was so fascinating to be able to raise money. I was what I was born to do. It was really great. First United Negro College Fund telethon happened right here twenty-two years ago. The Bud Billiken Parade started right here on camera. I was in that parade as a little girl. This is our twenty-first--I think it's the twenty-first year of the parade. And me being able to host that parade for twenty-one years. When I think back of where I was, scared to get off the bus to go to Spiegel's [department store] to get a job. My goodness, how we grow. Story_ID: 6438 Speaker 1: My company [WGN-TV, Chicago, Illinois television station] has grown. Speaker 2: In what ways? Speaker 1: Women are empowered. Women are in powerful positions. I have a male who is a general manager here. A young lady who worked here, is a general manager at a station in Washington [D.C.]. I mean that was unheard of. I don't even know whether they thought of doing anything of that nature. We have diversity programs. The word diversity wasn't talked about. I remember driving a Cadillac [luxury automobile] when I came here. Mind you, I didn't get it after I earned money here. I drove in here in it. I wore my furs here. I didn't get them after I came here. So I was fine when I was hired here in 1972, and I remember going out to get in my car one day and there was a note on my car that said, "What are you doing after work? To be able to drive a car like this and wear those furs." And I thought to myself. I remember reading it, and I got so choked up, and I got in the car and I sat there and it was so cold and I--my fingers were--it was below zero. And my fingers got cold, and I'm holding the note and I read this note and I read the note. And then I remembered start the car and get warm. And I read this note, and I remember balling it up and putting it on the seat next to me and thinking to myself this will not work. I am not leaving. So there. And no matter what they did, and there were many, many things that people did. No matter what they did to sabotage me, no matter what they did, what they said, how they treated me, I was not leaving. I was hired here by a gentleman and I call a gentleman today. He had nerve enough to hire me, and I thought, well, you got me and here I stay. I'm going to be the best that I can be. And that's that. My very first newscast here was trauma. This man had gotten out of jail, he had been convicted, and--I'm sorry, not gotten out of jail, he had been convicted, and my mother-in-law, whom I loved long after my divorce and stayed very close to, didn't live very far from him. My mother-in-law was murdered in her home and it came across a wire on my first newscast. I was doing a two-person newscast and my partner did the story and, of course, you're trained, and so the camera came to me and I did the story and I was almost through with that story, and all of a sudden I heard the first story that my partner had done. And in the middle of what I was saying, I turned to him and said, "Oh my God. That's my mother. It's my mother you're talking about." And he looked at me and I could hear the director yelling, "Get the camera off of her. Get the camera off of her." She had been murdered in her home and--so there was a lot going on in that year. He was convicted. She was murdered. There was all of the notoriety and all of the stuff around me and learning to be in a new culture and learning to be in a new company, learning to get along being in corporate America. It was big. Story_ID: 6439 Speaker 1: How did the black community react to this? This was a big deal for them. Speaker 2: At the... Speaker 1: I mean that you had gotten this position [newscaster at WGN-TV, Chicago, Illinois television station]. It was a big deal for them, right? Speaker 2: It was a big deal, yeah. The community was just--they were overwhelmed. It was very, very heart warming because there were the group of older people who never thought they would see somebody like me. And most of them knew my background, and knew where I had come from, and that I had, as they said then, pulled myself up by my bootstraps. Whatever that means. So, they were proud--tremendous pride. And then there were the schoolteachers who told their children in classrooms and called for me to come to the classroom and come to graduations and speak and encourage and motivate the kids and let them know that they, too, could do it. There was a lot of pride. A lot. The ministers had pride on two levels. The one level was pride, happiness, look what you can do, you too can do this. But on the other side of it was here is a survivor. This is who God gave you today. A miracle walking. Take a look and be empowered. They didn't use that word, but that was basically what they said. Know that you, too, can do it. And I began to feel the weight of the world on me. I liked it, I was good at it, it was good for me. It was empowering. It helped my self-esteem rise again, because it had been up and down and up and down. It helped me come back on track when I would slide back down in a day when I felt like I just couldn't come outside. There were those times when fear would grip me because somebody would throw a rock up to the window and the alarm would go off at night. There were a lot of those instances. I left my home, because there were 3,000 people to my front door to see where I lived, who I was. My daughter [Toya Monet] went to school in a police car for a while. It was--there was a lot to handle and I thought that if I leave this house, which was a beautiful home in an area called Pill Hill [Chicago, Illinois]. If I leave, my neighbors won't be bothered with this. Maybe my daughter could have some kind of normalcy. My family who also lived very near, maybe they can get back to their own lives. I felt interruptive, I felt like I was interrupting peoples' lives. So I moved as far as I could move. I moved to the North Side. I thought, well I move up there where nobody knows me, and they probably won't talk to me either. So, this will be a good thing. I'll be left alone. Well, that wasn't true. They, too, knew me. Story_ID: 6440 Speaker 1: Did you--when did you know that you had a gift for the media? I mean it takes a special gift. Everyone can't present themselves in a collective manner. You know everyone can't be articulate. Speaker 2: I knew it long before I came into the media. I think IBM [International Business Machines] let me know it. Shirley Hamilton Agency [modeling agency] let me know it. The Playboy Agency [modeling agency] let me know it, helped me to know it. Helped me to hone my skills by giving me the opportunity to be out there speaking in front of people. I knew it. So when I came here, I was very grateful--very grateful to get this position. But I knew they had somebody too. Story_ID: 6441 Speaker 1: How did it feel--because here you are adored on one end and then sort of despised on the other? I mean, you know, people really not wanting you around. I mean--that has happened a lot in black America. You know talent here, and having to fight battles constantly. Speaker 2: It's a mixture. But you just go through it. It was happiness on one side. It was almost like I had half my face up and half down in a day. As long as I could remember in those early days, there was always that mantle that I was a black person, that I had been given this position, that there was great pride in me, I could not slip, I could not do anything wrong, I would never be forgiven. I owed my life to the community. I felt that. And that's why I said I felt the weight of the world. It wasn't just those black people in Chicago [Illinois] or those Creole people from New Orleans [Louisiana]. It was the world. Story_ID: 6442 Speaker 1: I was asking about how long you had anchored, and I was wondering at that point was that your decision to go off air or was it the station's [WGN-TV, Chicago, Illinois tv station] decision and how did that all happen? Speaker 2: It was the decision of the news director who always holds the reins and has the right to put you on and take you off. And how I was removed wasn't a nice way, but that's the way the business goes too. It was a decision that I wanted and I had said to someone and it had gotten back. I said that it was nosy and harsh and people suffered by the reporting. I was also doing sports, which I loved. I thought that was the greatest thing going because inside all that I had done, I had also co-founded with Bob Love [basketball player], who was then playing for the Chicago Bulls [basketball team], a boys' athletic foundation that was called Athletes for Better Education out of which six young men came, and all six of these young men are stars in the NBA [National Basketball Association]. A few of them are now coaches, so I'm very proud of that. But the transition was I think difficult in the very beginning, and then amenable. It was time to move on and do things that I was passionate about. Speaker 1: Did you miss being on air? 'Cause the--. Speaker 2: I never really went off though. Speaker 1: Okay, right, because you still--. Speaker 2: (simultaneously) just came out of news. I was editorial spokesperson then, and then I did a talk show again. Speaker 1: What show was that? Speaker 2: 'The Heart of Chicago' [television show]. Speaker 1: 'The Heart of Chicago.' Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: What about the other one though--I have--'Take 2' [television show], that's more recent, right? Speaker 2: Oh, 'Take 2' was an outside thing that I did for the Catholic [Communication] Commission, Communication Commission out of Washington, D.C. approached me to do twenty-six half hours that would be taped with an audience, minority audience, and it would be on twenty-six issues that were of pertinent value to the community. And it was the community people who chose the issues, and they were everything, childcare, women, men, marriage, divorce--everything. Speaker 1: And how long did that series run? Speaker 2: Well, I talked to a young man on the phone yesterday who just came in from Milan [Italy] who told me that he saw a tape in Washington last week. So, I guess the series is still running from place to place. They were issues that belong on the air right now. The same issues. Just different times, different solutions. Speaker 1: That occurred in what, 1996? Speaker 2: It probably--I really don't remember. Speaker 1: Now let me--so you became editorial, you said editorial--. Speaker 2: Spokesperson. Speaker 1: Spokesperson, and then you--when--help me through your, you know, career years. So you were editorial spokesperson. Then you became head of the foundation? Speaker 2: Newscaster, editorial spokesperson. Did some public relations--talk show host. Story_ID: 6443 Speaker 1: I became director of community relations. And very shortly thereafter, manager of WGN-TV [Chicago, Illinois television station] Children's Charities, which is a fund of the Robert R. McCormick Tribune Foundation. Speaker 2: So why--when you became head of community relations, what was that--was that job defined, or was it just this is a job and maybe there wasn't much expectation with it. Speaker 1: There wasn't much expectation from the management group prior to the management group that hired me in that position. The expectation level jumped pretty high up when this young man came in. He had high expectations about what we would do, what we would not do, and what we could do, and how the station could grow. And that young man was a general manager at the time. He had tremendous confidence in me. He had been out in the public where he had seen the public's reaction to me. He had heard me speak. He knew I was bold enough to be--and strong enough to stand tall with convictions. My values were high, and gave me an opportunity, and said, "Change it." And the rest is history. I've been in this position for a very long time now, and I can only tell you that the position when I took it over was all about looking at PSA tapes, public service tapes and pretty much knowing the ropes to get it on the air. Choosing them and putting them on the air. It has evolved into a major position. Here at this station, I think that my position and his influence in putting me in this position and giving me the freedom to create this position, I think it influenced other station management too. I have heard that. So I give him a lot of credit. His name is Dennis FitzSimons. He's moved up the ladder quite a bit himself as a youngster. I called him a young man. He's still a very young man. Speaker 2: So what are some of the things you're proud of that you've accomplished in this position? Speaker 1: Being able to raise millions and millions and millions of dollars and have--be with a company that says, give it out. Go help people. Do what you do best. Go do what you can do to assist them to be the best that they can be. That's what you want to do. To trust me to do that. I'm very proud of that. We choose wisely. And I say we just because I don't like to feel alone. It's mostly children's issues. I should say it is children's issues. I include women, because that's a children's issue too. And then I include families at times because that's a child's issue. But that's a great accomplishment to me. One of the other accomplishments in this position that makes me feel very good is that it has come full circle. So it's not just about somebody sending in a public service announcement and you take a look at it and you put it on the air. I've been able to teach people what this position should be about. I've been able to get the passion out of them. One young lady that became my assistant ended up becoming me at another TV station. Very proud of that. One young lady who came to me as an intern, I mentored, and is now a writer in Hollywood [California], worked on 'The Cosby Show' [television show]. This was a kid from the West side of Chicago [Illinois] who lived with her grandmother who was scared of everything that moved. And now we consider her a valley girl. Danita has grown tremendously, and I look at her like my own daughter--Danita Jones. She has called me several times to say, "I wrote this sitcom. Look at it. I actually wrote it." She works for Carsey-Werner [production company]. Some of the other accomplishments have been just accomplishments to me. They've meant a lot to others. They probably meant more to others than they've meant to me because I think that you get to a point where you really don't have to go look for what it is that you want to do. It presents itself to you. The need is always there. It'll just present itself to you. I always say, "The need is there. You just have to fit yourself into that need." And take it and make it. Nurture it and go in the kitchen and cook and make it a wonderful meal. Suppertime is a great time. It's a time of families. It's a time of beginnings--secrets, learning, and loving. Story_ID: 6444 Speaker 1: I want to spend some time on the area of blacks in the media. And I have--I'd like to have your thoughts about this whole, you know, area. There hasn't been a lot of movement, you know, when you look back over the twenty years. I mean there are more faces on then when you came on, but I just would like to have your sort of thoughts about this whole thing. I mean sometimes--well, I'd like to have your thoughts. Speaker 2: We've come a long way. We still have a long way to go. But we've come a long way. I think it's important to give credit where credit is due. So that when I came in to this arena, I felt very much alone. I think that my presence and my ability to be patient and loving and understanding allowed me to have the patience to open those doors. I think also it allowed me to teach. My boldness allowed me to be able to speak up and speak out and say, "Well, so where's my counterpart? Why am I alone? So when do we get this? When are we going to--." That has been good. We have moved. So now we have all kinds of people on the air considered minorities--which I still have a problem with, because minority means lesser. And since I don't feel that I'm less than anybody, I don't like the term. Had to say that. But where we are today is opening up, and I just think in the year 2000 we are so behind the times, so far behind the times. Oh sure, we have one here, one there. We're behind the times. We have not grown to where we need to be. I think also that I concern myself with the media creating an area or an arena of prejudice and then nurturing it. I think that the younger people who are coming in today have an air of arrogance that says dues, who me? They have to be glad to get me. I won't owe any dues. That makes me tired--tires me out, because I know the dues I paid to sit in this chair. And I think sometimes the audacity of them to think that they should move someone like me out. I'm older, you know. I'm older now, and I'm a woman on top of that. So, I should just move on out of the way and open the door and let one of them sit in here, prepared or not prepared. That is the audacity that I seen now, disrespect. But understandable, because in our households we have allowed that. We have taught that as parents, and we have nurtured it. And so we're reaping the harvest of it. Speaker 1: So what are your hopes for African Americans in this field? We still don't own a lot of media. Speaker 2: That's what I want us to do. I'd like to see us own more and more and more. I think it's very important. The only way we're going to really make tremendous changes is to be competitive. I look at a Bob [Robert L.] Johnson [media entrepreneur] and people say, "An airline? Who does he think he is?" I think he's a man. He's a man with vision, bold. A bold stepper and a bright dreamer and I support him wholeheartedly. Story_ID: 6445 Speaker 1: Is there anyone else you admire in this industry? Speaker 2: As many times as I could snatch him and sit him down in his seat, I admire [Rev.] Jesse Jackson [Sr.], and I have to say it that way because I'll say that to him. This is a man who has done a lot of work. He has stood where other people stood and stepped back and he stood there anyway. Now, there are those that say, "Well, why wouldn't he do it? He gets all the accolades. He gets all the press." They don't go home with him. And neither do I. I just think that I have perhaps better vision, better understanding, better sensitivity. He's been a bold stepper. We need to support him. He's been a man who has, in his time, stepped way out of where those who were supporting him said, "Okay, now. We're going to support you on this issue." And when he got into the arena, he stepped on that issue, the next one, and the next one, and all those that he'd been holding back. And he just dropped them all out there. And those people who were supporting him jumped back and went like, "Whoa. That's not what you were saying. That's not what you said you were going to do." I admire that. Tremendous strength in that--tremendous strength in his family. Tremendous strength in his wife. To stand there and support and not know whether he's coming home, like a Coretta Scott King [civil rights activist]. Not know whether the crazies were going to do to him what they tried to do to me, take me out of this world. Not really know whether the children are going to get to see him again. You gotta like him, you can dislike him. You have to respect him. You gotta give him credit. I give him a lot of credit. It's interesting for me and [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.]. I was here, I was awake, I was alive. And yet in many instances I don't relate. Speaker 1: What do you mean by that? Speaker 2: I relate to the guys that I see now. I relate to the Jesses. I relate to the [Illinois state senator] Emil Joneses. I relate to the guys that were right here in Chicago [Illinois] with me. I relate to the changes that Martin Luther King [Jr.] brought about, but somehow I didn't get down into it and I didn't go to march, and I didn't get angry with the people and--I didn't. Every time there was a cadre over here of anger, I moved away from it, and took from it everything that was good about it and I went to a school or I went to a community, or I went to a church, and I tried to give out a little bit of this anger and a whole lot of what you can do and how you can change the world. So, when I say I don't relate, I do relate, just in a different way. But the legislators, the congressmen and women--I mean, it's just unbelievable today. I am looking at history. I look back at my history, and this is the excitement about me living in the year 2000. I have vision about the future, but I have memory. God has given me memory. To think that I had bullets in my head and still woke up and still can sit here and remember and come from and be able to share all of that. But nobody can get it like I have it because I was there. What beauty that is. What a privilege it is to get older. I've been getting older since I hit fourteen. That was when I realized that I was of an age and it was when I realized that my grandparents were these wonderful people who didn't have much education--fourth and fifth grade--but nobody could touch them. They sat together. They talked together. They had this dignity and air of grace that just surrounded them, so that when they walked down the street, the neighbors would say, "Hello, Mr. and Mrs. Blouin." And I smile now and I laugh about that because it's what I'm experiencing now. Story_ID: 6446 Speaker 1: Let me ask you this. What does the future hold for Merri Dee? Speaker 2: Writing my book. Writing some books. Teaching. Traveling the world. Learning about other cultures and helping to bring people together. And I want to do that through writing, too. Because no matter where you are in the world, what happened to me happens to other people. Speaker 1: And you've been sharing for a large part of you life. What do you want to share with other people at this stage? What do you want to teach them? Speaker 2: Stamina. Stick-to-it-ivness. Audacity. That is in all that we have learned, we fold. I want us not to fold. I want us to learn how to hold. Stand tall and hold and don't fold. When you get to a spot, you didn't get there by accident. You're there because you're suppose to be there. And if you're not supposed to be there, you won't be standing there. If you're not suppose to be alive in that place and someone says, "You're not suppose to be alive," then you won't be. But if you find yourself in that place, wherever that place is, you have a responsibility. You have a responsibility first to self, the person that you woke up with. You have a responsibility to realize that you are alive, and you have a day in front of you. And maybe you won't have a day in front of you. But whatever time you have, you have that time and you're responsible for you to be the best that you can be and to share your knowledge and your wisdom. To share all your good and also to share your weaknesses and your sad times because nobody, nobody who gets to know me, should just know how wonderful I am. Story_ID: 6447 Speaker 1: You spoke of a special friendship with Nancy Wilson [singer], and I was wondering if you could comment on that. Speaker 2: My special friendship with Nancy Wilson. Boy, that goes thirty years or more (laughs). We met when I was a disc jockey. We were both young mothers, struggling. She was on the road taking care of her children, calling up long distance, and I was right here in Chicago [Illinois]. Or I remembered calling up long distance asking about my baby. She had two. I had one. Then she had three. I had one. And we just struck up a friendship through being mothers. Dedicated parents. And that's basically what we talked about. It wasn't about music. We talked about being able to cook good food, and taking care of your family, and opening up avenues for other people, helping them get in the door. Little things like that. This relationship has just blossomed into the greatest friendship. We talk to each other. She'll call me from Timbuktu, "I didn't want anything, just saying hi," or she'll call and say, "God I'm tired," or vice versa. We're in a good support system for each other. Speaker 1: And your views on friendship? Speaker 2: Everybody is not supposed to be my friend. That's one thing that I always come up with. And I don't allow everybody to be my friend. So there are people who would like to have friendship with me, but I don't allow myself to be chosen or selected. I choose. And when you become my friend, I also choose to let you go. You can be as angry with me as you want to, and you don't have to talk to me. But if I still consider you my friend, that is what you are. You're not released until I release you. I say friendship is something you stand with in the good times and the bad times. You have friendship, you have a lot. If you have somebody that you can share and have secrets with, and know that they'll watch your back and know that they'll be there. You don't have to talk to them every day. Don't have to talk in a year. But when the phone rings, it's like there wasn't a day that passed. I was talking about friendship this morning with a gentleman that I dearly miss who was a dentist here in Chicago [Illinois]. A very popular man. Dr. Melvin Macklin, who became my friend, just like sister and brother, great friends. And I said, "I don't even know how long Melvin's been gone, but gosh, I miss him." Because there was such a wonderful friendship. There wasn't anything that I could do that would make him so angry that he couldn't forgive me and vice versa. You don't have many friends like that in a lifetime. So I hold them dear and near. I spoil them. Hug them a lot both up close and long distance, and I let them know that I need them. And I let them know that I'm here for them. Friendship means everything to me. Story_ID: 6448 Speaker 1: So your daughter? Speaker 2: My daughter? Oh, you mean my best friend? What can I say about her? She is my pride and joy. I'm just so proud of her, I don't know what to do. She was twelve years old when that incident [kidnapping] happened to me and she was one of the strongest people around me. And I remember hearing her voice at the hospital, because I had lost my eyesight, and when she came--she was in California when it happened, and immediately my brother flew back here with her. And she came into the hospital and I remember her asking me how I felt, and how was I, and I held her hand, and I remember the words, "Mom." She said very calmly and very adult-like, "You know you're not dying." And I don't remember what my response was on that, but I remember her next words were, "You can't die. You know that. You promised. You promised it was going to be me and you. You promised me. So, you can't die." And I remember thinking, well okay. She came through like a trooper and she really helped the rest of my family at a very young age. But it's been very difficult for her throughout these years. She received a couple of college scholarships that she refused to take because she couldn't go away. She had to stay with mom. She had to see where I was, what I was doing, who I was with. So actually in college, she became my mother and I let her because she was so well prepared. And now she's really my mother. I'm a grandmother. She's married. She has a daughter who is four years old now who looks like me, walks like me, talks like me, is a little clone. I have a good time now with her and I told her that--recently that she's my hero, because she has recently become the mother of two boys who are thirteen and fifteen. So she now has three children this summer who will live there, and she really is my hero. It takes an awful lot for a young person to give up time and be dedicated and committed and determined that they're going to turn out well. She married well, and when I say she married well, people say that by money. She married well by status. She married a young man with the same kind of dignity and grace, commitment to family and self--smart. They're a great family. They're a model family for me. I can model myself after them any time. She's really a great person. She's an executive vice president of a company. Wants to be a full time mom for a minute, which she'll probably do. Speaker 1: Now--. Speaker 2: (simultaneously) I love her dearly. Speaker 1: Her name. Your granddaughter's name. Her husband's name. Speaker 2: Toya [Monet], Kevin [Monet]. Granddaughter is Marissa, Marissa Monet. Story_ID: 6449 Speaker 1: When you think of Merri Dee as a young person, you know, growing up with this stuff and you see your daughter [Toya Monet], what thoughts go through your head? Speaker 2: Gratefulness. Very grateful that I turned out the way I did, that I have a daughter that we are close. I dedicated my life to being a great parent. A great mother. Divorced when she was six years old, so we became girlfriends. And what she meant when she said you can't die, you promised me, 'cause I did promise her when I divorced. You take care of me just like I take care of you. You are my responsibility. I am your responsibility. I have to look after you. You have to look after me. And we've lived our lives that way. So we know where each other is. We talk every day, no matter where I am. No matter where she is in the world, everyday. And I look back at those times when my heart was hurt, when I felt crushed, when I felt left out and alone, when I felt like I didn't have anywhere to turn. I'm glad she doesn't have to go through that. I'm glad I turned out as well as I did. And I'm really very, very pleased that she chose me as her mother. Story_ID: 6450 Speaker 1: ...played a very important role in this state as relates to adoption and adoption laws--I can't believe I didn't ask that, but anyway, and I'd like you to talk about your role there, how you got involved. Speaker 2: Got involved with the adoption laws in the State of Illinois through Brenda Edgar, who was then the first lady of Illinois with her husband [Governor Jim Edgar] being the governor, the then governor, and had some conversations. She wanted to see some laws changed, I wanted to see some laws changed, and she had the husband. So one word led to another one, and there were legislators, there were people--we were, we were--well, let me speak for myself. I was absolutely awed, appalled that there was one judge hearing adoption cases. One judge. And you know what happens. It goes on the bottom of the docket, and the children languish in the system, in the system being in foster care, for years and years and years. That changed very quickly so that those cases would be heard immediately. Judges were on target, knew the laws. We got the fingerprint system situated for families. Moved up the process. A lot of changes came. I mean if I can say that I'm proud of one thing, it is finding homes for children. And when I came back to my office one day, the same gentleman, Dennis FitzSimons [television executive]--I said to him, "You know I had no idea there were forty thousand children--there are forty thousand children in foster care, but my goodness, there's a one hundred and some thousand children in the State of Illinois. They don't have homes for them. We have to help them." And I remember him being very gracious to me and listening and he said, "We'll talk about it." Well, we did talk about it. I don't think he really thought I would go away. I think he wanted me to go away, but I don't think he actually thought that. In his own mind, he knew that somebody had to do something and why not us. WGN-TV [Chicago, Illinois television station] stepped up to the plate, gave a million dollars in airtime the very first year. Actually more than that. In the seven and a half years, almost eight years that we have been involved with this adoption program here that I have the privilege of hosting, we have--more than 50 percent of the children have found homes. They've actually been adopted. They have been taken out of the system. Many of the children were children with disabilities. Many of these children are children that we call children with special needs. Many of these children are young children that people thought no one would ever want. We've reduced the roles tremendously be working as a team with the Department of Children and Family Services, the Governor's Office, individuals, churches, the ministers have come on board. One Church, One Child, that was begun by Reverend George Clemons, who was the Catholic priest who adopted a couple of kids himself. We've just grown to today, where recently, we had the actual unveiling, after seven years, of looking for the opportunity to have a stamp to go across the world where you could go into a postal service and ask for a stamp. We have the unveiling of a stamp, an adoption stamp that says, "Adoption is a good thing. Finding a home for a child. Adoption." And at the unveiling came really famous people. Muhammad Ali showed up. He's adopted a child. Gale Sayers [football player], best running back ever, Chicago Bears [football team]. Now a businessman in the city of Chicago, adopted a child. Though his child is grown, he and his wife are still very much involved with adoption. Dave Thomas, the owner of Wendy's [restaurant chain] who was himself an adopted child like me. I'm very proud of that. And I'm very proud of my station, because they could have given up. We've given over a million dollars every year in airtime to these spots. And these spots are not just in Chicago. They're in fifty-five million homes. People call a 1-800 number and they find children who live in the State of Illinois. Their faces are on camera with me as well as in the newspaper at the same time. Newspapers around the state of Illinois run their faces almost simultaneously. So we've maximized the press. I'm ecstatic. We have won an awful lot of awards because of it. But that's just a tiny little piece. The biggest, biggest reward is when a parent walks up to me in the grocery store and says, "Can I hug you. I adopted this kid, and she changed my life." Or when a child walks up to me and says, "You know I'm adopted. You know that don't you?" As though I know each one of them by name and face. It's been wonderful. It brings tears to my eyes when I think about it because I was that little kid who was adopted who all I ever heard was, when you're adopted, you're not as good as everybody else. And when you're abused as a child, you grow up to become abuser. You become an abuser, and I determined that that would never be me. And I adopted a young man, so I am not only Toya's [Monet, Dee's daughter] mother, but I'm the mother of a young man who is an attorney here in the city. His name is attorney Richard Wright. He's married and has children. Very fine young man who, like me, gives back. He's now an ordained minister. It's been good. It's been very good and it's not over. That's the good part. Speaker 1: And your friendship with Brenda--with Edgar did that make a special bond or was that more politics? Speaker 2: It was necessary at the time. It was. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I have tremendous respect for that lady. Speaker 1: Okay. That's it. Speaker 2: It continues now though, I must say with the new first lady, Laura Lynn Ryan, who has also dedicated herself to this issue very, very much so. So, I'm--I feel like a little bit of a catalyst, but also a little bit of a follower. It wasn't just me. My passion and my craziness wouldn't let it stop. Speaker 1: That's shows you you're a leader in that way. You know, and when you have those passions, they will take you far. They will all the time. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: They will. Story_ID: 6451 Speaker 1: This is my daughter, Toya [Monet], and my granddaughter, Marissa [Monet], with us trying to cheer her up. She had a bad cold and a runny nose and she wasn't a very happy camper that day (laughs). Speaker 2: [Merri Dee (left) hugs her granddaughter, Marissa Monet (center) and daughter, Toya Monet (right), ca. 1990s. From the collection of Merri Dee.] Story_ID: 6452 Speaker 1: This is some of my colleagues, management. Speaker 2: At WGN [-TV, Chicago, Illinois television station]? Speaker 1: At WGN. Some of my management colleagues. This is the whole department head. And some of these peoples' faces have changed from last year to this year. A few of them have transitioned to other departments, other business units within the company. As they say, they have moved on up to the East Side. Speaker 2: [Merri Dee (third from right) with colleagues from WGN-TV, Chicago, Illinois, not dated, from the collection of Merri Dee.] Story_ID: 6453 Speaker 1: The former Superintendent of Rolice, Matt Rodriguez. Speaker 2: [Merri Dee (left) with Chicago Police Superindendent, Matt Rodriguez, Chicago, Illinois, not dated, from the collection of Merri Dee.] Story_ID: 6454 Speaker 1: The present Mayor of the City of Chicago [Illinois], Richard [M.] Daley. Speaker 2: [Merri Dee (right) with Chicago Mayor Richard M. Daley, Chicago, Illinois, not dated, from the collection of Merri Dee.] Story_ID: 6455 Speaker 1: The gentleman up on the left on the top was Paul Davis, my news director when I--not when I started, but a few years later. And over to the right is the man who gave me tremendous--right there. There he is in the middle. If you come over and show those two guys there together--. Speaker 2: In the background? Speaker 1: Well, Speaker 2: These two? Speaker 1: Right there. The one on the left is Dennis FitzSimons who is now the executive vice president of Tribune Broadcasting--president of Tribune Broadcasting. The gentleman on the right is now the general manager here at WGN-TV [Chicago, Illinois television station]. He was then station manager. And to the left of Dennis FitzSimons I mentioned earlier that there was a young lady who worked here who is now a general manager, so move. Right to the left--she's right there on the end. She is now the general manager of a TV station in Washington [D.C.], Pam Pearson. We're proud of that. Speaker 2: Okay? Speaker 1: Well, let me get the--big--everybody shots. Speaker 2: [Merri Dee (back row, third from right) with the staff of WGN-TV news, Chicago, Illinois, ca. 1985; also featured: News director, Paul Davis (top left); Dennis FitzSimons (center), president of Tribune Broadcasting and Pam Pearson (bottom, third from left). From the collection of Merri Dee.] Story_ID: 6456 Speaker 1: The young lady on the right is Micah Materre who came back to Chicago [Illinois] after spending eight years in Detroit [Michigan] in television, and we [WGN-TV, Chicago, Illinois television station] luckily got her. She is a Chicagoan and she is the new mom as of two days ago of Lewis Materre Jackson. And the young man in the middle is our morning sports anchor, Mike Barz. Speaker 2: [Merri Dee (left) with WGN-TV co-workers, Micah Materre (right), and Mike Barz (center), Chicago, Illinois, not dated, from the collection of Merri Dee.] Story_ID: 6457 Speaker 1: Our [WGN-TV, Chicago, Illinois television station] 9:00 p.m. anchor [Allison Payne]. Speaker 2: [Merri Dee (right) with WGN-TV news anchor, Allison Payne, Chicago, Illinois, not dated, from the collection of Merri Dee.] Story_ID: 6458 Speaker 1: She is the executive director of the National Kidney Foundation. Speaker 2: Do you know her name? Speaker 1: Of Illinois. Speaker 2: [Merri Dee (right) with the executive director of the National Kidney Foundation of Illinois, not dated, from the collection of Merri Dee.] Story_ID: 6459 Speaker 1: That's Merri Dee and her twin, her daughter [Toya Monet], her best friend at my niece's wedding. We were sparkling that day. Speaker 2: [Merri Dee (left) with her daughter, Toya Monet, at a niece's wedding. From the collection of Merri Dee.] Story_ID: 6460 Speaker 1: This is a very special card. I was one of eight women chosen when Bloomingdale's [department store] opened to have the photographs taken. And this particular--the artist that did these--last name is White--is such an excellent person. She did everything. We were all in color. She made it into black and white, and the original pieces that I have is painted--just the flower is painted. She's Sharon White. She's an outstanding artist, outstanding. This piece was used as the opposite side of the mailing for Bloomingdales when they announced they were in Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 2: [Merri Dee models in an advertisement for Bloomingdale's department store, Chicago, Illinois, not dated, from the collection of Merri Dee.] Story_ID: 6461 Speaker 1: That's Toya [Monet, Merri Dee's daughter], my best friend and mommy. Speaker 2: [Merri Dee (left) with her daughter, Toya Monet, not dated, from the collection of Merri Dee.] Story_ID: 6462 Speaker 1: That's Marissa [Monet, Dee's granddaughter], my clone, with Gammy's glasses on. Speaker 2: So is Gammy your name? Speaker 1: Gammy. Yeah. Speaker 2: [Merri Dee (left) with her granddaughter, Marissa Monet, ca. 1990s. From the collection of Merri Dee.] Story_ID: 6463 Speaker 1: This is [granddaughter] Marissa [Monet], you know I'm four now. I'm a big girl now, Gammy. You know I'm four. Speaker 2: [Merri Dee's granddaughter, Marissa Monet, ca. 1990s. From the collection of Merri Dee.] Story_ID: 6464 Speaker 1: Miss Marissa [Monet, Dee's granddaughter]. This is her first beautiful long gown and her first wedding that she was the flower girl in. She was the flower girl in the wedding of the young lady who babysat for her as an infant who got her masters from Northwestern. Marissa lives right by Northwestern University [Evanston, Illinois]. Her mother is at Northwestern University every day in her head because that is her school. Speaker 2: [Merri Dee's granddaughter, Marissa Monet, dressed as a flower girl, not dated, from the collection of Merri Dee.] Story_ID: 6465 Speaker 1: That young man that I said helped me on my way to get the victim's bill of rights passed for the State of Illinois, Jesse White, state representative is now the secretary of the state. Speaker 2: [Merri Dee (right) with Illinois Secretary of State Jesse White, ca. 1990s. From the collection of Merri Dee.] Story_ID: 6466 Speaker 1: Adopting a child, building a home, creating a world, shaping a life. Speaker 2: Oh, that's what the stamp says? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Oh, that's nice. Speaker 1: A family can make such a difference. Speaker 2: So you work primarily with The Cradle? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: No, but it's--. Speaker 1: No, that's just where we had the big unveiling under a big tent and people came. That was all. We actually donate funds, though, to The Cradle now to assist. We've been doing an adoption party every year at the holiday time for these children and families. That's been going on for probably about six years. Speaker 2: What are your views about orphanages? Because I often think that they're not a bad thing in today's world. Speaker 1: Well, it's hard for me to say anything bad about them, because it was what I want--you know, it's where I went, and it's part of how I grew up. And the Lafond Boy's Home [New Orleans, Louisiana] was an orphanage and it wasn't bad. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Because I think some of the kids would be much better, I'm telling you. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) I think that we probably would be better off now, especially the minute the kids start getting older and don't get adopted. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: You create a nice world for them. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) For a family Speaker 1: But there have to be strict laws and committed people Speaker 2: [U.S. Postal memorabilia promoting adoption presented to Merri Dee by The Cradle, Evanston, Illinois, May 11, 2000. From the collection of Merri Dee.]..