 Story_ID: 179223 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Observing is Mrs. Billups and Evelyn Chapman. Sir, can you please state your name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: Vernon Nathaniel Dobson. V-E-R-N-O-N, N-A-T-H-A-N-I-E-L, D-O-B-S-O-N. Speaker 1: Okay, and can you give us your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Ten twenty-nine twenty-three [10/29/23], Baltimore, Maryland. Speaker 1: And what is your occupation sir? Speaker 2: Minister of Union Baptist Church [Baltimore, Maryland]. Speaker 1: All right, and what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date? Today is the fifteenth of November '03 [2003]. Speaker 1: All right and where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: (Laughter) In our church in (unclear) Baltimore, in the Union Baptist Church. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: Main sanctuary. Story_ID: 179224 Speaker 1: Okay, all right now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight, People magazine questions we always ask. Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: They just require a short answer, in fact they only deserve a short answer. Speaker 2: The first one is, sir, what is your favorite food? Speaker 1: Favorite food, chicken. Speaker 2: Okay. Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 1: Favorite color? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Blue. Speaker 2: Okay. Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 1: Christmas. Speaker 2: A favorite vacation destination? Speaker 1: Catonsville [Maryland]. Speaker 2: What, I'm sorry? Speaker 1: Catonsville. Speaker 2: Catonsville? Speaker 1: That's as far as I go yeah, right outside of Baltimore [Maryland]. Speaker 2: Here in Maryland? Okay, alright. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: And sir, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 1: Not really. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: All of 'em grab me, whichever one comes to mind at the time. Story_ID: 179225 Speaker 1: Okay, all right let me ask you about your family history. I'm gonna ask you about your mother's side of the family and your father's side of the family. I want to start by asking you about your mother's side. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Estelle Irene Dobson, Cook-Dobson. E-S-T-E-L-L-E, I-R-E-N-E, C-O-O-K, D-O-B-S-O-N. Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: I don't know. My mother is deceased. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, I don't know (unclear). Speaker 1: Okay, does 1901 sound about right (unclear)? Speaker 2: It would. Speaker 1: I saw it on the form (unclear). Speaker 2: Oh, great. Speaker 1: Okay, did you know where she was born? Speaker 2: Yeah, Cooksville, Maryland Speaker 1: Okay, alright. Can you tell us what you know about her side of the family? How far back can you trace them? Speaker 2: Oh, I have--I did not know her mother. I knew her father and I was almost in awe of him. He was a guy about 425 pounds, Indian, beautiful black hair, always playing out the Indian side although he was colored just like we were, but--and always pontificating. He is a guy who came to all of the dinners at the house, never brought anything except himself, and he always have--say the grace and always do the carving and great prayer. When he--in fact he was one of the main--when he came to Baltimore [Maryland]--one of the big members at the church--the last church where your cousin served, Metropolitan [United] Methodist Church [Baltimore, Maryland]. He was Methodist. Speaker 1: Yeah, Lavelle Parham was my cousin (laughter). Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah and he presided over all of the great occasions in our family, funerals, weddings, Sundays, anything where there was a big meal. Speaker 1: He was 425 pounds or so? Speaker 2: Yeah, 425 pounds. Speaker 1: Was he tall? Speaker 2: Tall, handsome fellow, was six feet, looked like--hands twice my size, and he always loved to be a mystery man. He did not talk about the history of the black community with any enthusiasm because he was half-Indian and half-colored, but he was just amused behind anybody else's conversations around the struggle as black people. He'd just listen twiddling his fingers. Living up in Howard County [Maryland] he amassed a lot of land because Maryland like--even though it's the first free state, like other states allowed people who took care of the land to have a little piece of land. So he was an entrepreneur of sort, and he took his little piece and he'd always add a piece of the man's land that he was keeping onto his so by the time he had left Howard County to come to Baltimore, he had a sizeable piece of land. It had increased under divine intervention to a pretty large piece of land, and got--put money for it. Stingy as he could be, took every dime and kept it in a big trunk and we were always under divine indictment almost not to bother that trunk. That's where the treasure was and he kept it until he died. Speaker 1: Okay, what was your grandfather's name? Speaker 2: Moses Cook. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. You say you never knew your grandmother on that side right? Speaker 2: Annie [ph.] but only--only a faint glimmer of her. Speaker 1: Did your grandfather talk about his ancestors, his mother and father or? Speaker 2: He wouldn't--not my father's, I mean my mother's mother would not because she wanted to protect the fact that he was not of our clan really, he was Indian as much as he was Negro, or whatever he was, colored. Speaker 1: So he didn't talk about his parents (unclear)? Speaker 2: No, he'd get teary when he talked about slavery and about the abuse of it. Speaker 1: Did he--was he a slave himself? Speaker 2: No, he was not a slave but he had a memory of slavery, so he'd talk about other people's enslavement, and the viciousness of it. Speaker 1: Do you remember any specific stories he told about it? Speaker 2: No, he would not talk about it. Again, he always stayed above the fray. My father's father talked about it. Story_ID: 179226 Speaker 1: Now, what about your father's side of the family? Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Yeah, my father's--my father's--father's name, full name? Speaker 1: No your father's full name? Speaker 2: Oh, Spencer Griffith Dobson. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is his date of--can you spell his name for us? Speaker 2: S-P-E-N-C-E-R, G-R-I-F-F-I-T-H, D-O-B-S-O-N, and he's deceased. I don't know his birth date, but he and my mother [Estelle Irene Cook-Dobson] were within a year of each other. Speaker 1: Okay, now what do you know about your father's side of the family? Speaker 2: My father's father [Isaac Dobson] was an Eastern Shore [Maryland]--from Eastern Maryland, from Eastern Shore, Maryland, right in the heart of slavery, had a vivid memory of all the abuses that were put upon us as a people and he claimed--my father was a preacher, but he claimed that he had been turned off from religion by the racism that he experienced on the man's farm. Now, he had various pieces of land to take care of and, did it with the same kind of skill. He loved to be in charge of Mr. Musgrove's [ph.] land. He told me said, "Vernon"--and this was at the beginning of the Civil Rights Movement--he said, "those people are mean--they're mean, but you got to know how to fool them." So he'd like to wear an old hat cocked over his eye, and when I was a youngster I thought he was very solicitous of white people, cause he'd tip his hat and bend, "Good morning"! They'd go on by and would always notice as soon as they got by, he'd mutter something under his breath, calling them a "mother" or something else and he'd keep going, and one day he sat down with my brother and I, both of us turned out to be preachers. At that time we were terrorists, we were not preachers, and--. Speaker 1: At that time you were what now? Speaker 2: Terrorists. Speaker 1: Terrorists? Okay. Speaker 2: The two preachers were terrorists before God got a hold of us and changed our mind and direction and all that stuff. Of course, we were great religious so we knew what we were supposed to tell out of our church experience, that we had saved and we weren't going to steal anymore, no more cussing, take nobody's bike and all. So we were saved early. My brother was--he was really a terrorist converted. A great preacher and he knew how to be extreme and letting everybody know that he was saved so my grandfather said, "I want you all to be like your father. I want you to be preachers, but I don't want to get into none of that stuff" he said because "all the people who were in charge of me on the slave plantations were Christians." He said, "Some of the most damnable people you ever met in your life. Sometimes we'd be hungry. We'd produce the food on our part of the land, if they ran out they'd come down and make me give them my family's food to them," and he said, "so I always tip my hat to them when he'd leave the farm in the morning, 'Good morning Mr. Musgrove,' he said. Then as soon as I see them turn the bend, I'd steal his chickens, his eggs, take a pig," and he said, "and steal anything else they left in the house." So he said that I think that God has somehow just wanted me--I don't believe there could be a God who really supported my interests and the interests of my family, but your daddy, he said, he's a--then he'd get teary about my father. He said, "One of the finest men I've ever known in my life, you be like him doesn't cuss, don't drink whiskey." Story_ID: 179227 Speaker 1: He [Dobson's paternal grandfather, Isaac Dobson] said, I gotta keep--I gotta keep a drink. Now, so he'd go down to the--in the field until spring and pull his jug up by the string and take a slug and then put it back down there to keep it cool. Speaker 2: In a well or--a stream or was it a well? Okay. Speaker 1: Well, yeah. He use to like to stand outside the church and hear my father [Spencer Griffith Dobson] preach but he wouldn't go in, and he had--my father had four brothers who all lived up in Howard County [Maryland] and when they came to Baltimore [Maryland], they took residence on Pennsylvania Avenue. It is about two blocks down from here. It was a strip where all the night clubs were and all the bars and all the great singers, Billie Holiday, Cab Calloway, Duke Ellington, we saw them everyday down there and they hung out with them. These guys were celebrities and my mother [Estelle Irene Cook-Dobson] was always making certain that we did not have an affinity for that side of him--of the family. They were not Christians. One of my brothers--uncles looked like Billie Dee Williams, handsome and the ladies were all over him all the time. My mother would, "don't even"--she wouldn't let us go with him because he was too aggressive around the ladies and we had to be Christians in our heart. Of course, my father was too. Speaker 2: Who was your grandfather's name? Speaker 1: Isaac. Speaker 2: Isaac Dobson, right? Speaker 1: Isaac Dobson. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I got a picture around him, here--somewhere of him. Speaker 2: We'll show it later-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --when we finish the interview, yeah. Story_ID: 179228 Speaker 1: Tell us about your mother's [Estelle Irene Cook-Dobson] personality. What kind of a person was your mother and what did she do? Speaker 2: My mother was an intellect who wanted you to know that she was an intellect. She got all the schooling that she could get in Howard County [Maryland]. At that time the Lord did not allow colored people to get public education so they went to the school at Mount Gregory [United Methodist] Church [Cooksville, Maryland] which was six grades and that is as far as you could go. The reason all the family moved to Baltimore [Maryland] and where they lived is now the famous strip that [James] Jim Rouse created called "Columbia" [Maryland], but they lived up there in the country then and college kids would come to Baltimore after they exhausted their six years, six years in church school and in order to get into public schools. Story_ID: 179229 Speaker 1: Harvey Johnson who was the minister of this church [Union Baptist Church, Baltimore, Maryland] was the guarantor of our participation in public education in Baltimore [Maryland], but it did not get to the [Howard] County [Maryland] in time to help them. In fact that was one of the big things he did as a prelude to developing the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], forcing the State of Maryland to allow colored children to be educated in public schools, and it was also one of the premises on which he put the Church into a continuing engagement of this apartheid condition that we lived in. A whole lot of people think that because Baltimore was the first "free state" that it was not southern in its tendencies. Baltimore is just as racist as any other state anywhere else, but I remember when I went into the [U.S.] Navy I was boasting in Chicago [Illinois] of the fact that "I not from down south man, I'm from Baltimore" (laughter), and an old fat boy from Mississippi told me one day, "Look he said, you from the South too, you just up South and we down South" (laughter), and he was right, Baltimore did not escape--in fact none of the places up until about the '40s [1940] really responded to our personhood, our persona. They resisted it and would not allow us to be included. That's why Harvey Johnson, and I'll keep coming--going back to him, but that's why he's such a--. Speaker 2: He's quite a hero in this community, right? Speaker 1: 'Aw, man, he's Mr. Civil Rights and what angers me is people--HistoryMakers don't know him as a broad person, for example W.E.B. Du Bois claims that he started NAACP. Harvey Johnson had two or three things done here in Burling [ph.] before W.E.B. Du Bois ever had denied re-movement. He invited Harvey Johnson to deny re-movement in that--in '23 [1923]--because Harvey had already through the Church developed some access for us in public education and in law and that's why I invited him up here. So it was--it's out of that richness that I find it a joy to be a part of this church. Speaker 2: So, he was an organizer of people and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Oh, great organizer. Speaker 2: All right. Story_ID: 179230 Speaker 1: He [Harvey Johnson] was, again going back to my mother [Estelle Irene Cook-Dobson] the question you asked, they were born out of the same garment of destiny. They did not--and I think Fred [Frederick] Douglass and all these people, they did not have the access to a formal education, but they had the spiritual core that allowed them to go way beyond their own time and generation expressing the intellectual gifts that God puts in all of us and allows us to expand as we are aggressive enough to expand. My mother came from Howard County [Maryland] to Baltimore city [Maryland] to continue her education. In fact the whole family, there's eight of them (unclear) their education at Morgan [College, later Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland]. We were always--in the early years we were always proud of the fact that my mother and my father [Spencer Griffith Dobson] went to Morgan--sort of put down a bit when we found out that Morgan was a high school really, it was not a college at that time, sort of a boarding school when it first started out, and so these people came from surrounding counties going to Morgan had really not had a full-blown college education, but she always kept that as a part of her retinue [resume] that she was a graduate of Morgan, and mama was also a kind of elitist. People who taught me in high school around here at 130, Nellie Buchannan and others remember "Cookie" they use to call her as a great student at Morgan with them and they never exposed the fact that she was not really in the college course at that time. She was one of their sorority and, she--President of Minister's Clubs, developed another interdenominational group of ministers, developed a group of women who took on Pennsylvania Avenue corridor [Baltimore, Maryland] when they did not allow colored people--imagine this, to go into Tommie Tucker's [Tommie Tucker Five and Dime, Baltimore, Maryland] and get a hot dog and sit. Now, when you talk about that and put it in context that's (unclear), it almost seems impossible, but then you remember Baltimore at that time, you couldn't go down to--you couldn't go anywhere and eat, better not sit down and you better be grateful that you were able to get a hot dog or a sandwich and somebody would give it to you for the price if you could afford it. So she was also a great organizer, always a leader in our church. My brother Harold always said that she pastored, and my father was the assistant pastor (laughter). He's almost right and I hope she doesn't interfere with my conversation right now 'cause I don't mean that. I'm still scared of her, but that's the way it was, and she was a beautiful woman, chunky, her father [Moses Cook] formed a panel out of (unclear). In terms of being a mother, she was a mother not just to the six of us. She was a mother--her mother died when she was young so she was a mother to her brothers and sisters also. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: The kind of maternal instinct, that shot through her whole being, and before they moved from Howard County to Baltimore she had all these children to take of and saw them all the way through school, insisted that all of them went to high school and graduated. Story_ID: 179231 Speaker 1: Tell us something about your father's [Spencer Griffith Dobson] personality and what he did now? Speaker 2: My father was a great man. I'd say he's tough-minded but tender hearted. He would cry at the drop of a hat, but he believed that everything that he had belonged to his children, his family, his church, his community nothing withheld. If somebody had a need it was theirs and he would really practice--I wish--I wish I could be the kind of Christian he was. He practiced the virtues. He--in a little church we had in Pimlico [neighborhood, Baltimore, Maryland], my earliest experience in a Baltimore Church. He pastored that church; there were about twenty-five people in there. Every family in there knew that they would not go hungry because of Pastor Dobson. Every family in there--in that community knew that he was their lawyer, a high priest. He was their defense. Everybody in that Pimlico community knew that the church was what the church was supposed to be, an intimate fellowship empowering the community into itself. What happened was when he went to Pimlico none of the children out there had ever finished high school. When we left after ten years, the joy for us was that every child out there went to high school. That was the thing they wanted--they enjoyed fact that they finished high school. Now the reason they didn't finish high school was because there was no school in Pimlico for colored, Negro children then and they would come to--have to come to Baltimore [Maryland], get transportation to continue their education but he--he affirmed that for them. He worked at the stone quarry first while he was a beginning preacher. He offended my grandfather [Moses Cook], my mother's [Estelle Irene Cook-Dobson] father because we were under a Methodist discipline, John Miller who plays the organ for me--his father was my father's pastor in Howard County [Maryland] and a Methodist. He got angry when they--the Methodists can change you around the way they want you. So they sent him to Baltimore from Mount Gregory [United Methodist Church, Cooksville, Maryland] and he didn't like it so he decided to leave the Methodist Church and start a church of his own and he took my father with him as a youngster and they began a Church that is now Unity [United] Methodist Church [Baltimore, Maryland]. They went out of the Methodist Church and they went back in, but my father was under Reverend Miller, and when he left there he took up ministry as a Baptist and of course that disappointed my grandfather greatly. That's the worst thing he could ever do. Speaker 1: Go from Methodist to Baptist. Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, my God! The Baptist is the worst--there is no God in him, you know. "Stay away from me", and he was disappointed with me also and my brother. He counseled us many times about not being in the real faith because--"now you say you take those Baptist fellows, dumb as (unclear) ass, he says, it's true. The Methodists they have a discipline. Vernon, I wish you would come back to God," you know. Then I'd tell him I had as much God as he did. Get the tar knocked out of me. Oh, he was--everybody feared him when he spoke, even God listened. Story_ID: 179232 Speaker 1: Tell me about growing up. What were some of the--what was the neighborhood like you grew up in and what were some of the sights and sound and smells--? Speaker 2: Fortunately for me I am in the neighborhood where I grew up [in Baltimore, Maryland]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I--I'm about ten blocks away from my spawning ground. It's a beautiful neighborhood. We had--we were the first or the second--what were we then colored? I don't know if we were colored or Negro then (unclear). There's a decade span when we changed. I think we were still--no we were Negro. That was the change when we went into that neighborhood it was all white. Speaker 1: What year would that be that you cite this change? Speaker 2: Twenty [1920] around '25 [1925], '26 [1926]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Maybe four or five years old. Story_ID: 179233 Speaker 1: So we were getting ready to talk about the change, the change from "colored" to "Negro." Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And you were going to tell me about that, how that happened. Speaker 2: Oh, I think this is--it's a sea change that only the people who experienced it who bring a memory to our journey can talk about it. The affluent black community now doesn't like to talk about that, but you can't--I think that disconnect we don't remember that each one of those separate changes brought with it a kind of redefining of who we were then they don't know how excellent our journey has been. See that's the thing that angers me. Our journey has been a magnificent journey in a system that refuses to allow us to be accepted on the basis of the excellencies that we provided not just for us but for the whole world. That's--that's what my father taught me, I think. My father [Spencer Griffith Dobson] worked a stone quarry, became one of the best people in that job, and (unclear) a superintendent when he was a Negro, but because of the color of his skin he couldn't get--be--he worked at the post office as a laborer. The belt broke--I was in the post office and the belt that brings mail in broke, and causing the post office, this was in '40 [1940] around '43 [1943], caused the post office great terror because it was at Christmas time and the superintendent said "can anybody fix the belt"? He, having done belts out there at the stone quarry to bring these stones up out of the pit, said, "I can fix it, give me two men". Within about three hours he had the post office--the mail running again. The whole post office gave him a citation in Baltimore [Maryland] for it, made headlines. They took him downtown and put him in the Mechanic's Office downtown, the first Negro--yeah Negro in that office, and the whites heard about and they said "he has no credentials, you know, he's not an engineer and we're gonna walk out if he is gonna have that job". So they took the job from him and sent him back to the Post Office to sweep the floors and then the superintendent came in about a year or so later and said, "this is a disgrace! This man saved us thousands of dollars," and he ended up in the post office as the first colored person "engineer" in the downtown office, but that's just one person's history of the way this apartheid system is vicious and will not let you go, and of course when I got into the Probation Department later on, the fact that I was training all of the whites who came in under me as probation officers to be my supervisor did not in any way cause me injury because I understood. I was supposed to train them, I was a Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] graduate, had--they were supposed to be--have Master's degrees in sociology. They didn't have it. I found out that about ten guys that I trained, none had sociology. They were all pre-law students, but they'd come in a get a job as a probation officer. I would train them. They would become my supervisor (laughter), and I'd get back in place, but I didn't cry about it because my father had had the experience before me and I knew my place, and I understood what to expect. So, that's--that's a Negro. Story_ID: 179234 Speaker 1: "Colored" was, I would say, would be defined as the time when you had nothing and you understood that you deserved nothing. Negro is--was a kind of progressive revelation about your "who-ness." I'm a person, I'm authentic, I can celebrate [Mary] McLeod Bethune, Fred [Frederick] Douglass. I can read about them not in my books, because the books I got in high school and public school were second-hand books that came from other schools, been used, abused--but my mother [Estelle Irene Cook-Dobson] was--that's another thing about her where education was concerned. A book was a priceless treasure. So you put brown paper on the back of a torn book and if you got--if you tore the page, if you got grease on it you had a whipping coming, you know. "This is where your strength lays," you know. "Don't ever abuse a book," and the other thing that I'd say about "colored" was colored and Negro defined our journey on the basis of some mythologies that attend education now that are lies, and I think if we didn't have that disconnect, we wouldn't have as much trouble as we do in public schools. When you were colored the only thing you had going for you was to get an education. Now, that's a lie that they tell now about us not wanting to learn. When we were Negro, you not only got an education, but you excelled, and the mythology is that we do not want our children to learn, to pursue excellence, but all the time, both as colored and as Negroes in public education, there was no access. Story_ID: 179235 Speaker 1: That's where the contradiction drives me crazy, you know. We have a head start center over here now. I'd like to stand on top of a roof and say, Our head start center is excellent. It is the best in the country. I see these kids come in here who are poor, who are out of touch with their own reality, who have been scarred by all the indecencies that society continues to lay upon poor people, but what they taught me at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] in 1949, I see it in residences in--a child comes in the world prepared to learn before we are ready to teach them and I see it in these kids because I remember it when I was a kid, and there the only thing that kept me from learning--I wanted to learn. The only thing that kept me from learning was that I did not have the opportunity and even when I had the opportunity it was overburdened with mis-opportunity, used books, you know. I served on three Commissions in education in my last twenty years. Every one of them found out the same thing that in Maryland we are talking about the Thornton Commission [on Education Finance, Equity, and Excellence] where we are saying the schools should not be discriminated against, that everybody ought to receive an equity, quality education. We said that ten years ago. I can show you a map of Maryland, take the money that's spent on schools, and overlay that--the economics with the geography and where there are colored----Negro--Blacks the expenditure of dollars is less, in spite of the fact that we went through what was supposed to be the "great years of integration". It ain't nothing but a reintegration of that same area, and the problem of giving equal dollars to every kid so that he is an equal in the process of becoming a student, it offends us. So, yesterday the Washington Post put out a documentary on the fact the fact that--and it hurt me, bruised me--that AIDS [Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome], not AIDS--Hispanics and blacks--and then you know what happens in my mind "Negro" and "coloreds"--are not equal in the educational enterprise. That contradicts everything that we know in a Head Start program where our presumptions are about the ability of children to learn are driven by what we know about education from psychology at Howard University in 1949, and that is children are ready to learn before we are able--. Now, parents must be involved, over there they can't come unless their parents are with them. The second thing is you must always raise the level of expectation, you don't come in here--child is crippled, cockeyed like I got, we don't send no cockeyed person out, you're in, crippled, you know, you're in. The expectation is that every child that comes in there is a learner. What happens? These children go out--and this isn't a false statistic. They go outta here and we keep testing--Ms. Billups is the director of our--I mean head of our Board over here. They are three years ahead of the average (unclear) in public school. Why don't we have universal Head Start? If in thirty years, Myrtle White Edelman and others can prove this, that's--[HM] Vernon Dobson doesn't have to say--in Mississippi they're three years ahead. Why don't we have universal Head Start for us? When we are building schools in Iraq after bombing those people out, you know, for them which happens to also to be the center of excellence. We are going to democratize them but--learning and all that stuff was--came--I learned that also at Howard, that the whole world started the thing in Africa, you know. Learned that at Howard, and so if we want to find out where it all started, you go back to Iraq and Africa and all these places and in the beginning of the human journey and then we go from there-- Story_ID: 179236 Speaker 1: Where did you go to elementary school here in Baltimore [Maryland]? Speaker 2: I went to elementary school in Baltimore about eight blocks from here, [Franklin Square] School 100 [Baltimore, Maryland], and first six grades. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Went to high school right here, 130 Booker T. Washington [later Booker T. Washington Middle School, Baltimore, Maryland], the only high school we had for coloreds. It's right around the corner. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Went to the only colored senior high school, Douglass Senior High School [Frederick Douglass High School, Baltimore, Maryland]. It has moved several times since then. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And we are sorry it's moving because we are proud of the fact that it has produced all of the national and international greats. Thurgood Marshall came out of Douglass, [HM The Honorable] Parren [J.] Mitchell came out of Douglass, all these, you know, so we can down the list. Cab Calloway came--well he wasn't a great student (laughter), but he came out of Douglass (unclear). Douglass, well everybody that came from Baltimore that has achieved anything came out of Douglass. Can any good thing come out of (unclear). Speaker 1: Tell me about your experience in grade school. Did you like school and what were your favorite subjects in school? Speaker 2: Wasn't no choice, had no choice, yeah. I grew up in that age when this was the--this was the thing that everybody saw you. You don't talk about whether you like school or not (laughter); I mean that was a must and you better like it. Make the oatmeal in the morning. Somebody had the task to make the oatmeal. Lump it up, and eat it anyhow. Off to school, you know, and then look for your mother to appear during the day to see on about one of the six. So we tried to have a coupling with each other that we would all behave cause you know mama will come up to school and she's got a right to do it, and when she came to see one, she was coming to see about all of them, and my brother was a--preacher was a malfeasance, and so he always had her up there and we would getting those side corrections because he was misbehaving, you know. One of the things that happened in school was that you have--you went to school to learn, not to be stupid and not to be undisciplined. That's another thing about education. Public education in the colored and Negro community was defined as "discipline first". Everybody disciplined you, in the halls, anybody, any teacher, any class. "Come here young man, come here", and when they talk about discipline now, they call it abuse now. You don't--over at Head Start you don't put your hands on children. They talk about "leave no child behind". When I grew up it "was leave no child's behinds", I mean they'd grab you in the hallway; shove you all upside the wall. I mean abuse and then tell, "go and tell your mother", you know. He mis-behaved and then he got another one. So you would never go home and tell that a teacher abused you. You were privileged to be abused. The elementary school that we went to had some of the best teachers in the world. And it's just--as you went from elementary to high school to high school, it got better. You know why? Cause there were no places for teachers--once they allowed Harvey Johnson--teachers the privilege of teaching colored children, there was no place else for a teacher to go except to a colored school. So in high school we had people who had been to Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut], Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], Brown [University, Providence, Rhode Island]. Where else are they going? There were no colleges to teach. There was an overload and actually that's one of the deficits that I see that's been laid upon public education now that we didn't have then. Because they didn't have any other place to go, we always had excellent teachers. Other thing was, the teachers were taught to teach. You couldn't go to a college and be a history major and then teach, you had to learn the discipline of teaching to teach history, and my wife [Napoleon Dobson] was a teacher and so I know that there's a difference. Lesson plans and all this stuff, there's a way to engage a child's mind-- Story_ID: 179237 Speaker 1: Now can you name some of the teachers that you remember from school that were outstanding? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, Nellie Buchannan, Essie Hughes, Houston Jackson, who was a Director of Choir, Rueben Jones, Ms. McGuire, that's well, the--P.D.G. Pennington, who was a graduate of Brown [University, Providence, Rhode Island], Mr. Carey who taught shop; and it's the first time I got 100. He told us the first day, right around 1:30, "if you bring your apron it's clean, you don't mess up any of my material, you have 100". Man, I worked hard on that year to get 100, didn't mess up any of his material in shop, brought my apron clean every time and got 100, so ever since I was in the eighth grade I think, no I was in the ninth grade--9 B 2, and my name was on the board-- Speaker 1: Was that about 19--? Speaker 2: I was leading the class--. Speaker 1: Was this about 1934, '35 [1935]? Speaker 2: No, this was '37 [1937]. Speaker 1: Thirty-seven [1937]. Speaker 2: Around '37 [1937], on the back of the board when I walked in to look my name--and everybody just went on, said This is impossible, Dobson is leading the class in scholarship! I mean how this--it's impossible, and they said, "How did you do it?" I think my grade average was ninety-two point something. I said, "I did it 'cause I'm smart, you know." "Let me see your report card." "No, don't put your hands on my report card, I'm taking it home to mama [Estelle Irene Cook-Dobson] and let her see it first and then you can see it when I bring it back." That year I got 100 in shop because I didn't mess up any of Mr. Carey's work. I got ninety-eight in gym and some other subject, got nine--(laughter) but anyhow three of the courses was non-academic, and I had way over ninety so I led the class. Man, I was so proud. I don't care how I got it. I was so proud of the fact that I was leading the class 'cause it only happened once but--. Children are not really inspired to achieve anymore, except individuals, yeah, yeah. When it's a family enterprise, they are. My children have been blessed with the same kind of tending to in education and academic pursuits as we were with my mother. My mother demanded excellence and got it and then she had enough children in the mix to accommodate the kind of healthy competition that made everybody an achiever. Story_ID: 179238 Speaker 1: Now how many brothers and sisters do you have and where do you fall in the group? Speaker 2: I'm the second oldest and there are six of us, one sister. Speaker 1: Can you name 'em for us? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Spencer is the oldest. Spencer Dobson, Jr. I'm next. Harold is--my brother is a preacher, was a preacher and is deceased and Irving, Anna is my sister and David, and David was an outstanding musician who was the choir director and organist of a college in Orangeburg, South Carolina and died suddenly as a youngster. We don't know what happened to him, just slipped away, but a great musician. Story_ID: 179239 Speaker 1: Tell me about high school at [Frederick] Douglass [High School, Baltimore, Maryland]. What was that like? Speaker 2: Douglass was--Douglass High School was an experience of enrichment because there are more of the same. These teachers at Douglass were many of the teachers who--Harvey Johnson was the source by which they got their Master's degrees, because you not only afford to get colored teachers the ability to teach us, but then the next thing they did was enforce--they--and they took black lawyers in Maryland to the Bar by taking the state to court on that and so the first lawyers came out of here and then annually lawyers for years used to come here and celebrate the fact that Harvey had gotten them to (unclear), and the third thing was to take the State of Maryland to court for not allowing blacks to go to the University of Maryland [College Park, Maryland] and the University of Maryland--and I don't know what time it--I would say around the '50s [1950s] because [HM The Honorable] Parren [J. Mitchell] was the first--Parren Mitchell was the first--yeah, it would be around the '50s [1950], he was the first black to break the ceiling and get into schools for social work and sociology. He and I were--it was in '50 [1950]--cause he and I were in the probation department together at that time, but the University of Maryland would--the state would allow colored people, no Negroes then--Negroes to go to any other place in the country and they would pay for it to do their graduate work rather than allow them to go to the University of Maryland. So for about a decade, the colored teachers had a sweet thing going. They went to NYU [New York University, New York, New York] on the weekends, they went to Columbia [University, New York, New York], they went all over the country, and finally the state of ours came to their senses, they said, "we're crazy", cause they were--the two things happened. One was they were seeding an academic community that obviously was scholastically above the rest of the academic community so that when integration came, and one of our commissions found this out, Negro teachers were better qualified than white teachers in the system, and the reason was clear, they'd all gone and gotten their--many of them got their Master's degree free while--so when Parren broke through in the School of Social Work--Sociology, then that was the demise of our getting Master Degrees and PhDs [degrees] as Negroes in the academic community, but it also meant that in high school, [Paul Laurence] Dunbar [High School, Baltimore, Maryland] now is a high school and Douglass, they got two, Dunbar East [unable to verify] and Douglass. You got all these--you got people with master's degrees teaching in high school and a real joy for those of us who were the benefactors of this enrichment. Story_ID: 179240 Speaker 1: Now, when you were in high school [at Frederick Douglass High School, Baltimore, Maryland] did--were you engaged in like a high-school activities did--? Speaker 2: Boxing. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Basketball--couldn't make the basketball team. I could make the street team, but I couldn't make the team (unclear). I went out for it every time, made the boxing team, got medals for that and couldn't make the football team, went out for it every time. We had in this area--we always claimed we had the better team outside of high school, so we were better than the high school team 'cause we couldn't make the team (laughter). Story_ID: 179241 Speaker 1: The joy for me was when I went in the [U.S.] Navy in '40 [1940]--1944, '45 [1945]. I went to [Naval Station] Great Lakes [Great Lakes, Illinois] and was fortunate enough to be in a barracks next to the twelve Negro Navy candidates for officers' candidate school [OCS]. They were all put in this barracks next to us, and in the choosing of them they chose all great athletes, the big ten. So the first twelve people were (unclear) so here we had this great academy of outstanding athletes training to be ensigns right next to us, so for a year we played the best, and with the best everyday--football, basketball and Larry Doby came out of LIU [Long Island University, Brooklyn, New York, New York] to the program up there, and I played with him, and brag about it all the time. I made the team with him. He was a great basketball--in fact he was "three lettered" football, basketball and baseball before he--he was actually better in basketball and football than he was in baseball. Because if you remember, he made the Cleveland Indians; that's the first one in the American League, but he played with us (unclear). It was a great joy for us at Great Lakes to have that kind of excellence attend our way. Story_ID: 179242 Speaker 1: When you were in high school [at Frederick Douglass High School, Baltimore, Maryland] did you have an idea, I know you came from a legacy of ministers. Did you think in high school that you would become a minister or did you have another--? Speaker 2: No, when I went in the [U.S.] Navy, because officers' candidate school [OCS] was something that I wasn't supposed to want to do, so I applied for officers' candidate school (laughter). Speaker 1: Now, you went to the Navy right after high school? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The--I got a deferment, went down to, down to Martins [ph.] and worked on airplanes and missed the weekend and so they put me in the Navy in 1943. The--when I went in the Navy took an examination along with 2,500 other people and passed as enough to be qualified for officers' candidate school, and applied for it, and on the application there were four things--I don't care about what it was, but Cornell [University, Ithaca, New York] was on there. That's one of the schools that you could go to--to do naval training. Brud Holland was a great football player at Cornell. So I wanted to be Brud Holland, so I found something on it at Cornell, I think it was engineering. So I applied to Cornell and said I wanted to be an engineer, but it was really to get to Cornell to play football, course I didn't go, and that's another bitter experience (unclear). I finished up with my last interview. There were ten of us. All of us had gotten our letters that we were accepted. We were in Corpus Christi [Texas] then. The last ten, nine were white and me, I was the only black. We went in the room before all of these scrambled eggs, admirals and everything. We were accepted, but I noticed they kept me until last. It started out with 250 of us, and we were accepted and when I went in to the room it was stone silence. So, the guy who was admiral who was in charge of the credencing process said, "How'd he get here," and I said, "Sir, I passed the exam," He said, "Did anybody speak to you? Did I tell you to spea?" Well in the Navy that was a no, no. (Unclear) "No sir." "Until I ask you to speak you keep your mouth shut." Then he asked the question again around the board: "How'd he get in?" They all started laughing (laughter). He said, "You're in the wrong place son, dismissed," and so I got up and saluted and walked on out, and became a misfit for about three months, tried to sabotage everything that was down there. No letter, no explanation, nothing, and held that in my craw the rest of the time I was in the Navy. Story_ID: 179243 Speaker 1: [President Harry S.] Truman came in just as--about the time that we were to be discharged and when he got his--when he had his inauguration he looked out at the people who were leading his entourage and he didn't see any Negro--Negroes in the [U.S.] Military Honor Guard, and it is said that he went back and that day integrated the [U.S.] Navy. We didn't know what happened, all we know is that they told us to "get your gear". We were on the--we were the last barracks right on the ocean, so when the waters came in they just swept our tents down, you know, clothes and everything and--. Speaker 2: Where were you at that time? Speaker 1: Corpus Christi [Texas]. Speaker 2: Corpus Christi. Speaker 1: And we often had these typhoons and things so--. Speaker 2: This is 1946? Speaker 1: Forty-six [1946], so we--next thing you know we got moved up to the cement part of the base that was cemented out and brick buildings, man, we were living in basketball courts, aw, man! Speaker 2: So they had you all down on the-- Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, right down on the water and many times we--overnight the--in Corpus Christi you'd have those heavy storms. They'd just come up and sweep all your gear and everything--sweeped you out too (laughter), and we were first and this is--this was the inequity of it, and the WAVES [Women Accepted for Volunteer Emergency Service] were next. We were first and the all the Negro Navy personnel right on the edge of the water, then the next phalanx [ph.] were WAVES. Speaker 2: The women? Speaker 1: The women and no blacks women there, they were all--and the next were all the center seaman as part of it or permanent part of it were the whites and officers. So, when people talk about the apartheid conditions that attend the ways of us in the city, it didn't stop with the city. It went into the [U.S. military] service. It followed us all the way wherever we went, and you accepted it, and you better not protest and this is--this built up the kind of anger in most of us that had no way of being addressed until the Civil Rights Movement. Story_ID: 179244 Speaker 1: And this is the glory of the church. The church gave us a kind of disciplined passion that really interpreted what we would do in the Civil Rights Movement to bring the kind of freshness and newness to our life--our lives on the plantation, and most people don't understand that. They think that the response of the Civil Rights Movement was a--and it--a reading of the [Mahatma Mohandas Karamchand] Gandhi sympathies into to our stuff (unclear). It was the reading of our sympathies, our passions into our stuff. It was the Church that always--before I ever got into the ministry--when my father [Spencer Dobson] was a minister, it was the church that always made us respond to all indecencies that were laid upon us with a kind of reasoned response. Story_ID: 179245 Speaker 1: When I was a child, I saw on Edmondson Avenue [Baltimore, Maryland] on Carey Street [Baltimore, Maryland] the guy who was--I was in high school [at Frederick Douglass High School, Baltimore, Maryland] and the guy on the corner before I went into the [U.S. military] service, the guy on the corner in the basement sold ice. The Jewish store was above him and he was in the basement. It was an all-colored neighborhood then, and I use to work in this ice place, and made good money. I'd make a dollar a week chipping ice away, and mama [Estelle Irene Cook-Dobson] didn't know it. He also had a numbers business going on. Of course, she'd have killed me if she had known that. I didn't know it. I didn't know it what (unclear) numbers. I'd seen people coming in. In fact they were shooting dice in the front also. I didn't know that cause I was a Christian. I wouldn't dare go into a place, a den of inequity until one day I did cut a ten cent piece of ice for a lady--I chipped it kind of close. It was a five cent piece and I tried to save five cents for myself. So I chipped it kind of close and she said, "Is that a ten cent piece of ice?" I said, "Yes, ma'am." She said, "I'll slap the living daylights out of you. Give a ten." So I chipped her a ten (laughter). That almost ended my job you know, but other than that I didn't have any difficulty. This woman went into the basement to play her numbers, and numbers at that were illegal. See, now they're legal. The state can play numbers--but that was a good business in those days, numbers. So--and it belonged to us in the indigenous community. She went in to play her numbers and she came out and policemen came from everywhere on these little tricycles. Evidently they were raiding the number joint, and he said something--they said something, "Did you go in there and play the numbers?" She said, no and that was the wrong answer, and the first police officer hit her. It was all white policemen and then blood just flew everywhere and then about ten officers beat that woman until blood was running in the street like water, and the thing that hurt me was all those men down there that was shooting crap--that's a--I always wondered, Where--what kind of man are you? Not one of 'em would go out there and come--I mean they would beat that woman until blood just ran and then lock her up--in my mind I think that made me a civil rights responder then. I said, "I'll never let it happen--I'll never--that will never happen as long as I am alive to see a--to stand by and see a woman," but I understood later. Why--they could--all of them would have been killed, they would have just taken their pistol out and shot 'em, but to see that kind of indecency going on in our community because she went in there and played numbers was a kind of memory that I carried into the Civil Rights Movement. A memory of not being able to buy a hot dog on Pennsylvania Avenue [Baltimore, Maryland] and sit down, a memory of not being to go into the stores on Eutaw Place [Baltimore, Maryland] and try on anything. You could buy it but you bet not try it on, and when they would try it on they'd put a lining for coloreds, put a lining in a hat and then put it on your head, and I worked on the Hucksters [ph.] when I was in Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], and could not try on anything in Hucksters; but I was a laborer, kept that place spotless. The colored people, Negro people who worked there couldn't try on anything, couldn't buy it. Story_ID: 179246 Speaker 1: So when people respond to or seek an answer to our anger that abides, they just have not walked in our shoes. The Indian says in order for you to understand who I am, you'd have to walk a day in my sandals, in my shoes and we're--there's a disconnect. The affluent black community's getting over it. "Don't want to remember--I don't--it never happened". As a result, it is revisiting us, and we still don't understand that the condition under which we have struggled to survive abides, you know. Two-thirds of the people in the world are colored people, and now Britain, France, Germany, America is about empire building again. I was--I've been blessed in the ministry to run into people like Tutu. Speaker 2: Bishop Desmond Tutu in South Africa, right? Speaker 1: Yeah, Dr. [Levi] Watkins over at [Johns] Hopkins [University, Baltimore, Maryland] has had him speak to him several times, and Tutu says, and says it eloquently. He says, "When the people come to South Africa they come with the Bible and they stay a while, and when they leave they leave the Bible with us, and take all of our oil and our diamonds and our rubies." And he's right, that's what colonization has been over time. Story_ID: 179247 Speaker 1: I wanted to know what you did after the [U.S.] Navy? Speaker 2: Well, after the Navy I came--I went--all of us did that, went to school on the GI Bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944], best thing that ever happened in America. Speaker 1: Okay, so where did you go? Speaker 2: Howard University [Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 1: All right, now, this is--? Speaker 2: Oh, Howard (singing song) we sing of thee. Speaker 1: Is this '47 [1947] or? Speaker 2: No, '50s [1950], '49 [1949]. Speaker 1: Forty-nine [1949] okay. Speaker 2: Naw' you're right '46 [1946]. I graduated in '49 [1949] from undergrad [undergraduate]. Speaker 1: Okay, so the same year that you marched for [President Harry S.] Truman's-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --inauguration you start at Howard? Speaker 2: Came out and was fortunate enough to go all of the way through undergraduate school, and all the way through graduate school on the GI Bill. Story_ID: 179248 Speaker 1: Now earlier you mentioned some of the courses you had at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.]. You mentioned black history being taught at Howard. Did you have (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: Howard was the creme de creme. I mean at Howard you had the greatest of everything. You had the scholars in every field. Mordecai Wyatt Johnson collected the greatest scholars in America and housed them at Howard University. Howard University, and he was the greatest of all of them, and he pastored Howard University. He as a preacher, did not have a Ph.D. [degree] but smarter than anything that was over there. He had his master's [degree] of sacred theology from Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], but he would walk into zoology and teach the class. He's--he's a great guy, and he took Howard from a collective of outstanding small departments into the great academy that it has become-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And this expanded offerings throughout all the academic experiences. Speaker 1: Now you--at that you all had E. Franklin Frazier-? Speaker 2: E. Franklin Frazier. Speaker 1: William Leo Hansberry--- Speaker 2: Oh, you--you from Howard? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. I--and I had all--I had 'em all. Hansberry is a little fellow looks like a black Roman. Bald headed, keen as he could be and a little sharp nose and he was the one who taught me all my black history, and long before other historians have attached it to paper, he taught us back there that civilization began in Africa and then he brought it all to fore. I mean he didn't make that statement, he taught us about the excellence (unclear). He was the one who taught us about what Africans consisted of. He was the one who wetted my appetite as far as--because my father [Spencer Griffith Dobson] was a preacher, of now going into religion even--I was still playing with this stuff that I was going to be an engineer, but going into religion because he, in anthropology, told us about the beginning of man and would never say it, all those guys were kinda arrogant, they'd never give religion credit, but everything he said indicated that there was a sedimentary spirituality about the core of man's quest for "is-ness." So everybody who taught in Howard taught as if he or she were preachers. They--I think they didn't like the fact that Harvard--that Mordecai was so predominant, so they wanted to show that they knew as much about history, more about history than Mordecai did, cause Mordecai would interfere in your business, you know so they were attempting to correct him. They were always in power--anything in his set of knowledge that he had about the beginning of man, and it was at Howard at that time that--well you couldn't go to Howard without getting a clear understanding of the human journey, and being inspired whatever your discipline might have been to want more, and also to anchor your own expertise into continuing the journey. That's--you have not gotten where--you are not where you ought to be but you are continuing now, and also--at Howard they were arrogant. All those teachers were arrogant. They came from Harvard and Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut] and all those places, but they would tell you in teaching you that they had to go to Yale and Harvard to teach them, you know. They would tell you in a minute, they were not aware of this. They had no understanding. And, 'aw I used to love it man, you talking about a joy! These people would lecture from their membrane and give such integrity to what you were about, that every person who went out of Howard, went out of Howard claiming some responsibility to continue in the journey. Howard has slipped so far from that as have all of our institutions-- Story_ID: 179249 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But now here, you got a little ole nappy headed boy from Harlan Square [Baltimore, Maryland] coming through colored schools that had the best teachers before integration going into an apartheid condition in the [U.S.] Navy, that had my whole inner self grinding against itself out of anger, and having no where to place this anger in proper perspective and running into Howard University [Washington, D.C.], Mordecai [Wyatt] Johnson who was--he's one of the great philosophers who spoke so eloquently about the rest of our journey. One of the greatest preachers America ever produced. He looked like a white man, in fact we thought he was white, but he could man, that guy! And everything he preached, and he preached every time he did the graduation, he did the--what's that thing you have before graduation? Speaker 1: I know what you're talking about. I can't think of it (unclear). Speaker 2: Any way, he did that too--. Speaker 1: Convocation? Speaker 2: Convocation (laughter) at all of them! So he had him about four vintage--vintage Mordecai and he would go down to the [U.S.] Senate to ask for money for the city on the hill, Howard University. He said, "You've got some colored peoples who will bring this country to her greatness, if you'll give us a little money to help us on our way", and I would speak, he said, to Mr. Byrnes from South Carolina, and he had no decency in his heart for the Negro, but I'd tell him about God and a radical change which take place in his heart and God would reduce him down to the place of yielding of the nerve center of his consent to God, and give Howard University the kind of money that you--you all need to be the students that you are, now don't waste it. Now, where did Mordecai come from? He came from Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia], and who did he bring with him? He brought Benjamin Mays, Howard Thurman, and who else? He brought all this--raped that school of all its outstanding minds, bought them all to Howard. So he had him a little Negroes from Harlem Park [Baltimore, Maryland] going through Booker T. [Washington] and [Frederick] Douglass, some of the richest people--then running--the next--my "mother and father like I got, ain't no comparison nowhere, and then run headlong into Mordecai, Benjamin Mays and Howard Thurman and a whole host of relatives and friends over there. The great--[William Leo] Hansberry, you know. Story_ID: 179250 Speaker 1: Tell us about Howard Thurman and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It just--it just, oh my God! It's intoxicating. I'm gon' have to quit cause I'm getting teary now really! The things that God will allow me to be privileged to sit on the baton of Leon Wright, oh, Dr. Wilson [ph.] who swallowed a dictionary. He never saw a five, six letter word that he did not prefer to a two letter one. I mean, he's 'aw--these guys were something! Thurgood Marshall was over there then in Lowell [ph.]. Speaker 1: Charles [Hamilton] Houston was (unclear). Speaker 2: Charles Houston, Naebrith [ph.], the boy who did in medicine, who? The guy who was the first Ambassador of the United Nations [HM Andrew Young]. Speaker 1: Ralph Bunche--they were all teachers (unclear), all of them teachers (unclear). I mean, just, as you go crazy. And could go into their class and sit, you know, and they would allow you to come into their classes and love to have you. "Young man, have a seat." In fact they were so arrogant about it cause they love that--that you would dare seek them out (unclear). "You know whose class you're in?" "Yes sir, yes sir." Mordecai [Wyatt Johnson] has never been given credit for or Howard Thurman for the kind of giving a prelude to the Civil Rights Movement, but Mordecai, Howard and Thurman, they were the ones who gave the philosophical grounding for the Movement, and they thought they were better--they were above violent protests, so they studied Satyagraha that's Soul Force. They studied [Mahatma Mohandas Karamchand] Gandhi, they studied with Gandhi so they brought all this stuff to their discipline and that God does not resist tyranny unless he does it out of your soul, your center and unless he does it as a discipline so to respond to racism, to segregation with an undisciplined mind or spirit, that's Howard Thurman, you know, was to give yourself over to your enemy. We got that in class every day. You, (unclear) Howard would look off and he'd cry. "If one is unable to be in control of his own 'ism,' his own 'ism,' 'his ism,' 'his ism,' then one has given license to the enemy to abuse him in his offerings and at that point you're no longer free but you are the slave of these economies to which you have given yourself. Now don't do it." "Oh, man," he used to say, "whew." And then he'd--that was all you'd get, and he'd look and tears would be coming down--"God our Father, God our Father." Story_ID: 179251 Speaker 1: Yes, we were talking about Howard Thurman. Speaker 2: Yeah, talking about Howard. He--Thurman was a part of that academy that Mordecai [Wyatt Johnson] brought to Howard University [Washington, D.C.] that made Howard University, I would say of for about thirty years one of the greatest educational centers in the world because they were collective of the great minds that came out of the struggle and who embody the whole struggle in their history. That coming through colored schools like I did, through Negro schools like I did and through colored colleges, which were excellent, but then who could not get the Ph.D. [degree] in the colored colleges and had to go on to Ivy League schools to get their Ph.D., then they'd come back--had to come back to colored schools to teach. So we were the people who got all of that excellence 'cause they had nowhere to go. Now these guys can go anywhere--anywhere they want to all over. The other day-oh this boy [Cornel] West is in trouble. Speaker 1: Cornel West? Speaker 2: Cornel West is in trouble, and the little fellow who is with him at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. Speaker 1: Gates? [HM] Henry Louis [Skip] Gates [Jr.]? Speaker 2: Yeah, they're in trouble but--and then before then there was no problem in people offering up their excellence, because they had nowhere to offer it up except in colored schools. As I was saying that Mordecai would put a caution into our anger by insisting--that we always thought as students because we were--the Civil Rights Movement was coming into vogue that we knew better than they did about all this stuff, but that's the way students are. It's dumb now when you think of it. Here all these people knew all the inconsistencies that can attach themselves to a person's journey and they were giving interpretation to and defining the next wave of the journey and we were angry with them, almost said "get outta the way, let us tear the walls down". They knew that this is a country that would have killed us by the boat loads if we'd done it, so they tried to discipline our dissent and they always try to discipline by giving a philosophical base to the struggle, interpretations of the struggle and they did--I think they did a good job. Howard in the'50s [1950] and '60s [1960] when I think of really great theological adventurers in the nation, most of them came from Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] or from Howard or they have had some of their seedings from those people and that was because a person like Howard Thurman would give proper dimension and interpretation to what the struggle meant. Always it was a pursuit of the Kingdom of God. That was the ultimate reality. It was always a reality of God trying to find space, acceptance in the world and you can never do this without finding God first and dealing with as much of God as you know and coming to know as much of God as you need to know. Story_ID: 179252 Speaker 1: Now, the other day, I heard [Desmond] Tutu reviewing what they did in South Africa to their enemies once they overthrew them. They call it "reconciliation," and he spoke well about reconciliation being the need to risk a relationship that has been injured by other people who've abused you. So you go back expose yourself to them and in doing that you are saying, You are forgiven. I am open to you even though you have abused me before. I am open to you again. And the Tribunals [Truth and Reconciliation Commission] in South Africa took all those people who abused he and all of his friends over the years and gave them forgiveness, which is reconciliation in order for healing to take place, and I heard Tutu give this conversation to students at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] because he was angry about the way America is doing in Iraq and he was laying his interpretation on the way we ought to be approaching this war climate over in there. We ought to be reconcilers if we are going to bring about healing in the world, and I said I'd had heard that before and went back to one of Howard Thurman's books. Howard Thurman being one of the most prolific writers that the race has ever produced; he has written about twenty books and he's got a chapter on "reconciliation" and there it is. Now, he wrote that back in the '50s [1950] sometime or maybe in the '60s [1960] when he was at Boston [University, Boston, Massachusetts], but there is a template for the way the whole race ought to respond to racism. If we don't learn that then we are fair game for the [former U.S. Attorney General John] Ashcroft way of seeing the world, and that is to profile and then--profile us and then respond out of a racist profiling and find legitimate the right to blow your brains out, and America is sitting right on all this terrorism right now--has created that opportunity for us almost to be non-persons again, because we got melanin in our skin because they're doing it over there they can do it over here and what hurts me is we don't have a church now that is busy about the business of empowerment. They're busy about the business of entertainment and entertainment does not give us the kind of legitimate undergirding, spiritual undergirding that we need in order to continue the journey. Story_ID: 179253 Speaker 1: Sir, what do you think about the megachurches now, the big super churches? Speaker 2: The megachurches are fine except that they defy, they defy the premise of church and that's an intimate fellowship, an intimate fellowship that is built on relationships. Religion has no meaning, no legitimacy if it does not create the opportunity for one finding his or her divinity in another, you see, and any church that goes after numbers and I'm talking about our church too and this is something we're continually struggling against. This is--and I'm not gonna dismiss Union Baptist [Church, Baltimore, Maryland], one of the greatest churches in the County. What we have done--thirteen churches that have come out this church, we have tried to dissuade ourselves of any excellence that is ours and always give God the primary resourcing of whatever we're doing and then they'll always remember that we are looking for a city out of biblical context who's building maker is God, that--that is our legitimate journey we have not found it, we are continuing that the fellowship, the struggle continues, but I'm continually wrestling with people in this church who believe that you define church by numbers, and just are dismissive of the fact that we--we are a church of about 3,000 people a week during the week when we're not in worship, and God knows that we couldn't do it if we didn't have a committed group of people worshiping here on Sunday, four [400] or 500 of them, but I wouldn't care it about it if they are under 300. If you lose the opportunity to be a person to some other person and to realize your own persona in the process, that you are not as good as, not as bad as you think, you know, that you are somewhere in between and so you are working it all out and trying to discover your "is-ness" and your "ought-ness" out of these relationships. Then we will never have community. We will never have what we call the "beloved community", but the megachurch cannot attend to personal injuries, scars, bruises, that this community continues to put upon us--ain't got time for it, you know. In a megachurch a welfare mother is some lazy prostitute that doesn't want to take care of herself. She's my daughter, she's God's child. She wants just as much as you want; I see it every day over here in Head Start, now she'll never come into this Church. Not because we keep her out, we beg them to come in, but she thinks this Church is too high falutin' for her. We are not because her child goes over there free, because the church ties into a Federal fund and her child gets an excellent education three--that puts him three years ahead of everyone else. Free, because the Church--and we don't boast about it, or say to the fellows who are up the street who've gotten caught up in drugs, they're in our Father's house. A fellowship (unclear) supposed to be, going there free, rent free, beautiful place, clean, you just have to (unclear) clean, you know, now the boys are a little angry with me 'cause I say a man can have a couple of dirty pees, they say that's wrong. They're right, I'm wrong, and I ought to tell 'em, if you pee dirty once you're out, but then I go back and tell them "give em another chance", because as a probation officer I found out that you don't get out of that kind of stuff that took you months to get into it. You cannot, I don't--oh, that's right I'm on tape, "no, they can't stay there if they don't urine clean". I'm correcting the record. They can't stay there--out, you know and I'm not gonna ask that they stay, cause if it is--they will cut off my funding, but as a probation officer I've seen a whole lot of men come to themselves after two or three years of wrestling with me, and wrestling with themselves as the primary cause for their (unclear). Don't love themselves 'cause they--so they can't find capacity to love each other or love somebody else. Story_ID: 179254 Speaker 1: I don't want to be negative about a megachurch because they have their image of God and they are working with it. I just think that one of the primary sources for becoming is intimacy. The Bible is very clear about that. "Where two or three are gathered in my name, there will I be there in the midst". The Bible is very clear about Dr. [George] Sumner calling and saying that Jesus' fellowship of the Twelve [Disciples] was a "cabal of homosexuality". That's a lie, and if it is so what! If they come to themselves so what, you know. We are looking for whole human beings, and I don't want--I don't want to get into anybody's sexual preference, I want to get into somebody's human preference! Do I want to be a child of God? Jesus never allowed himself to abuse the imprimatur of the Divine that was in every person and so he said to the woman who was caught in adultery, "Do you know who you really are? You are my daughter; you are God's because you are God's child." Boys who tricked him, he hugged them back into the fellowship, you know. I don't like to be tricked as a Minister here now. I look at a Deacon who tricks me--I keep my eye on the buzzard and first chance I get, I go upside his head, but I mean I'm not--I'm trying to become like Jesus in my heart. I haven't got it--I'm still--I'm working on it-- Story_ID: 179255 Speaker 1: Sir, I wanna take you take back to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], and get you out of Howard and--now, why did you choose psychology in the first place to major in and how did it--what made you change--? Speaker 2: I just choose psychology because it sounded esoteric. I really believed that I wanted to be a preacher all the time because my father [Spencer Griffith Dobson] was a preacher and because I saw somebody live the eternal virtues. My father wore a pin stripped suit until it wore the pins out of it, the stripes out of it and it became a blue striped suit, but not one child lacked anything, so my father was a better preacher than most of these preachers in Baltimore [Maryland], but never had a major church until his last two or three years, maybe five years in ministry and then we had to build that from the ground up, but somebody living the ethic, he lived it. You couldn't want to be anything else but--but growing up in Harlem Square [Baltimore, Maryland] I couldn't go down and tell nobody that I wanted to be a preacher. Man, I'd been whipped about fifty times. I was a knock-down man. Don't bother me--I was egg headed, real light, much lighter than I was then, get dirty--dirt all down your face--called me "yellow pine", so I had to be--I had to live up to being bad. Hit you in your mouth if you say anything to me. You can--how you gon' be a preacher? The cross had to (unclear) but all the time I really wanted to be like my father who was like Jesus in his heart, so I think now that you've pressed me for it philosophy and psychology were really the two foundations on which a religious profession would be built and that's what I took and history. Speaker 1: Okay. So, at what point did you switch--? Speaker 2: I never switched, just went right on through psychology--I graduated with a degree in psychology and philosophy and then went on to religion. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But I didn't want to be a preacher--still resisting the Holy Spirit. I went over there to teach, I was going to be a teacher, not a preacher. Speaker 1: Now, what did your father think of all of this while this is going on? Did he ever try to persuade you to--? Speaker 2: He didn't-didn't want to get into that at all. That's fine, and that was the end of it. Now, he--because that was an age when preachers' sons were--preachers were making their sons preachers. Said he didn't--he didn't want that. I don't know the answer to that. Story_ID: 179256 Speaker 1: Now, was your--you have a brother [Harold Dobson] than went into the ministry too? Speaker 2: Right behind me. He was a greater terrorist. He taught--graduated from Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] too, taught the Sunday School lesson for the Baptist Conference which is a gathering of about fifty preachers who meet every Monday at a church and that--this is a big occasion. They come down there to talk about civil rights, about everything and about a three-hour meeting every Monday, and it just goes to show you how profound he was. We--the Sunday School teacher is elected every three years to teach this group of people--ministers based on his proficiency and his scholarship, and my brother taught for thirty years once he got it. 'Course he spiced his teaching with little idioms that kept me uneasy the whole time he was teaching, but the old preachers loved it. That's--that was-especially when he'd curse. Vernon Johns one of the great Preachers of America came here to be with us for about three years and he fell in love with my brother, and we were--I loved him too, but he said, "Dobson, the thing I love about your brother Al is he understands that when God made a man a preacher he didn't take all of the choice words out of his vocabulary." Story_ID: 179257 Speaker 1: He said now Vernon Johns was a one-man Civil Rights Movement, out of Farmville, Virginia--legendary. Speaker 2: Yeah, he's the minister that preceded [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] in Montgomery [Alabama]. Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, way so far--and I' don't--I--I knew Martin, worked with him and everything, but there is no comparison. Martin and Mordecai [Wyatt Jones] and Vernon Johns--these guys are--me--they are so far ahead of us it isn't funny, but people don't--Harvey Johnson. They are--they are light years ahead of us when it comes to interpreting the struggle and making it an embodiment, but Vernon Johns was one of the--he was one of the greatest preaches that I've ever heard in my life. He and Howard Thurman would assume the stage in a preaching contest and we should've had tape recorders, because the great preachers are gone. I'm really--you don't get great preaching like that anymore. Preaching now is performance, but those guys were students of the Bible, students of all of the economies that underwrite religion--religious pursuit and they can do it standing on their feet and would be glad to do it--very egotistical (laughter) whether you ask or not and take a whole hour and just keep going. Story_ID: 179258 Speaker 1: But my brother [Harold Dobson] also--I'm not going to get away from you, but he was an excellent preacher, but they almost fired him towards the last--through saying--could say anything he wanted to say. They tolerated his cussing, Go to hell (unclear), keep going, but he was teaching about Jesus and Mary Magdalene once in the last three years and he said, (unclear) one of the preachers-"Do you have any profiles of Mary Magdalene, Dr. Dobson?" He said, naw--he said, "Well all I can tell you is she was a pretty hussy." They said, "Ahh!" That's all the preachers said. "Aw," he said, "man she was something--umh!" He said, "When Jesus first laid his eyes on her, he went crazy. He said, "And I am of the opinion and I'm searching for it now, I can't get documentation, but I'm of the opinion that he had an attachment to her that was never interrupted." They said, "What are you saying?" He said, "Aw, that was Jesus' girlfriend." (Laughter) They said, the old man jumped up and ran outside--"I can't stand anymore, I can't--" (laughter). Jesus had a girlfriend, and he hollered this and that hurt me. This old man was a senior old man. He said, "Aw you shut up." He said, "You got a girlfriend, ain't ya." So I called him that night. I said, "Look, just quit," you know, I said, "don't--don't--you--you've gone too far, now you're doing violence to these old preachers, their saints"--and (laughter), aw he said, "I'm sorry, I'm sorry." (Laughter) (Unclear) I said, well (unclear), but he was some teacher and kept that place packed because they were there to hear him teach and preach. Speaker 2: What church was he the pastor of? Speaker 1: St. Marks [Institutional Baptist Church, Baltimore, Maryland]--from my father's--the church that my father [Spencer Griffith Dobson] had its over (unclear), and he said to my father that he made him the oldest assistant minister in Baltimore [Maryland]. That's--we--he became my father's assistant after he graduated from Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] and then we built a church over in--called St. Mark's, and my father--every year he would say he was going to retire but he told Al he said, "Buddy boy, I think next year I'm gonna retire," and (laughter) next year he wouldn't retire so he would always introduce himself as the assistant pastor of St. Mark's. He was the oldest assistant pastor in Baltimore (laughter), and he'd just--of course my father kept the church until he died. Story_ID: 179259 Speaker 1: When you left divinity school [Howard University School of Divinity, Washington, D.C.]--are there any other stories from divinity school you want to tell? Anything else? Speaker 2: No, just that--just I ran into preachers all over the country. In fact, could remember them. They were all preachers who defined the Civil Rights journey wherever they were and they all to--to speak of them is to speak of all of the dead. Most of them are gone now, but just by [L.] Venchael Booth out in Ohio, Cincinnati, Ohio, great Civil Rights leader, guy in Los Angeles [California] died he was--all they--all those people coming out of Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] from the '50s [1950] until about the six [1960s]--that decade where the leaders in the Civil Rights Movements across the country, and we were privileged to respond to the fact that Mordecai [Wyatt Johnson] and [Howard] Thurman gave us the kind of grounding that we needed in our--I was just blessed here in Baltimore [Maryland] to be with a bunch of them, Frank Williams who pastored Metropolitan [United Methodist Church, Baltimore, Maryland] for years, he's in a nursing home in Washington, D.C. now. [HM Reverend] Marion [Curtis] Bascom, around the corner at Douglas Memorial [Community Church, Baltimore, Maryland], great preacher, Irving Lachman [ph.], a friend of your brother's, I mean your cousin's. All these guys were--Howard, your cousin. They were all at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] with your cousin, and you couldn't go to Howard and not come out insisting that you be included in the struggle. It made Baltimore [Maryland] a center for the Civil Rights struggle that has never been properly claimed, but in 1958 Marion Bascom who was the President of the Interdenominational Ministerial Alliance [of Baltimore] led the church community and five thousand other people to a march on Baltimore, Jackie Robinson and Jay Javers [ph.] were in the march also for fair housing, fair employment, education, if it was--it was at first a precursor to the FEPC [Fair Employment Practice Committee] law that was federal and we broke the back of the closed housing market here in Baltimore. Speaker 1: They had covenant housing here (unclear)? Speaker 2: Covenant. Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Story_ID: 179260 Speaker 1: Let's talk about that important time, I just want to summarize your, what you did when you left Howard [University, Washington, D.C.]. You just, you worked for the Probation Department, right? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: And you--did you--tell us just quickly and then we'll go to that--the other part. Speaker 2: When I left Howard because of the fact that I was a youngster and the Baptist do not allow young preachers to--that use to allow young preachers to pastor major churches. In fact when I left, the Methodists were going to give me a church. My grandfather [Moses Cook] was living then, he was--my mother's father. He was so happy cause I was coming back home to Methodism and I found out the boys were gonna send me to a church in West Virginia, up in the hills of West Virginia. Yeah, I got six children, how in the devil am I gonna go to West Virginia and pastor a church (laughter)? That's another sign so I didn't--I did not go to the Convocation that would have taken me in and I--the society remained Baptist and got the rich and rare opportunity to pastor a church in Overlea [Maryland]. Ms. [Evelyn] Chapman who is here with us today--she is one of my members, a youngster in that church and the church in Overlea was a delight. I mean I--first place I immediately brought a black suit and black shoes--had all of the retinue. The church seated about forty people at capacity, had a choir loft up there for about six or seven, eight (unclear). Three deacons, outstanding men and they worked it out, they were so proud of me. I graduated from Howard University and they loved the fact that I was a graduate of Howard and I use to bring my sermons that I had given in class undiluted to this little church in Overlea in the county and read it all to them. Sometimes it would be four and five, these long yellow pages, and then I was reading Sermons and I was reading all of this stuff that had come right from Howard Thurman and from Dean Hill [ph.] and Dr. [Leon] Wright--undiluted! So the three deacons would take a nap. They worked it out so that two would sleep and the other would say "amen" to keep you going and the then other one, he'd take off and the other two were sleeping and so they were able to carry me through my half an hour, hour whatever it was very well with the proper passion "amen, amen" and then when the service was over they (unclear) "fine young man, thank God for him. He's blessed us this morning with the Word, with the Word from God", and now we want to take an offering, and the offering was mine, they told me they couldn't pay me but would I accept the church for the offering? But they loved to present the offering when the service was over with the proper ceremony. "We're not trying to pay you, but we're glad to give you this offering this morning and we want you to understand that God is blessing you, and you're coming a long way. There's $13.50 in the offering. You wanna--you want to take this, son, and let God use you the way he's been using you this morning. Honestly, the way he used you this morning. No, it was $11.10, "Yeah, well $11.10." "Do you have a dollar to make it up?" No, well, say "We'll make it up the next time." So, that's what I went through there. I get the offering, the whole offering, then I get a--maybe once a month take the whole family to somebody's house and they would feed all those children. It was a sweet fellowship, and I was embarrassed because I had all those children. Bring every one of 'em in, everyone, and they'd feed us 'til we wanted no more. I enjoyed it. Story_ID: 179261 Speaker 1: Stayed out there three years before I came in here to run this program for Reverend Matthews [ph.], who at this time keeping the tradition of Union [Baptist Church, Baltimore, Maryland] going as a community church, having built thirteen other churches decided that he'd build a community center next door. The first community center built by a black church for after-school activities, a recreational center. It is a carbon copy of the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] that Harvey Johnson started in 1929 and that's up the street on Druid Hill Avenue [Baltimore, Maryland], so they had a YMCA right here next to the church and it has turned out to be one of the defining moments for the continuance of Union. It was a recreation center for children in this community to a community now had changed from "solid family" members to families that were "in deterioration" slightly, lots of children, but parents who were working, weren't home when the children came home in the evening, so we'd have 150 children in here who play basketball, checkers, sewing, cooking classes. This place was literally crammed and jammed for about ten years with children in gathered here after I had been in the probation department. Story_ID: 179262 Speaker 1: In the probation department, I ran into some stalwart citizens in Baltimore [Maryland] that made all the difference in the life of the city. One was [HM The Honorable] Parren [J.] Mitchell. Parren Mitchell was the first black accepted by the University of Maryland [College Park, Maryland] in its graduate program as a sociologist and of course history knows him to be the outstanding congressman, the first black that Baltimore had. Another was Joe [Joseph] Howard [Sr.] who came into the probation department. Joe Howard became the first black judge whom we got elected. No--we'd never elected a black judge before. That came out of that relationship. It came out of that relationship because when we were as probation officers, we were talking. The Civil Rights Movement was just beginning and we were talking about how we can contribute to moving the whole civil rights agenda to the next step. The church was here as a meeting place for all of these activists. On Saturdays we started a group called the Black United Front. Speaker 2: Now, what year was this in? Speaker 1: This is in 1950--1960. Speaker 2: Okay and you called it the Black United Front then? Speaker 1: Black United Front. Speaker 2: Okay, 1950-- Speaker 1: All of the black activists were allowed--were enticed--were encouraged to come here and meet with us on Saturdays. The agenda was an open agenda. We were asked to come here and talk about how we could improve our lot in the community, knowing all these indecencies would--had been laid upon us. Then we were into all of them, inequity in funding in schools. We had a housing situation in Baltimore where colored people couldn't live in certain neighborhoods. They were restricted--restrictive covenants. We had no fair employment practices in the city. You got a job, but at somebody's permission. You had a apartheid condition where we were accepted in the probation department with a primary academic attainment which was a college degree, but we could never become a manager or a-- Speaker 2: Supervisor. Speaker 1: An administrative leader, because they told us that you had to have the master's degree or better. Parren had the master's degree and they still didn't allow him to do it. I had the master's degree because I had the B.D. [Bachelor of Divinity degree] from Howard [University, Washington, D.C], but they said even though that I was credentialed for as a master's degree, it was not in religion and I went back and got my papers and showed them it was in psychology, but still I couldn't. Now at the same time we were allowed to train all of the people who became our supervisors. It was not until Joe Howard, that's when he first got into trouble, stayed one evening and went through the files and found out that none of these people had master's degrees. Speaker 2: None of the white people (unclear)? Speaker 1: None of them. They were all pre-law students. In fact, every probation officer whom they hired was pre-law. We were also in a courthouse there were there were no black judges, no black supervisors, no black clerks, so the seat of justice was an apartheid situation--probation department was divided, which gave us legitimate grievances right there in the courthouse to work on-- Story_ID: 179263 Speaker 1: So we had a full agenda and the Interdenominational Ministerial Alliance [of Baltimore] which was a collective of interracial and denominational ministers began to fight all these grievances. Bethlehem Steel [Bethlehem, Pennsylvania] did not allow any blacks to work anywhere but in the coke oven. We got--we took their appeal on. The--well recreation centers, one being Gwynn Oaks [Gwynn Oak, Maryland] did not allow us to use Gwyneth Oaks [Gwynn Oak] Park [Gwynn Oak, Maryland], but it was right to the edge of the black community, so that became a big center of protest. You couldn't go to any restaurants downtown to eat. Cab Calloway, Duke Ellington, all these great performers came to Baltimore [Maryland], but couldn't eat down there. They had to come up on Pennsylvania Avenue [Baltimore, Maryland] to eat. They could go down there and play and entertain all the people downtown but-[Louis] Armstrong (unclear). Now-- Speaker 2: Louis Armstrong, yeah? Speaker 1: Yeah, as a young man, of course, it worked out perfectly for us because Fred Sampson [ph.] and all these people were available to us all day long--Billie Holiday because they didn't have anywhere else to go before the night crowd took them downtown. We got the benefit of having all the greats among us, but they had--did not have the advantage of using downtown where they performed. So we had an agenda laid out for us here in Baltimore that spelled out the way--defined the way that we would go, at both the church and as individuals, and that was the beginning of, really the Civil Rights Movement here in Baltimore. Story_ID: 179264 Speaker 1: We talked before about the meetings at the Afro newspaper [Baltimore Afro-American] and some of the people in the community and the church that-- Speaker 2: When we built the [Interdenominational Ministerial] Alliance [of Baltimore], we had allies that predated our struggle as the Ministerial Alliance, namely the Afro American newspapers and the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]. By that time the NAACP did not put Harvey Johnson in the forefront. They didn't say he didn't start it, but it was more a civil rights organization. It was a church-organized civil rights organization, so Ms. Lillie [Mae Carroll] Jackson, a saint. I went to school with her son when I first when to 130 [Booker T. Washington School, later Booker T. Washington Middle School, Baltimore, Maryland], Bowen Jackson and I, she was the Patron Saint of the Civil Rights Movement in Baltimore [Maryland], and--. Speaker 1: Lillie Jackson? Speaker 2: Lillie Mae Jackson. She started it in my memory vein, she and Carl [J.] Murphy were the persons who started the NAACP--was not until I became the minister here that I was given access to all this corrected history. I don't--and I don't want to infer that they didn't mean to make the history, but I--all my life all I knew was Ms. Lillie. She was--and she was the provocateur of the greatest--running her mouth, I mean she could talk and her daughter, Juanita [Jackson Mitchell] and her son-in-law Clarence [Mitchell, Jr.] who was (unclear) known as the fifty-first Senator because he became the NAACP leader in Washington, D.C. and he was--had an open access to Pop [former President Lyndon Banes] Johnson when he was President and Pop Johnson was proud to talk about him as a leader. So the Mitchell family had a position here in Baltimore, they lived right across the street from the church, directly in front of here. They had a position in Baltimore that was preeminent, and all of history gathered around them and proceeded forth from them. Brother Murphy would therefore call the ministers to the Afro, which was five blocks down from the church on Eutaw [Street, Baltimore, Maryland], which merged right into Druid Hill [Avenue, Baltimore, Maryland] and you'd go down there to have him preside, he was a little short fellow, prominent, he presided over whatever the present dilemma was, police brutality, numbers; he--and everybody kept quiet while he talked and he presided with great power and prominence. So even the ministers were beholden to him and to Ms. Lillie as to the direction that we would take in our protest and they in turn helped provide the early--earliest politicians before [HM The Honorable] Parren [J. Mitchell, III], who were also--they handed the power to them. Story_ID: 179265 Speaker 1: Enolia McMillan later became, she was the assistant to Mrs. [Lillie Mae Carroll] Jackson. I'm glad you mentioned her because she was of my beloved teachers over at 130 [Booker T. Washington School, later Booker T. Washington Middle School, Baltimore, Maryland]. She later became head of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and then head of the National NAACP, a teacher beloved, but by the time she became the principal person in the NAACP, the NAACP had a second or third tier in leadership. Their alliance presumed all of that once they got started and we had white and blacks in our ministerium who helped us to interpret the struggle. The Cardinal [Cardinal Lawrence Shehan], for example, was with us in the whole struggle which was unheard of in most cities. Cardinal Shehan was with us in everything we took on and because he was the Roman Catholic Church, prayer was predominant in our struggle. Many of the Catholic--the Berrigan Brothers [Daniel Berrigan and Philip Berrigan] were our friends and a part of our struggle, in fact the day the boys burned those records down there, I missed the meeting its--I was supposed to be down there with them. I didn't know they were going to burn any draft cards, but I--I wanted to be in the struggle with them because that's the way it was. If something was going on everybody wanted--Chester Wickwire who was the Chaplain of Johns Hopkins [University, Baltimore, Maryland] was in the struggle with us. The--but they were all--they were the ministers who helped inform my journey and at that time we had as many whites as we did blacks in the [Interdenominational] Ministerial Alliance [of Baltimore]. Now, what is not properly told is that this was not a popular movement. It was popular nationally, but in every city it was not popular universally in that city. For example, we were called crazies. There were only about--I would say about fifty of a team of us and they claimed that we were crazy" 'cause we were interfering and preachers have always been closed to politicians, and as of today it is something we are still going--struggling with. Story_ID: 179266 Speaker 1: In this faith-based mess, there are a whole lot of people who have bought onto that. Anybody who was in the Civil Rights Movement, some of them--a few of the guys but nobody bought into that foolishness. A whole lot of black preachers were--bought into the religious right and their redirecting our struggle in another direction all together. You'd never catch any legitimate civil rights person in that--the--so, today as I look at our struggle, it is has come down to a minimus participation. You can't be in the Civil Rights Movement when avowed [ph.] Civil Rightist even though it's much to be done and be a participant with a faith-based organization. There are contradictions. You can't be with them and be with Jerry Falwell [Sr.]. The other day two Nigerian boys came in there. One was a Bishop and was--wanted me to get on board on something that they were gonna do internationally to bring a religious revival in the world, and we talked, man it got sweet, strangely warm and the guy, one of who was Bishop said to me, "Dr. Dobson if you really want to get credentialing from--for my--the work that I do, what you can do"--he was pressing the button for me to help to get some money for this thing and it sounds good to me, cause as I talk to him it looked like we were on the same wavelength and that was an attempt to get a religious revival started since all of us now understand that our spiritual core started in Africa. So, I said this is gonna be great if we can connect this up. So he said, "And if you, I speak nine languages and I am known all over the Nations and if you want to get a reference from me, call [William] Billy Graham [Jr.], so I "said, ok, or call Jerry Falwell", I said, "Yeah, well you had to catch some of the other boys 'cause I'm not gon' to speak in terms of those folks." They haven't seen a Civil Rights Movement that either one of them loved, and I'd be lying to you. We are not in harmony one with the other, but they--it's that kind of distance and dissonance that has engaged our struggle, and then a whole lot of people have made the Civil Rights Movement a place to pimp. So you got a lot of Civil Rights pimps, never been to jail, never lost a pound or a night's sleep, never lost a profile of prominence, yeah. There are still people who have suffered in order to make the Movement continue and I rejoice in it with them, but very few, very few, and hardly any now. It goes back to your earlier question about--what'd you ask me--what church did you ask me about? Megachurch. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: You never--they never get caught in civil rights. It's a conflict in interest. You can't have 'em--they don't give up--I mean you are not going to give up your membership, anything like that. It's undefined. Story_ID: 179267 Speaker 1: Have you ever been in alliance with the Nation of Islam or any other black religious (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, we had a rich experience during the Alliance [Interdenominational Ministerial Alliance of Baltimore], rich experience. Isaiah Kareem--my boy--my boy dropped him because he was too close with us. Speaker 1: [HM] Minister [Louis] Farrakhan [Sr.]? Speaker 2: Farrakhan dropped him. He's up here on Lyons Street [Baltimore, Maryland]. Oh, he was in every meeting with us and had a great thing going. If you follow the history of Islam, you remember that at the height of the Civil Rights Movement, there was a disconnect because preachers were seen, even those of us who struggled, were seen as compromisers, and so--the argument was that "build your own stuff (unclear) you want to take the man's name, build your own," and the economic--Islam developed a kind of economic base that was used to pronounce that we were really not legitimate, and a lot of black churchmen got caught up during [President Richard Milhous] Nixon days in that economic empowerment stuff and lost their cunning because they--well got money and lost their ability to struggle. Story_ID: 179268 Speaker 1: What would you think is the most important message that you'd like to leave your own church [Union Baptist Church, Baltimore, Maryland], you know, that's grown from your years of struggle. Speaker 2: One of the things I'd like to say is that the church is the only institution that the black community has that is free enough to continue the struggle unabated that since God is the ultimate reality and since we are proceeding from God to God, that the journey is not over. The journey continues and what any person can do in the interpretation of that journey as being a progressive process towards God is to do like Vernon Johns said, "If I had a son and I saw the struggle going on, what I would say to him was--" Story_ID: 179269 Speaker 1: My name is Racine Tucker-Hamilton and I am the interviewer. [Edgar] Carey Lane is the videographer and Evelyn Chapman is the observer. This is a continuation of [HM] Dr. Vernon Dobson's interview, and today's date is March 6, 2004 and the location of this interview is Union Baptist Church in Baltimore, Maryland. Story_ID: 179270 Speaker 1: Now Reverend Dobson if you will, let's talk a little bit about how you became involved in the Civil Rights Movement. I think that's about where you left off the last time you spoke with The HistoryMakers. Speaker 2: The Civil Rights Movement for anybody just happened because of the sociology of a colored person becoming a Negro, becoming a black and an African American and the events of that particular metropolis. Baltimore [Maryland], for example had covenants which disallowed Negroes living in certain sections of the city--you went to assigned schools, colored schools, you had colored teachers, you could not go downtown and-- Story_ID: 179271 Speaker 1: As you were saying, [HM] Reverend [Vernon] Dobson how you became involved in the Civil Rights Movement. Speaker 2: I was indicating that the sociology of our time living in the--city like Baltimore, Maryland being one of the first free states had all of the coloration of separation, apartheid experiences but also a hint of allowing us to be participants in a larger society and yet it was just a hint, just a suggestion. For example, we couldn't try on clothes downtown. Could work in a store, you could not go in a store and shop in that same store. You could work in a municipality. For example, I worked as a probation officer before. I worked as a probation officer of the criminal court. I worked in the post office. That was a big job for a Negro, but no supervisors. Post--probation department the same way. An all-white court, no black clerks, no black sheriffs, no black judges and majority black defendants. So, it was in this kind of apartheid condition that was an opportunity for inter-racial participation but also a clear understanding by everybody who participated where you belonged, and what you were supposed to and what you were not supposed to do, and fortunately for me I ran early into some of the giants of the Civil Rights Movement in Baltimore, in fact of the nation. [HM The Honorable] Parren [J.] Mitchell [III] was a graduate of [Frederick] Douglass High School [Baltimore, Maryland] a year ahead of me and he was in my probation department, invited me when there was an opening to take a job there and I jumped at it from the post office, and Joe [Joseph] Howard [Sr.] had just moved from Iowa, he was an All-American football player out of Iowa who came here because his father and family had moved out of Iowa under some protest because they were great civil rightists. His father was lawyer, and so he joined the probation department also, and I think it was in that cabal that our insistence on a larger participation in the governance of at least our own concerns took place. Story_ID: 179272 Speaker 1: It first started with a simple thing. We discovered that we were training probation officers, white, who were becoming our supervisors coming in after we did and never understood why they were supervisors and we were not. In talking to them, because we were friends, we found out that they had no greater academic training than we did. They were coming from different schools, but when we protested the response was that you had to have a degree--a graduate degree in sociology or school of social work in order to be a supervisor, and further exploration of that untruth caused us to become more aggressive about what we were due right in the workplace, and the aggression in the workplace moved us first to insist on having a larger position there and not getting it, but at least causing great strain on the whole probation department, its definition of how the Negroes were being treated as far as equity in law was concerned, as far as justice from the bench was concerned--police brutality. You could--there was a feeling tone of separatism, and I think in about a decade it was changed tremendously. I know for example, [HM The Honorable] Parren [J.] Mitchell [III] was the first Negro to graduate from the School of Social Work at the University of Maryland [College Park, Maryland] and that made us more insistent that others of us become supervisors. I use to always like to train the new whites who came in to be my supervisor and then made certain that when I was in the hallway passing them by and we had a nice audience, I would ask them who trained you, and they would say, "You know you trained me", and they were really friendly about it. "You know you trained me", and I said, "Yeah, I just wanted to know cause they--people don't believe that I trained you and I trained--" and then when we finally looked around, we had trained all the people who were supervising us, and discovered that it was lie--these--all of these people were pre-law students. None had the master's degree in sociology. We then began to have evening meeting outside of the probation department to start insisting that some blacks be given the opportunity to be clerks and sheriffs, and there was minimal pressure put there. Story_ID: 179273 Speaker 1: No black had ever been elected as a judge in Maryland. Joe [Joseph] Howard [Sr.] was the perfect candidate because he, under our pressure, became an assistant state's attorney. What happened is that Joe took advantage of being in the state's attorney's office to just by chance to do some research on the justice or injustice in the justice system and looked at rape cases, and discovered, and I noticed Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut] just discovered about two years ago and there was a big headline about that at Yale, and they had about a dozen lawyers who found this out, but Joe Howard found out--this is back around '63 [1963] found out that no white male had ever been convicted of raping a black woman, never. That every and every--every black man charged with raping a black woman was convicted and got the death penalty, and this--when this was exploded, of course, the newspapers argued that it was a lie, which they usually do, and then the lie that was the truth changed without any great public protest--the whole way in which the judges under the whole Supreme [Court] bench mediated that attitude towards this kind of social crime. We decided then we needed a judge on the bench and we asked Joe to run. This was the first time a black had ever run. In order to break this strain, they put a black on the bench, but he didn't run. He was not elected, so he was "selected" which meant that his position was tenuous, it was not secure, but he was a judge on the bench and we had to salute him with the proper adulation, and we did, because he was a youngster, and I won't name him whom we love. He, of course, could not protest like we protested. Story_ID: 179274 Speaker 1: And [HM] Reverend [Vernon] Dobson you all were very active in--in fact you founded an organization called the Goon Squad in 1967. Tell me about the Goon Squad. Speaker 2: Well, you had three of them, Joe [Joseph] Howard [Sr.], [HM The Honorable] Parren [J.] Mitchell [III], who not only became a supervisor of probation officers, but rose to the top in the probation department. My brother who was a minister. Speaker 1: His name. Speaker 2: Harold Dobson, who copied the magnificent theme that [Dr. Leon] Sullivan did in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], OIC [Opportunities Industrialization Centers] and brought it to Baltimore [Maryland] and established the first OIC in Baltimore, and it was tremendously successful. There was [Augustus] Gus Adair, a graduate of Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia], who is a professor at Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland] working on his Ph.D. [degree] at Johns Hopkins [University, Baltimore, Maryland] and he got it in philosophy, and [Dr.] Homer Favor had his Ph.D. [degree] from [the University of] Pittsburgh [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]. He was teaching economics, a fine teacher, who got money from the Ford Foundation to establish an urban studies institute and it lasted for four years, and imaginative things were done about addressing the necessities of the common man in the urban setting. The Ford Foundation said at the end of his tenure, naming colleges across the spectrum, especially all the larger colleges like Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut], Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and all them that they gave money, expenditure money under the baton of Homer Favor at Morgan [State University] was the best expenditure that had been made. He used this money to develop a sub-law group that got many youngsters interested in taking law or social work, so instead of going right out of college into graduate schools that they couldn't get into, they had this "a priori experience" that gave them great strength, but the Goon Squad also, and that's the joy for me, the Goon Squad also become personal friends, Lalit Gadhia is another, an Indian who was an economist who worked in the--Homer Favor's urban studies institute. So we started meeting at night at the church, specifically to address a plethora of social pains that impended our community, such as not being able to live in certain neighborhoods. It was an early way of organizing to address that through legislation, through the city council, through the state and finally having a breakthrough on that and ridding ourselves of these [restrictive] covenants. Story_ID: 179275 Speaker 1: So that we could live in many neighborhoods, this is very important, because when the [restrictive] covenants were broken, now as I think back it on, whites then began this exodus--massive exodus from the city, but it is very important because something else is happening now up and down the Eastern Seaboard that indicates that this outer migration was only temporary. Bob [Robert C.] Embry [Jr.] was head of the housing department at that time, argued that they shouldn't leave the city because Baltimore [Maryland] is a great city. All the resources were here and there ought to be space enough, and he was really serious about this. That it should be space enough for us to create a model city and live together, but there was a massive move out of the city. This is when we ran into [James] Jim Rouse. I don't think history has been written about Jim Rouse's concern at that time about this outer migration and his belief also like Bob Embry that the city ought to be integrated, and he went to the city council and made a passive and impassioned appeal for us to do something to stop this, especially over in Bolton Hill [Baltimore, Maryland], a beautiful part of the town. It's only about five or six blocks away from here, and this obvious neglect of areas that were being left by the cities in providing proper cleaning, sanitation workers that kind of thing, electrical workers--he insisted that planned work in the city could make Baltimore a great place to be and it could, and he was right about that. The city council voted him down and Jim being as aggressive as he was decided then, alright I will build a new city outside of Baltimore that will reflect all of the imperatives that I am saying could happen in Baltimore, and that's when this new city was built in Howard County [Maryland]. Speaker 2: Called? Speaker 1: And it is-- Speaker 2: That city is called? What is the name of that city? Speaker 1: The city of-- Speaker 2: Columbia [Maryland]? Speaker 1: Columbia. The beautiful part about this and this amused me. He got the Goon Squad because we had elected Joe [Joseph] Howard [Sr.] then and then a plethora of judges. Once that started we started electing judges, clerk--the first clerk of the court, sheriff the movement could not be stopped, but seeing this, Jim, who was rich and imaginative and injured by the city council not accepting his studied opinion about having this excellent city, said he wanted the Goon Squad or most of us to help him imagine a city where people of all races, all economic statuses could live together and that is what the city has become-- Story_ID: 179276 Speaker 1: Do you think he [James Rouse] was successful when you look at Columbia [Maryland] today? Do you think he was successful in that goal? Speaker 2: I--I know he was successful because I know what he went up against first. I know people thought he was crazy. I know secondly he paid us, which is the first time I've ever been paid for doing this Civil Rights, and I didn't know I was supposed to be a scholar in that regard, but Dr. [Homer] Favor and these other guys were. They knew what they were doing, I was just on that agitate, but he brought these builders from Britain to Baltimore [Maryland] and for months we sat with them and had rich discussions about what makes a city and one of the things he--and I will never forget this, one of the things he insisted upon was making a city reflect economic disparities is the way you destroy a city. So he said when we build Columbia we will build Columbia so that even though a person may be a person of greater means than another, he will not live in another block, another section. There will not gated cities in Howard County [Maryland]. They will live across the street from each other, down the street from each other. There will be a common mall in which all of the people who live in the city will cross-fertilize their togetherness because they'll shop together. There will be shops in the common mall that will not say this is "Tommy Tucker's [Tommy Tucker Five and Dime, Baltimore, Maryland]" which is a cheap space and this is some other high center, they'll all be together. You will know what city will, or where you are able to shop and where your means is viable and he did it, that's the thing that--I remember the first two or three years after the city was built, I'd go out there. The thing that amused me is it was such a wonder to me having lived a segregated life all my life, that (laughter) I was still sort of astonished that it worked. Speaker 1: About what year was this? Speaker 2: It was around '70 [1970]. This is--I didn't have a dog of course and to carry on my (unclear) and that was one of the signs of affluence, you have your shorts and the dog and your also carry a pooper with you. If the dog messed on then--it tickled me, people going around brushing it up (laughter), and I just--I told him you know, I was discredited at that point. Story_ID: 179277 Speaker 1: [HM] Reverend [Vernon] Dobson, had the city council accepted Mr. [James] Rouse's plan at that time, what kind of difference do you think that would have made in Baltimore [Maryland]? Speaker 2: I think that where we are going to be now is where we would have been, and it would have been two cities of similar textual. I think Maryland would have been better because everybody who is the possessor of some real knowledge about the politics of Baltimore, Annapolis [Maryland], Washington, D.C. knows that gentrification is taking place and I can--if you had time I'd be glad to take you to Bolton Hill [Baltimore, Maryland], two blocks that were not Bolton Hill because they were colored, Negro, black, African American, whatever it was. They have become Bolton Hill and that's the exchange except the facades have been cleaned on the outside, except that millions of dollars have been spent taking these same old beautiful houses and renewing them on the inside, except that a large center of grass, walk (unclear) goes down the center of a previously rugged or cobbled street, except that people do walk their dogs up and down, and this is as close as--except that our [Union Baptist] Church [Baltimore, Maryland] is in danger now. That's the part that hurts me. I saw this happening twenty years ago and said to [Robert] Bob Embry, and I must be certain that I tell everybody that these are people like Bob Embry and the man who had me do some television work and we just married him a few days ago, (unclear) at a time when he wasn't supposed to do that and when we were excluded. These men took a chance. The very time when we were the Goon Squad, a sort of a pronounced fear and we knew it across the whole city, never bothered anybody, we were never--never aggressive physically, but intimidators nevertheless because there was a [Joseph] Joe Howard [Sr.], because there was a [HM The Honorable] Parren [J.] Mitchell [III], because Parren Mitchell became the congressman, and one day after Parren was elected, and you're too young to know this little sister, I have to say this not to put you down, but you are--there were only first seven congress persons at first. Parren was the pre-eminent congressman among them and immediately took many of our imperatives into the first seven. Story_ID: 179278 Speaker 1: [HM] Reverend [Vernon] Dobson, let's talk a little bit about you had mentioned that [James] Jim Rouse and some of the others that you worked with didn't want this to be known. They didn't want it to be very public. Speaker 2: Now, Jim was a kind--this is a good guy, I mean this--he's one of these old fellows that I love, listen to me old fellow. I loved him and I remember when [Reverend Dr.] Martin [Luther King, Jr.] got killed, he called me and then he called Brian [ph.] and the rest of us, and put a bus load of us together to go to Washington [D.C.] to talk to the Maryland Congressional Delegation about what we could do to save the city because burnings were all around, and he said driving back that day on the bus, he said, "Vernon, [HM The Honorable] Parren [J. Mitchell] is going to be the next congressman. He said I didn't see anybody on there. I like 'em all. I didn't see anybody up there who is more qualified than Parren to be a part of this leadership", and he was right, and Parren became one of the seven. He showed us that. Parren has bills on record now that are unmatched, and I want to make certain I stay away from making comparison. For that reason I am not naming any other persons because I am a bit bitter about what I see, a vast disconnect in all of this pain that was caused in trying to bring us to where we are and then to see us slip back again. For example, Jim Rouse asked nothing of us but we took the Goon Squad, and the anti-poverty program that Parren ran, and the organization genius that we formed to get him elected to get the Harbor Place [Baltimore, Maryland] for Jim Rouse. And the Harbor Place is--if you want to see a miracle just go down--it's beautiful. Story_ID: 179279 Speaker 1: What is the Harbor Place [Baltimore, Maryland]? Speaker 2: Harbor Place is the Baltimore [Maryland] city center of excellence. I can't buy a tie down there--place--or a suit, but that's where you buy all the best. Saks [Fifth Avenue] and all these other big stores down there, but Jim [James] Rouse took Baltimore City and recreated what was right down at the harbor, obviously going into bankruptcy and complete deterioration, and to change it overnight so much so that it is now a place where they are building as fast as they can new hotels, so that Peter Angelos who was in the [Baltimore] City Council at that time and another friend of us and a friend who had the grace to help us under God, has built two stadia, football and baseball, so that a beautiful black neighborhood just to the right of the two stadia where people have lived ever since I've been in Baltimore a county-city life kept their lawns where they are an endangered species because I will predict that in the next decade I won't be around, but within the next decade that's gonna be a place where boats will be pulled up to the backyard and people will get out of their boat and they will go into their $250,000 - $350,000 house and live in the city of Baltimore that once had slaves that had gotten off of slave ships down there, but this in-migration is going to take place down there now. I hope I am wrong. I hope for once in my life I am wrong, but I'm saying it's going to happen and it will happen because it is perfect in that it--it's a trifecta that you couldn't make. It is Washington, D.C. it is Annapolis [Maryland], Baltimore all coming together. It is a perfect place for slots. I'm not supposed to say that, but slots are not coming to Baltimore they either coming there or they are coming to race track. It is a perfect place where you will have all the fun you want if you are rich enough. It's a place also where this historic church [Union Baptist Church, Baltimore, Maryland] of 150 years and Sharp Street [Memorial United Methodist Church, Baltimore, Maryland] around the corner and Bethel [A.M.E. Church, Baltimore, Maryland] across the street and all of these great churches of ancient memory that started colored schools when they wouldn't allow us to go to school, that started colored colleges when they wouldn't allow us to have colleges, that had doctors lined up and down these streets. This was Sugar Hill [Baltimore, Maryland]. We're in Sugar Hill, but the sugar is gone. I'm trying to put some back in here, but the only thing I can get is a little sweet and low, and saccharin can't--it they don't want to put--now, I will bet money will be invested in there if they get rid of this blackness because right over there is Bolton Hill [Baltimore, Maryland] and that was Jim Rouse without moving these churches. His church is right around the corner. It's empty because you cannot keep a church like (unclear) and they moved on out on Charles Street [Baltimore, Maryland] around there unless you have more than a small number of people, and numbers of people don't mean anything in a church, but it is a fellowship-creating community. Story_ID: 179280 Speaker 1: That is what we're trying to do here in this [Union Baptist] Church [Baltimore, Maryland], trying to make this the beloved community by creating--by having a coffee house, by having a head start center. I hope you have time sometime to take time from me to look--to catch our head start center one day when the so-called poor children are going there and coming out for at least the last thirty years, two years ahead of any other children entering school anywhere else, and the teacher who was sitting behind me who will not deny even though she was more than a teacher out in the [Baltimore] County [Maryland]--wouldn't--well she was you know, one of these big things you know a superintendent. She's a superintendent of the county, but she knows our kids are as vital as those kids who came from her county where she was a superintendent, because they got colored education and Harvey Johnson who pastored this church insisted that colored education which started in the home, started with the kind of personal empowerment, took the [President George W.] Bush rhetoric and said it correctly "not 'leave no child behind', but leave no child's behinds." That's what makes education. We didn't take this from out of education, they did. Look our public school system was over there, all that is gone. Story_ID: 179281 Speaker 1: I know you asked me to say some more about Jim [James Rouse] and little sis, and I'm sorry I got off so put me back on. Speaker 2: That's okay [HM] Reverend [Vernon] Dobson. Let's go back a little bit to the civil rights era. Let's talk a little bit about BUILD [Baltimoreans United In Leadership Development, Baltimore, Maryland]. Tell me what BUILD was. Speaker 1: Jim Rouse jumps up again. I-F, Industrial Areas Foundation was a great idea established in the '60s [1960] in Chicago [Illinois], Saul Alinsky, one of the great social leaders of our time was doing in that community I think what we were trying to do here, only we were trying to do it here through churches, he was trying to do it through community organizations and did it. It was called Back of the Yards [Chicago, Illinois]. He taught organizing. The organizing principal is that organizing people and organizing money put two equals into competition. One is not any stronger than the other and if they work together they can create community. So the little cardinal, Cardinal [Lawrence] Shehan, again one of those little greats that God just sends your way. Loved us, in the middle of the Civil Rights Movement he exposed the Catholic church to us. Catholic priests must go to jail with us when we went to jail, they must march with us. It wasn't--it was no choice and little old cardinal loved my brother [Harold Dobson]. My brother was aggressive and you are not supposed to touch a cardinal's rings or get close to him, but my brother is dead now, but he violated all the rules and he would go into the cardinal's office and say, "Oh, I love you--you sweet thing," and the cardinal says, "Oh Harold, my son," and I'd be so embarrassed because I was standing in line in formation properly and giving proper deference to the cardinal, but my brother would go to Chester Wickwire, one of the chaplains at [Johns] Hopkins [University, Baltimore, Maryland] and greet him the same way, and if I said something to him about it then that was our constant argument. He would say to me, "See you aren't a real civil rightist because you defer these people. They're no more than we are, you know. I loved the cardinal and pinched the cardinal on his cheek," and the cardinal gave him all kinds of buildings to start OIC [Opportunities Industrialization Centers], to start a association called The Black Charity--Associated Black Charities [Baltimore, Maryland]. It worked perfectly and he and Harold had a love affair unlike any other and I mean, gave money to all of our problems when--when the monsignor [unable to verify] at St. Matthews [St. Matthew Catholic Church, Baltimore, Maryland] got caught up in the Civil Rights Movement, he was a classmate of the cardinal's. He was a friend of Saul Alinsky's. He started, he quit the ministry because he said they were too slow and he went into Saul Alinsky's organization and did such a bang-up job there they talked to the cardinal about it and the cardinal said, "I want you to meet some of these guys in Baltimore [Maryland] who are doing some similar things to see if you can't start something," and he came to Baltimore. His name was Ed [Edward] Chambers. Ed Chambers came to Baltimore and the cardinal introduced me to Ed Chambers. I happened to be president of the Interdenominational Ministerial Alliance [of Baltimore] at that time, and Ed Chambers said of course right away. We didn't know anything about organizing, and what he'd seen us do with Jim Rouse was nothing. If we got with him we'd get some things done, and we took the challenge on and BUILD became a reality. Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: The first demand was, can you get forty churches to meet--forty church leaders to meet with us and be sincere about confronting the power structure with legitimate appeals about inclusion? And we said we could, and we did it. Story_ID: 179282 Speaker 1: Now the first thing we took on in the BUILD [Baltimoreans United In Leadership Development, Baltimore, Maryland] organization was housing, and what we decided that we would get those forty churches to get as much of fourteen million dollars as they possibly could to put in a fund because he [Edward "Ed" Chambers] said that in building new housing, the maximum cost is in that money that is pre-established--bank and held for a while until you are ready to start your housing, not wait and find out where you're gonna build and then go get the money, and we did it. We didn't get the fourteen million [dollars]. We had a friend to call Jim [James] Rouse and since Jim Rouse is dead, Jim will forgive me. I lied to him and I told him all we needed Jim, was fourteen million more and the more was mostly his and he gave it to us, and he took--he, the Cardinal [Lawrence Shehan] and the forty churchmen went to a sometimes friend, sometimes enemy, now he is a friend, who then happened to be the governor, who was a mayor. When he was a mayor he and I had some bitter arguments, especially about [Dr.] Roland Patterson and his dismissal as superintendent of [Baltimore] Public Schools--I know, these things keep coming up, one of the greatest educators we ever had. They ran him out of town. [William Donald] Schaefer entertained us in Annapolis [Maryland], to hear our argument about rebuilding the city [Baltimore, Maryland], which was another way of coming right back with Jim Rouse's idea. He said, "Where will you start?" "We'll start in Sandtown[-Winchester, West Baltimore, Maryland]." "Where will we get the money?" He said we'll bring you eighteen million, will you match it? He got the eighteen million--we have eighteen million will you match it, and he said, "Well how can I not match it?" And the lady who is in charge of the funds for housing was--I thought she might have had a heart attack because she, "That's all we have for housing for the state [Maryland] for the whole year, governor," and he said--what my--and it was so embarrassing to me. "With my friend [Reverend] Vernon [Dobson] down here and with the cardinal" (Laughter) and everybody knew that he and I were not tender, hugging buddies, but I was--I looked like that my wick went out, but we hugged in front of all of the public and got the eighteen [million] and built 650 houses in Sandtown. Now, quick story, every Saturday morning they met over there in the gym, anybody who was a prospect for a house before they were built. All you had to do was to promise that you would allow one of our church members to teach you how to make a budget and how to produce that budget so that it was legitimate. We stocked up those six hundred houses, before we finished we had about one thousand people ready to take those house before we finished. We have not lost one of those houses in mortgage defaults, not one. Since that time we've run it up to about 1,200 houses. Now, gone from housing to living wage, that's a BUILD issue that started in Baltimore. Story_ID: 179283 Speaker 1: [HM] Reverend [Vernon] Dobson, I just want to make sure we get everything in so I wanted to also ask you a little bit about just as we're moving along in chronology, I wanted to go back a little bit to 1963 when you helped organize buses for the March on Washington here from your [Union Baptist] Church [Baltimore, Maryland]. Tell me a little bit about what that experience was like and even with your experiences with [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King, Jr. were like? Speaker 2: That led--the March on Washington was the most emotionally-filled rather than actually fulfilled part of the [Civil Rights] Movement, because I'd been to Selma [Alabama] with Martin in marches down there. They were not that--they--that pretty, I mean they looked good on TV but they were not well organized. Speaker 1: What were they like? Speaker 2: Well, it was a bunch of people (laughter) of us getting together and singing with no pre-formed agenda. It was a mass movement moving, you know and you move until you ran into the police and then that's when all hell broke loose, and half of the preachers who had promised to be non-violent forgot their promise, and so it wasn't as easily an effective non-violent movement cause some preachers, I wasn't one of 'em, but some preachers will fight. If you hit them, they'll hit you. Martin Luther King's father [Martin Luther King, Sr.] said one day in a meeting to [Daniel Patrick] Moynihan, that was in Florida, we had a session with a bunch of preachers and [HM Reverend] Jesse [L.] Jackson jumped up on the table, he was a young radical cause Moynihan wanted to give his speech and leave, and so Jackson said you know, You aren't gonna sit here and run your mouth about what you think ought to be done for us and not staying for questions. He said, "So you aren't going anywhere," so Moynihan said, "I have a train ticket to New York and I have to leave," and old man King said Jesse, "Now Jesse you not gon' break up my son's thing and it's hard for us to"--Ford Foundation paid for that too. In Miami [Florida] we would spend two or three weeks down there. It was a beautiful experience, priests from all over the country--"You're not going to break up my thing." Jesse made the mistake of balling his fist up at the old man, and he said now, Jesse let me say something to you, he said my son might be non-violent but if you come across this table, he said you got no violence (unclear) (laughter). Now I think the old man would have given Jesse what he needed, too, 'course Jesse bowed out graciously, but the March on Washington was performed by the high priest, the old man in labor [A. Philip Randolph], NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and Martin and [Ralph D.] Abernathy, and then they farmed it out to all the labor leaders shipped across the country. In Baltimore [Maryland], it was primarily labor that brought it to us, Troy Brailey who was high in labor and also was in the state as a delegate then. Later on he became a senator. He brought it to use, and Reverend Frank Williams was the president of the [Interdenominational Ministerial] Alliance [of Baltimore] then. He collected all the preachers together, and we met over his church and his church seats about one thousand people and it was packed and they all agreed that we would pay for the buses and we would go. It sounded like a spiritual movement that had a kind of necessity for the movement, but will not be actualized but that morning when we met in Dolphin Square [Baltimore, Maryland] which is about six blocks away from here when we met outside the church, and the buses pulled up. When they moved--every church that had buses assigned to go had people ready to get on them when the buses came, and they were bumper to bumper from beginning of Baltimore all the way to Washington, D.C. from Mississippi from everywhere--yelling out of the buses and just bus after bus after--and everybody's teary the whole way, I mean we didn't believe it, and then when the march got off--took off--again, it's--where are we going? We're just going and people just fell in line and where they came from I don't know. Story_ID: 179284 Speaker 1: It's--people, no fighting, no noise, no trash, just rejoicing all and when [Reverend Dr.] Martin [Luther King, Jr.]-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) How did you feel? Speaker 1: Just messed me all up, I just cried all the way, just I couldn't take it. It was the finest experience I've ever had in my life, to see that many of all people harmonized around an event that had no expectations except that we're here, because at the time--it has since been revisited with untruth. [President John F.] Kennedy did not want us there. Now, it changes around where he was talking and he was helping. We had been warned not to come to Washington [D.C.]. We had been warned, by all of the high-ups here, that we were unwelcomed and it was going to cause a lot of trouble and just the opposite happened, and the whole day was a day of revival, and I don't think there's been another experience in my life where there's been that kind of cosmic participation that was not only intentional, but everybody knew it. I was in with the--a group of youngsters called Black Panthers and who behaved. They loved it, you know. There were other black groups. In fact when we were in the Civil Rights Movement you had to have a big dashiki or dirty dashiki and you had to be funky, I mean--it's--a big bush and we had 'em, I mean you couldn't see each other there was so many bushes and then to see these old women, I'd seen it before in Selma [Alabama], I would hope that somebody would try to recover that because I don't think we have properly catalogued the fact that my mother [Estelle Irene Cook-Dobson] walked long before I ever got there--out there demonstrating. My mother's the person who should be celebrated. Stockings falling, and unafraid of police, and these old women up and down Pennsylvania Avenue [Washington, D.C.] insisting that they're gonna be allowed to participate and being turned away. So that's what that experience was and, for me, it becomes again and again an emotional experience that I love, but I had to leave it alone 'cause I can't handle it. It's too much and I think the Civil Rights Movement had more cosmic integrity than any church thing I've ever been in in my life. I'm gonna tell you the truth, and nobody had to tell anybody no cursing, no drinking, there were no rules. People had their bands on but they didn't need 'em, and people with their little children dragging them along and they were all in the movement. Story_ID: 179285 Speaker 1: Share your thoughts with me about where we are now in terms of the African American community. Are you happy with what you see? Speaker 2: I'm not happy in the collective with what I see. I am overjoyed with individual accomplishments because on an individual basis I can find a time anywhere an individual excellence that is a collective, a community excellence. For example, [HM Dr.] Levi Watkins is at [Johns] Hopkins [Hospital, Baltimore, Maryland] pronounced. He is--everybody there says that Levi is one of the great doctors, but the minute I say that I have to remember that Levi came out of Homer [Favor] and my insisting that Hopkins give him his due because he was the top student graduating that year from Hopkins when very few blacks graduated, and the top student from Hopkins was supposed to be maintained as a teacher, and that was a real fight on our part and on the part of the Goon Squad to keep Levi at Hopkins now. Since Levi stayed there I know fifty or sixty blacks have gone through and they have reached prominence in the medical field. I know that Levi has produced an instrument that is saves thousands of people called the defibrillator. I know that there are other doctors who have had pronounced genius that is above Levi and it is not, but they're more liked by the white community, but the young man who divided, the twins (unclear)--but I also must say immediately "where are all the hospitals gone?" While we were fighting to save Levi, we won the Board of Provident Hospital [Baltimore, Maryland]--just built a new hospital called "the Liberty Hospital" [Liberty Medical Center, Baltimore, Maryland] and I saw them work assiduously by rules, by false rules and false engagements to destroy the excellence of that hospital so that most black doctors do not have an institution like Provident Hospital to practice their art and to become as excellent as Levi is at Hopkins, so it looks like I am contradicting myself, yeah, the joy of a Levi reminds me of the dissipation of health institutions that belong to us, and that will give us an opportunity to continue that climb that we made, and I believe that--that is a retrogression that is planned and I think it is planned because, I think, everybody knows now that two-thirds of the people in the work are colored people. Now I think everybody in the world knows that--that two-thirds of the people in the world are colored people are also the persons who are sitting on the wealth of the world, two-thirds of the wealth of the world and I have watched people in think tanks revisit race in a way that is disclosed and you can't touch it, you sniff as Howard Thurman says (sniffing), knows it there, but you can't put your hands on it and I see unless somebody--unless there is a larger Goon Squad that gets together in some room and starts rethinking our progress--that is progress individually. Story_ID: 179286 Speaker 1: Are you happy with the (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: But it's not progress institutionally if they--we don't get in some--I don't think we are going to maximize the benefits that belong to us out of this excellence that is ours and out of these materials that we sit on. [Nelson] Mandela was right, or either he or [Desmond] Tutu that said, when they first came to South Africa they brought us the Bible and he said and they took the gold. He's right. I heard a little Japanese woman say the other day in a Japanese parliament, which gives me some hope, "The colored peoples"--and she said this-"the colored peoples of the world will not allow another empire to grow in our midst and control our resources." She is a thousand percent right. If somebody, some Goon Squad somewhere could get people to understand that two-thirds of the people in the world are colored people or that it all stated in Africa, or that DNA was discovered in Africa, (unclear) or medicine, yet nobody is dealing with that, in fact all our scholars seem to want to run away from that, run away from the truth. Story_ID: 179287 Speaker 1: Are you happy with the current leadership in the African American community, and who do you think are leaders in the African American community? Speaker 2: What I just described to you is an arrested state of leadership because planned genocide makes those who are successful satisfied, and it makes those who are not successful victims so that there is a neat patterning of blaming the victim while celebrating the celebrity. Now, that is not--the colored community will never make it if we have to have celebrities. If we cannot find comfort in the fact that what we celebrate is the ability to create the community of God that is flowing in us all the time in a continuum that's always inclusive, always growing. We had that. The church gave it to us. The church cannot give that to us if the church is defining itself by its numbers. The church can only give it to us when it defines itself by its service, you know? Whom do you serve, where is the need, you know, but if the church must become the celebrity church so that--how large a building is, you know, how many members you have, what your preacher drives, where he lives, how--when we deal with these things, we have lost all the struggles of my mother [Estelle Irene Cook-Dobson] and my grandmother and my grandfather and the people who gave us the floor on which we stand, and I see so many brilliant youngsters. Sitting here talking to you today and if you take it off the tape if it shouldn't be on there, but sitting here talking to you today you are not only beautiful but brilliant, but now that is all over the place, and people do not celebrate that. If you don't--one here, one there, one (unclear) and define it in its one, two, three, four, five thing rather than saying it's in us. Let it grow and where it is not taking rootage, dig up some ground and plant some seed and then don't do it in order to say that we are better than anybody else, but make it happen because we are seeking community, and I really believe that we are the people who can do it if we want to. Story_ID: 179288 Speaker 1: Are you happy with your life and the way that you've lived your life? Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm very, very happy; glad I'm a preacher, wish I could be a better preacher, glad I came up on the preaching side where I had a father [Spencer Griffith Dobson] who was a servant preacher rather than a celebrity, glad that I got into a church and to churches that expounded this service role and couldn't be any better. I appreciate it. Story_ID: 179289 Speaker 1: Do you have any regrets or are there any things that you would do differently? Speaker 2: No, not that I know of. My children made me proud of them. They are properly aggressive. They have taken advantage of all of the opportunities that my wife [Napoleon Dobson] and I have been able to give them. I was fortunate in marrying a school teacher who is academically my superior so--and let me know it quietly now and then without ever embarrassing me. No really, we've had a joyous life together. Story_ID: 179290 Speaker 1: Some of your hopes for the future, particularly for the African American community? Speaker 2: My hope is that before we blow it up in this race to possess things rather than to possess and to know self, that we will rethink where we have come from and see in the whole process a divine hand participating for our good but also being universal, never this--it's not just us and I don't--I get very upset when people want me to claim my religion as being superior to the religion of a Muslim or--that's the way they see God. None of us know all of God. None of us will ever possess God totally and yet anybody who knows anything about God knows that God is--I have a God of all or God is not God at all. Now, my years have taught me that God is God of all, and I'm included and I wanna thank you, Sir. Glad he has included me 'cause I didn't have to be, but I am. Story_ID: 179291 Speaker 1: [HM] Reverend [Vernon] Dobson, I know that--I think you wanted to talk about [HM] Dr. [Freeman A.] Hrabowski [III] at the University-UMBC [University of Maryland, Baltimore County, Baltimore, Maryland]. Speaker 2: UMBC. Speaker 1: Did you--what did you want to share with us about that? Speaker 2: It's another one of those--one of those scholars who hasn't forgotten. I believe the world that needs educational--the world knows Hrabowski to be as excellent as he is. What he's done at the University of Maryland Baltimore County Campus is phenomenal. Speaker 1: What has he done there? Speaker 2: He has taken a school that was sort of throw out just to make certain that as the population left Baltimore [Maryland] and left the resources based here, but they built a school out there, University of Maryland Extension [College Park, Maryland] that would provide for those students that would take advantage of going there, who would be mostly white and he has quietly had a memory about his own growth cycle and without it being perverse or unfair, has reached out for all kinds of students and I think the record shows that he graduates more Ph.D.s than any other school in the university community and they're from everywhere, Asian, African, Afro-American. I tease him sometimes, and he had me come out to tour the campus because he brings a group of students to church once a year just for service, and he thrills at the fact that this is an inclusive community. So, I walked the campus with him a few months ago and when I walked the campus he was--one thing I love about him, everybody knows him on the campus, the President and they love him and they said, "Dr. Hrabowski." They wanna touch the hem of his garment and he says to me, "See, I told you we're inclusive." I said, "Yes, you're inclusive of everybody but colored people from Baltimore." (Laughter). (Unclear). He (unclear) furious (unclear). He's angry because he gets the best students. He gets the best students from all around the world and I know that, and he's got as many colored students, Negroes, call 'em what you want, but he's got the top. He's just like everybody else and he's creaming. He gets--because of the reputation of the school now, he gets the best. You think--I have a Ph.D. guaranteed me if I stick up because this guy who is the president has had the ability to get people with money to make this investment that I'm not gonna try to go to that school, you crazy and so they go there, but he's got more people from Nigeria than he has from Green Willow Street (laughter). Story_ID: 179292 Speaker 1: [HM] Reverend [Vernon] Dobson when you think about the forty-plus years you've spent in this [Union Baptist] Church [Baltimore, Maryland] here, and when you step outside and look around, what are some of the changes over the years that you can share with us. Speaker 2: One is that the church has been able to maintain its historical origins not as a myth is a reality. When people talk about Harvey Johnson being Mr. NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], everything that Harvey Johnson stood for that came out of the NAACP when he and W.E.B. Du Bois were battling continue. I can show you every line of it and it continues to something in this church and it is not self-interest. It always points to the empowerment of somebody else. The second that's beautiful about this, the people in this neighborhood, and this is what I love, it's their church even though they will not join. Now, they know that most of the people who come--who go here are school teachers and professors and all, but this church is open every day during the week and I'd much rather have a church that is informing, inspiring, infusing, undergirding the lives of the people who live here because that is an integrated effort to be every day, rather than a good sermon or a bad one (unclear) on Sunday morning and this is what they get. I was downstairs with a group of addicted persons who are getting themselves together in one of our houses up the street, and they were actually more spiritual that I am. They had a high level of spirituality. I mean they held hands and they clap. Now, that won't happen in Union. I don't know whether I'm being apologetic or not, but--except Mrs. Chapman might do it--might scream out and say "amen" every (unclear). This is a--very few "amens" (laughter), kind of quiet, but these boys they had--I mean they had a "Praise the Lord" and I loved it, and I loved it because when we had the Black United Front, we had just as much noise but the boys were addressing each other in another language, that was--now if a church can accommodate this variance, you know, in fact the language over there when they were so bad, raw, that the minister who preceded me said "My boy, don't you think they're a bit loud," he said, "And don't you think you may get put out of here?" I said, "You cut this cursing out in here, you're in church!" (Laughter) and they said, "Well you started it!" I said "oh, my God"(laughter), but that's why we love it. We can go to the coffee house--the old lady we buried this morning, we had a funeral here this morning and she joined this church, there it is through the coffee house. She lives in the high rise. Six years ago she joined the church, and at the coffee house they have free food at night, coffee and music, and on Thursday nights, we have jazz. That's jazz night and I almost slipped up and told them this morning during her eulogy what her favorite hymn was and I said "You're a fool, shut up," because there's an old--and for the ageless crowd the '70s [1970] crowd, there's a memory of it. You wouldn't do that. (Singing) "Baby, Meet me with your (unclear) on (unclear), Baby," and she was--sit there with her coffee and every now and then she'd say "Play my favorite number" (laughter). So I think when she got into glory this morning, they didn't play her favorite number. I'm afraid, but she loved it, she loved it. She belonged to our church. Story_ID: 179293 Speaker 1: How have you seen your congregation [at Union Baptist Church, Baltimore, Maryland] change over the past forty years? Speaker 2: I define congregation now as people who understand that church is a place for refuge, and that you don't have to be saved to be a part of this church because none of us are saved. Salvation is a process and we are being saved, and I'm certain that a lot of the people who live around here, who go to other churches incidentally, but this is a weekday church. I'm certain a lot of them know that their sins are no greater than anybody else's sins, that we are all sinners saved by grace and I love it. I think that the way the world ought to be. Speaker 1: How has the neighborhood changed in the past forty years? What's different--? Speaker 2: The neighborhood has changed four times. This used to be Sugar Hill [Baltimore, Maryland]. Speaker 1: And then what was the--. Speaker 2: And I went to school around at 130 [Booker T. Washington, later Booker T. Washington Middle School, Baltimore, Maryland], this was--and the guy who lived across town where I live tip-toed through this neighborhood to go to 130, and tip-toed out. Doctors, lawyers, Indian Chiefs all the way up on either side; now, strange thing, the [Lafayette] Avenue is next, the next block down. Cab Calloway, Duke Ellington, Billie Holiday, what's my boy's name? 'Sanford and Sons', see him everyday--what kind of life, I mean, what a joy. I saw 'Sanford and Sons' there, and he was funnier down on the corner than he was on TV. Speaker 1: Redd Foxx [formerly, John Ellroy Sanford]? Speaker 2: Redd Foxx. I--aw, he's something, and he would call you one quickly! Right on the corner here, and his hat was cocked all on the side. "My man!" Now they call you "Dog". "Hey, dog!" But that's a great neighborhood. Speaker 1: When did it change? Speaker 2: It changed in the '40s [1940]. Speaker 1: And how did it change? Speaker 2: The people who lived here, the doctors and lawyers moved to Ashburton [Baltimore, Maryland] where I live now, further out. All these non-covenant places when we broke the [restrictive housing] covenant[s], and then the next move from there was to Howard County [Maryland] and the County is all around and they come back; that so, you got about a three-tiered level of people. Some who live here in the neighborhood, very few. Speaker 1: What's it like today? Speaker 2: The neighborhood is, in my opinion, one of the best neighborhoods in Baltimore [Maryland], because the church is here. These guys who are next door will not allow drug sales in the neighborhood, none of that, and will tell the guys, "Move on my man, not here." Builders helped us to build some new houses down there. They are not house owners, they're rentals but they're new. The Avenue has been recovered somewhat. The houses across the street are partially in recovery, and partially in deterioration and I just--the thing that really hurts me is that I may not stay here long enough to see that neighborhood really be established. It can easily be done by having all of the houses redone just like they're doing over in Bolton Hill [Baltimore, Maryland]. Story_ID: 179294 Speaker 1: [HM] Reverend [Vernon] Dobson if you will, tell me a little bit about how you want to be remembered and what you'd like for your legacy to be? Speaker 2: Oh, think I'd really want to be remembered as Sterling Spencer's boy because I've been blessed with two of the finest parents that anybody would have. My mother [Estelle Irene Cook-Dobson] and father [Spencer Griffith Dobson] made sacrifices for me that, and for all of us that were examples that were so high we could almost not reach them and they set goals that were intentional in forcing us to grow by reaching, and then they were people who didn't talk love, they lived it. I mean my mother--some of the greatest examples of what it means to be a person and to be a Christian were given to me by mother in simple things. Nobody in our neighborhood, and we grew up in a neighborhood that was struggling, always struggling to become always living above the--above the edge of necessity, but nobody was turned away. In the '20s [1920] somebody would come to the door and say they were hungry and wanted a cup of soup, or a sandwich and got it, and one of the things that made me a minister was a guy to the door drunk and said he was hungry and my mother said, "Vernon, fix him a sandwich," and I smelled the liquor on him, and he's sagging all against the door and so I went back and got two pieces of bread and slammed them together and put them in the cellophane paper, the bag it came in and slung it at him, and just as I was slinging it, she said, "Just a minute, Mister, Mister, Mister, just a minute. She said "Give that back to him please." "No ma'am I'm sorry." She (unclear) "Just give it back to him, take it back." She said, "Open that sandwich up." She said, "No mayonnaise?" And she said somebody-"if you wanted a sandwich and you had asked them to give you a sandwich because you were hungry, would you accept this as a sandwich?" I said, "No mama, he's drunk." She said, "He didn't say--I didn't say anything about his being drunk, he said he's hungry," and she said, "don't you ever give anybody something that you wouldn't want for yourself." I think that one thing has followed me all my life. "Don't you ever give anybody anything that you wouldn't don't want for yourself," and not only don't do that, but get it. Implicit in her remark was, you make certain you become the source of anybody's need if you are able to do it. Don't withhold it. Story_ID: 179295 Speaker 1: And the second experience was with my father [Spencer Griffith Dobson] who, when I was in Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] was a sweeper, a broom sweeper in the post office and got me a job in the evening at the post office as a clerk. He was--had the lowest job. He was a cleaner, and I came in off the train that evening and the detectives in the post office said "Ssh, we've caught somebody stealing. Stay down here. Don't tell anybody that we're here." So they made me stand down there an hour, and I didn't see (unclear), and they said, "Okay, you can go ahead, and we'll tell your boss that you were--we held you up." About a week later I got a letter from the foreman saying that I had been fired. I was their substitute and of course, a substitute had no recourse and the letter didn't say why. They said we don't need your service anymore. So I went to see him and he said, "Well you were there when those guys were stealing and I don't know whether you're in it or not. Guys say that you were around the area." I said, "Yes sir, but I didn't touch anything and didn't know what they were doing." "Well, you can find a job, ha, ha! You go to Howard, you'll find a job." So, I told the union man and he told me, "I'm sorry, but you don't belong to the union, and that's just too bad and you ought to learn how to stay out of trouble, you know if you see trouble, stay out of it", but I said, "I ain't did--that's alright." So I told my father and my father waited about two weeks, and one day he said, "Oh don't go to school today come and go with me. And I said okay. Said, "Where are you going?" He said, "I'm going down to see the foreman," the head of the post office, and I said, "Oh, daddy don't do that. I said now you got a job and you're" (unclear). He said, "you don't tell me what to do. Who do you think you are?" So when he went in-Sibley [ph.] was the man's name, sitting behind this big desk and he said, "I know what you're in here for, Rev." My father was a preacher and they loved him. "I know what you're in here for. It's not because of you. You've never--you've never given us any trouble, but these young boys who come out of the [U.S. military] service are smart alecks and they don't have the right attitude, and they tell me when they questioned him he gave them no information," and so my father said, "What information was he to give 'em?" Well, he's colored he should have known something was going wrong. My father said, "But what information could he have given them?" "Well, I'm sorry, just let him find something else. He's a bright youngster going to Howard," you know. So, my father said, "Well if he's not hired today, he said, then I'm going to Washington and see that you gon' be fired tomorrow. He said, "Listen my God", and I said, "daddy, don't." He said, "You keep your mouth shut. This man has been unfair to you. You never," he said, "I know you, you wouldn't steal anything. You wouldn't touch anything, you keep quiet, you understand?" And so Sibley said, "Rev. it's not you, we love you. You've been here with us ten years. We love you." Said it's not you. My father said, "If he is not hired tomorrow, I'm gonna try to get you fired the next day." So, that evening, I got a call to come back to work the next day and I'll never forget that. Here's a man in the lowest totem pole in the post office and the other thing about it was in that same year, the post office runs the mail on these rubber belts, and my father worked at a stone quarry before he worked out there, but this was a promotion to come to the post office and the belt broke and they were losing money. They said, "Anybody in here know how to fix this belt?" My father said, "Yes, I can fix it." He said, "give me five men." So--men couldn't work, the place was stopped, and he had it fixed and running in four hours and Sibley called my father down and promoted him as the first black in the Engineer's Office downtown, and that's where he ended up working in the post office, the first and only black that made it there. So I'll never forget that and it's that kind of manhood and womanhood and personhood that I'll never forget Story_ID: 179296 Speaker 1: And it has enriched my life and I have--I ought to be whipped with many stripes if I fail at any point to try to help somebody who is in need, and the joy for me in ministry is--I don't want to say it this way cause it sounds--might sound like I'm praising--it's not that, but remembering them. Nobody has ever come in here and their need has not been met and I am talking about people who's houses--I've lost thousands of dollars saving people's houses out my own funds because God told me to do it, and I knew I should do it, and I didn't have the money to do it and I'm proud of it and they are my proudest moments. Speaker 2: Okay, thank you very much [HM] Reverend [Vernon] Dobson. Speaker 1: Thank you. Story_ID: 179297 Speaker 1: This is Dolphin [Street] and Druid Hill [Avenue, Baltimore, Maryland]. It's the corner southeastward from our [Union Baptist] Church Baltimore, Maryland] before we possessed it and turned it into a coffee house and to a head start center. Speaker 2: About what year was this one taken? Speaker 1: This is in the '70s [1970]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: (MS. CHAPMAN): This is our Men's Day I believe. No it's not a Men's Day, can't be. Speaker 2: Good. Speaker 1: This is Dr. Gardner Taylor, one of the great preachers of the race. Speaker 2: Pull out a little bit [Edgar] Carey [Lane], because actually [HM] Reverend [Vernon] Dobson is in--I mean Reverend Dobson is in that. Is that you right there Reverend Dobson? Speaker 1: (MS. CHAPMAN): Yeah, yeah, that's him. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): I was just getting more flow. Speaker 1: Oh, I'm sorry, I'm sorry. Speaker 2: And this was a Men's Day program. We were blessed to be able to get him to preach for us, and persons like Gardner Taylor and Howard Thurman have not only given our pulpit the strength of their personality and their mind, but also a kind of spiritual integrity that makes Union the place that it is. Speaker 1: About what year was this one? Speaker 2: This would be in the '80s [1980s] (simultaneous) yeah. Speaker 1: (MS. CHAPMAN): Eighties [1980s], probably '80s [1980s]. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 179298 Speaker 1: About what year was this photo taken of you, [HM] Reverend [Vernon] Dobson? Speaker 2: This would be in the '80s [1980s]. Speaker 1: (MS. CHAPMAN): Early '80s [1980s]--mid-'80s [1980s] early to mid-'80s [1980s] when he had a real big bush. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Do you know where this was taken? Speaker 2: (MS. CHAPMAN): That's-- Speaker 1: Taken here in-- Speaker 2: (MS. CHAPMAN): Right here [Union Baptist Church, Baltimore, Maryland]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The sanctuary. Speaker 1: Alright. Okay. Speaker 2: (MS. CHAPMAN): That's the Anniversary Banquet-- Speaker 1: The 150th Anniversary? Speaker 2: (MS. CHAPMAN): Yeah, and that's Katherine Kennedy-Townsend [sic., Kathleen Kennedy Townsend] you're talking to. Speaker 1: Former lieutenant governor of Maryland? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Of Maryland. Speaker 1: (MS. CHAPMAN): Sister to the late [President] John F. Kennedy. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): No. Speaker 1: (MS. CHAPMAN): Not sister? Speaker 2: Sister to-- Speaker 1: (MS. CHAPMAN): Niece. Speaker 2: No, cousin to the late John F. Kennedy. Speaker 1: (MS. CHAPMAN): Cousin. Speaker 2: Cousin and she is the-- Speaker 1: (MS. CHAPMAN): She is a cousin? Speaker 2: No. That's niece. Speaker 1: (MS. CHAPMAN): She's a niece, not cousin? Speaker 2: Right, right niece, I'm sorry, niece. Speaker 1: (MS. CHAPMAN): Bobby [Robert F. Kennedy] was her father. Speaker 2: Yes, I'm sorry. Speaker 1: (MS. CHAPMAN): Is that your daddy? Speaker 2: That's my father. He was the former pastor of the St. Mark's Institutional Baptist Church [Baltimore, Maryland]. Speaker 1: What's your father's name? Speaker 2: Spencer Griffith Dobson. Speaker 1: Okay, and about what year was this photo taken? Speaker 2: This would be in the '70s [1970s]. Speaker 1: Okay. Right, Bobby Kennedy was her father, right? Speaker 2: (MS. CHAPMAN): Right. Speaker 1: Kathleen Kennedy Townsend. Kathleen Kennedy Townsend, daughter of Bobby Kennedy. Speaker 2: (MS. CHAPMAN): Niece. Speaker 1: Right, niece of John F. Kennedy. Speaker 2: (MS. CHAPMAN): Former lieutenant governor. Speaker 1: Former lieutenant governor of Maryland. Speaker 2: (MS. CHAPMAN): Right. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): How do you want (unclear)? Speaker 2: This is my father's father [Isaac Dobson], grandfather bless his memory, who these are two other grandchildren of his but he's the kind of person that this photo reflects. Speaker 1: And what's your grandfather--(simultaneous)--what was your grandfather's--? Speaker 2: He loved youngsters-- Speaker 1: What was his name? Speaker 2: --always had. Isaac. Speaker 1: Dobson? Okay. Speaker 2: (MS. CHAPMAN): Was he a slave? Speaker 1: What? Speaker 2: Is that the grandfather you talked about who was a slave? Speaker 1: Was a what? Speaker 2: (MS. CHAPMAN): A slave? Was he a slave? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: This is my mother's [Estelle Irene Cook-Dobson] father. Speaker 2: His name? Speaker 1: Moses [Cook] and he was part Indian and although we didn't think it important, he did. Speaker 2: About what year was this photo taken, you think? Speaker 1: That was in the '50s [1950s]. Speaker 2: And the photo of your grandfather, about what year was that one taken? Speaker 1: That was in the '60s [1960s]. Speaker 2: Okay, thank you. Okay. Speaker 1: That's my Aunt Mildred. She is the youngest of my mother's sisters. Speaker 2: And what's her last name? Speaker 1: Mildred Crump. Speaker 2: And about what year was that photo taken? Speaker 1: That was taken in the '50s [1950s]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: (MS. CHAPMAN): This was taken at the 150th Anniversary Banquet. Speaker 2: And is that you and your children. Speaker 1: And the children, my wife. Speaker 2: Okay, can you name the children, Reverend Dobson starting from left to right? Speaker 1: (MS. CHAPMAN): Saundra, Michael. Speaker 2: Michael. Speaker 1: Reverend Dobson. Speaker 2: Keith. Speaker 1: (MS. CHAPMAN): Keith, Kim, Kevin (simultaneous). Speaker 2: Keith, Kevin. Speaker 1: (MS. CHAPMAN): Is that Rosalind? Speaker 2: Rosalind. Speaker 1: (MS. CHAPMAN): Harry. Speaker 2: Jonetta. Speaker 1: (MS. CHAPMAN): And Donna. Speaker 2: And my wife is in the front. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: This is another photograph of my children. Speaker 1: About what year was this photo taken? Speaker 2: This was taken in the '60s [1960s]. Speaker 1: Can you name the children (unclear)? Speaker 2: Michael, Keith just above, my wife next to me, Saundra above her, Rosalind next to her mother, Jonetta behind her and Donna. Speaker 1: (MS. CHAPMAN): Who's down on the floor? Speaker 2: Who's down on the floor? Speaker 1: And this is-- Speaker 2: (MS. CHAPMAN): Kevin? Is that Kevin? Speaker 1: Kevin? Speaker 2: And who else? Speaker 1: (MS. CHAPMAN): And who's next to her? Him, they're sitting there in front of you. Speaker 2: That's Donna. Speaker 1: (MS. CHAPMAN): You named Donna twice. Speaker 2: Naw', so that wouldn't be Donna. I don't know who-- Speaker 1: (MS. CHAPMAN): Right. It's one of the kids, I would just--I would need to see the picture up close. Speaker 2: Okay, go ahead and walk up to it Ms. Chapman and watch your microphone--there you go. So Ms. Chapman? Speaker 1: (MS. CHAPMAN): That looks like Kim to me. Speaker 2: Point to it. Speaker 1: That's Kim, yeah. Speaker 2: (MS. CHAPMAN): That's Kim. Speaker 1: And Donna seated on the floor. Speaker 2: Donna, yeah. Speaker 1: (MS. CHAPMAN): Donna's on the floor. Speaker 2: Okay. And who's in this one Reverend Dobson? Speaker 1: That's me and that's my brother Harold [Dobson] who is deceased and was a minister and that's my oldest brother Spencer [Griffith Dobson, Jr.]. Speaker 2: Which one is you? Speaker 1: The first. Speaker 2: The first one, okay. So this is you right here? Speaker 1: (MS. CHAPMAN): On the left, yes. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And about what year was that photo taken? Speaker 2: (MS. CHAPMAN): (Laughter). Speaker 1: 1929. Speaker 2: Okay. Now this is a photo of you with your television program. What was the name of your television show? Speaker 1: 'Look at it This Way.' Speaker 2: And that was about--what year was this about? Speaker 1: '60s [1960s]. Speaker 2: In the '60s [1960s] okay. Who is in that photo Reverend Dobson? Speaker 1: (MS. CHAPMAN): (Laughter). Speaker 2: That's me in the '70s [1970s]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My bush is gone! Speaker 1: (MS. CHAPMAN): (Laughter) You didn't have a bush then. Speaker 2: You didn't have a bush back then. Who's in that one? Speaker 1: That's me in the [U.S.] Navy. Speaker 2: About what year was that photo taken? Speaker 1: That was taken in '46 [1946]. Speaker 2: Okay, 1946. Is this your former church was it--? Speaker 1: That's the former church in Overlea [Maryland]. Speaker 2: (MS. CHAPMAN): Name of it is the Emmanuel Baptist Church [Overlea, Maryland]. Speaker 1: Baptist Church. Speaker 2: Okay, and about what year was that photo taken. Speaker 1: That would be in the '50s [1950s]. Speaker 2: Was that your first church? Speaker 1: First. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 179299 Speaker 1: Okay, that's you [HM Reverend Vernon Dobson] again. Speaker 2: Me taken in the '70s [1970s]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): It still has to be put on other. Speaker 1: On top? Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): No, no put on as other. Speaker 1: Oh, I gotcha. Okay. Who's that Reverend Dobson? Speaker 2: I don't know. Speaker 1: Is that your father [Spencer Griffith Dobson]? Speaker 2: (MS. CHAPMAN): That's your daddy. Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: No? Speaker 1: (MS. CHAPMAN): Yes it is. Speaker 2: No it isn't either. That's Dr. McKinney. Speaker 1: (MS. CHAPMAN): That's not Dr. McKinney. That is your father. Speaker 2: No, that's my father. Speaker 1: (MS. CHAPMAN): (Laughter). Speaker 2: Okay, and what year as this photo taken? Speaker 1: '80s [1980s]. Speaker 2: Nineteen eighties [1980s], okay. So Reverend Dobson if you can just name the folks in this photo from left to right? Speaker 1: That's Bennett. Speaker 2: (MS. CHAPMAN): George Bennett [ph.]. Speaker 1: That's me and-- Speaker 2: (MS. CHAPMAN): Joe [Joseph] Howard [Sr.]. Speaker 1: Judge Howard. Speaker 2: (MS. CHAPMAN): Judge Howard and-- Speaker 1: Maxell Matthews [ph.]. Speaker 2: Who was the last person? Speaker 1: Dr. Ballard, Maxell Matthews my predecessor. Speaker 2: Okay and about what year was that photo taken? Speaker 1: That would be in the '70s [1970s]. Speaker 2: Okay. Okay. Speaker 1: (MS. CHAPMAN): (Laughter). Speaker 2: That's me and that's about '56 [1956]. Speaker 1: (MS. CHAPMAN): When you were in the probation office? Speaker 2: Probation department. Speaker 1: Okay. You could just name the folks in this photo from left to right. Speaker 2: That's me and that's-- Speaker 1: (MS. CHAPMAN): That's [HM Reverend Marion Curtis] Bascom. Speaker 2: That's Marion Bascom. Speaker 1: (MS. CHAPMAN): And [Reverend] Willie Ray. Speaker 2: Okay, about what year was this photo taken? Speaker 1: '70s [1970s]. Speaker 2: Seventies [1970s] okay, and just the photo here. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): (Unclear). Speaker 2: That's my mother, Estelle [Irene Cook-]Dobson. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): (Unclear). Speaker 2: About what year was that photo taken that you all used on the program? Speaker 1: That was taken--the photograph was taken in the '60s [1960s]. Speaker 2: Okay, the '60s [1960s], and this is the last one. Just that one, a photo of your father, do you know about what year the photograph was taken? Speaker 1: About the '60s [1960s]. Speaker 2: Okay, the '60s [1960s]. That's Reverend Dobson's father. Spencer Griffith Dobson, Sr...