 Story_ID: 90576 Speaker 1: We're going to start by slating it. My name is Julieanna Richardson and I'm the interviewer, and Matthew Hickey is the videographer. And I'd like to have you start out by stating your name and spelling it. Speaker 2: I'm Ofield Dukes. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, when I--just let me finish the question-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --so that we're not talking over each other. But can you start off by stating your name and spelling it for us, and giving us your date of birth. Speaker 2: Okay. I'm Ofield Dukes, O-F-I-E-L-D, Dukes, D-U-K-E-S. Date of birth is August 8, 1932. Speaker 1: Do you--it's--do you have a middle name? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. And can we have today's date and our location? Speaker 2: Today's date is Saturday, May 31st, 2003, and we're at 1424 Carrollsburg Place Southwest in Washington, D.C. And the zip is 2004, 2000--no, 20024. Speaker 1: Okay. And your profession? Speaker 2: I am a public relations practitioner, the president and CEO of Ofield Dukes & Associates. And this is my 34th year in the public relations business. Story_ID: 90577 Speaker 1: We're going to start off with five questions that are little "People-Magazine-ish"--just short answers. And I'd like to know what your favorite food is. Speaker 2: What is my favorite food? I would say steak. Speaker 1: Favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Spring. Speaker 1: Favorite color? Speaker 2: Blue. Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Let's see, the Caribbean. Speaker 1: And favorite phrase or saying. Speaker 2: The favorite what? Speaker 1: Phrase or saying? Do you have a favorite phrase? Speaker 2: Oh, yes, yeah, uh-hum. Socrates said, "The first law of life is knowing thyself." Aristotle said, "Be thyself." And Shakespeare said, "To thine own self be true." Speaker 1: Good, that, see. The HistoryMakers--they just come with that off the top of their head, okay. Story_ID: 90578 Speaker 1: Okay, we're going to start and I want you to talk about your mother, if you could give her name. Speaker 2: My mother who's deceased, her name was Violet Stringer Dukes. My father, who's also deceased, his name was Garfield Dukes. Speaker 1: Well, can you talk about your mother and what her background was and her growing up? Speaker 2: Oh, my mother was born in Rutledge, Alabama. And she was a wonderful housewife. And I can remember at the age of five, my mother and father as sharecroppers--pick cotton in the cotton fields of Rutledge, Alabama, which was sort of a rural area outside of Luverne [Alabama]. And, of course, there was no Head Start programs, no daycare. So, at the age of five, my mother placed me at the end of a sack, and as she pulled the sack picking cottons with both hands, she babysat with me. And she pulled me along every day out in the hot sweltering sun as she did what she had to do in picking cotton. My father, oh-- Speaker 1: His name? Speaker 2: Garfield Dukes-- Speaker 1: Good. Speaker 2: --was invited to come to Detroit because he had a brother who had migrated to Detroit. And that was during the period when Henry Ford made history in recruiting Negroes from various parts of the country to pay them the grand salary of five dollars a day. And so my uncle, whose name was Greeley (ph.) Dukes had moved to Detroit with his wife. And my father was invited to come and he--I think left--it must have been about 1937 or '38 [1938]. And a couple of other brothers also migrated to Detroit. And I think it was about 1941 that my uncle Greeley came to Rutledge, Alabama with a 1939 Chevrolet. And my mother and three sisters and myself hopped in the car, and we drove from Alabama to the Freedom Land of Detroit and that was about 1940. Speaker 1: Now, you were what age at that time? You were-- Speaker 2: Oh, I was, gee, about eight, eight-- Speaker 1: --about nine, eight or nine? Speaker 2: --eight years old, yes. Story_ID: 90579 Speaker 1: Now, I want to take you back to sort of Rutledge [Alabama] a little bit. And I want to know what your earliest memory as of growing up. Speaker 2: Yeah. Outside of being on that side, I guess, my mother picked cotton. I remember very clearly attending school. I remember going to Luverne [Alabama], and with a nickel buying a, a notebook. And a white lady took my nickel and gave me the notebook and sort of patted me on the head. We attended a one-room schoolhouse which was behind the church adjacent to the graveyard near the woods. And during the winter, we depended on a pot belly stove for heat. And there were times when we did not have wood and it was cold, and we would were not accustomed to the cold weather--and with the little tennis shoes that had holes in them. The teacher would dismiss us, so that we can go out into the cemetery into the woods to find pieces of wood in order for us to have a fire. And she was a very strict teacher, if you came to school and didn't practice your spelling or your reading. Now she had a switch, and she would take us out in back of the schoolhouse, and have us to pull them down and bend over. And that was sanctioned by our parents, and sometimes we'll get a beating at school, and a beating at home. And that was the environment. That an intense desire on the part of our teacher. And all of us, regardless of our age, were in the same classroom. I also remember my aunt who played basketball. And her parents were pretty strict and so whenever she went to the basketball game, she had to take me along as the chaperone. And this was Crenshaw County Training School. And I remember their wearing the big bloomers that went down to your knees. And the basketball games were always outdoors. And there was quite a bit of interest in pride at Crenshaw County Training School. Those are my early recollections. And I also remember when we moved from the country to Luverne and we would haul my sisters. My mother would have this big tub on a Saturday night, having my sisters to take a bath, a Saturday night bath, and some of them regretted that. And, and she would, after the bath, they were sitting around doing their hair with that straightening comb, and preparing them for church on Sunday. And we always went to church in our best clothes. And there was people from everywhere walking to church, and the hair neatly combed and whatever. Also, I remember--I had on the radio and the, this young man was just probably my friend next door--they had a radio. So when Joe Louis would fight, I would be on my porch listening to the radio, and he would be on his porch. And then, he would run over and tell me what was on his radio. And then I would run over and tell him what was on my radio. And we were sort of surprised that what I heard on my radio, he was hearing on his radio. And when Joe Louis won, everybody in the neighborhood would come out and singing and, and applausing. That was the most exciting thing. And the one thing that was a great sense of pride to all of us was when Joe Louis fought and he won because he represented the race pride that we did not have in Alabama at all. And people would--all kinds of people, grandmothers and everybody else--it was a grand celebration and just wonderful. I remember how my father would have a, a place in the back where he would kill the hog and store the meat. And my mother would can goods for the winter. And it was not a bad life, and we very seldom encountered whites 'cause we lived in a segregated part of the city. And we had our own little store, and our own church, and our own school. And so, we did not look forward to dealing with the rest of the world. Story_ID: 90580 Speaker 1: Tell me what Rutledge [Alabama] sort of looked like, you know, if you could, you know, if you could sort of describe it. And how far was it from Luverne [Alabama]? Speaker 2: Rutledge was a, a rural area. And we lived, oh, in a little hut away from my grandmother that lived on the hill. And so, there weren't--we didn't have any neighbors. We had to walk to school. There was no buses and tere was just dusty roads. And our little house was surrounded by the cotton field. And we would have the man coming by selling watermelons, and the guy would come by selling ice. We didn't have electricity. We had a lantern, lantern. We had an outhouse. And we did have Santa Claus. We had pecans and some semblance of Christmas. We were very poor, but did not realize how poor we were because we were able to have our meals prepared, breakfast, and lunch, and dinner. My mother [Violet Stringer Dukes] never worked, never worked. And all through her eighty-four years, she was the best housewife and the best cook. And we had wonderful grandparents on both sides. My, my mother's father was a minister and he was a farmer. And his main animal was an ox. And he would get on, get in his wagon, and, and have his ox to pull the wagon. I just remember one little location. I was visiting him and we all laugh about it. And as he was leaving his house, the ox raised it, its tail, and was getting ready to do something in the yard. And my grandfather yelled, Tobin (ph.)--I think he called it Tobin, the ox, Tobin--Tobin, hold it, Tobin, hold it, Tobin, hold it until you get out. And so, the ox probably didn't hear him, and it all came out. And my grandfather was sort of exasperated. He had to get off and clean out the yard because my grandmother was very particular. She wasn't so enamored of the ox because he just had his habits of just letting it out whenever. Speaker 1: You know, you've described so well, sights and sounds. I often like people to also describe smells. What smells remind you of growing up in, in Rutledge? Speaker 2: Oh, I just--the countryside, oh, I am not so certain that I can recall the smells. There's just one thing is that my grandmother lived the way, but you can smell what she was cooking. And that was so wonderful, whether it was barbecue or collard greens or whatever. It seems as if the wind was blowing in that direction--candy yams or turkey or whatever, you could smell it. And the same for my mother. That was the one fragrance that--whether it was breakfast, you can smell the eggs and the bacon, or if it was in or whatever. So that was a, the smell that I just recall, and it was a wonderful feeling, you know, and to smell dinner before she even rang the bell. Story_ID: 90581 Speaker 1: Now siblings, do you have siblings? Speaker 2: Yeah, I-- Speaker 1: So where do you fit in the birth order? Speaker 2: --I was the second oldest. I have an older sister who's two years older and a third sister. Speaker 1: Her name? Speaker 2: Her name was Arlene Dukes. She's deceased, Arlene Dukes Brown (ph.). And the third member of the family was another sister who was two years younger--that's Lou Alice Brock (ph.). She's in Detroit. And the third sister is four years younger--that's Ann Dukes Harris in Buffalo. And the fourth sister, who was born in Detroit, and I don't even remember her age. And she'll beat me over the head if I even suggested it. She's a younger sister born in the '40's [1940s]. I just don't remember. Speaker 1: So that, that was, that was, that's your family? Speaker 2: Yeah, four sisters. Speaker 1: And one, and one boy? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So were you spoiled? Speaker 2: There was a suggestion because with the four sisters, especially in Detroit, I didn't--maybe on occasion, I would take out the garbage. But I didn't do dishes, and my mother [Violet Stringer Dukes] didn't have me doing dishes. And I, although my father [Garfield Dukes] had a strap, my mother always threatened my sisters. In my life, I don't ever recall receiving a beating because I was always there. And my sisters would do some crazy things. And my mother would always know that her son, he would be home one time and never stayed out late at night and whatever. And that's, in the older years, when I would return to Detroit for Christmas or Thanksgiving, we would sit around the table. And my sisters would complain jokingly that I was my mother's pet because she was never on them. And then, they would suggest that even in college, I would go to a dance and would always be home early, whereas with my sisters, in college, they would go to a dance, and they would have breakfast. And my mother and I would be on our way to church. And my sisters would just be coming home. And they could not remember my ever, even in college or after college, ever staying out overnight sleeping with another lady because I always came home. And they couldn't understand that. And maybe I was--something was wrong with me. So we always laughed about that and that was a habit. And when I was engaged to be married, my fiancee came to Detroit and substantiated that. She just said that, though we were engaged, that even if I were in bed with her, I would get up at 2 or 3:00 in the morning and return home to my own apartment because I had the feeling that I just needed to get up in my own bed. And so, that was one of my idiosyncrasies. Story_ID: 90582 Speaker 1: Now, I want to take you back to Rutledge [Alabama]. And I want to ask, what was Ofield Dukes like as a young boy? I mean, were you quiet and shy? Were you retiring or--I mean, I mean, not retiring, were you rambunctious? Were you mischievous? Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION). Speaker 1: I was asking what the young Ofield Dukes was like? Speaker 2: It's a good question. At the age of five and-- Speaker 1: Five, six, seven--I mean, just-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I was in Detroit. I think I left at the age of-- Speaker 1: Eight, you said eight. Speaker 2: Yeah, about eight. The big thing up there was school. I enjoyed school, going to church on Sunday, and oh, just into the environment. I was quiet. I had the three sisters. And oh, the memories are just pretty vague. I guess I was a typical five or six or seven-year-old living in a rural area in a highly segregated period, being protected from all of that by my parents who were sharecroppers. Speaker 1: But you, you--did you daydream at all? I mean you, you know, the one thing that you talked about was the Joe Louis fight and going back and forth, you know, between houses and listening. But was there any, any, any sense of a life beyond, you know, Rutledge, Rutledge, Alabama at that point? Speaker 2: No, we didn't have--our teachers talking of--that much about life beyond a rigidly segregated society. We talked about Christ and living a good life. And then, if we were good, going to Heaven, and that was a major emphasis--loving our neighbor, and developing those kinds of principles, and having faith that the Lord is with us. And regardless of our trials and tribulations and maybe one day, life would be better. And so, that was the nature. I think that was an important period in my life of developing faith in our own ability to deal with the adverse set of circumstances, and to overcome because later on in life, that type of faith in one's ability to deal with that adversity became a, a pivotal point in my life. And although the initial source of it was my Christian training, in college I attributed that in part to Ralph Waldo Emerson's book of essays, one of which was self-reliance. And his own description of the genius of Beethoven and Mozart and Plato and Socrates, and his description was that their genius was there and faltering faith in their ability to deal with adversity and then move to excel. Speaker 1: Now the--were you raised Baptist? Was the Bap- or Baptist-- Speaker 2: Yes, uh-hum. Speaker 1: Okay, now, it's okay. Speaker 2: That, that was the main denomination of the South. You know, Catholic? Episcopalians? Methodists? no. Story_ID: 90583 Speaker 1: When you--do you remember the trip to Detroit? Speaker 2: I remember our riding, yes, I remember it. We were in my uncle's 1939 Chevrolet, and it was the first time we'd ever been in a car. And my mother [Violet Stringer Dukes]--we were all in the back seat, and my mother had prepared chicken and whatever. And my uncle just was facetiously reminding us, let's don't get any grease on his new car. And we would stop and, you know, the restrooms were always segregated. And we were--quietly move from the car to go to wherever we had to go. And so, it was a wonderful ride and exciting ride. And it was a new world arriving in Detroit on Dubois with my uncle. Well, we lived with them, so strikingly different world where people were free, relatively free. It was quite an experience. Speaker 1: Do you know--I mean you were young at that point, so do you know if your parents had any trouble adjusting? Your father [Garfield Dukes] went to work in the Ford-- Speaker 2: It was for a little company. It was a very wonderful adjustment because Henry Ford was paying Negroes five dollars a day and that allowed us to--we had his car. And eventually, we moved into a house next door. And I guess when we come to Detroit, we'll talk about going to the Paradise Theater and seeing Sammy Davis, Jr. and Count Basie and all of those folks, so it was a different life entirely. Story_ID: 90584 Speaker 1: So you lived on--where, where did you, what was the street? You said-- Speaker 2: Dubois in Detroit. There's the lower East Side. We lived about five blocks from Joe Louis. We lived a few blocks from Charles Diggs. And practically most of the blacks lived on the lower East Side--what we call Black Bottom. Have you heard that expression before? Speaker 1: Yes, I have heard the Black Bottom in Detroit. That's fine, okay. Speaker 2: Okay. Yeah, it's almost like the South Side of Chicago. Speaker 1: Now, do--can you describe a little bit more about the community that you grew up in--your block, you know? Speaker 2: Oh, in Detroit? Speaker 1: Uh-hum, Detroit. Speaker 2: Oh, oh, indeed. Oh, everybody in the block knew each other. We knew the people upstairs. And when we moved next door--an Italian family and, and they moved upstairs, and the Italian family lived next door. And there was Joe, the--who owned the shoe shop just right around the corner. And we knew everybody in the block. And during the summer, we never locked the doors. We didn't have air conditioning so the doors were open. And everybody knew each other. And we had one little store owned by an Italian grocer. And we attended the Church of Our Father. And on a Sunday, you have Negroes from all over walking out--going to their neighborhood churches. And we attended Duffield Elementary, which was about ten blocks away, and so we would all walk to school. Middle high school was just a block away, but we were in elementary school. So we would get back, and the people from middle high school, a block away, would walk past our house. And it was a wonderful, wonderful community. And everybody knew each other and, and that type of camaraderie, that type of spiritual connection. And all of the kids played together out in the street, whatever, hide go seek, whatever. Speaker 1: Now, were a lot of people--was that because people were migrating up, was there a sense--a lot of people coming from Alabama at the time or, you know, Mississippi, henceforth? You, you might not have been aware of that though so-- Speaker 2: Well, I seent the migration was very much in progress. Our neighborhood was pretty stable. We just knew everybody there because many of the people were there when we arrived. And my uncle was real outgoing. And every Saturday, my uncle and aunt loved to play cards, and they would have neighbors over playing [bid] whist and tonk and poker, and drinking a lot of beer. And there was one little lady--I forget her name, but she would sit and chat, and consume almost a case of beer. And so, an elderly fellow--whose great sense of humor and he was a great player. And everybody was intimidated by him and he would challenge everyone. And so, we would just sit around and, and watch, and it was just great. Story_ID: 90499 Speaker 1: So, can you share, you know, some more memories of, you know, growing up in Detroit? Speaker 2: Okay. Oh, I went to Duffield Elementary School. And one of my teachers was Mrs. Barrow and she was a sister of Joe Louis. And she was as physically striking as Joe Louis--about the same height. I think she, I think she was taller and she was a tough teacher. I think I was in the fourth or fifth grade. And she was a sort of no-nonsense, and she had a huge paddle, and if you were late for her class, she would ask you for five and you have to stick out your hand. If you were destructive in the class, now, that's a cardinal crime. And she would have the fellows to drop their pants and bend over and take her huge paddle and whack you, and it's maybe, you know, four or five times. And that was sanctioned and she was intimidating, and you--if you're going to be in her class, you'd have to learn. And she contributed to my sense of discipline because she was intimidating. And she was as--Joe was a nice guy, but she was--we thought she was mean and evil, but we learned to appreciate her because we learned quite a bit. Story_ID: 90500 Speaker 1: When I moved to, to Miller High School [Detroit, Michigan], I think I was--even just before I moved to high school, I started delivering newspapers. I think I was about eleven years old when I was delivering the "Detroit Times". And I had about eighty customers. And it was--I lived on DuBois and (unclear), and my route was about nine blocks. It's from Clinton where the, the elementary school was located to J Street where Miller High School was. And so, every day at 3:30 or 4:00, I would pick up my papers and deliver them. And people would be sitting outside waiting for the paper because there was a section in the paper that carried numbers. And the big thing in that community in the morning, the numbers guy would come by. And my father played the numbers. And my uncle was very good in hitting the numbers--and my aunt. And three doors down from me was a lady whose family sort of backed the numbers. And the numbers men would, you know, come through the back gate and whatever. So every day between 3 and 5:00, there was a sense of suspense. What was the number for the first race? And I guess there was a series, and then they wanted to know what was the number for the second race. And in the paper, there was a--I don't know if it was a horoscope, or there were some series of numbers that had to do something to do with the numbers game. And people were waiting for the newspaper, and I couldn't afford to miss, you know. And, and the other thing that was important is the Detroit Tigers. There were no Negroes on the Tigers. There were no Negroes on the Lions football team, but the Negroes in Detroit just lived--many of them lived because the Tigers had a good team. They had Hank Greenberg and they had Dizzy Trout, and they were very, very competitive. And people were listening to the baseball game, but they wanted the paper that described the action of the day before. And the "Detroit Times" didn't carry any information about Negro activities because the writers were all conservative. But then, there was another group of people who read the comic pages, O. Henry and, and all of those, and so the comic session, section was important. Oh, I developed an interest in journalism then because I read Walter Winchell, and then Dorothy Kilgallen, and Bob Considine. And then, there was Westbrook Pegler. And Hearst was very sensational about combatting Communism--Randolph, William Randolph Hearst, the owner of the, of the Hearst papers. Story_ID: 90501 Speaker 1: The other thing that people were very much into, say, between 3 and 5:00, was the radio soap operas--"When A Girl Marries", "Stella Dallas", and there were others. They were all white but there were 15 minutes. And every house--people sitting out in the summer. And the radio was on--or "When A Girl Marries", "Stella Dallas" and "Fibber McGee and Molly" and, you know, whatever. And those were the compelling things on the lower East side because we were not in the radio, but there was one radio show that we would listen to. I think it was on a Saturday night and that was "Amos 'n' Andy". And we would gather around the radio and we just laughed about "Amos 'n' Andy". And, and I forget Amos's wife was a silly lady, frivolous, and that was the one thing that we sort of associated with. Our radio was a very important on a Sunday. We would get up and listen to the "Wings Over Jordan", and that was the other major black show on radio, the "Wings over Jordan". Story_ID: 90502 Speaker 1: So for four years, I delivered papers. And when there was a snowstorm or rain or whatever, I just never missed a day, whether it was Sunday or during the week. And I learned to accept a level of disappointment because some of my customers were always late in paying and some didn't pay at all. And so, I developed a sense of self-reliance and didn't make a whole lot of money selling the papers. But all had the pocket change, so I never asked my father [Garfield Dukes] who's a--after he left the Ford Motor Company, he went to barber school. He has his own barber shop that he ran for about forty years. But I never asked and, you know, contributed a little something to my mother [Violet Stringer Dukes]. Story_ID: 90503 Speaker 1: Oh, and at Miller High School [Detroit, Michigan], which is all black, I was--gee, I guess just about 5'3" or 4", 120-, 25 pounds. And we had the best basketball team, a good football team--wasn't able to play any sports, so I became student manager. That's the ball boy for the football team and the basketball team. And it was exciting--simply because with a coach named Will Robinson who was a disciplinarian, a philosopher, a father substitute. And his message had tremendous impact on my life. And he felt that the student manager, the ball boy, had as much responsibility as a player. And he was very strict and told the players if they wanted to be a champion, they had to live like a champion. They had to make the sacrifice that they couldn't be spending a lot of time with the girls and had to remain in shape, and couldn't have sex with the girls during the basketball season. And then he had a curfew. They had to be home by 10:00 and couldn't be out playing around. And he set the same goals for the student managers, and said, well, we're not playing. He says, well, the rules applies--you guys can't be going to bed with ladies and whatever. And, so, we had--if you're part of a team, and whether you're on the floor or not, you have a sense of responsibility and whatever. And he also mentioned that, that if Negroes wanted to be first class citizens, they had to think and act like first citizens--first class citizens, with a sense of responsibility, and to do things with class and grace and, and with quality, and learn how to be a good sportsman and how to--I think he mentioned that there is no shortcut to success, that you have to develop a strong work ethic. You got to work hard. And he felt, and he said that Negroes had two strikes against them generally--those attending Miller that the school was not a first class school. We didn't have the resources of the white high schools and that was one strike. And then, because of the racial discrimination in Detroit at the time, the Negroes were forced to live in a neighborhood that was discrimination in housing, discrimination in education, discrimination in employment. There were no blacks hired by department stores beyond being a janitor or an elevator operator. And he just said that the second strike was being a Negro. But he just said that in the game of baseball, you only need one opportunity to knock the ball out of the lot. And you could have two strikes against you, and the question is, what are you going to do? And with the third potential strike and he just said, let us don't lament the fact that we have those obstacles to overcome. And he was remarkable because in spite of the fact that Miller did not have a gymnasium, and the fellows had to walk six or seven miles to the Brewster Center to practice basketball. And we didn't have a football field. We didn't have a baseball field, and that the football and baseball team had to be bussed to Bell Isle out about ten miles away, and that we had the second class equipment. But we had very dedicated teachers. And he just said that we didn't need to spend any time lamenting the fact of our circumstances, but to develop the intense commitment to be excellent in spite of, and to act with a sense of dignity and class. Story_ID: 90504 Speaker 1: And his [Will Robinson] basketball teams created history by really winning the metropolitan championship. But they played the winner of the Catholic League for the first time, and they played at Olympia Stadium before 16,000 people. And this was extraordinary to have six or 7,000 blacks in a stadium with six or 7,000 whites. And the papers weren't certain, and the Catholic League weren't certain, and the Metropolitan League, all governed by whites, weren't certain--how explosive this would be. And we had the principal and we had meetings at the high school--everybody need to be on their very best behavior. And so, Miller [High School] beat St. Joseph Catholic School down the street in a very close game. And Miller won the championship for three straight years. And the white sports reporters for the "Detroit Times", the "[Detroit] News", and "[Detroit] Free Press" became so attracted to the team because they played with a lot of class, a lot of determination, and superior skills. They were just better than anybody else. And that was sort of surprising. And if they lost a game, there were no weeping and mourning of whatever, and they demonstrate great sportsmanship. I remember on one occasion when Miller was playing a predominantly white high school, Cass Tech [Technical High School, Detroit, Michigan], the number one technical school. Everybody wanted to go to Cass Tech. This was the number one academic high school in Detroit. And it was a home game at Brewster Center, and Miller was behind and it was the last 30 seconds of the game. I think the score is about twenty-seven to twenty-six. And a foul was called against Miller, and the fans started booing. And the coach went out on the middle of the floor--had the referees to call time out, and he held up his hand and then there was a hush, quiet. And then he spoke and said, hey, if we have to win this way, I would rather not win at all. And it was as quiet as a funeral parlor on New Year's Eve. And the game was resumed, and it was the last five seconds. And a guy named Robert Taylor got the ball from one end of the court, dribbled down just beyond the half floor line, and threw up a shot, and then the gun sounded. And the ball went through the hoops, and Miller won by one point and that was very dramatic. Story_ID: 90505 Speaker 1: That's a great little story (laughter)--dramatic, yeah, that's, that's a wonderful story. Speaker 2: Yeah. Well, that was the character of Will Robinson. And he not only was the football coach and the basketball coach, but he was the sports editor of the Detroit edition of the "Pittsburgh Courier". And at that particular time, the "Courier" was the main black newspaper throughout the country. They had editions in Detroit, in Chicago, and Washington, and Baltimore, and whatever. And you had the best writers, for the "Courier", the intellectual writers, the sports writers. Wendell Smith was the person who was pushing hard for the first base--Negro baseball player, Jackie Robinson. And you had Benjamin Mays--was a Communist. And you had the others. And the "Courier" took on the fight against those who did something to Emmett Till and whatever. And they--the "Courier" had the best sports page. And Will Robinson was the editor of the Detroit edition, and so whenever there was on TV at that time, the two main attractions were boxing. On a Wednesday, it was Pabst Blue Ribbon boxing from Chicago on a Wednesday night sponsored by Pabst Blue Ribbon beer. And on Friday night, it was the Gillette Blue Blade sponsored fights from New York Madison Square Garden or the Olympia in Detroit. And it was the days of Sugar Ray Robinson, and Sandy Saddler, and Archie Moore, and Sugar Ray Robinson, and Hurricane Jackson and, and it was great. And Johnny Bratton, Kid Gavilan (ph.)--it was a great day for boxing. And blacks everywhere would line up in front of the TV because there's nothing else on. And in high school, Will Robinson had me to become a cub reporter, and I started writing--covering high school sports. And the people at his office made fun of me because I couldn't spell. And the editor and the other people bringing and the, the, to imagine (unclear)--Will, why you bringing this little high school guy down here and he can't even spell cat? And so, Robinson was very patient with me. And I was taking the journalism class in high school [Miller High School, Detroit, Michigan]. And I eventually--when I ended up in college, I covered all of the major boxing events at the Olympia, and had a national byline by Ofield Dukes. And it was--whether it was Joe Louis, or Archie Moore, or Sugar Ray Robinson, that was a thrill. But learning to write was a challenging exercise because I couldn't at the very beginning, and just sitting down at an old Underwood typewriter trying to peck away. And I did take typing in high school, which was helpful, but I had to learn to spell. Story_ID: 90506 Speaker 1: After I graduated from high--but also in high school [Miller High School, Detroit, Michigan], I had some funny notions. And the person in the neighborhood, who was always sharply dressed, was the numbers man who would come knock on the back door first thing in the morning, and he was driving a sharp car with his Stetson hat and, and whatever. And the other person who was running around the neighborhood with the convertible was a pimp. So, somehow, I had the notion that one day, I wanted to be a lover. I wanted to be a pimp, chance taker, and easy moneymaker, and hero to any poor girl's dream, and that was my notion. And I was never an athlete and so, I didn't have that type of athletic appeal to the young ladies. So I had to be creative and so, since I was learning to write, and on the, the student newspaper and the yearbook, oh, I started riding little love notes to young ladies, extolling their physical virtues and, surprisingly, it worked. And so, I developed a little harem of young ladies who were attracted to me simply because I would write such flowery things about them--their countenance and how attractive they were, and how they affected me, and how I just thought they--heaven must be at recess because they were all angels and describing--making them feel good. And though they may have been in a romantic relationship with an athlete, but they were never given that type of praise and positive reinforcement and whatever. And so, these little ladies carried my little notes around and it worked until--I guess, a couple of them went to a restroom and they started comparing. And they just wanted to engage in physical violence and, and although I had the little harem, I was intimidated by the fact that the worst thing that could happen in high school was impregnating a young lady and then having to drop out. And that was an occurrence because that was before the pill. And so with the little girls I were--had and I was dating, I had a strange habit. And I carried in my wallet just a little calendar monitoring their menstrual cycles. And because if there were going to be any action, I had to make sure that it was at the right time, and also carried in my pocket, you know, a bunch of Trojans that gathered dust. I wasn't doing anything, but I was being overly protective, and had the strange, strange occurrence of a couple of young ladies calling me--says, Ofield, I don't know where I am in my cycle, so check your records or whatever. But that was a part of my mentality of survival because good friends were--it was during the period of drive-in movies and the lovers' lane, and the backseat rumbles because the cars became, you know, the thing, and the--couldn't go to a downtown movie. So, you know, big date was taking a young lady to a drive-in or going to a drive-in restaurant. And with the loud music and then after that, driving to Bel Air or to some remote place, you know, lovers' lane. We had a lovers' lane all over the place, and people were engaged in that because parents were strict--be home by ten, so that was one of the worst things--young ladies having to drop out of school and fellows dropping out to get a job, and the early marriages which was a problem. Story_ID: 90507 Speaker 1: But I had a very good journalism instructor who was very, very stern about writing--Mr. Kennard. And he also insisted that we learn French and Latin and all of that. The teachers were, were excellent. Oh, I got a fair education and after graduate--I was very much involved, president of the student government. I was president of the 12B class. I was in all of the activities and whatever, very popular, speaker, and participated in the musical, theatrical productions and whatever. And everybody knew me because I was just overly active, and the Hi-Y Club, and the student council and whatever. And I must have been maybe a "C-plus" student at best because that wasn't the major emphasis. So, after I graduated, I went to go to Wayne State University [Detroit, Michigan]. And I, since I was sort of academically retarded in English, I had to take the entrance exam. And that was a unique experience. And so I took that exam and failed miserably because I hadn't, you know, vocabulary, the multiple choices, and all those kinds of things. So, I studied a bit and at the time, I was a little heartbroken because the young lady who was on the cheering squad, and the young lady I loved so very much, oh, decided to move on after I graduated because she was dating me because maybe I was popular. And I think one day--I was just standing on the corner after I graduated. And she came out the front door and I started walking to her. And then, a convertible Riviera pulled up and stopped in front of the door. And she looked at me and then waved, and then proudly got in the Riviera and it sped past me, and then she waved again without looking. And so, that was a harsh reality of the unpredictability of, of love or whatever you--or emotional insanity or whatever it is. And that clouded my thinking and sort of broke my little tender heart. And it was still the time I was trying to find my way from high school to college, so I took that exam again. And, one shouldn't use heartbreak as an excuse, but I failed the second time. Story_ID: 90508 Speaker 1: And so, I took a remedial course in the evening and looked around for a job. And the best I could do was a maintenance job at Sears and Roebuck, and that was a janitor, getting there at 6:00 in the morning and mopping the floors. And my beat was cleaning the parking lot and the service station. And at Sears, as was the case at other stores, retail stores, Sears wasn't even hiring blacks at the service station as grease monkeys. They were not hiring Negroes in the stockroom. And, of course, there were no Negroes in sales and that was the nature of things. So, for a year or so, I attended Wayne [State University, Detroit Michigan] at night taking English, and working as a janitor at Sears. When then there came a letter from a guy I wasn't really familiar with--a guy named Uncle Sam. And that was during the Korean War, and it was a mandatory invitation. First, you take a physical exam at the age of eighteen. And on my birthday when I was nineteen, there came a second letter suggesting that I report for active duty. And that I did and end up going on a train to Fort Bliss, Texas, where I spent six months in basic training. And being that from the discipline of the coach, as the fellows on the weekend would go to Juarez for social, social entertainment, and to respond to their other emotional and physical needs, and I would stay on the base reading my little--[tape cuts off] Story_ID: 90846 Speaker 1: Let's do this. So, you spent time in the service, and then came back to Wayne State [University, Detroit, Michigan]? How long were you in the service? Speaker 2: Two years. Speaker 1: Okay. So, was that--did--are there things that you learned about that experience? Okay, (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Yes, it made a big difference. Speaker 1: Uh-hum. Speaker 2: That was the mecca in my life. Everybody has a mecca, that turning point where you're able to discover who you are. That made a big difference. Speaker 1: Was it the discipline or the being away from-- Speaker 2: Are we on camera now? Speaker 1: Yeah, uh-hum. Speaker 2: Oh, oh, okay. After basic training, we--just a group of us included fellows from high school [Miller High School, Detroit, Michigan]. We were all sent to Korea on a boat. And my first night in Korea was an unforgettable one because as we're going from--as we were traveling by jeep, by truck, to our unit, the shells were coming in. And we had to stop the truck and run for cover and it was a very frightening experience. But during my tour in Korea, I was a part of the Second Army Division in the 82nd Antiaircraft, Antiaircraft Artillery Unit. And we were stationed about five miles from the front and overlooking the Cheorwon Valley--and on guard, and we're on guard twenty-four hours. We would be on guard two hours and off four. But it was at that point that I spent a lot of time reading, reading and soul searching, and becoming aware of the fact that I was going nowhere in life--didn't have a sense of vision, no sense of direction. And so, it was introspection and discovering my own sense of self. And I did a lot of reading and I was reading about Socrates and his advice. The first lesson in life is knowing thyself. And I was reading Ralph Waldo Emerson, his self-reliance, and his essays and whatever. So I discovered the essence of Ofield Dukes. And the other thing is I realized that if you're mediocre that you really can't go that far. So every day, I read. And every time I came across a word that I did not know or a word that I was fascinated by, I became a word-aholic, collecting words. So I collected about 10,000 words and pulled out paper, and did the etymology of each word to diction and usage and whatever, and just spend time writing and writing. And I was developing an intense desire, an intense determination to move from being nothing in life to one day being something. And recalling the words of Coach Will Robinson, and if you are going to be successful, you have to develop the right type of work ethic--that there's no, no shortcut to success and whatever. So, the thirteen months in Korea was almost like Henry Thoreau, being at his own "Walden"--the sense of reflection, introspection, and developing the sense of confidence, faith in your ability to deal with the obstacles, the adversities, and then the words Ralph Waldo Emerson--developing your own sense of genius. And so, when I got out of the Army, I was highly motivated. Story_ID: 90847 Speaker 1: Said a little prayer the night that the Lord would be with me, but also to provide me with the wherewithal to, to live up to my potential. I also put the women in perspective--that I no longer wanted to be a lover and a pimp, and all of that because didn't see any American women for six months until the "Wings Over Jordan" choir came to Korea. And these were older women--not necessarily beauty queens. And the soldiers would line up, white and black, to see these American women. And, and so I learned the sense of self-reliance and putting things in perspective 'cause when I came out, I reentered Wayne State University [Detroit, Michigan], became a journalism major in a class of eight fellows. I was the only black, and I became a good writer and "B-plus" student, and worked part-time as a sports writer for the Michigan, for the Detroit edition of the "Courier", and covered the big sporting events, and even covered the Detroit Lions then because they had black players, and even covered the Detroit Tigers because they had hired a couple of blacks. And so, I could spell a little better, and writing was easier for me. The day before, a week before graduation from Wayne State University in June of 1958, the advisor, a white advisor named Mr. Holden (ph.), came to me with his head down and says, Ofield, I've been able to arrange jobs for the other seven, seven fellows in your class, and have been able to arrange jobs with the "Detroit Times", "Detroit News", "Detroit Free Press". And one fellow was Jewish, the "Jewish Week". And then he paused and said just--sorry, I don't have any contacts at "Jet" and "Ebony". And so, there isn't anything that I can do for you. And although all during the time I was in Korea, I had a dream of one day being a journalist. And that dream was nourished through the thirteen months in Korea, and all during the four years at Wayne State University. However, when he mentioned this to me--oh, my dream of being a journalist was not shattered, but it did jolt me into the sense of reality of the racial environment at that time because the daily papers weren't hiring any Negroes. And that was even before--I think Carl Rohn (ph.) was hired by the Minneapolis paper. But somehow I recall what Ralph Waldo Emerson said, and what my coach said, so I did not lose faith in my ability to, to deal with that. So I was disappointed, but not shattered. And I was writing for the "Pittsburgh Courier"--and I think the income was $10 or $15, you know, a week. And I just thought that was wonderful experience. So I graduated without a full time job. Story_ID: 90848 Speaker 1: And, however, it was almost, like what my grandmother used to say--that the Lord is going to come when you want Him, but he's always on time. I think it was in July, or the first of August, that I got a call from a guy named Frank Seymour who was the general manager of a new radio station that had been built in Detroit by three black dentists. And this was historic for three black dentists to come together to build a radio station, WCHB AM. And Frank Seymour knew of my writing and he calls--say, Ofield, we're just--I'm the general manager of this new radio station. And it's owned by Dr. Bell and his two partners and both being married to Dr. Bell's two daughters. And he said, we need a news director and we want to hire you. I said, said to myself, wonderful, and so I was hired as the news, the first news director of WCHB Radio. And I went out there every day at 5:00 in the morning and did seven or eight newscasts--oh, and covered all kinds of activities and it was a remarkable experience. Speaker 2: Now that was in--was it 1958, '59 [1959]? Speaker 1: That was 1958. Speaker 2: '58 [1958], okay, okay. Speaker 1: Uh-hum, yeah. Speaker 2: And you did that for-- Speaker 1: For three years. Speaker 2: --three years, okay. Speaker 1: And the experience was wonderful because it taught me how to--we had the five-minute newscast every hour on the hour, and then there was a break from 11 to 1. I would drive to Detroit and cover the police stations and activities at night and have the news done. But in 1960, I covered for WCHB, as news director, the presidential campaign of John Kennedy. And there is a picture of me with my little microphone interviewing the President as he sat in a motorcade. Story_ID: 90849 Speaker 1: Oh, after I, after three years there, I was hired by the "Michigan Chronicle" as the assistant editor. And there, I would sit at my little Underwood typewriter at 8:00 in the morning and I would do crime articles. I would do front page articles. I would do the feature articles. And the general manager would come to me on a Monday. And six or seven hours before the deadline and say, hey, we need three editorials. And I said, what are they going--what, what, on what subject? He says, well, maybe we'll do something on education and the school system, and you think of the other two. So, four or five hours, I would sit there pecking away and do the editorials. And then, for fun, I did a jazz review column. And I had the record guys coming in with a bunch of albums and I would get 10 or 15 albums a week. And then, I was--did a political column from a personal point of view, whatever. And in 1963, I won three national writing awards from the National Newspaper Publishers Association. One article was a feature article on--interviewed--they--it was New Year's Eve. And I interviewed a prostitute, a lady standing on a corner on a cold, wintry New Year's Eve, and she was standing there, and I interviewed her. And she said that she was there because she had a 16-year-old daughter, and she wanted her daughter to have a better life. And her daughter didn't know what she did, but she was making the supreme sacrifice--came from a Christian family. And she was doing this to raise money, so that her daughter could go to school, because she had a daughter when she was in high school so she had to drop out. Then I went to a flop house and talked to several of the people there on New Year's Eve. And one guy was there because he was an alcoholic. And on one occasion he, after going into the bar, went home, and his whole house was destroyed. And so, his wife and four or five kids were killed in the fire. But he had stopped drinking--didn't have a job, but he had a bright outlook. I think we talked to a couple of others. And the other article was on Dr. Albert, Rev. Albert Cleage who had intimidated all of the black leaders because he accused them of being Uncle Toms. And he was very militant, as militant as Malcolm X because Malcolm X was of Detroit background. And so, he had his hatchet. And he was a Catholic, and he was--so I wrote an article on a dialogue in a barber shop. One guy was very critical of Albert Cleage. And the barber, another person sitting there was sort of defensive, but the guy, he was very critical, was outspoken, and very rational. And this was the first time that anyone had taken on Rev. Cleage. And the next week, Rev. Cleage had his little pink sheet. He would put, put it on every week, and he would have the Uncle Tom--(unclear) had Olfield Dukes. Uncle Tom, handkerchief head and whatever. So, and then there was an editorial. So I won the three NNP[A] awards for writing which was a historic point in my life for a guy in high school who couldn't spell. And in '63 [1963], the same year, I end up coming to Washington, D.C. representing the "Michigan Chronicle" and doing, by special arrangement, to, to do some taped interviews for the radio station. So this was--and all this in 1963. I found myself coming to Washington for the first time and sitting on the steps of the Lincoln Memorial while a guy named Dr. Martin Luther King [Jr.] was being introduced by A. Philip Randolph. And this was the historic March on Washington. And there I sat with my little tape recorder. And next to me was Lena Horne; and next to her was Harry Belafonte [HM]; next to her was Sidney Poitier; and I think it was Diahann Carroll [HM]. And Dr. King was just a few yards away. And there you saw people hanging in the trees. It was a tremendous sight with a half million people--a sea of people, a multitude. And when I thought about when I graduated and couldn't work for the "Detroit Times", the white papers and all the things happening, and says it must be a divine scenario in life for each one of us. And I just thought quietly about what the coach said. And so that was a special moment in my life. Story_ID: 90850 Speaker 1: You know, I wanna ask you because you, you gained probably a lot of, of prominence in Detroit around that time and, and, and especially, you know, sort of intimately the black press, and you were working for a radio station. It was new to even being, you know, that had never operated as a radio station. So, I would like you to sort of comment just about the, you know, the black press and the importance of that. You know, a lot of people talk about the "[Chicago] Defender". The "Pittsburgh Courier" was, you know--maybe, you know, yeah, (unclear) depending on what part of the country. Speaker 2: The "Michigan Chronicle", John Sengstacke, and Louis Martin to Detroit in 1932 [sic, 1936] to organize a paper, and Louis Martin organized the "Michigan Chronicle". And the "Michigan Chronicle" became the powerful paper because it aligned itself with the Reuther Brothers and the UAW [United Automobile Workers] in the fight in the '30's [1930s] for union representation. And then, there was the riots in '43 [1943]. And the "Michigan Chronicle" became the voice of, of blacks. And when the blacks decided to run for office, the people from the "Chronicle" were the key leaders. Charlie Workman (ph.), executive editor; Bill Matiney was managing editor--later became a writer for the "Detroit News"--became a national correspondent for ABC, NBC. But he was also secretary of the Michigan Boxing Commission. And then Longworth Quinn, business manager, president of the Business Organization. And then Charlie Workman was a doctor, historian. And the Reuther Brothers always came to visit Charlie Workman. And G. Mennen William was the governor--didn't do anything without coming to visit the "Chronicle". And when the black leaders met, the people from the "Chronicle" were part of that leadership. And I was involved in the campaign to, to elect the first black on the city council, Bill Patrick. And then, the--he--black leaders had (unclear), Horace White, who was a very prominent minister, and Charles Bradley. So the "Chronicle" was the voice of black folks crying out in the wilderness and that was highly respected. It was as influential in Detroit as the "Defender" was in Chicago, and as the "Pittsburgh Courier" was doing its--in its heyday. Story_ID: 90851 Speaker 1: The other thing that I became involved in was a close friendship with Dr. J.J. McClendon, a very prominent physician, who was the president of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]. And during the riots, everybody quoted Dr. McClendon because he was one of the key leaders. And he inspired me to organize the young adult division of the NAACP and Gloster Current, who's a former Detroiter, was assistant to Roy Wilkins. And he sent a person from the national office to Detroit to work with young people because when Gloster Current was in Detroit, he was very much involved in youth movement. So we did something different. We organized the young adult division of the Detroit NAACP, and it was lawyers and teachers and black professionals. And I was the president. That was in 1961 and we developed adult education classes for the welfare mothers in the Brewster-Douglass projects. And there was a lady named Lena Bivens (ph.) who was a part of it. And we taught them politics--the Board of Education, the mobilization. So when Bill Patrick ran, Lena Bivens organized the welfare mothers throughout the city. And she became, eventually, a top black leader recognized nationally for her grassroots movement. But we also met with the president of Sears because I had worked there as a janitor. And so we met with Mr. Jayne (ph.) who was the president. And I told him that it was time to start hiring Negroes in the white collar positions. And so he remembered me, and we got in to hire the first Negro salesperson, a guy named Al Dotson. And he was hired in vacuum cleaners--became the first Negro salesperson [sic, sales manager] for Sears. And would you believe two weeks ago, the Continental Club had their 50th anniversary? And the guy came up to me and said, hey, Ofield, how are you? And I said, how are you--didn't recognize him. And he gave me his card--Al Dotson. And he introduced me to his wife, Mrs. Dotson, national president of the Continental Club. And he says, hey, this is Ofield Dukes, and if hadn't been for him and the YADs in Detroit, I would not have had my job. We also picketed Crowley Milner's, which is a department store, and also Federated Department Store. And we became the most aggressive militant group in Detroit. And every year, they would have the membership campaigns. And usually a labor, UAW [United Automobile Workers], and all of the blacks in the labor unions and the churches would sell the most memberships. But we beat them, we beat them. And we were so aggressive and militant that we became a problem for the president and executive director. And they needed to control us, and we would have a hundred people, and these were lawyers who later became judges and whatever. And so, we had to have a meeting with Dr. McClendon. And he said--told the president and executive director that I'm supporting these folks and whatever because they thought we were too militant. And Gloster Current became involved. And he says, well, I was like Dukes and these other folks when I was there. And so, that was a part of our legacy, and it was a great leadership training experience for me, and we've had some reunions. And, and our folks have gone on to be judges and principals of schools and superintendents and whatever. And that was a part of my Detroit experience. Story_ID: 90852 Speaker 1: So you're saying both the newspaper, working for the newspaper, the radio station, and also the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] chapter. Okay, that was sort of forming you. Let me ask--how did you come to know the Gordys? Speaker 2: Okay. I wrote a record--review column, yeah. And so I--the--you know, there was what they called payola then. And the record people would go to the radio stations and, you know, with a wad of money. And, you know, you have to pay the DJs, and then the people who are writing, you didn't pay them. But you gave them free albums, and so I collected about a thousand albums. And so, some of them I didn't even have time to listen to them. So I was writing and, of course, if--and I just knew the Gordys because they operated a print shop. But Esther's husband [George Edwards] was a state senator, and whenever he wanted something in the paper, you know, he would call. And I became familiar with Esther [Gordy Edwards], and I knew the Gordys because if they wanted something in the paper when they started Motown, so I was on the scene. And the Supremes came from the Brewster-Douglass projects, and Smokey Robinson and all of the others, so we were all a part of that scene. And we would see them at the 20 Grand or the Flame Show Bar. And so everybody, you know, I was--my byline appeared on the front page of the "[Michigan] Chronicle". And so, and then they knew me from WCHB, but I became very close to Esther and her husband and developed a wonderful relationship with, with her. So, that is the, the nature. I know Mr. Gordy [Berry Gordy, Sr.]--they, the father, when they operated the print shop on St. (unclear) Street. Speaker 1: The print shop was in tandem. Was it--it, it would--it preceded the music. Speaker 2: It preceded the--oh, indeed, indeed-- Speaker 1: And all the kids had to work-- Speaker 2: --oh, indeed, in the print shop. Speaker 1: --in the print shop. That's right. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, oh, yeah, indeed. Speaker 1: I remember her talking about--they had--they were trying to get out of that print shop. Speaker 2: Yeah, well, the old man who was very demanding--and everybody had to work in the Gordy print shop. And that was a very successful business. Story_ID: 90853 Speaker 1: Now, Detroit was popping at this time, you know. Speaker 2: Oh, indeed, they had the Paradise Valley and Detroit had Idlewild. Detroit and, and the blacks in Detroit did very, very well because it was no longer five dollars a day. It was, most like $10, $15 an hour to work at Ford, Chrysler, and General Motors. And black business was all over the place and so Detroit was booming. Speaker 1: And who were some of the others sort of major players in town, you know, around that time you had a-- Speaker 2: Oh, Charlie Diggs, the Diggs Funeral Home. You had Joe Louis and the Joe Louis Farm. You had the UAW [United Automobile Workers], you know, Coleman Young and the folks working in the UAW. You had--and Detroit was the motor capital of the world, and so you had blacks making good money. And then blacks were moving into sports, and then you had the Detroit Lions were doing well, and the Pistons, and blacks playing football at the University of Michigan, Michigan State. And then Motown was revolutionizing music, so Detroit was the big "D". It was badder than Chicago, Atlanta, and what else? It was the motor city. And you had blacks traveling from throughout the world to come to Detroit to buy a car from the assembly line. Sugar Ray Robinson always came to Detroit to buy a new Cadillac. And then the entertainment world was taken a notice because the biggest thing going was Motown. Speaker 1: And did he go--when did the people start paying attention to Motown? When he--I mean, was it from the very beginning or it took a little time. Speaker 2: Well, gee whiz, it--in the '60's [1960s], that was it because you had the Supremes. Stevie Wonder was 16 or 17. You had Smokey Robinson, Martha and the Vandellas, the Four Tops, the Temptations--so exploded. And that was it--Big "D", Motown. Speaker 1: And what about Aretha Franklin? Speaker 2: And Aretha, oh, yeah, because she started when she was 16. And her father, C.L. Franklin was one of the most noted ministers throughout. And you had--and as far as entertainment, the Paradise Valley was really it. And for middle class blacks coming to Idlewild was even more popular than Martha's Vineyard because everybody wanted to go to Idlewild. That was the middle class place for golf, for boating, for the night life. And Paradise Valley was comparable to night life in Chicago, the famed Show Bar, the 20 Grand, the Frolic. And the Gotham Hotel was the one Class A black-owned hotel in the world, owned by John White--was in the numbers business, and John Roxbury who was the manager of Joe Louis. And for people who wanted to come to Detroit and the Gotham Hotel was comparable to the Hilton here. And the Ebony Room for, for dinner was it, and it was just two blocks from the Flame Show Bar and you had Dinah Washington whatever. And then when I was a teenager, I was an usher at the--[tape ends] Story_ID: 90517 Speaker 1: At the-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah, when I was a teenager--as a part of Detroit being sort of an entertainment capital, I was a usher at the Paradise Theater. And there was Billy Eckstine, and Duke Ellington, and the Will Mastin Trio with Sammy Davis [Jr.] and his father, and the Sweethearts of Rhythm, Erskine Hawkins--all of the big bands. And they would all come to the Paradise Theater for a week. And then Dinah Washington, and Sarah Vaughan, and all of the others--Arthur Prysock would come to the Flame Show Bar. And the Flame Show Bar was it, and all of the people would want to come to the Flame Show Bar. And Detroit had Paradise Valley where you had a whole bunch of nightclubs, and it was remarkably for its entertainment. And then came along Motown. Story_ID: 90518 Speaker 1: So, anyway, tell--okay, talk about your coming here. Oh, can you wait before I--can you just talk a little about Idlewild--just a little bit? Speaker 2: Oh, Idlewild was a, a crowning point for upper middle class blacks for summer vacations and for entertainment. This was the in place, and people came from everywhere to go to Idlewild because the, you know, all of the major entertainers would go to Idlewild for summer. And they had boating and golf and tennis, and so that if you were anybody, anywhere in the country, and, and you were a Negro, you wanted to come to Idlewild. It was almost like a black Las Vegas. And it was--I think, more popular then than Martha's Vineyard is now. The difference is at Idlewild, you had the Joe Louises, you had the Sugar Ray Robinsons, you had all of the entertainment, the night life, and the boating, and whatever. And people owned their property, so it was sort of an entertainment mecca for Negroes during that particular period. And if you could afford it, that's where you went and it was that exclusive. Story_ID: 90519 Speaker 1: Tell me, then, how you came to come to Washington [D.C.]. Speaker 2: Okay. There's a fellow named Hobart Taylor, Jr. who, in 1960, did a strange thing from a black perspective. Hobart had been a--he had graduated from the University of Michigan with a law degree. And he was an assistant prosecutor in Detroit, but he originally came from Texas. And his father, Hobart Taylor, Sr., was a wealthy businessman in Houston. Hobart Taylor, Sr.'s father was a free slave who bought thousands of acres of land in Texas, and he developed a trucking company and whatever. But during the '30's [1930s] and '40's [1940s], Hobart Taylor, Sr. underwrote the Supreme Court law banning voting discrimination. I think there were some form of grandfather clause, whatever, but he was very much involved in the Civil Rights Movement. And when a guy named Lyndon Johnson decided to run for Congress, Hobart Taylor, Sr. helped finance Lyndon Johnson. And in 1948, when Harry Truman was running for president again and had some financial problems, Hobart Taylor, Sr. contributed. And Hobart, because of his father connections, campaigned for Lyndon Johnson for president in 1960. And Negroes in Detroit thought that was strange for Hobart, a very prominent black Detroiter, a lawyer--campaigning and urging other Negroes to support a Southerner named Lyndon Baines Johnson. But, Hobart was a good friend. And he invited me to his Christmas party in 1963 and says, hey, the people are writing about me and "Jet" wants to do an article--and "Ebony" about my being a millionaire. And I'm not interested in that, and I just need someone to come to Washington to assist me in my PR [public relations], and to work with the President's Committee on Equal Employment Opportunity. And so, I was polite and said okay, I will think about that. And in January, he called and said he was working on a position. Then he called the first of February and just said that things were rolling along, and there would be a position at the Department of Labor. And then he called in March and said that it was almost there, and called a couple of weeks later--said, you know, everything was fine. And then I didn't do anything. And so, the first of April, I got a call--Mr. [Longworth] Quinn (, the general manager, said he had received a call from Louis Martin, who was then vice chairman of the Democratic National Committee. And Louis had been involved in Kennedy's campaign as the closest black. And Louis is the same guy who organized the "Michigan Chronicle" and was a part of the ownership. So Louis Martin called at the suggestion of Hobart Taylor, Jr. And Louis Martin said to Mr. Quinn, the general manager, that Hobart wants Ofield Dukes in Washington. And what you need to do, if necessary, is to fire the guy to get him here. And Mr. Quinn came to me with his head down, and he just says, Ofield, you have a choice of resigning, and going to Washington, or I have to, with some level of compassion, fire you to get you out to go to Washington. And so, I didn't have a choice. And so, I was a little upset. I had my harem of ladies in Detroit and I had to give them up. And so, I packed my little stuff in my little Chevrolet car and drove to Washington--a spring day in April. It was on a Sunday. And Hobart had arranged for me to live at 800 Fourth Street, the Capitol Park. And I became assistant director of the President's Committee on Equal Employment Opportunity, which was a very important committee, chaired by Lyndon Johnson. Story_ID: 90520 Speaker 1: Hobart [Taylor, Jr.] was the executive vice chairman. And [W.] Willard Wirtz, the secretary of the Department of Labor, was general vice chairman. And the president [President Lyndon B. Johnson] was the presiding chairman of it. Willard Wirtz was vice chairman. And the president provided--presided at all of the meetings of the President's Committee. We were having conferences throughout the country. And there was a group called Plans for Progress, a group of 300, the corporate executives who were promoting affirmative action voluntarily, and included the Watson Brothers from IBM, Courtlantd Gross from Lockheed, presidents of--H.I. Romnes is the president of AT&T and whatever. These were the heavy hitters. And they were involved in pushing the recruitment of qualified blacks for employment. And I became the director of PR [public relations] for that because the programs are part of the President's Committee. Story_ID: 90521 Speaker 1: But it was just fascinating being exposed to [President] Lyndon Johnson who had developed an intense commitment to civil rights. And in the push to support Title VII, the law to ban discrimination based on race and employment, Lyndon Johnson had the civil rights leaders to be part of a planning committee simply because Roy Wilkins, the executive director of NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], and Whitney Young, the president of the Urban League, were not so fond of Dr. Martin Luther King [Jr.]. And there was limited communication and A. Philip Randolph was the elder statesman, but he couldn't breach the communication gap because King was all over the place. And so, Lyndon Johnson was very smart. He organized this council or planning committee to plan a National Conference on Civil Rights and they called it to fulfill these rights. And so, once a month, Dr. King and John Lewis and A. Philip Randolph and Roy Wilkins and Whitney Young would come to the Indian Treaty Room at the Old Executive Office Building for a meeting. And Lyndon Johnson had a guy named Ben Heineman, the railroad executive from Chicago to preside. And on one side, you would have Whitney Young and Roy Wilkins, and Dr. Dorothy Height [HM]. And Dr. Height was always there knitting--sitting there calmly knitting. And on the other side was Dr. King, John Lewis [HM]. And Dr. King would, would--this Roy Abernathy, you know, they were almost like the Lone Ranger and Tonto. And A. Philip Randolph and Bayard Rustin--and so, it was just an interesting dynamic. So, Lyndon Johnson was just suggesting that we got to have the leaders, you know, together. And that was a historic period for African Americans. Story_ID: 90522 Speaker 1: I, after a year of serving on the President's Committee [on Equal Employment Opportunity & Plans for Progress], I ended up somehow on the staff of Vice President Hubert Humphrey. And that came about during the debate on Title VII of Simeon Booker [HM], the bureau chief of "Jet Magazine", decided to run a little article in his column, "Ticker Tape," that the two white liberals in Washington, or two of the white liberals in Washington, did not have any Negroes on their staff. And these two white liberals described by Simeon Booker was Senator Robert Kennedy of New York and Vice President Hubert Humphrey. Well, once the article appeared, Senator Robert Kennedy ran out within a week, and hired a guy named Earl Graves [HM] to manage his Harlem office. Then, Vice President Hubert Humphrey wasn't certain of what he should do, so he went on a nationwide search for a super Negro. And he was interviewing judges from Minnesota and lawyers, and all kinds of people looking for a super Negro. One day he had a conversation with Hobart Taylor [Jr.] and just told Hobart Taylor, Jr. that I'm looking for, you know, a Negro for my staff. And this is the Hubert Humphrey whose life revolved around civil rights who made that great speech at the 48th Convention that motivated or inspired [Strom] Thurmond and the others to walk out. And Hobart said, hey, I have a person for you, a guy named--from Detroit. And he says, why don't you check with Louis Martin about the guy because he worked for Louis' paper? And Louis was sort of the genius. Lyndon Johnson didn't do anything without checking with Louis Martin 'cause Louis Martin is the guy who was recruited to participate in Kennedy's campaign. He was recruited by Sergeant Shriver. And Louis came to Washington from Chicago. And Louis is the person who suggested to the Kennedys that the president [presidential candidate] should call Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] in the Birmingham jail. They have a telephone conversation and then if he did that, then Louis would spread the word that maybe Dr. King was supportive. And so, John Kennedy, the candidate, did call. And they made a deal with Dr. King that if King supported the presidency of John Fitzgerald Kennedy that the--Kennedy, if elected, would end discrimination in housing with the stroke of a pen by executive order. And that call was made, and the promise was made, and then Louis Martin leaked it to all of the black papers. And it became a factor in the 1960 presidential election--that with the heavy blacks vote, Mr. Kennedy beat Mr. Nixon. And the black civil rights leaders sort of held President Kennedy to his commitment. And so, '61 [1961] came and there was no executive order. '62 [1962] came and they were putting pressures on the Kennedy. And I think it was the sentiment of the Kennedys that maybe they had done enough for the Negroes. And then in preparation for the '64 [1964] campaign, that if they did anything more, like an executive order, it may alienate the South, and John Kennedy may have a problem being reelected. And the historians and the news people don't describe this as such, but this was a compelling rationale for the 1963 March on Washington in protest of the Kennedys not following through on their commitment to end discrimination in housing by an executive order. And the Kennedy White House did not participate in the march because they were intimidated and they were afraid and whatever, but that was the compelling rationale. But, anyway, when [Vice President] Hubert Humphrey talked to Louis, everybody respected him as a political genius and Louis was very humble, very, very smart. And he says, oh, yeah, he's a great American and he worked for my paper and he won these awards and he would be excellent. So, a couple of weeks later, I got a call from a few members of my harem in Detroit, and they were on my case--why was the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] coming and, you know, checking on me, and how did they get the phone numbers and whatever? And the next thing I knew that I was getting a security clearance--had not met Mr. Kennedy, uh, Mr. Humphrey. But then, two members of his staff called and so they wanted to meet with me. And we had a luncheon meeting and the next thing I knew, I was appointed to his staff--never having met Vice President Humphrey. And it wasn't until a reception of business leaders who were a part of the Plans, Plans for Progress Program--it was a reception in the John Quincy Adams Room at the State Department that Humphrey came. And I was introduced to him, and there was media around and he says, hey, you folks come here. This is Ofield Dukes and he's going to work for me. And so, for three years, I was the Negro on his staff. Story_ID: 90523 Speaker 1: But during the debate on Title VII, Louis Martin and I worked together to bring black groups to Washington [D.C.] to meet with Vice President [Hubert] Humphrey for breakfast. And then, at the White House--and one, that particular year, we brought together the black press, the editors and publishers to meet with Humphrey for breakfast. And then they met with the President [Lyndon B. Johnson]. And there was a guy named Dr. Carlton Goodlett, the publisher of the San Francisco "Sun-Reporter", challenged President Johnson about there only being two black or Negro generals, both in the Davis family. And President Johnson said, I hadn't even thought about that. And he told Marv Watson [W. Marvin Watson], his executive assistant, to call Secretary of the Defense [Robert] McNamara and arrange for McNamara and all members of the Joint Chief, Chief of Staff to meet with these black editors and publishers. So the next day, we go over to the Defense Department and Secretary of Defense Bob McNamara is there and all of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. And Carlton Goodlett was a PhD from San Francisco--stood up and said, Mr. Secretary, we were at Berkeley together. You may not remember me but I was as militant as you and Carlton is a scholar. And he raised the questions. He says, Mr. Secretary, I just have this question. You know, there are only two Negro generals and do you think that the Negroes in America should wait for the Davis family to engage in fancy inter-breeding before we can have the third Negro general? And Mr. McNamara almost fell out of his chair. And then he recouped and looked at his Joint Chiefs of Staff and said, we're going to do something about it. And then, he started the Affirmative Action Program. And one of the great beneficiaries of that program is a guy named General Colin Powell [HM]. Story_ID: 90524 Speaker 1: And during the debate on Title VII, [President] Lyndon [B.] Johnson had the corporate executives, about seventy of them, to come to the White House for a meeting in the East Room because the debate was hot and heavy. And he needed the corporate support and especially since these executives were pushing voluntarily affirmative action in employment. And so, Willard Wirtz presided and he's very eloquent. And Lyndon Johnson was busy at a security, a national security meeting on the war in Vietnam, and was late in coming. And then Hobart [Taylor, Jr.] spoke. And so, you had all of the, the heavyweights, the CEO's, and Lyndon Johnson finally came. And he was looking sort of beaten down and the war was getting to him. And he started speaking and just said that people are surprised that, as a Southerner, that he's developed such an intense commitment. And he talked about his life as a Southerner, as a poor Southerner, and how he worked with the Hispanics and the Negroes and whatever. And he pointed to Hobart Taylor, Jr., and he says, look, you all know Hobart, and Hobart was smart. The, the corporate executive loved Hobart because he knew much about Wall Street and he played golf, and he was in much a part of their culture as anybody. They just loved him. And Lyndon Johnson said, see, Hobart, his father's [Hobart Taylor, Sr.] a millionaire, successful businessman, and Hobart is working for me at a sacrifice. He could be making several hundred thousand dollars a year out there. But he says, there are a lot of Hobart Taylors out there, and what we want from Title VII is for these Negroes to have the same chance to be taxpayers instead of tax eaters. And he was so convincing that the--these corporate executives said they would become active supporters of Title VII. And that was decisive, but before the bill was passed, there was a senator from West Virginia, who introduced a, an amendment as a subterfuge to kill the bill. And it was amended to prohibit discrimination, not only based on race, but also based on sex. And he thought that this would certainly kill the bill. But Lyndon Johnson is so smart, so he called--had his staff to do a little research and to find out how many women held positions, sub positions in the government. And then, he decided to have a press conference at the National Press Building to make an important announcement. And he announced a series of appointments of women to key positions and said that this amendment would expand opportunities for women, and it became a positive story. And so, white women became supportive of the bill and it was passed. And I became very much involved with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission that was set up to administer the bill with Sam Jackson and Arlene Hernandez and et cetera. And the first two class action lawsuits under Title VII were filed by AT&T by white women who were switchboard operators, and by flight attendants for TWA. And they won, and Title VII has been a--create a benefit to white women in a sense than blacks. And Lyndon Johnson was so smart that he, that he was clever enough to, to, to use that ploy to get the bill passed. Story_ID: 90525 Speaker 1: I want to ask you about those, those years there. And this is your first time only working within the Federal government and the things that you sort of learned and how it's, it shaped you. Speaker 2: Okay. It's a good question simply because it's an extraordinary position working with the President's Committee on Equal Employment Opportunity [& Plans for Progress] and not necessarily as part of the Federal bureaucracy. And when we have the President serving as chairman of the committee, it sort of made just a big difference. I, as I said, was deputy director of, of information and I had the responsibility of developing the newsletter and the regional reports on the series of meetings that the President's Committee was having throughout the country. And there was a problem in getting labor support, so we had to have meetings with the labor leaders and we had regional meetings in San Francisco and in Chicago, in Atlanta, just generating support on equal employment opportunity and what it was--and working with Hobart Taylor [Jr.]. And the greatest thing was being exposed to the politics, to the public relations of a remarkable man, [President] Lyndon Baines Johnson, who was very, very persuasive. And the amazing thing is that he developed a commitment to civil rights. It was far more intense and sincere than that of the Kennedys. And his commitment--I think exceeded that of Vice President Hubert Humphrey because Lyndon Johnson was in a position to do something about it. So the fact that he not only, you know, was able to gain the support of the Congress and the passage of the Civil Rights Act--I think in 1964, '65 [1965], Title VII. And when you look at the Great Society Programs, he was able to pass legislation affecting Americans from the womb to the tomb from Head Start to Medicaid, Medicare, Title IX, the Student Loan Program. So, if it had not been for Vietnam, he would go down in the history books as the--probably greatest American president in terms of programs affecting people, even more so than Franklin Delano Roosevelt. But the tapes are now also indicating that possibly the Secretary of Defense [Robert] Bob McNamara from the Kennedy years, and Senator [William] Westmoreland, who's suggesting that the troops would be home by Christmas and whatever, misled him in terms of information, so he's being vindicated. Story_ID: 90526 Speaker 1: But I remember one final meeting that President [Lyndon B.] Johnson had with the group of black editors that Louis Martin and I set up. And that was in the spring of 1968--I think it was in May, and he met with these editors and publishers for about an hour and a half. And they waited almost two hours to meet with him because he was very, very busy, but he did not want them to leave. And he came down and said that this is off the record. And he talked about the importance of black having influence in both parties, so that the Democrats were not taken for granted, or the Republicans will just be guilty of benign neglect. But he also talked about how some Northern senators tried to convince him not to introduce a fair housing law of 1968. And they indicated--said, Mr. President, you've done so much for civil rights and Negro Americans that you don't need to do this because if you push this fair housing legislation, it will create problems for the Democratic candidate in 1968. And you will alienate the South and, and then people in the North, and whatever. And Lyndon Johnson said he thought about that--and that one Sunday he and Lady Bird [Johnson], after church, decided to take Air Force One and go to Georgia to see the 82nd Airborne off to Vietnam for the third time. And so, when they arrived--first, then Johnson told the black publishers that what struck him was the, the large number of Negroes in the 82nd Airborne and this was a volunteer group. So he went up to one of the soldiers and said, young man--said, why are you in this group, going to Vietnam for the third time? And the soldier looked at the president and said, Mr. President-[tape ends] Story_ID: 90854 Speaker 1: Okay. So, he says, Mr. President. Speaker 2: And this young Negro soldier looked at the President [Lyndon B. Johnson] and says, Mr. President, for the first time in my life, I've been treated with respect, with dignity, as a first class citizen. And President Johnson said he was moved by those comments, and that he and Lady Bird returned to the White House that evening and said their prayers. And when he got up the next day, he just said his thought was that if these Negro soldiers can go to Vietnam and fight from an integrated bunker that he would do everything possible to make sure that when they returned that they could live in an integrated neighborhood. And that became the compelling rationale for his pushing, and he pushed and he pushed, and the law was passed. And a week later, he announced that he would not be running for reelection. But during the meeting with the black editors and publishers, and the white historians were not there, and the only guy there with the tape recorder was [Robert] Bob Johnson, the editor of "Jet". And I tried hard to get a copy of that tape from Bob Johnson before he died. Story_ID: 90855 Speaker 1: But [President] Lyndon Johnson just said that--explained why he was so committed to civil rights, and that the thing that pained him more than anything else was the fact that his Southern colleagues in the Congress, Senator Russell and, and Stennis, and the others accused him of being a traitor to the South, and that he felt that if he ran for reelection, it would be probably difficult because he would not have the same type of support in '68 [1968] that he had in 1964 in the landslide victory over Senator Goldwater. Also, he was pained over the Vietnam War and that just hurt his heart and he was very pragmatic, but he just indicated that his commitment to civil rights was not just a political thing. It's something that he felt very, very strongly about it. And in connection with that three years ago at the 25th anniversary of the Great Society programs, there was a three-day symposium in Austin, and also at the LBJ [Lyndon Baines Johnson] Library and at the ranch. And at the dinner at the ranch, it's hosted by Mrs. [Lady Bird] Johnson and the two daughters, Bill Moyers played some of the tapes, and then he played a, a video of the last remarks of President Johnson before he died. And he was looking very weak, and he appeared at a symposium on civil rights at the library. And his final words were that he wished he could have done more for Negroes, which was very profound and very revealing, in light of the fact that all he did in passing the voting rights law, the civil rights law banning discrimination in public accommodations, the fair housing. And his comment was not so much about peace in the world, but he regrets that he could not have done more. And there can be no question about who was the greatest civil rights president. Of course, not Abraham Lincoln, because the Emancipation Proclamation was more of a PR document, and that Fred [Frederick] Douglass and others forced him to do that in order for the North to win the war. And Franklin Delano Roosevelt, you know, the Fair Deal and the New Deal, but Franklin Delano Roosevelt was not surrounded by blacks in his cabinet. And they're not really certain, if outside of Mrs. Mary McLeod Bethune, and--was a part of the kitchen cabinet. But when you look at the Kennedys, they're not in the same ballgame as Lyndon Johnson in terms of civil rights. And so, one day the historians will deal fairly with him in terms of that--there's no question. Story_ID: 90856 Speaker 1: And the other interesting thing is I was very much involved with Vice President Humphrey. I was on the campaign plane and all of that, but it was unfortunate that Humphrey lost and there are reasons for that. At the reunion of the Humphrey staff three weeks ago, I was interviewed and just indicated that it's a tragic paradox that Humphrey, so committed to civil rights, was left hanging in the lurch, not so much by blacks, but by his liberal white friends. Gene McCarthy, who ran on--who ran against Humphrey in 1968, refused to endorse him in the closing minutes of the campaign. And then the folks who were a part of the ADA [Americans for Democratic Action], the liberal group, the group of white liberals said Humphrey organized, and these were the liberals, white liberals throughout the country, refused to support him, refused to support him ostensibly because of Vietnam. But I indicated that on the last weekend of the campaign. I was on the plane and we spent the weekend in Los Angeles. And I had called Nancy Wilson [HM]--was very supportive of Humphrey, and who was trying to get her friend, John Conyers [HM], to support him, and [Andrew] Andy Young [HM] and some of the others who were hung up over the Vietnam thing. So Nancy said, Ofield, come by the Cocoanut Grove nightclub after, you know, my performances, and that will be about 2:00. So I went by and went to her dressing room, and she received me. And she had some other guests, some white movie executives, and who were playing cards. And so we went into a separate room and called John Conyers. It was about 2:30 there and it's 3:30 back in Detroit. And we got John, and we also called Andy, and she was trying to persuade them to support Humphrey in spite of their strong feelings about Vietnam. And we went back and started talking to her white executive friends, and she mentioned that she would call John Conyers, and she was supporting Humphrey. And they seemed a bit surprised. And then she said that they could not support Humphrey because he was pushing fair housing and he was pushing busing, and he was pushing affirmative action and quotas. And so, here are these white liberals who were afraid of Humphrey because of the busing and civil rights issues which is the worst kind of political hypocrisy. But anyway, Humphrey lost by 500,000 votes. And for the next two or three months, I was left feeling shattered, disillusioned, and not knowing what I wanted to do, and that was the paradox. Story_ID: 90857 Speaker 1: And I smile because remaining from the harem in Detroit [Michigan] was young--one survivor, one loyal, young lady who felt that Ofield Dukes should return to the city, and be her permanent hero and marry her. And I wanted to do the respectable thing to return to Detroit and to follow through on that, but I'm not really certain that would be wise since I didn't have a job. And there was nothing happening for me in Detroit, although there was a possibility of Chrysler and whatever. So, from November until the first of April, I had gone through interviews but there was nothing. And so, the phone did not ring. And it was a bright, beautiful sunshiny day in April, and I stood on the balcony of my apartment in southwest Washington [D.C.] communing with nature, and the cherry blossoms were in full bloom. The skies were bright, beautiful blue, and the birds were chirping. And the flowers sent a wonderful fragrance. And something happened, and something came to me like a bolt of lightning. Why don't I remain in Washington and set up my own little PR [public relations] tent and practice the public relations that I learned from the Johnson-Humphrey administration--a noble thought. So I ran to the phone and called a good friend of mine, just a white fellow from Michigan who had a PR firm in the Press Building. And he says, hey, Ofield, you called at the right time. I'm just getting ready to move and I have extra space. I can lease an office to you. Then I called the woman who had worked with me in the campaign, the wife of a very good political friend. And she says, oh, I would love to do that and she says, I'll talk to Frank Reeves who was a top political leader in, in Washington and, and arrange to go on my vacation to the Virgin Islands early so I can be ready. And I only had $2,500 in the Federal Retirement Fund. So within two weeks, I had a little office at the National Press Building and had a part-time secretary--no clients. And I had a little announcement, a little classy announcement, announcing the opening of Ofield Dukes & Associates, Suite 716, the National Press Building, Washington, D.C. Story_ID: 90858 Speaker 1: And a day or so later, there came a call from Detroit [Michigan] from a lady named Esther Gordy Edwards. And she said, Ofield, I understand you're in the PR [public relations] business. She said, guess what? Motown would like to be your first client, and that was marvelous. And I thought again of what my grandmother said--that the Lord may not come when you want Him, but He's always on time. And then, a couple of weeks later, I got a call from a guy in New York, and I had worked with him because he had been on loan to the Plans for Progress Program as an executive. He's a vice president of Lever Brothers, vice president of PR. He says, hey, Hobart Taylor [Jr.] called me, and said you're in the PR business, and Lever Brothers would like to be your first client. I said, I'm sorry, if you don't mind--if it's not offensive for you to be the second client. And so, that was the beginning and it was exciting having Motown as a client. 'Cause whenever the Supremes or the Four Tops or the Temptations or Stevie Wonder came to Washington or New York, I handled them and learned about the egos of entertainers because when the Supremes came to Washington, and I arranged for them to be interviewed at Channel 9. I learned that one lady desired to have her own car. She didn't want to ride with the others--a sense of privacy, so I made the adjustment there. And on another occasion, Stevie [Wonder] was going to do a big rally in the park. Oh, they had even the White House. Bob Brown and Stan Scott thought it would be a good PR thing to have Mrs. [Pat] Nixon there, and it was at the Washington Monument. So it was at 4:00 and during the summer, and Stevie was coming from Baltimore. And Mrs. Nixon was there at 4:00, about 10 or 15 minutes till 4, and the Secret Service people, and 15,000 predominantly African Americans, you know, and all excited. Stevie was coming and the backup band was there, and it was 4:00. No Stevie--it's 4:15. No Stevie--4:30. And by 4:45, people are getting restless and the Secret Service is--I was there and it was just where is he, where is he? So there was just suspense, the drama. And Mrs. Nixon was nervous, and these people were becoming impatient and threatening, you know, how people are. Brothers (unclear) we're gonna turn this mother out if he doesn't show. And suddenly, Stevie arrived about 10 minutes to 5, casually. And Mrs. Nixon was so excited as if this was saved, you know, what could have been a violent scene that she jumped out of her chair, walked over and greeted him with a big hug. And that was the photo carried around the world, and it was really misinterpreted that this was a warm, friendly greeting of Mrs. Richard Milhous Nixon--such a fondly greeting of Stevie Wonder. But I guess I learned the PR implications of all of that--that it's, in getting with entertainers, there's the unpredictability. And the other thing that I learned is about cash flow, business cash flow. I did all those wonderful things for Motown--all of the excitement, and I just remembered somebody saying, all that glitters is not gold, simply because this was not the age of fax machines, of emails. Of whatever the circumstances, Motown was six or seven months late in paying. And there were days at the Press Building when I looked forward to their check, prayed for their check, simply because I didn't have 50 cents on some days to catch the bus from southwest Washington to the Press Building. So I, I walked, and my part-time secretary was very understanding and, you know, it wasn't anything that she needed. But I learned about cash flow. But I also learned the art of perseverance. Story_ID: 90859 Speaker 1: But in the meantime, I developed muscle spasms and irregular heartbeat--the tension, the tension, from being in business and having a highfalutin client that didn't pay on schedule which is a painful lesson. So I ended up in Georgetown Hospital--had called my former boss, Mr. [Vice President Hubert] Humphrey, to make sure I was attended by the best heart specialist. And this was the best at Georgetown Hospital. And he taught at the medical school, came by and brought his students, and had me to get up and say, here's Mr. Dukes, you know, he suffers from tension, the lack of exercise. And he would have me to exercise, and that's the cause of his irregular heartbeat. And he's in PR, and then sometimes the pressures overwhelm him. And so, that was a valuable lesson that even in business, you have to be concerned and to protect and reserve your physical wellbeing and your mental health. And so, when I got out, I took transcendental meditation, and I would meditate at my desk in the morning. And I would frame my mind of all the extraneous sources of stress, and became very protective of my peace of mind. Then I started playing tennis and became a more practical and a better business person, and learned how to protect myself against developing proposals, and people taking advantage of you. So it was a wonderful lesson for me and I still play tennis. And I have what I practiced doing those days in the '70's [1970], I have read about in Dr. Richard Carlson's book, "Don't Sweat the Small Stuff". Don't allow anything to disrupt your peace of mind. And then, in reading the foreword in Carlson's book, from my favorite philosopher, who suggested that once attitude determines how far one goes in life, and that if you're able to control your thinking and your sense of self-discipline, which goes back to what the, the coach said. And so, philosophically, I developed the right principles of self-perseverance as a business person. And it just made a very important, a very important part of my life as a business person. Story_ID: 90860 Speaker 1: How long was it after you started that you started having health problems? How, how far were, were you in business (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: That was during the recession of 1971. It was two years, but that was a blessing in disguise. That was a warning. But I got up every day with a passion to be excellent, a passion to be excellent. And folks wanted--or perceive me first as a Negro in business, as a Democrat, et cetera, and I first just wanted to be a business person who is excellent, but people reversed it, and then it was always, here's a Negro who's in PR because there were very few. And PR [public relations] people were considered hacks then, but I got up every day with a determination to be excellent, to be the best I could be, to be on top of my game. And in 1975, I was called back to Detroit after Coleman Young became the first Negro mayor. And they knew that I had served on [President] Lyndon Johnson's Inaugural Committee in 1964, so that Bill Beckham and Malcolm Dade, who were the top assistants to Coleman Young, says, Ofield, we want you to come back and organize a inaugural program for Coleman Young. So I organized--so I came back right after Thanksgiving--pulled together twelve different committees. And Esther [Gordy] Edwards was the chair of one of the committees dealing with executives and then all grow, VIP reception and whatever. We had a committee for the prayer breakfast, for senior citizens, for inaugural concert. We had all of the radio, TV stations on a public service media. And so we organized a three-day inauguration because Coleman was concerned that he had been elected predominantly by blacks, and that was a serious racial polarization. The white folks were afraid of him. So that the first event was a prayer breakfast, and we had 3,200 people. And we had the Cardinal. We had the president of the Board of Rabbis. And we had the Greek Orthodox. We had the Lutherans. We had everybody there. And at the end of the prayer breakfast, they all stood up and held hands and sang, "We Shall Overcome". And then we had the, the business luncheon. And we had a Republican governor. And we had Henry Ford. We had Lynn Townsend of Chrysler. We had the president of American Motors. So we had the presidents of all of the Big Four. And we had the president of the UAW [United Automobile Workers]. And "Time Magazine" ran an interesting article, article and picture of a black mayor, a Republican governor. And for the first time, the presidents of the automotive industries posing with the adversary, the president of UAW. And we brought them all together. It was 3,800 at the, the, the business luncheon. And then we had an inaugural concert. It was eight inches of snow. And we had more than 4,000 people. And Diana Ross sat on the stage singing, "Let us reach out and touch somebody"--so white hands and black hands all reaching out. Story_ID: 90861 Speaker 1: And then, there was the inaugural ball. And Essie [Gordy] Edwards was in charge of a VIP. And we got the Hudsons to donate something. And Cobo Hall was looking just gorgeous. And at 6:00, all of the, the white "A" leads, the business executives, the people from Grosse Pointe, Bloomfield Hills, they all came to a VIP reception--$1,000, with a few blacks and that was from 6 until 8--red carpet, champagne. And then at 9:00, the brothers and sisters with their brown bags, swung in and we had 10,000 people at the inaugural ball. And the papers and the TV stations all covered it. And the first six pages in the news, (unclear) "Free Press". And they--people consumed more champagne than in the history of Detroit. And everything went off quite well. And the papers described it as a, as sort of a Renaissance--coming together of all of these people. And there wasn't a single incident. There was one potential because that afternoon about 3:00, Malcolm Dade called me--says, Ofield, we got a problem. There was a, a gang, a militant black gang out on the East side had called, and said that if they didn't get tickets, they were going to turn this mother out. And so Malcolm had to get a call-in. And he said hey, yeah, we're coming to this, you know, the language. And I said, gee, you really--we'll be delighted to have you. Tell me how many are coming and should we arrange for transportation? He says, no, man, we have our own, you know, gigs and whatever. He says, well, how many tickets do you need? And he says, well, probably about twenty-five. And I said, so have them delivered to you? He said, no, man, we'll be there. I said, what time do you think you're coming? We'll be there by 11, you know, the people in Detroit, you know, you don't do things so early here. So, we had a VIP group to welcome the brothers and sisters, and they did come with their brown bags. So everything went very well. And the vice president of PR [public relations] for Chrysler, a white guy, nominated me for this Silver Anvil or competitive award for the Public Relations Society of America. And I won. And this was a wonderful send-off for Coleman Young. And it was interesting because Coleman was criticized, Malcolm Dade and, and Bill Beckham criticized, because why did they call this guy in Detroit, a former Detroiter to come back when there are other folks there who could have done this? And they were white matrons who had been involved in Coleman's campaign--people from the UAW [United Automobile Workers] were not so happy about it. But as things--one of the business leaders of Hughes and Hatcher--I think in Detroit, was very critical. And he came up to me and says, Mr. Dukes, I didn't like the idea, but I think that you pulled it off. So we got the Silver Anvil. And then when I came back, the "Washington Post" did a Sunday magazine cover story on the top six PR persuaders in Washington. And I was a part of that, and that recognition was very important because people then stopped suggesting that I was the top black in PR because there weren't that many of us, and I was the only downtown. And that indicated to me that if you pursue excellence that it may even transcend race and color. Story_ID: 91347 Speaker 1: --Deal with the, you know, your--you and your PR [public relations] firm in terms of what you would see as important moments, you know, or things, you know, anecdotes. I want to go back to the anecdotes that we started with-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --you know, with your childhood, so the things that you, you know are--that are fond memories or things that, you know, what happened and-- Speaker 2: Okay, okay. Are we on? Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Yes. Speaker 2: In my PR career, George Haley [HM] called on one occasion and said he had a brother who's writing some little book on some subject or whatever, and that the brother needed some space. I said, okay, George, you know, have your brother to call me. And the brother didn't call. The brother--one day, just showed up at my office on the seventh floor of the Press Building. And the secretary said, hey, Mr. Dukes, there's a guy here named Alex Haley. He said he doesn't have an appointment, but he just would like to chat with you. And I said, okay--well, send him in. I just knew Alex from the Autobiography of Malcolm X, and we greeted each other. He gave me a big hug, and so he just said he needed to share office space. And I said, okay, fine, I just have a vacant office. And so for three years, Alex shared an office with me. And on occasion, I would leave at 7:00 in the evening and Alex would be there at an old Underwood typewriter. I said, what are you doing, Alex? He says, I'm working on chapter three. And I'll come back the next day at 7:30 in the morning, and there's Alex still on the typewriter, and his research is stretched out on the couch. And the secretary working with him had gone to her hotel. And I says, what are you doing now, Alex? He says I'm still working on chapter three. And he just said, you just got to get the precise wording--the description. And during that period, I think Alex leased the space--I think it was only about 200 or 300 dollars a month that he was paying. But his publisher was on his case because this was the 10th or 11th year of the publication and it was well overdue. And so, they decided to cut back on his allowance, and at one point, cut back on his credit card because they were losing patience with him. And there was a whole year that Alex didn't pay anything. And so, I wasn't paying, you know, that part because he's a sublessor. And he was sending his money directly to the Press Club and that was the written agreement. And so, one Friday, the manager of the Press Club came to me--said, Ofield, I've talked to you before, and Mr. Haley hasn't paid anything in a year. And he says, you are primarily and legally responsible. And we've had meetings with our lawyer, and they've decided to go to court on Monday, and they will subpoena you to be present. And they're going to file the suit on Monday and you may end up being subpoenaed, you know, shortly thereafter. Story_ID: 91348 Speaker 1: And I tried to reach Alex [Haley]--called his brother, and George [Haley, HM] didn't know where he was. And so, that weekend was a trying weekend for me--went to church that Sunday and said a little prayer, and couldn't understand how the brother would leave me hanging in the lurch. And that night, I just went to bed with a heavy heart--just thinking that the lawyers at the Press Building will be filing this suit, and how it would affect my image as a business person. So I just went to bed. It's about 11:30, after the news. And it was about 12:15--the phone rang. And it's--oh, and my wife was slightly annoyed--says who's calling so late? And I answered it, and it was a lady with a foreign accent and she said, is this Mr. Dukes? And I said yes. This is a special call from Trinidad, and we have a person on who's interested in speaking to Mr. Dukes--this is Mr. Alex Haley. And I said, is this a collect call? And she said no. Okay, then I will accept the call. And Alex came on--Brother Dukes. And I said, Brother Haley. And he said, it's finished. And I said, Brother Haley, what's finished--because I'm almost finished, you know, too. He says, well, I've completed "Roots". And he said--and I said to him, guess what? My grandmother once said that the Lord may not come when you want Him, but He's always on time. And Alex said, hey, my grandmother said the same thing. And I said, Alex, guess what? And he said what? The people are getting ready to take me to court on your overdue rent. He says, well, now I will be willing to pay it and et cetera. So, with the great sigh of relief, I was able to sleep. And the next thing is "Roots" was on TV. And then we had a big luncheon to welcome Alex back to the Press Building. The manager was there and the lawyers and all of the people--reporters from everywhere. And Alex had a big check. I think it was about--gee, it was about $2,000 that was presented ceremoniously to the Press Club. And it was a wonderful sigh of relief. And for the next year, I coordinated his schedule. Story_ID: 91349 Speaker 1: And the week before he went to Seattle [Washington], where he [Alex Haley] had the fatal heart attack, he appeared on a Maryland Public Television program. And, and they were asking about some things and he mentioned that about the incident. And he just said, my friend, Ofield Dukes, and this set of circumstances--quoted his grandmother. And I told him that my grandmother said the same thing, that the Lord may not come when you want Him, but He's always on time. And he was saying that about "Roots" simply because he indicated on the TV show, as he indicated to me, there came a point with "Roots" that he became so depressed, so disillusioned, that on his final trip to the Gambia, to get a sense of feeling of how the slaves felt when they came over on the ship, that he had to go back and somehow get that sense of feeling. And he was on the ship, on his way back to the states, and still didn't have that feeling. And he was standing out there on the deck of the ship in the middle of the night, in the dark of the night, and he was so depressed, so disillusioned that he leaned over. Then he felt of just ending it, of taking his life. And then he looked up, and he saw with his mind's eye his aunt, and he could hear a voice up there in the quiet darkness of the night. And it was his aunt telling him, Alex, you can do it, Alex, you can do it, you can do it. And he said he was inspired to run down to the bottom of the ship, took off all of his clothes, and there he remained on the floor until the sun came up. And he jumped up and said he had it, he had it, and then he thought that somehow that the Lord had inspired his aunt to whisper the words. And then he thought that the Lord may not come when you want Him, but for Alex, He was right on time. And then, a couple of days later, he flew to Seattle, and had that fatal heart attack. But Alex had the terrible habit of going to the Florida Grill, the Florida Avenue Grill, to have that greasy breakfast, and he just could not get over eating that. Story_ID: 91350 Speaker 1: Another important point in my PR [public relations] career was on one occasion, a guy named Moe Septee, the producer of "Bubbling Brown Sugar", called out of Philadelphia and wanted to know if I could handle the production in Washington. I had never heard of it. He says, well, Ofield, you catch the train, come to Philadelphia, and to see it. And I thought that maybe it was a cake recipe. So I went to Philadelphia--never, you know, done anything with a musical before, and it was so impressive, tremendous. All of these talented people and they hadn't been on the road yet. And so, they were coming to Washington. And he said, are you union? I didn't--I said, union--I just, I don't know. And he said, well, think about that. And when you get back to Washington, call me. And then I learned that in order to handle a play--to be a theatrical press agent, you had to go through the National Association of Theatrical Managers and Press Agents based in New York. And you had to be recommended. You had to do a three-year apprenticeship. And the manager of the Negro ensemble was in its second year of that. I said, how, how--and, and Moe Septee was bringing "Bubbling Brown Sugar" to Washington in a few weeks. And so, I just--before calling him in Washington--politics is decisive factor. So I called my former boss, [Vice President] Hubert Humphrey, and says, hey, how do I get in the union? And he says, well, call my friend over at AFL-CIO [American Federation of Labor and Congress of Industrial Organizations]. And so I called, and the guy says, well, the executive director is a guy named Murray out of New York. Just call him and tell him I said, you know, to explain to you what the procedure is. And so, I called the fellow. And he went through, you know, this and there were only a couple blacks in the union at the time. And they weren't that excited about increasing that number. And they said you gotta do this and that or whatever, and he--I say, okay, I'm sorry. And he said, well, I'm sorry, to, Mr. Dukes. And he says, well, tell me, be-, before you hang up, who told you to call me? And I said, well, I was on the staff of Vice President Hubert Humphrey. He said really? Humphrey's my man--you worked for Vice President Humphrey? I said yeah. He said, well, Brother Dukes, let us look at this. Why don't you send me your information, your social security, and your birthdate, and we'll see what we can do. Ten days later, I got this letter, and I'm a card-carrying member of the union. Story_ID: 91351 Speaker 1: So "Bubbling Brown Sugar" came to town, and I was doing my first bit as press agent. And so, I was--explained to me that, you know, it would be the first two performances will be sort of rehearsals and whatever. And the thought occurred to me that word of mouth is very powerful. And so, I had a great list of people--so invited Hubert Humphrey and the senators and the Congress people. And I attended Shiloh Baptist Church, Rev. Gregory, a huge black. And I knew ministers and I knew the black leaders, Urban League, and NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]. And then I had a guy named Peter Green who was a sportsman at a radio show, but he also was a gambler, and he knew all of the pimps and prostitutes. The same man--when we invite them, and so for those two nights, I invited a cross-section. And the pimps came and the prostitutes in all of their attire. And the pimps came in chartreuse Cadillacs and Lincolns and whatever. And it was a historic coming together because the theatrical people wondered--who are these ladies with their hip boots and their miniskirts and yellow hair and whatever? But after the two rehearsal performance, Peter Green called me early that Sunday morning--said he was at some place where they were gambling. And the, the sports people and the prostitutes, and all these folks were there. And he said, Brother Dukes, all they're talking about is "Bubbling Brown Sugar". And the word was so powerful that for the remaining six weeks of "Bubbling Brown Sugar", you couldn't get a ticket. And the other thing I did was to have a little tape recorder and Calvin Rollock (ph.) and everybody who came--they talked about it. And we put it on--we had all the DJs, and everybody was talking about it. So, my introduction was highly successful. And so, I was a theatrical press agent and handled everything that Woodie King brought to town, River Niger, and the Wine Cellar, and whatever. But the thing that I couldn't deal with was the egos. The two leading stars in "Bubbling Brown Sugar" fought, hated each other. And arranging interviews for them had to be separate cars and whatever. And the one other thing about being a theatrical agent--once you sell out, then they pull you from the payroll so that was a wonderful experience. Story_ID: 91352 Speaker 1: And then, I moved on and became a PR [public relations] representative of the Washington Bullets when they moved from Baltimore to, to Washington. And for all of the '70's [1970s], I was a PR representative. And in 1978, they played Seattle for the championship. And the Bullets won the sixth game at Capital Centre, and I had Don King as a representative. Let me just deal with Don King first, okay. Don King was having trouble with the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] and they were on his trail. And they wanted to take him to court for some things that he was doing in terms of his bil--business dealings. So he called me and said he would be in Washington--that he needed some advice. So he came by my office in the Press Building--walked in, and said he wanted to hire me because he didn't want to go to jail, and that maybe the FBI, you know, had the wrong image and whatever. And I said, okay, fine. I said, should I develop a contract and send it to you? He said, no, man, we don't need to do that. I'll just give you my word. And as he is walking out of my office, he reached in his vest pocket, pulled out an envelope, and just threw it on the desk. And then I walked him to the door. And when I came back, I said, now what did this guy leave? And I opened it and it was $3,000 in one hundred dollar bills. And so, I handled Don King and got Don and King--Don and Larry Holmes who's the champion then, got them--made him a member of the Executive Council of the Democratic National Committee for $10,000. And he was invited to the White House. And then we had him invited to Howard University, and we had 2,000 students in Cramton Auditorium to hear him. But we also had Don commit to giving Howard, the medical school, $15,000; the Department of Journalism, $15,000; the NAACP, a certain amount because it was the end of the year, and he had all this money he had to deal with. And so, the students were very cynical and curious. And they came as if this was going to be a circus--seeing this wild man with his wild hair, and to see what he was all about. And so, when Don was first introduced--no one, you know, stood up, and, and very few applause. And Don got up and started quoting Plato and Aristotle and Shakespeare and Greek philosophers, I never heard of, and talking about his experience with Rockefeller, and quoting Einstein and talking about Copernicus and his theories. And people were intellectually overwhelmed. And when he sat down, everybody stood up. And Don told them that it's not a matter of what's on your head that's important--it's what in it. And the students were impressed, and I was impressed, and Don--I took him to the publishers' meeting, and he gave the money and developed a wonderful sense of philan-, philanthropy. And for a couple of years, the FBI somehow backed off because Don's image was embellished sincerely. And Don just needed some advice and guidance because he would pay the Federal government 10-15 million dollars in Federal taxes instead of developing a foundation and contributing to certain causes. And found that Don has a very big heart. And that was a wonderful relationship. Story_ID: 91353 Speaker 1: Don [King] always had me involved in his Las Vegas [Nevada] fight with Larry Holmes and Ken Norton. And so, I went to Las Vegas the same week that the [Washington] Bullets were playing for the championship. And so, I flew from Las Vegas back to Washington for the sixth game at Capital Centre. And when the Bullets won the sixth game, it was a 3-3 tie. And the seventh game, decisive game, would be played in Seattle that Wednesday. And so, I went to Abe Pollin, the owner of the Bullets and say, hey, what should we do in planning possibly a celebration for the Bullets in case they won? He said, Ofield, get away from me--I'm superstitious. And then, I, I went to Bob Ferrin, the general manager. And he says, Ofield Dukes, I'm suspicious also, but he said Abe Pollin has a lot of respect for your professional judgment. And whatever you do, whether we win or lose, that will be the plan. So, I flew back to Las Vegas that night, and made arrangements in Detroit. I mean made arrangements in Las Vegas to come back Tuesday morning for a meeting in my office. If not at my office, at the mayor's office for the planning committee for the Bullets' celebration or whatever. And I had a 10:00 meeting, and then, then flying back to Dulles, it was--fog was heavy and whatever. But I had developed a 10-page plan. Option A, if they won, we'd have a victory celebration down Constitution, down Constitution--uh, Pennsylvania. And if they lost, it would be something at the airport. So, I flew back and was a little late for the meeting, but we had about forty people at the City Hall with the chief of police. We had invited someone from the White House, some from Capitol Hill. We had the emergency preparedness group and whatever. And I was talking about plan A, and that would be a motorcade down Pennsylvania Avenue beginning at 3:30 that Friday. And we didn't have a choice because the owners were having a meeting that weekend in Hawaii. And the Bullets would be flying back on Thursday, and Friday was the only day. And we would have the first stop at the District Building, the second stop at the White House, the third stop at the State--at the U.S. Capitol, and then a big rally at RFK [Robert F. Kennedy Memorial Stadium]. And during the discussion, the police chief stood up, and said that if you start the motorcade at 3:30, it will be in the midst of the, the, most difficult part of the day, you know, the traffic would be heavy as to rush hour. And he said, Mr. Dukes, we just can't do that. We can't tie up Pennsylvania Avenue. And we have the hundreds of thousand people, you know, getting out, getting off work from the agencies. It can't be done. And there was a long pause in the meeting--a long pause. And the chief says, there's no way for us to have a victory parade. Story_ID: 91354 Speaker 1: And the game was the next night in Seattle [Washington] at 9:00. And they were expecting a plan from me--plan A, if they won; plan B, if they lost. And here was a dilemma. And what if they won--and we can't have a victory celebration. So, I thought for a minute as the chief stood there and was very adamant about it--said we can't do it. And I just stood up for a minute, walked around, and said, Mr. Chief, do you remember when the truckers came to Washington to protest? And you had 50,000 of them, and your police department was second to none. And do you remember when the anti-Vietnam demonstrators--more than 100,000 came, and they were all over the place? The city was proud of your police department, and they could handle it. And I was under the impression that your department was the best in the world. And the chief looked at me and said, Mr. Dukes, you're right. We can handle it! And so, that was approved--the tentative plan A. And that Wednesday night, in the last quarter of the game, Wes Unseld and big Alvin Hayes scored important points, and the Bullets won. And within the hour, Abe Pollin had his representative to call me long distance. And the question was, Ofield, what is the plan? And I said, I will have delivered to Capital Centre tomorrow morning, and there was no email and no fax, so I had someone from the office to take several copies of the plan to Capital Centre. And that Friday, the Bullets left Capital Centre at 3:00. We had 100,000 people all lined up along Constitution Avenue--Pennsylvania Avenue, and had 15,000 people on the--surrounding the District Building. And they said that this was the largest crowd at the District Building since VJ Day, Victory in Japan. Then we went to the White House, and President Jimmy Carter had his people to tell me that the president only had 10 minutes. And so, it was going to be a quick stop. So in the East Room at the White House, he had 300 people, and they were standing on the chairs. And the fat lady was there. And when the Bullets won the sixth game, the chant was "It's not over until the fat lady sings". So we had the fat lady there and we had the Bullets, and we were at the White House 45 minutes which to us like--but everything was televised live. And we went to the U.S. Capitol. We had all the senators standing there to greet the Bullets. And then at RFK [Robert F. Kennedy Memorial] Stadium, we had about 30,000 people. And one little incident that we had was for Elvin Hayes to leave the platform at RFK to shake some hands. And then the people just rushed, and we had to shorten the program. Everything was televised live and everything went very well, and the people were excited. And I received the second award for pulling off the victory celebration in three days. And that was one of the high points and the great challenges of my little career. Story_ID: 90601 Speaker 1: So, can we talk about CBC [Congressional Black Caucus]? Speaker 2: Okay, uh-hum. Are we on? Speaker 1: Uh-hum. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Yes. Speaker 1: I think it was in 1971 [sic, 1972] that Congressman Charles Diggs called me about assisting in organizing the first dinner for the Congressional Black Caucus, and there were only seven members then. And then this was sort of a radical thing and it was Louis Stokes [HM] and [William] Bill Clay [HM]. And I convened a press conference for Bill Clay and Lou Stokes because it was during a period of Stokely Car-, Carmichael and the Black Power group. And it was the white business executives, and white labor leaders were concerned whether this was a Black Power thing that the caucus was segregating themselves off or whatever. So we convened a press conference at the National Press Building to explain. Then I worked with the caucus in the first dinner, which was a spectacular event with Ossie Davis [HM] being the keynote speaker, and Nancy Wilson [HM] and Dick Gregory [HM]. And then after that, I was invited to serve with a, a, with a small group to organize the Congressional Black Caucus Foundation, and was a charter member and served on the board for fourteen years, and worked with the caucus in its infancy. And, presently, I edit the Congressional Black Caucus quarterly newsletter, so I've been a part of their life and existence over the years and I've done it as a volunteer. Story_ID: 90602 Speaker 1: One of the great things about PR [public relations] is that it has provided me, not only with the professional opportunity to make a living, but also an opportunity to provide a, a social and civic service in giving something back. This included serving on the board of Mrs. Coretta Scott King for ten years during the time that Henry Ford gave her the money to build the center in Atlanta [The Martin Luther King Jr. Center for Nonviolent Social Change, Atlanta, Georgia]. With Mrs. King, when she would come to Washington [D.C.], you know, she would have her meetings in my office. And I became a very close personal friend and a personal advisor, and there were many long conversations that I've had with Mrs. King when she called. You would have to prepare yourself to be on the phone for a period of time 'cause one subject would lead into another subject. And she was remarkable and she had faith in my judgment. She invited me to be a part of a historic entourage to South Africa before the end of apartheid and the--was the main invitation--was for the enthronement of Bishop [Desmond] Tutu in Cape Town. But we went to Zimbabwe for a meeting of the non-aligned nations, and she had me to sit in on meetings with the heads of state for about six African countries. And then we spent three or four days in Johannesburg. And we had a large entourage of press because this was the first time that a main American civil rights leader was invited and supported by the State Department to visit South Africa during apartheid. Other people who went in--it was very difficult for them to get a visa, but Mrs. King had tentatively arranged a meeting with P.W. Botha, of which was a compelling interest to the American media. Here's this, this man who had been the presiding elder of a horrible racial caste system. And she also was to meet with [Mangosuthu] Buthelezi. So we went to Cape Town for the enthronement and went on a visit to see Crosswoods (ph.), one of the worst ghettos in the universe. And after our visit to Crosswoods, Bishop Tutu expressed his displeasure. And Mrs. King meeting with P.W. Botha and, and Allan Boesak, who was the militant leader of the South Africans for the end of apartheid, had a press conference, announcing his opposition. And we had tried to get [Andrew] Andy Young [HM] to call Boesak before we got there, and could never get him to return the call. So the papers, you know, had Mrs. King, you know--its picture and the big article. The opposition to her meeting that Tuesday with, with P.W. Botha, so that Monday night, we had a meeting and we had people who suggested that maybe we should return to the States. Story_ID: 90603 Speaker 1: And I just suggested very quickly that why don't we write a letter to Mr. P.W. Botha just saying that we wanted to cancel or reschedule the meeting for a later date? And so, Mrs. [Coretta Scott] King said okay, Ofield, that's a good idea. Why don't you write the letter? So I got up early the next morning and couldn't find the right typewriter. But eventually, I typed up the letter and got it to Mrs. King and she signed it. And she was having breakfast with one of his cabinet members who was going to deliver it to President Botha. And so he left about 9:00, and Mrs. King had a call to the president's office about 9:30 to see if he received it. She called again at 10:00, and still couldn't get through and called again at 11. And so, we decided the meeting was scheduled for 12:30 with P.W. Botha, so we just couldn't get through. And she kept leaving messages, but he never returned her call. So when the Senate at 12:15, President P.W. Botha goes out into his garden and all of the media, you know are gathered, waiting for the 12:30 meeting so that they could take pictures of the--Botha and meeting with Mrs. King which was historic. And even Dr. Sullivan, you know, had not requested a meeting with, with the president of South Africa. So at 12:15, he goes out and he tells everybody--all the media that I'm waiting for our 12:30 meeting with Mrs. King. And at 12:30, he says, well, she's due here, but I guess she's maybe on her way. And at 12:45, he's still strolling around and says, maybe, she has stood me up. And then, in the-[William] Bill Raspberry [HM], the next day in the "Washington Post" has this big article. And the front page article is "Mrs. King stood up the--P.W. Botha". And Bill Raspberry has this highly critical article that why is Mrs. King over there in the first place and whatever? And it became a big issue so the, the next day, we have an early morning meeting. And then I'm appointed to address the media to explain to them--to share with them a copy of the letter that was sent to President Botha. But it was an outstanding example of a man who was very shrewd in his PR [public relations], and he out-maneuvered us, and he manipulated us. But the other part of that is the fact that Bishop Tutu and Allan Boesak hated [Mangosuthu] Buthelezi. And it reminded us of the tug of war between W.E.B. DuBois and Booker T. Washington because Buthelezi was the Booker T. Washington type. And, of course, we got caught up in that type of confrontation, but it was a wonderful trip for Mrs. King having the courage to go there. And she left her impact because after everything was clarified--that she was described as a very courageous person to want to go there. And she inspired the South Africans in their fight because she met with all the folks who were involved in the fight. Story_ID: 90604 Speaker 1: For years, I was a very close friend and advisor to Rev. Leon Sullivan in his effort, and very briefly, the friendship with Sullivan was sort of historic and very meaningful because when he did his bread boycott of Philadelphia, in Philadelphia, no one was really aware of Leon Sullivan generally. And I was on [Vice President] Hubert Humphrey's staff in the early '70's [1970s] and got a call from Cecil Newman, the publisher of the Minneapolis newspaper. And he was very much involved with Dr. Sullivan and his OIC [Opportunities Industrialization Centers] program. And he called me and says, hey, Rev. Leon Sullivan is going to be in Washington and would like for you to arrange for him to meet Vice President Humphrey. So I called the appointment secretary and she says the vice president is very busy today, and I don't know if you'll have a chance, but if you would have Rev. Sullivan to come to the office, Ofield, you come down to meet with him, and then as Humphrey is leaving to go to another meeting, he can just say a brief hello. So I had Rev. Sullivan to meet me, and Humphrey was coming from a National Security Council meeting and had another meeting, and so we went into his office. He was on the phone talking to his wife, and then he hung up the phone. And I said, here's Dr. Leon Sullivan. He says, oh--shook his hand, and said, sorry, I don't have a chance to chat with you, but I got to run to another meeting. And Dr. Sullivan opened his mouth with his baritone voice, and so it's not the aptitude that's important. It's a person's attitude, and then he said a couple of other things. And Hubert Humphrey stopped. And in three minutes, Humphrey was wiping tears from his eyes. And Sullivan was so profound that Humphrey ran back to his desk and said, Ofield, I'm supposed to address these 300 business executives tomorrow, but I think Sullivan has a better message. And he called Hobart Taylor [Jr.] and he called Willard Wirtz. And then Sullivan spoke for the first time before an audience of 300 corporate executives. And Sullivan had them jumping up and down as if they were at a football game. And then the next day, Humphrey called me at home, 7:00 in the morning--so, Ofield, what manner of man this Sullivan is. I need for you to develop a memo for me for President [Lyndon B.] Johnson, explaining to him who Leon Sullivan is, and maybe the president would have a chance to meet him the next time Sullivan is in town. So I ran to the office. I didn't have that much information, but hopped on my little Underwood typewriter--no email, no computer, and did a page and a half, and had it delivered to Humphrey's office. And he read it--didn't change a thing, had it hand-delivered to the president. And a week or so later, President Johnson was on Air Force One on his way to Philadelphia to meet Rev. Leon Sullivan in the old jailhouse, housing the OIC program, and they had a great meeting. And for Leon Sullivan, that was the beginning of his relationship with every American president since that time. And Leon Sullivan became, his program became a line item in the congressional budget. And he always remembered me for helping him at the very beginning. And the day he died, his wife called and said, Ofield, can you come to Arizona because my husband said if anything should happen to him, he would want you to come and to coordinate some of the arrangements for his funeral. Speaker 2: That's a great story. Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 90605 Speaker 1: What about your role with--at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] with teaching and--okay. Speaker 2: When Dr. [James] Cheek [HM] developed the school of communication, he called Tony Brown to be the first dean. Tony and I attended Wayne State University [Detroit, Michigan] together. And Tony called me and asked me if I would teach the first courses in public relations. And for two years, I taught the first two, and only courses in public relations. And I had an average of twenty-five to thirty students in each class. And because of my contacts, even during the Nixon years and the Carter years, I had all of these students involved in internships. And we'd talk about the practicality of, of life, of being excellent, to being prompt, of working hard, and whatever. And ten years later, I helped organize the PR [public relations] sequence at Howard. And so, I've been credited with producing more public relation students in PR than anybody else in the country. At the Dr. [Dorothy] Height Gala, a young lady came up to me and says, Ofield, I just want to thank you for what you did. And she's a judge in Atlanta. And in going to Florida A&M [Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida] as a guest lecturer, the guy who greeted me at the airport is a county supervisor. He says, you taught me time management. But I then taught as an adjunct--public relations at American University [Washington, D.C.] for eight years, and was voted at AU [American University, Washington, D.C.] as the outstanding adjunct professor for the graduate class for one year. Story_ID: 90606 Speaker 1: But the other highlight is that in life, you can work hard, you can pursue the passion of being excellent. And it was surprising in the year 2001 that I became the recipient of the highest individual award given in the PR [public relations] industry--the Gold Anvil. And that led to a group in Washington having a luncheon for me shortly thereafter. And Cathy Hughes [HM] came and said that when she met me in the first year she was here. I talked about my experience at WCHB Radio, and when she decided to buy WL that she called, and I raised $200,000 for her. And during the time that she was at the WHUR, whenever, she had a problem. She called me. And when she had any problems, she was in touch, but at the luncheon, she mentioned those things and just indicated that she was establishing and contributing to an Ofield Dukes PR Scholarship Fund at Howard University, contributing $25,000. And that when I returned to Detroit, that if I should ever go to my old station of WCHB, that it would be different, and that in her building, housing her three radio stations that she was planning to have a special dedication of the building in the name of Ofield Dukes, and that was last April. So she had several hundred people there and there's this building named in my honor. And those things are unexpected, and usually they happen to folks after they're passed. So it's been a blessing from God that I've been able to survive--or not survive--to be successful in PR for the thirty four years, and before going home to have that type of recognition, so I am very fortunate. Story_ID: 90607 Speaker 1: Well, let's talk about that just a little bit. In terms of, you know, here you are. You transitioned from journalism to public relations at a time, you know, when the public relations still was--I mean, relatively young, especially in the black community. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, just throughout-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous), right-- Speaker 2: --yeah, because PR [public relations] was not taught at most white colleges in the '60's [1960s]. Speaker 1: So, I'm just wondering if you could comment on that, you know, because you could have continued to be, you know, in journalism--gone back to a newspaper that, you know, either in the white press or, you know, or, you know, continued to be involved with black, you know, the black media press. And I'm just wondering if you can comment on that, you know, that career change, and what, what this industry really is. Speaker 2: Okay. The, the change has really come. The revolution and the way we communicate--information technology has created instant worldwide communication. And that has had more to do with the change in communication and the whole profession simply because now Fortune 500 companies need professional experts in communicating to their consumers. And now with the global economy, it's just throughout the world. Also, in politics, in public service, in government, in, in a democracy, the people have a right to know. And FDR [Franklin Delano Roosevelt] did, you know, the radio fireside chat. John Kennedy and Nixon engaged in the first public telephone, television debate. And the public relations of John Kennedy made a big difference in the outcome. And Louis Martin, in terms of his public relations advice to the Kennedys, to have a symbolic call to the candidate. So public relations, the effective communication has become an essential component of the American democracy--how to communicate effectively. And the founding of our country, and whether it was Jefferson, Payne, and Madison, were very effective communicators. And it was the public relations of the Boston Tea Party and the Boston Massacre which wasn't a massacre--it was just multiple slayings. So, and, and then in World War I, there was an organized, a PR committee to promote that. And then Roosevelt had a, a PR, the information agency, but anyway, with the radical change in communication, reporting through newspapers became not obsolete, but not the most effective means of communicating, so that PR became a very important profession in the '70's [1970s]. And now, the greatest example of public relation is the international debate precipitated by our president introducing a new foreign policy on preemption. And Colin Powell's [HM] speech before the United Nations, it was a PR presentation. And then, what we discovered is that the foreign minister of Germany, and the president of Russia, and the foreign minister of France were just effective in their PR. And now we are realizing that Mr. Bush [President George W. Bush], who was elected on the basis of his PR, and out-PR-ing Al Gore in the debates, and Mr. Bush kept on message, education, and wherever he would go to Harlem, you know, there was a photo opportunity. And he always ended up with some black or some minority. So his people are PR geniuses, Karen Hughes, and my good friend, [Victoria] Torie Clarke at the Pentagon. And the embetterment of the media and the war, so nothing happens in Washington and in this country without PR. The two main products of Washington are PR and politics, but PR preempts politics because everything the president does is based on public relations. And they're very good at it, and if you watch TV this morning and you could see the example of the rescue of this lady. It turned out to be a PR event. Story_ID: 90608 Speaker 1: What, what would you say is good PR [public relations], and what is bad PR? Speaker 2: This PR, public relations is effective communication. It's the ability to relate to the interest of people. It's, it's bilateral communication. It's the art of winning friends and influencing people. [president] Lyndon Johnson was very good at it. [President Ronald] Reagan was a good communicator and he stayed on message, education, education. So PR is the ability to relate to the interest of people--to inform, to educate, and to persuade. Those are the noble goals. And if people are dishonest, if they exaggerate, and they are out to manipulate people, then that is a bad PR. But, our country was founded on the basis of PR. Jesus Christ was an expert in public relations and he had seven, he had twelve PR agents, and he couldn't trust all of them, and some of them were dishonest. We don't have to name them. And he was very effective in getting word out. And John the Baptist lost his head. And the Greeks were outstanding in their public relations, whether it was Socrates or Mark Anthony and his speech, whatever, so effective communication/PR has undergirded human civilization. Story_ID: 90609 Speaker 1: So, what, what, why is this industry important in the black community? Speaker 2: Oh-- Speaker 1: And white, you know, and you, you know, started the Black Public Relations Association? It's (unclear). Speaker 2: It is, it is interesting now simply because as a profession, the compensation is far greater in public relations than in journalism. And when you look at the stats of blacks in journalism, twenty or twenty-five years ago, when they had the Kerner Commission, they discovered that it was about five or six percent. And when you look around now--whether it's the "Washington Post", "New York Times", it may be six or seven, but for most newsrooms and the black journalists are complaining, it remains about the same. The, the highest paid people in Washington are the public relations people. They are lobbyists. They are folks who represent the Fortune 500 companies here, people who are vice presidents of public relations for the 3,000 trade associations, so that the bottom line of a company is based on consumer relations, public relations, investor relations, community relations, whatever. So, in my lectures to students at Florida A&M, University of Georgia, Ball State, I indicate that what the global economy and information technology, and instant worldwide communication, public relation people are now essential, more essential than journalists. And journalists are--many of them are now moving from journalism to public relations, whether it's press secretaries or becoming corporate executives. When you receive a call from a search company for a vice president of public relations, the salary is 100,000 plus, and it may be 150,000, whether it's in New York or whatever. When you get a call from a newspaper to hire a talented journalist, and whether a person has been working for the "Post" or whatever, I'm not really certain if there are the $150,000, which is a starting salary for a talented PR person. Speaker 1: So that's, that's why you believe in (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --plus it's, but it's also the other part of the thing is that you--in the industry, you get to observe and see a lot, and it's a lot of sort of strategic positioning. Speaker 2: You're traveling around the world. Because, because of the global economy, Fortune 500 companies based in America are now depending on foreign commerce for their bottom line. So if you're going to work for Coca Cola, you may end up working out of Tokyo or Cape Town or whatever. One of the things that I was invited to do was to become a part of 25 American executives who spent a week at the University of Indiana learning how to do the busi-, so business with the Japanese. And then we spent 10 wonderful days in Tokyo and Japan just learning the culture, the politics, the art of, of doing business with the Japanese. And so, if you are involved in, in PR, you're on the first line of how to communicate with the Japanese politician because there's a tariff, and how to communicate with their media. And you got to have the gifts and how to communicate with the consumers and whatever, so that there are more jobs in PR and their higher incomes. And when you look at the schools of communication, whether that's the University of Michigan, University of Maryland, or University of Alabama, there are as many students majoring in PR now than in journalism. And in some schools, they're more people majoring in public relations than in journalism because the turnover in the journalism is very slow. And at the "Washington Post", you have people who have been there for twenty-five years. And you won't have anybody replacing [William] Bill Raspberry [HM], or Courtney McLoy (ph.), or Milt Coleman, or whatever because they will be there until they retire. And then, if you're going to be at the lower level and you're making 40 or 50 or $60,000 a year, you'll be there for six or seven years before you move over to making 100,000. So when you look at the PR director at the D.C. Public Schools and I helped Linda Void (ph.) get her job, and she's in her second or third year. And her salary is close to $100,000. And you look at a reporter who's been at the "Post" for eight or ten years, and they're not making $100,000. And that's the difference. It's an economic incentive, and the world has changed radically that communication--information technology is essential. Story_ID: 90552 Speaker 1: You have had a unique opportunity in your life to, not only be an observer, but a participant in the African American community, and a tremendous time of sort of growth. And I think about the fact that, you know, your description of growing up, you know, and, and at five years old, going along as your mother picked cotton to where you are now. And I'm wondering what--from that vantage point, what hopes or concern--what hopes, first, and concerns, second, do you have for the black community? Speaker 2: What suggestions? Speaker 1: Well, it, it can be-- Speaker 2: Oh, I think-- Speaker 1: --the hopes, hopes, first. Speaker 2: Well, I have outlined ten principles that contributed to my success, and faith is one of them. There's a spirituality--being spiritual and having a faith in, in God, your Maker. And then there's a faith in one's ability to survive and to face up to the challenge, and then the faith that others have in your sense of morality and your sense of integrity. One of the things I didn't mention--in addition to the passion to be excellent, the other thing that was so important to me was integrity, that I was intensely committed to the principle that nothing would ever force me to compromise my sense of integrity because in life, your reputation is the foundation for your success or your failure. And your reputation is like a whistle in its echo and it's your shadow wherever you go. The other thing that was sort of important is--it's a terrible para-, paradox to be successful in one's profession, and then a failure at one's home and domestic responsibilities. And I feel that one of the great joys of my life, the joy that's greater than the Gold Anvil and working with the Supremes or whatever, is being a parent, a parent of a daughter who lived with me during middle school after my divorce from her mother. And I had a civil relationship with her mother. And my daughter lived with me while she attended middle school, Holy Trinity in Georgetown, because her mother lived in suburbia. And it was more practical and so daddy got up, got her [sic] daughter up every day, and my daughter lived with me when she was in high school. And that was a tremendous joy and responsibility. And although there was a divorce, my wife, ex-wife, and I provide sort of a very productive and positive climate. So my daughter who's a 21-year-old senior student at Howard University [Washington, D.C.] feels that she has lived a very good life--has had two very good parents, and has been able to integrate the best traits of the two parents. And to all, in sense, at an awards event at Howard University the day before commencement a few weeks ago, the chairman of the Department of the Theater gave one award to the student who was so outstanding, so versatile, and who devoted so much of her time, and who was an outstanding talent. And when she called my daughter's name, Roxie cried. But during my daughter's four years, one of the trophies on my desk is as a parent and being actively supportive of everything my daughter has been involved in at Howard--actively support of the department and contributing time and effort. And my message there is that one has to be as committed to being successful in one's domestic responsibilities in being a parent, as one is in one's professional life. And there cannot be, you know, any separation of the two. And so, the joy of being a parent, and is far greater than the joy of receiving the Golden Anvil. Story_ID: 90553 Speaker 1: And, but one other question, your hope, your concerns--let me ask--do you feel positive about the future of black America? Speaker 2: Okay. I'm very positive, very positive, because I came from the cotton fields of rural Alabama, attending a one-room class schoolhouse. There's no Head Start, no modern books, no computers, and attended an inferior high school in the Black Bottom of Detroit. And if I, with all of these disadvantages and during the time when there were no laws banning discrimination in voting, whatever, and if I, and thousands of other blacks who went through the same thing could make it--certainly the present generation, you know, have a head start because we were not even in the ball park then. And now, they can start on first base or second base. And if they don't make it home, it's not about a matter of race or those kinds of obstacles. It's based on individual desire, determination, work ethics, and a commitment to being excellent. So I am very confident. But also concerned simply because there are more distractions for young people now than when I was growing up because I could be concerned about a young lady's menstrual cycle in terms of not messing up. But on TV, we did not have entertainments--we, we did not have junk on TV, served up as entertainment, and we did not have videos and records disparaging African American women. We did not have the nude scenes. And, you know, some of the kids in high school may have had a little pot, but we didn't have crack and all of the other kinds of violence and whatever, so that the challenges for parents and for their kids now are just more difficult because at my house, we didn't lock the doors. We did not have a lot of rapes and burglaries. We had a sense of respect and a sense of pride in spite of the shortcomings of a society that was racially biased. And there was a better relationship between parents and their children then because the parents were determined for the kids to overcome. Many of the parents now are well off. And the kids drive their cars and they have the great freedom and whatever. So there's the old-fashioned way of raising your family and having breakfast, lunch, and dinner. But at our house when we had dinner, everybody was there. And on a Sunday, my mother would cook and we would have sisters who were married and their husbands and they would come. And so, society is so different. And many of African American men and our kids are becoming victims of this new subculture which is really detrimental to our progress. And parental responsibility needs to be enhanced and to increase. And if I had a message, then it would simply be that one of the greatest gifts of God is the great of parenting. And one of the greatest responsibilities in life is being a responsible parent and making sure that your kids do the right thing for the right reason and being stern and making sure that there is the discipline, and that is my grave concern. Story_ID: 90554 Speaker 1: And what do you want your legacy to be? Speaker 2: Oh, I--it's a good question. Gee, I hadn't even thought of it--that I tried hard to be the best person I could be; to live up to God's principles of treating other people as you would want to be treated; and the legacy of my mother [Violet Stringer Dukes] and father [Garfield Dukes]; and being the best person, the best worker; and to make a worthwhile contribution to the cause of other people in life. It's not eloquently stated, but that's the gist of it. Speaker 1: And you want to be remembered for-- Speaker 2: A guy who came long and tried hard to do his best; and to have his success simply defined on the basis of the people he tried to help; and that if, if really, it's--my achievements should not be defined in terms of what I did, but my achievement should be determinant in terms of how I was able to contribute to the achievements of other people. Speaker 1: Okay, great, we're done. Story_ID: 90555 Speaker 1: The circumstance, but try to keep the answer short. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Tell us about this photo, please. Speaker 1: This is a photograph of me sitting at my desk at my office. That's-- Speaker 2: You, you know what year? Speaker 1: Gee whiz, about three or four years ago. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): And about ready. Speaker 2: Okay, next. ( OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, go ahead. Speaker 1: That's a photograph of my first meeting with Vice President Hubert Humphrey at a reception at the State Department in the John Quincy Adam Room. This is when he greeted me and told people that Ofield Dukes will be working for him. It was in 1965. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: And that's a (unclear)--went on an eight-country tour of south, of Africa in 1967. And one of the stops was in Ethiopia at a time that Haile Selassie was still alive. And we just arrived at his Imperial Palace, and that is a live cheetah, and you can see that I'm very cautious. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): (Laughter), okay. Speaker 1: That's a photograph of Vice President Humphrey and it's autographed to me. And I served on his staff for three years. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, one second, sir (unclear), post yet. Speaker 1: I'm sorry. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, ready. Speaker 2: Okay. That's a meeting with Vice President Johnson, and to the left is Louis Martin. And, and that was of the last meeting that President [Lyndon B.] Johnson had with a group of black editors and publishers. That was in the spring of 1968. President Johnson--every year met with black editors and publishers. Okay. There is--I made a little mistake. This is--the other picture with Vice President Humphrey with me talking was taken at a church when he first moved here. This is the-- Speaker 1: You mean, the last one-- Speaker 2: The last one-- Speaker 1: --just the last one we did? Speaker 2: --yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, correction. Speaker 2: Yeah, correction--the one with me standing there with Vice President Humphrey was taken at a church. Here was the State Department, and this was my first meeting with Vice President Humphrey after he announced that I would be on his staff. And I'm pointing to some photographers--don't take my picture, don't take my picture, and he was announcing that I would be on his staff. Speaker 1: What about the-- Speaker 2: Okay, yeah, okay. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): You want it straight like that? Speaker 2: Yeah. This is a picture of Vice President Humphrey at his home in southwest Washington with his wife, Muriel, and with Thurgood Marshall. The, the--Hubert Humphrey always had special guests meeting with him. Okay. I'm sorry about the desk on some of the photographs. Speaker 1: Okay, yeah. Speaker 2: That's a picture of me with my four sisters in Detroit and that was about 15 years ago. Speaker 1: Can you give their names? (Simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 2: My sisters, one to the left is my sister, Annie--it's Annie M. Dukes Harris; the next one is my sister, Lou Alice Dukes Brock (ph.); and that's me. And the next sister is the one who's deceased, Arlene Dukes Brown; and my younger sister is Betty Dukes Heygood (ph.). Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: Okay. This is a picture taken at the, the International Conference of the Public Relations Society of America after I received the Gold Anvil. And to my left is Joann Killeen who, at that time, was president of PRSA [Public Relations Society of America]. And to my right is Debbie Miller who was the first vice president--first president of PRSA. Speaker 1: Do you have anything of your time--is this at the Congressional Black Caucus? Speaker 2: Oh, I have a whole bunch of photographs, so should I pull some out? Speaker 1: Yeah, you should. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But you and Matthew will be on your own. Speaker 2: Okay. That's a photograph of my mother [Violet Stringer Dukes] and father [Garfield Dukes] celebrating their 50th wedding anniversary and-- Speaker 1: Can you give their names there, please? Speaker 2: Mr. and Mrs. Garfield Dukes. My mother, Violet Dukes; my father, Garfield Dukes. And the other photograph is-- Speaker 1: Can you spell Garfield-- Speaker 2: G-A-R-F-I-E-L-D. And Violet is V-I-O-L-E-T. Speaker 1: Uh-hum. Speaker 2: And at the top is my niece, Geraldine (ph.) Brock who's a nurse. And at the bottom is another niece, Kathy (ph.) Brock. And at the left is my nephew, Collee (ph.), when he was in a cradle. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's a photograph of me taken during the '70's [1970s] just on the telephone. Speaker 1: Okay, right. Speaker 2: I have a whole bunch of photographs. Speaker 1: Okay. If you want to grab, you know, I would say-- Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Now, to-- Speaker 1: Okay. It's a photograph with the late Dr. Benjamin Mays, who was the president of Morehouse College, and a very prominent African American leader. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Uh-hum. Speaker 1: So, photograph of me; my daughter in the center; and President Clinton at a Christmas White House Open House. That was in 1999. It's a picture after the TV series of "Roots". To the right is Alex Haley; in the center is an African Ambassador; and I am on the left. I don't remember the name of the African Ambassador, but it was at a reception hosted by the African Ambassador from the Ivory Coast. And that was in the same year as "Roots". I just don't remember the exact year. This was taken at the first Congressional Black Caucus dinner chaired by Congressman Charles Diggs to the left. And he was the chairman of the Congressional Black Caucus at the time. And a slim and trim Aretha Franklin who sang at the CBC, and then there's Ofield Dukes. It was a black tie affair, and this was in 1971--a very slim and trim Aretha. This was Ofield Dukes with President Jimmy Carter, and it was at some event at the White House. That was during the mid-70's [1970s]--I think after 1976 when he was elected. This is a photograph with John H. Johnson [HM], the founder/president of Johnson Publishing Company--"Ebony" and "Jet", et cetera. And it was taken at an event in Washington in the 1990's. This was a picture taken after the TV series of "Roots" with Alex Haley, Vernon Jordan, and a young lady who's an executive of the National Urban League. And this was taken at the National Urban League Conference in Washington during that particular time when Vernon Jordan [HM] was the president of the National Urban League. Story_ID: 90556 Speaker 1: This was a picture taken of Dr. Leon Sullivan. And to his left is--oh, gee whiz, I've forgotten, but anyway, this was taken at a National Conference of the Opportunities Industrialization Center. It is chaired by Dr. Leon Sullivan. And this was during the late 1980's. This is a picture of my meeting with Fannie Lou Hamer, who was a very militant civil rights leader out of Mississippi, and who helped integrate the Democratic Party after the 1964 convention in New Jersey. And this was taken in the late '60's [1960s] or early '70's [1970s]. This is a picture of me when I was a PFC, Private First Class, in the U.S. Army and I served from 1952 to 1954. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): And what's written on the bottom? Speaker 1: Uhh-- Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Did you send that to somebody? Speaker 1: Let me just see--what does it say? It's autographed to the Dukes family. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Uh-hum. Speaker 1: Okay. This is a picture of my daughter in front of me. That's Roxie Anika (ph.) Trap (ph.) Dukes, and, of course, that's Maya Angelou. And in the rear is Ceda (ph.) Luss (ph.) Taker (sic)--Ceda Luss Tucker. And this was taken at the annual brunch of Ceda Luss Tucker National Black Critical Congress, and this was in 1999. This was the official photograph of my joining the President's Committee on Equal Employment Opportunity in 1964. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): All right. Speaker 1: This is a picture of me with A. Philip Randolph taken in 1965 during President Johnson's National Conference on Civil Rights. It was called the Conference to Fulfill These Rights, and President Johnson convened it. And he had the civil rights leaders involved in helping to plan that conference. This was the presentation of the PRSA, the Public Relations Society highly competitive Silver Anvil to me by the president of PRSA at that time. And I won the award for coordinating the three-day inauguration of Detroit's first black mayor. That was 1960--I'm sorry, that was 1976, 1976. This is a picture with me and Congressman Diggs. Congressman Diggs is the chairman of the House Subcommittee on the District of Columbia--was the instrumental person in getting the home rule bill passed in the early '80's [1980s], and I worked with him as a consultant. It's a picture of my daughter, Roxie, who was in middle school at the time, and she lived with me and we were involved in doing some homework. And that's one of the great joys of my life. That was during the early '90's [1990s]. This is a picture taken during Vice President Humphrey's trip to Africa in 1967. And I'm there with Ambassador, with Ambassador Deborah, of the America--the, the, the, the Ambassador from Ghanda to United States. He's in the center, and the other person is an Assistant Secretary of State for Africa. And I just don't remember his name, but the person in the center is the Canadian, the, the Ambassador from Ghanda to the United States. It's a picture of my visiting the White House on some special occasion during the Clinton years. This was a picture taken in 1964 when I joined the President's Committee on Equal Employment Opportunity as an assistant director of information. And the young ladies are members of the staff of the President's Committee. It was in 1964. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: This is a photograph of me and the--it's Hillary Clinton taken at the White House during one of the special events at that time. I was very much involved in the two elections of President Bill Clinton. This photograph was taken at the Lyndon Johnson Conference on Civil Rights Entitled to Fulfill These Rights. And the photograph is with Bishop Catholic Archbishop Perry of New Orleans and, and, and Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King. And this photograph was taken in 1965. This photograph was taken in Detroit in 1963, and the demonstration of the young adult division of the NAACP in picketing a downtown Detroit department store at Easter time. And I served as president of the young adult division of the Detroit NAACP. That's 1963. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Are you in this photo? Was that-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): No, okay. Speaker 2: Uh-hum. This is a photograph of an executive from Chrysler presenting a Gold--the Silver Anvil to Coleman Young as a part of the Silver Anvil that I won in developing and coordinating the three inaugural, three-day inauguration of Coleman Young, as the first black mayor of Detroit. And that was in 1976. This is a picture of Vice President Hubert Humphrey, and I arranged for him to meet with, with Marion Berry who was president of a community group that was concerned with employment and other kinds of antipoverty activity. This was in--let's see, 1967, and it was before Marion became a candidate and was elected for mayor. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: This is a picture taken in 1966, a Plans for Progress meeting at the State Department, chaired by William Miller, who then was the president of Textron, and is the president of Plans for Progress program. And sitting there behind him is Roy Wilkins of the NAACP, and in the forefront is Hobart Taylor, Jr. And I'm sitting immediately by--behind Hobart Taylor with the glasses. And this is a picture of A. Philip Randolph and myself taken during Lyndon Johnson's Conference on Civil Rights in 1965...