 Story_ID: 460058 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Ma'am could you state your full name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: My name is [HistoryMaker] Carolyn Armenta Davis. That's C-A-R-O-L-Y-N, Armenta, A-R-M-E-N-T-A, Davis, D-A-V-I-S. Speaker 1: All right. And what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: I was born March the 8th, 1944 in Gary, Indiana. Speaker 1: All right. And ma'am, what is your occupation? Speaker 2: Well I am a consultant, a writer, a lecturer and my avocation is that I am a African diaspora cultural historian. Speaker 1: Okay. Now would you say that you--you're--one of your specialties is architecture right? Or would you consider that? Speaker 2: It's one of the things I've done. I've done three landmark projects over the last, I guess which is now thirty years--over thirty years. The first one was on black classical composers, composers of African ancestry who wrote traditional cl- European music, symphonies, concertos, operas, et cetera. And that was called 'The Black Classical Composers,' which I wrote and produced, and narrated in 1976 and it was on the air in Chicago [Illinois] on the classical music station [WEFM Radio]. It presented the music written by black classical composers from 197- from 1771, excuse me, from 1771 to 1975, over a two hundred-year period including people who were contemporaries of Mozart [Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart]. My second, what I call cultural African diaspora type of thing, was I also wrote a series on black women who left their feminine footprints in American history. It was called 'Feminine Footprints.' It was a series of sixty-five one-minute documentaries on black women who left their footprints in our history. And it was on--I don't--about ninety stations across the country and won an award in American Women in Radio and Television [Alliance for Women in Media] and that was 1978 on. And then currently I have been focusing on architects of the black diaspora and I created a historic exhibition project on black architects from the Americas, North and South, and Central America, Afro-Europeans and Africans. It included the built projects of fifty architects and had a world tour to something like twenty cities and eight countries on four continents. So I, I have a aficionado for architecture, but my focus has be- really been the black diaspora and many of our unsung heroes and sheroes, and the cultural contributions and achievements that we've made. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now, what is today's date (laughter)? Speaker 2: Today's date is Friday, November the 21st, 2008. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're at The HistoryMakers' studios at 1900 South Michigan in Chicag-Michigan Avenue in Chicago, Illinois, and I don't know the zip code (laughter) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, you don't have to know it. Story_ID: 460059 Speaker 1: Before we go, go into depth, there are five, lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that management compels me to ask of everyone-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and they only require a short answer. First one is do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: No, I really like all food. Let's put it this way, I like a lot of fresh fruits and vegetables and fish, but I also like a pork chop every now and then. So, I don't really have a favorite food. I just--there's nothing that I crave. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Well, I think if you looked in my wardrobe you'd think black was my color (laughter). I don't really have a favorite color either. I--I like--I like bright colors. I like earth tones, I also like black and I love the different shades of white. Yeah, but--and my color that I like sort of depends upon the mood and the day-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and where I am, warm climate, cold climate, sunny. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Yes. (Laughter) My favorite time of the year is really spring, summer and fall. So I guess I like--I li- spring, summer and fall are my favorite times of the year. I don't, I don't like--I like the three equally. Speaker 1: You don't like winter we can tell that. Speaker 2: Oh, I'm not as fond of winder--winter, but always thankful to have lived through another one (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Oh heavens (makes sound), no, I don't have a favorite vacation destination. I've been very fortunate to have traveled to oh, I don't know over fifty countries on five continents. And every place I've been has been so beautiful and so different and I mean, I just, I just don't have a favorite. They can return me to any of them, especially in the winter. Speaker 1: Okay. The last question is do y- do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Do I have a favorite phrase or saying? No--well, something that I'm known to say periodically is et cetera (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: When you get to a point that you understand that you understand it's like et cetera. There is no need to keep dragging it out (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 460060 Speaker 1: Now I'm gonna ask about your family history. I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Richard Davis, Sr.] side, but we'll ask about your mother's side first just to keep them from getting mixed up. So, can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: My mother's name is Armenta, Armenta Matthews Davis. Speaker 1: Okay and what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: She was born December the 23rd, 1914 in Helena, Arkansas area; Southland [ph.], Arkansas area. Speaker 1: Okay, that's a--okay. Helena is the same town that our late Cook County Commissioner John Stroger [HistoryMaker John H. Stroger, Jr.] is from. Quite a few, Armstead Allen [ph.] (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I know a few people. Speaker 1: Yeah, a lot of people of Helena here in Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 2: In metro, metro Chicago, yeah. Speaker 1: Well, what do you know about the ancestors on your mother's side? How far back can you trace them? Speaker 2: My mother and I have a--I don't know if I should say this on there, but I do have a picture of my mother's mother. My mother's mother name was Armenta [Armenta Mays Matthews] also, and she died in childbirth having my mother. And, so my mother was raised by her maternal grandparents and Alan Mays [ph.] and their family. And my mother's father's name was Rhodolph [Rhodolph Matthews], Rhodolph, R-U-L-D-O-P-H [sic.], I believe Rhodolph. I don't know much about him and I don't have a picture of him. Speaker 1: That's your mother's grandf- (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My mother's, my mother's father-- Speaker 1: Father, okay. Speaker 2: --was Rhodolph Matthews, and he was married to my mother's mother, who died in childbirth having my mother. Speaker 1: Okay. Now are there any stories of--I mean as far as you know, is Helena, Arkansas the, the--you know, the seat of the family? I mean is there any other place that they talk about coming from or--? Speaker 2: Well on my mother's side they were pretty much from the Arkansas area. And they mentioned Southland and Helena, and where else did she mention a lot? I don't, I don't, I don't remember--those were the ones that they mentioned the most. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Maybe Pine Bluffs [sic.], is there a Pine Bluff, Arkansas (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Pine Bluff, oh sure, yeah that's where the University of Arkansas [University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff, Pine Bluff, Arkansas], the, the black schools [HBCUs], yeah used to be Arkansas AM and N [Arkansas Agricultural, Mechanical and Normal College]. Speaker 2: Okay, might be Pine Bluffs, yeah. And my mother did--my mother was a pianist and she studied--she started when she was a young girl playing in--at a, at a country day school or something in that area. I don't recall the name, but it was in that Arkansas area that she grew up in. Speaker 1: Are there any stories in the family that go all the way back to slavery times or--? Speaker 2: Well, probably so. My mother ne- my mother didn't talk about that as much. Her, her unc- her maternal grandfather's family was a very large family. They had like eleven brothers and sisters, and her mother was one of them. Some of my aunts talked about--talked about it a little more about sh- they were sharecroppers and then they bought, they bought a certain amount of land. And my mother evidently had inherited a, a good piece of land when her mother died. I don't know whether it came from her mother or father's side. But basically they were sharecroppers and, and obviously before then I'm sure slaves also. My mother's mother has a lot of--on that side they have a lot of Indian [Native American] blood and, and if--in the photograph you will see, you know, the very high cheekbones, et cetera. And I don't know exactly which tri- which tribe. I think one of my brothers said he thought it was a Choctaw or something. We haven't done that, we haven't done that type of research yet. But mother did say that, you know, they picked cotton. And she, because she played the piano, she didn't have to work in the fields as much. She got to go practice, et cetera. And then she came to Gary [Indiana] I believe when she was a young girl maybe like eleven or twelve or something, to come live with one of her aunts, Aunt Bell [ph.] who raised her. Aunt Bell and Uncle Nia [ph.], and by then they had--they had moved to Gary and mom came to live with them. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And my mother actually graduated from high school in Gary, Indiana. Speaker 1: Which one did she--? Speaker 2: Roosevelt High School [Theodore Roosevelt High School, Gary, Indiana]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I have it written down, I think it's something like 19--probably '34 [1934], '35 [1935] or something like that, yeah. Story_ID: 460061 Speaker 1: Let me go to your father's side. Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: My father's full name is Richard, R-I-C-H-A-R-D, Hen- Henry, H-E-N-R-Y, Boyd, B-O-Y-D, Davis-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --D-A-V-I-S [Richard Davis, Sr.]. And he was born in the Nelson [Georgia]; Tate, Georgia area. I've gotten two things. On his death certificate it said one thing, and on his birth certificate something else. So, and he was born January the 24th, 1909. Speaker 1: Okay. Now what do you know about your father's ancestors (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. My father had--has had one, two, three, Uncle Harold [Harold Davis], Uncle S.P. [Saint Phillip Davis, Jr.], Uncle Leon [Leon Davis], had four--had three--four brothers. There were four boys. His moth- his--my father's mother was Polly Davis Castleberry [Polly Smith Davis]. And when--and I don't know her maiden name, but when she was Polly Davis she was--that's when she had my father, Richard, his brother, Saint Phillip, Uncle Leon, and Un- Uncle Harold. And he--and then I don't know what happened to his father [Saint Phillip Davis, Sr.], and I--I've never--I have a picture of my maternal--my paternal grandmother, Polly Castleberry [ph.]. But I don't have a picture of her husband, the Davis that she married. And I'm not--I can't remember what that name was. And then she remarried, she married a Castleberry and she had a daughter, Aunt Gladiola [ph.], who helped, was around and raised--helped, not raised--but helped, was around. And the story is that that husband, the Castleberry husband, or that relation is the one who sent my father and his brothers to school. And my father went to s- college at Tuskegee [Tuskegee Normal and Industrial Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] where he studied brick masonry and blueprints and that type of thing. And then he later went on to Tennessee State [Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State College; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee] where he graduated from Tennessee State, and I actually have a picture of him, which I brought today, with his graduation from Tennessee State, and it still, it has at the bottom of it the Masonic temple [Grand Lodge of Tennessee Free and Accepted Masons], Nashville, Tennessee. So that helps with that. So anyhow, he graduated. And I don't have an exact graduation date for him, but I would assume that since he married my mother [Armenta Matthews Davis] in 1936, and he had--it was probably about '34 [1934] or '35 [1935], you know any place between 1933 and maybe 1934 or something, 1933--'34 [1934]. Speaker 1: So your father graduated from Tennessee State University-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --okay in '34 [1934]? Speaker 2: Yeah in that area. I'm not even sure of the date. It was probably '33 [1933], '34 [1934]. He graduated there prior to coming to Gary [Indiana]. Story_ID: 460062 Speaker 1: Once again are there any-- Speaker 2: Stories? Speaker 1: Yeah, old stories from the family that are passed down-- Speaker 2: Not, not as (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) about what was life was like in Nelson, Georgia and what they were doing there? Speaker 2: Not as much and then maybe I, I just can't remember right. I had called my older brother and sisters to see if they could tell me some stories, nobody got back to me. They just basically didn't even get the message probably done that. I'm trying to think, no I can't remember any, any you know, any stories. Obviously they were also, you know, sharecroppers or worked on farms or whatever. I, I don't, I don't, I don't remember. I mean, you know, there've been stories said over the years, but I don't recall. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now do you know what brought your father [Richard Davis, Sr.] to, to, to--well he came after he graduated from Tennessee State [Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State College; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee]-- Speaker 2: Yeah, he came af- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) but, but what, what brought him to Gary [Indiana]? Speaker 2: Well I believe his oldest brother, Uncle Leon [Leon Davis], who was also--Uncle Leon was a minister and he was a minister in Gary. So I believe that he probably followed his oldest brother there, and of course looking for work and job opportunity. Speaker 1: Now what was his profession, I mean what did he graduate in? Speaker 2: What--from Tennessee State? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I don't--I don't remember. I don't know. I, I and I, I--we have--and both of my parents are dead. And we have all of these papers and things, they're at my sister's house and I haven't we haven't had time to--we haven't sorted through them. Speaker 1: Okay, well he came up and joined his brother in Gary. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Is there wha- what would--do you--well what job did he eventually get? Speaker 2: Well, well he, he had a number of jobs. He taught school for a while. He quit that and worked in the steel mill as a bricklayer in the steel, steel mill. He also sold real estate, had a real estate office on 17th [Avenue] and Broadway in Gary. And he also sold insurance. And, and he and his brothers also built him and--he and his brothers along with a couple of their friends also built houses. They actually built Uncle S.P.'s [Saint Phillip Davis, Jr.] house for him. You know, they, they were trained in the building (simultaneous) -- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In different contacting arts and building arts. Speaker 2: Yes, yeah, building arts. That's what people at Tennessee S- not the Tennessee, but Tuskegee [Tuskegee Normal and Industrial Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] learned a lot back then. And he was very active in the city in terms of being a political and civil activist. He also was president of the PTA [Parent Teacher Association] of what school I went up--went to, Froebel [Froebel School; Friedrich Froebel High School, Gary, Indiana]. And he was very active, but Norton School [Horace S. Norton Elementary School, Gary, Indiana], which was another school, where they would--had housed the younger kids and they sent my younger brother there. They tried to house them in a trailer because the school was overcrowded. And they protested and everything, and were successful in getting the school built. And he also protested things like our school getting the leftover textbooks from the white schools, anything. So he was a very ac- he and his brothers were--they were activist type, you know. What--I don't--activist, I think it's a--they were civil--they were parents who really understood that they were willing to stand up and fight for their kids. Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And, and they were--yeah, that type of thing. Story_ID: 460063 Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your parents [Armenta Matthews Davis and Richard Davis, Sr.] met? Speaker 2: Yes. There's a place in--there was a place in Gary [Indiana] called the, I believe the Friendship House [Campbell Friendship House]. And if, if my memory serves me correctly, it was like maybe on 21st Street [sic. 21st Avenue], right off of Broadway, maybe 19 [19th Avenue], 21st, I can't remember. And my daddy supposedly said to my mother, "You look like an angel; if you had one more wing you could fly." (Laughter) And she bought it (laughter). And that's how they, they--it was, you know, young people then got together at these, you know, sort of like neighborhood gathering places. It was like a community center I guess you would call it (cough), community center. And that's how they met. Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay so, wo- did they get married so--soon after they met or--? Speaker 2: They got married in 1936, October 1936 I believe, October. And so I guess it was relatively soon after that. Story_ID: 460064 Speaker 1: When you think about your parents' [Armenta Matthews Davis and Richard Davis, Sr.] personalities and their talents and their dispositions, who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: I think that I have sort of the best traits of both of them. My father was a businessman, and he also looked out (cough)--he was also looked out for the community and stood up to people. I have a cousin, Alan Theodore Mays [Alan Mays (ph.)], who reminds me that he bought his first house from my father. And Alan is probably only maybe six or seven years older than I am. And that how my father stood up to the white man and, and didn't let him cheat him out of the commission. And, and he was a person who really understood how to stand up and be willing to stand your ground and take the consequences. And, and I've sort of--I, I've been a businessperson. I've learned to--how to, how to stand up for myself, and also how you can practically say or negotiate most things with people if you say it in an acceptable manner, you know. You don't have to jump up and shout and this type of thing. But on the other hand, my mother was a soft-hearted person who everybody came to share their concerns with. She was always going to take care of people. Even when she was old and in the nursing home, she would say, "Oh that poor old lady, let me go take her something." And mind you she's wheeling down to take. So I also have a bit of that too, I think all of my friends and even as, as Julieanna [Julieanna Richardson] say, who I've known for a while, we've--I've always been a person who've been very supportive to my friends and people I know, and go out of my way to, to, to, to shore up people and show them, you know, to, to be positive. So I think in both ways I take after the best characteristics of both of my parents. Yeah, and even my brothers and sisters have said that in many ways I've gotten the best of both of them. 'Cause I, I'm sort the sympathetic one in the family (laughter), and but yet I'm also the person who moved to Chicagoland [Illinois], and, and, and went up against the world and went around the world, et cetera. It's sort of on my own, you know. NBC [WMAQ-TV, Chicago, Illinois] or CBS [WBBM-TV, Chicago, Illinois], nobody sent me, I went on my own volition and achievements and, and maneuver- maneuvers I would call them. Story_ID: 460065 Speaker 1: Now do you have brothers and sisters-- Speaker 2: Yes I do (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) I mean, yeah, well can you name them and just tell us where, where you fit in? Speaker 2: Okay (clears throat). I have two older brothers and two older sisters and two younger brothers and two younger sisters. I'm kind of a middle child. My very oldest brother is Richard [Richard Davis, Jr.] who is a ja- a retired--well semi-retired jazz musician, you never retire, was a jazz musician. He was with the Air Force Reserve Jazz Band for, I don't know, twenty or thirty years after he left the [U.S.] Air Force. He lives in California and travels quite freely. I believe he's in Ohio now (laughter). He's my oldest brother. The next oldest brother is--and he's named after my father [Richard Davis, Sr.], he's Richard Henry Boyd Davis, Jr., whatever. And the second oldest brother is Kenneth Bernard Davis [Kenneth Davis]. He lives in Houston, Texas. He is a retired salesman, automobiles, et cetera. And then after that is my sister Sandra Kenne- Sandra Davis Turner, she lives in Gary [Indiana]. She's the only sis- only sibling that still lives in Gary. She is a--was a reti- she was a school teacher. She taught school for forty-four years. As a matter of fact this summer, June of 2008, they had a big retirement party for her in Gary. And she retired. Then it's me, I'm there. And after me is my brother Warren Baxter Davis [Warren Davis]. Warren lives in Toledo, Ohio. He also was an educator. He retired in September or August or whenever they do from I guess maybe thirty-some years in the university system in Ohio, having been on the faculty at Bowling Green State University [Bowling Green, Ohio] and the University of Toledo [Toledo, Ohio]. He actually ran the student development program at the University of Toledo, whatever. And then after that is my brother Michael [Michael Davis]. Michael is in the veterans' facility in Marion, Indiana [VA Northern Indiana Health Care System - Marion Campus]. He, after several years in the Marine [U.S. Marine Corps], had had some incident and he's been in the veteran facility for probably about twenty, thirty years now. Speaker 1: Was he a Vietnam War vet? Speaker 2: No, he was not a Vietnam War vet, he was--he, he was not a Vietnam War vet, I don't--. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: And then, after that I have twin sisters. My mother [Armenta Matthews Davis] had twin babies when she was forty-three (laughter). And the twins, Elita [Elita Davis Ellis-Eames] lives in California, and she is a med- in the medical field, medical transcriber does benefit things for insurance. And then her twin, Elisa [Elisa Davis], is in a development facility in Indiana. She had pneumonia when she was about maybe six months old or something and had oxidation damage, yeah, okay. So anyhow, there are four boys and four girls. And so I'm--of the four girls, I'm the second oldest girl. Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous) Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, and I also have a picture of the entire family, my mom and dad and all eight of--. There were four older kids and then they took a break, and then there were four younger kids, all by the same parents. And my parents were married, oh, I don't know thirty-five, forty years or something, I don't know. Story_ID: 460066 Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory in the family? Speaker 2: Oh, I have some early memories. Speaker 1: Is there an earliest one-- Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: --or the first thing you remember in, in your family? Speaker 2: It--well going way back, some of my memories are jogged by the pictures. I must've been only--and I--of course I don't remember this, but I look at the picture I must've been maybe a year, a year and half or two, and my brother is sort of holding me back to keep me from--keep me still while they take the picture (laughter) you know. But also there were other early memories of playing, birthday parties, we always had birthday parties. I also remember, let me see, when there were four of us we used to go to Grandmother's [Polly Smith Davis] a lot, my father's [Richard Davis, Sr.] mother. And she would cook and we'd play and this type--. We went to the park a lot. We wen- we lived two blocks from (cough) Froebel School [Friedrich Froebel High School, Gary, Indiana], which is where I started to kindergarten. Speaker 1: Now, now where did--let me ask you this, what was the name of your neighborhood in Gary [Indiana]? Speaker 2: Oh we didn't have-- Speaker 1: Was there a neighborhood name or a si- side of town name or something, or--nothing like that (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I guess, not, I don't remember, I lived over--I lived over by Froebel School, that's all I know. Speaker 1: Okay. How, how do you spell Froebel? Speaker 2: F-R-O-E-B-E-L. Speaker 1: F-R-O-E-B-E-L, is that German-- Speaker 2: Yes the-- Speaker 1: --Froebel School, okay. Speaker 2: --kindergarten master. Speaker 1: Oh so he started--Froebel is the person who started kindergarten? Speaker 2: No, no, the person named Friedrich Froebel was an educator, who had--who w- with the concept of kindergarten-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --a German educator. Yeah, I don't know when he lived, maybe in the 1800s or something, I don't know. Speaker 1: Okay, that's interesting, 'cause you know they--a lot of schools are named for him and a lot are named for, of course Horace Mann-- Speaker 2: Horace Mann, yeah there's a Horace Mann [Horace Mann High School] in Gary too. Speaker 1: Yeah, of German extraction, but, you know. Speaker 2: Yeah. Well Ge- Gary was also a very ethnic community when I grew up. You know, there were Polish, Germans, Jewish people, Mexicans, you know, and of course because of the steel mills many of the ethnic Europeans came to work in the mills. Story_ID: 460067 Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Well, (clears throat) externally the, there were many sights. I lived two blocks from a school [Froebel School; Friedrich Froebel High School, Gary, Indiana] with a big park and I also lived very close to a library, which was across the street. So we, we do that. And we went on a lot of picnics. And my father [Richard Davis, Sr.] and mother [Armenta Matthews Davis] also had a garden. We had a garden, we'd get in the car and go to this garden. And the garden is where the expressway is now. It's where I think highway 80, 90 [Interstate 80 and Interstate 90] is--that cuts through Gary [Indiana]. And we would go there and we would help garden. In the summertime we'd raise vegetables, you know, like green beans, and tomatoes, and corn and stuff like that. And then we'd can them and cook. My mother also was a stay-at-home mom and so she cooked a lot. So there was always the smell of food and this type of thing. Now, because Gary was a steel mill town, whereas I didn't smell the steel mill, you could see it. Like I said lay in the bed at night and when you looked out and you looked north you could see the sky lit up with--the hue of the sky had the--from the--blast furnaces and things like that. Speaker 1: Yeah, with ferric oxide I guess, I don't know-- Speaker 2: I don't know what it is either (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I, I guess that orange--the, the particles of iron. Speaker 2: Yeah, and, and so what it is, is you didn't see it bursting out, but it was, that was the color of the sky. Speaker 1: The sky was orange? Speaker 2: Yeah. I don't--orange-ish red or something, yeah. And, and of course-- Speaker 1: Did you think it was pretty in those days? Speaker 2: Of course I did. I mean I- I'm not, I'm not a person that what I call a revisionist, you know, people like oh this was my world, I was a kid, it was my community, my world, and you looked out and, and that's what you saw. And there was a park called Gleason Park [Gary, Indiana]. We used to go out to Gleason Park and if we were there when they did fireworks or for a picnic, after night you could see the real stars (laughter). You know, so it was on the other end of town. But that was that. And yeah, yeah, so but anyhow. You were asking me about child- (simultaneous) Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Sights--yeah, sights and sounds and smells. Speaker 2: And of course in my house there was always music 'cause my mother played the piano, my sister [Sandra Davis Turner] played the piano, I played the piano, my brother played the trumpet, another brother played the clarinet. And, and so there was always music and there was always people coming in and out for music or either business things for my father, friends of the family, relatives, parties, you know, birthday parties, laughing, et cetera. My parents also played bid whist so periodically they would have their friends over and they'd play. You--so there were lots of sights and sounds. Story_ID: 460068 Speaker 1: --Of course weddings, funerals, parades on Broadway, you know, go to the parade especially with brothers in the band you'd go. And then the things that people did in small towns in--when you grow up. You know, you play in the band and you go to music, you go toa- there was a drama club, you go to see a play or you're in a play and music. And, and school then was a full school, you know, where you had all these things. There was a machine shop, there was a cooking program, sewing. So there were a lot of sounds throughout my growing up. My [paternal] grandmother [Polly Smith Davis] sewed, so there was the sewing machine at her house. My Aunt Gladiola's [ph.] husband took photographs, so he was always taking photographs, he had a dark room. They lived on, I don't know what street it was, but it was also close to a public bus barn. So periodically you would hear the buses come and going. Oh, and I lived close to the train station--not station, railroad tracks. There were railroad tracks at about--(unclear)--oh maybe about a block and a half, two blocks away and so you could hear the trains, yeah you, and they were great crosses, what we calling them great crosses, and you'd hear the trains. Yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It seems like Gary [Indiana], I mean when you ride through--I know a number of trains go through Gary. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: They--they seem to go very close to the center of town too. I mean you can see the town from the-- Speaker 1: Well of course yes, and of course when they were built, as here in Chicago [Illinois], trains were the way people went from center of city to center of city, and that's how Chic- one of the reasons Chicago became such a hub was because of the trains, you know. And the freight trains and of course with them--in addition to the steel mills there was, I don't--I think there was some plant that made windshield wipers and other parts of things that they made. I grew up at a time, obviously I was born in the '40s [1940s], I grew up at a time when mid America was the industry capital of the world. Whether you were in Gary where there was steel or you were in Ohio where they were doing glass and other things. So, my, my sights and sounds are that of someone growing up in the heartland, and particularly in a small town that was an industry town. And you know, and, and people made, they made a good living. And also church, we--my mother [Armenta Matthews Davis]--we went to church. I was never a big churchgoer. My mother and my sisters and brothers they--we--my sister [Sandra Davis Turner] always played for the churches. But we went to church every Sunday and of course the music and this type of thing. So there were lots of, lots of sounds and stimulations, and, and conversation, you know. My father [Richard Davis, Sr.] and his friends and buddies doing, you know. Story_ID: 460069 Speaker 1: You said your father [Richard Davis, Sr.] was in--sold insurance at a certain point (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He--real estate, he, he sold-- Speaker 1: Real estate, okay. Speaker 2: --real estate and also some insurance, and, and et cetera. Speaker 1: So did he have like around him, I mean, was he connected to a group of black businessmen in Gary [Indiana] that--? Speaker 2: Oh yes. And matter of fact, there was a group and he, he also was active and I--one of the pictures I did find was him with the Northern Indiana insurance association. He was standing up there, he looked like a relatively young man. There was a group of black businessmen who helped each other. He had a friend named Mr. Ramsey [ph.], and then my uncles, they were always doing things. They actually, as I said before, they actually built houses and did repairs. And then of course he sold houses and, and this type of thing. Speaker 1: So was he good at--did they ever engage in the practice of buying a house that's kind of disrepair, fixing it up and then selling it? Speaker 2: No, not that, not, not, not that, no. No, because he also had either four, six or eight kids, so--for whom he all wanted to educate or make sure they get an education. I don't think in, I don't think in his mind he was into what we do now is real estate investment in that way. Some people did, but not, not to my knowledge, not to my knowledge no, unh-uh, unh-uh. Speaker 1: I know that's so popular now people are doing that so much, so I'm not sure about-- Speaker 2: Yeah, and of course there are a lot of things now, I mean, you know, we now have friends who are financial brokers and insurance com- I mean there was a time that the major companies--and I'm talking about a time that Prudential [Prudential Insurance Company of America; Prudential Financial, Inc.] and these people didn't hire black salespeople. When I say he sold insurance it was probably Supreme Liberty Life [Supreme Liberty Life Insurance Company, Chicago, Illinois], okay, or these type of things. I'm talking about the '50s [1950s] and the '60s [1960s], you know, for-- Speaker 1: In, in terms of real estate, I know they--many people that we've interviewed have testified to the fact that the insurance indus- I mean the real estate industry wouldn't let black people take the test, a test or if you passed it you, you were a realtist instead of a realtor or something? Do you remember that? Speaker 2: Well, I don't know--I don't know about that, but I do know from--and this is something that my cousin Al [Alan Mays (ph.)] would be able to tell you more about 'cause he really was a businessman. He got the license, he had a license that hung up there. I think that what happened in many communities, there were blacks who had license because the state said that you had to have a license. But I think (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You couldn't join the association I think or-- Speaker 2: It may have been that you couldn't be in the association, and it may have been that you didn't show properties out of a particular area. And I also would say at the time that I grew up in Gary, there--the black schools were pretty much Froebel [Froebel School; Friedrich Froebel High School, Gary, Indiana] and Roosevelt [Theodore Roosevelt High School, Gary, Indiana] and I think one or two people went to Emerson [Ralph Waldo Emerson High School, Gary, Indiana]. Lew Wallace [Lew Wallace High School, Gary, Indiana] and Horace Mann [Horace Mann High School, Gary, Indiana] were probably predominantly white schools. It was a time of de facto segregation, yeah. But--and as far as that's concerned, my brother, Warren Baxter Davis [Warren Davis], was named--the Baxter come from a doctor in the community, Lionel Baxter Johnson [ph.]. And he used to talk about that he--you know, they had the black medical association, as you well know, because the white medical association [American Medical Association] wouldn't let them join them. So they had their own. And of course they let one or two people in. So I think they were always (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, they called it the National Medical-- Speaker 2: --parallel professional organizations for black people. Speaker 1: Yeah, National Medical Association. Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yeah. They're parallel professional organizations for black people. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, all of that. Story_ID: 460070 Speaker 1: You played piano too, and, and you studied (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I studied piano. Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: I studied piano. As a matter of fact, one of my--my, my parents [Armenta Matthews Davis and Richard Davis, Sr.] were very nurturing people. We had recitals. My piano teacher was named was named Mrs. Crump [Violet Crump], and her husband was Mr. Crump [Roscoe Crump], and he was a lawyer and he played violin in the Gary Symphony Orchestra [Gary Civic Symphony Orchestra]. And she--and they were black people (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Are these white people? Speaker 2: --no these are black people. Speaker 1: These are black people? Speaker 2: They're black people-- Speaker 1: And he played violin in Gary Symphony? Speaker 2: Yeah, he looked like, Mr. Crump looked like he might have been mixture of black and East Indian, not American Indian [Native American], but East Indian. I don't know, and he could've been--and he just could've been a black, you know, we come in all shades. And she was my piano teacher. And we would have recitals, and they would be at different places downtown. And my father always told us that we should finish, and when we finished our piece we would do--we were awarded a dozen roses. So I have one little picture, I must've been maybe eight, nine years old and here's my little dozen of roses. It doesn't mean I played it perfect, it mean I finished and that was sort of his lesson, is like you're there, you're performing, you must finish and you play, and you--of course you wanted to play the best and everything else. My parents also attended many of pr- especially mother always, any other performances you had at school or anything else because that's, that was her priority. You know, raising the kids and that thing. So anyhow, yeah there-- Speaker 1: So she didn't have to work outside the home or that kind of thing? Speaker 2: No-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --no, unh-uh. Story_ID: 460071 Speaker 1: Now was church a big part of growing up? Speaker 2: Yes and no. My parents [Armenta Matthews Davis and Richard Davis, Sr.] went to church, but they sent us more often. And sometime we would go to Sunday school and then go around to Uncle S.P.'s [Saint Phillip Davis, Jr.] and play chess (laughter) or Auntie Gladiola [ph.], you know. He was--and my, my mother went. And of course she was busy raising kids too, I--you know, when you have eight children at different stages in life, you know, the first one probably in 1937, when my oldest brother [Richard Davis, Jr.] was born, and the twins [Elita Davis Ellis-Eames and Elisa Davis] were born in 1957, so that's twenty years of having babies, right. So she didn't always go, but we, we went and she went sometime too, depending upon what age and state of life. And, my sister was always or is always the one who went to church more. I, I went when I had to and sometime I didn't. And we were also in the Girl Scouts [Girl Scouts of the United States of America], our church had a Girl Scout troop. The Girl Scout troop, Mrs. Robinson [ph.] and what was the other lady's name? I can't remember her name right now. We had a Girl Scout--Brownies and the Girl Scouts, yeah a Brownie troop. And my brothers were in the Boy Scouts [Boy Scouts of America], you know. So it was--it is what we now in America call small town life, but it was what everybody was doing then. I mean everybody, I mean I know people who grew up in Chicago [Illinois] who belonged in Boy Scouts and Girl Scouts. And somehow that--we--things have shifted, and I don't wanna go into that (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What was the name of your church? Speaker 2: I was--the First Baptist Church in Gary, Indiana on 21st Street [sic. 21st Avenue], First Baptist Church. And it was a very--a bit bourgeois black church where they sang anthems and spiritual--did not sing gospel music, not the, you know, hand slapping type of gospel music. And Dr.-- Speaker 1: Baptist, okay, but they didn't--they didn't, okay. Speaker 2: No, no, no. 'Cause the Baptist take the whole spectrum. And the Reverend Dr. William Penn [sic. Robert E. Penn], he was a Ph.D. and, and they were--a lot of the school teachers and principals and doctors and people belonged there. And they sang various anthems and stuff like that. My sister, who played for churches a lot, she also would play gospel music at all the other churches. She'd go out and she actually even played for a group that used to sing with the Car- The Caravans--what--Albertina Walker and The Caravans, is that, I don't know, but-- Speaker 1: I think so, I think you're-- Speaker 2: And then there was another group that, a young group that used to warm up for them and she played, she played gospel for them. And to this day, Sandra [Sandra Davis Turner], my sister, still plays piano for churches. She has converted to Seventh-day Adventist. She plays for her Seventh-day Adventist church, she is the mus- music minister. And then she goes to another church, which is a strict Baptist church, on Sunday and plays. So she has always been very active in church and also in, in the music aspect of it. Story_ID: 460072 Speaker 1: In terms of your own trajectory in life, when did you first become aware or were you always aware of black participation in classical music and history and-- Speaker 2: Oh (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) architecture and the arts and that sort of thing? Speaker 2: Oh, I, I've always sort of known. The advantage of having parents [Armenta Matthews Davis and Richard Davis, Sr.] who grew up in the South and went to school in the South, especially at some place like Tennessee State [Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State College; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee]. This is where blacks went to school. Tennessee State, Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] and places like that. I actually even taught school with a lady whose, whose father-in-law was John Work [John Wesley Work III], the classical composer. Speaker 1: Of the John Work choral-- Speaker 2: Yes, and, and of course my church, First Baptist [First Baptist Church, Gary, Indiana], we used to have the Fisk Jubilee Singers and the Morehouse Glee Club [Morehouse College Glee Club] come at least once or twice a year or every other year or something, along with many of the other people from the black colleges [HBCUs], in addition to singing black spirituals, they also performed art songs and arias, and, and et cetera. And then my mother played on the piano things like, you know, she would play pieces and they would be pieces composed by black composers. And part of it is because this is what people in black communities did to celebrate and to support each other's creativity. Story_ID: 460073 Speaker 1: I mentioned--before we started the interview, I mentioned William Marshall. Speaker 2: Um-hm (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And just because he's, he's a such a-- Speaker 2: He's a actor from Gary [Indiana], yeah. Speaker 1: He's an actor, he has a deep baritone voice. Speaker 2: That's right. Um-hm. Speaker 1: His presence is tall and you know, he's a Shakespearian actor and such, and you know. And you know, from people's popular conception of what Gary is, you know, it seems incongruous they think of steel mills and such (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well but again, I don't--people's-- Speaker 1: But there's a different, you know? Speaker 2: Well people's popular conceptions are driven by the media and they're driven by what they see and know. A matter of fact, I had suggested to a friend of mine, who also grew up in Gary, and was the Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] appointee, Alice Dear [Alice M. Dear], and if you all haven't did a--she's someone HistoryMakers [The HistoryMakers] should do. Alice Dear was the Clinton appointee as the director of the African Development Bank [Abidjan, Cote d'Ivoire]. She grew up in Gary, Indiana and I don't even believe her parents attended, I don't think her parents were even college graduates, I don't know for sure. And she and I were talking, and I said what Gary needs to do, is they need to do their own history museum. They need to do a thing of the people who stayed there in Gary, who taught school, who run churches, who are doctors, who are lawyers, who write books, who make music. They live in Gary, and parts of Gary is a wasteland, it's a wasteland because of the economic base have shifted, but it's also a wasteland because of bad management of money prior to [HistoryMaker] Richard Hatcher being elected. But anyhow, getting back to William Marshall and Gary, there are a list of people out of Gary who've gone on and made very, very, very solid lives and contributions in every field, in every field. And, and what people do is because when the media go in--now even if they go to Gary, they'll show you the downtown, they won't go out to Indiana University [Indiana University Northwest, Gary, Indiana] or the sections that are still--in the midst of this--still contributing to nourish minds, et cetera, so et cetera. Gary has been an interesting micro study of urban cities, and in an interesting way for me because I was born there. I went to--started to kindergarten at the same school that I graduated [Froebel School; Friedrich Froebel High School, Gary, Indiana], which was two blocks from my house. I st- went to my first, first two years of college at Indiana University out Northwest, went away to Bloomington [Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana], and then came back and finished. Speaker 1: We're, we're gonna take each one (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh no, but I wanna-- Speaker 1: --but as one at a time-- Speaker 2: Okay, but okay, but-- Speaker 1: --let's just thought I'll throw that out. Go, go ahead. You didn't lose your point, did you? Speaker 2: Yeah, I did, I kind lost the point 'cause I was gonna talk about Gary being the--the evolution of Gary. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Speaker 2: The evolution of Gary. In the sense that I was living in Gary when Richard Hatcher was elected the first black mayor of Gary. The previous mayor, Chacharis [George Chacharis], was a Greek guy who had gone to prison for stealing the city in bankruptcy (laughter) practically, almost. And so in addition to the mill downsizing where it probably once employed a certain amount of people, the, the steel industry in America at one time was a dominate field, it is no longer. They make more steel other places. But what has been lacking is the management, not only of the corporations to be responsible, but also the fact that some of the leaders, the previous leaders had stole the city blind before Hatcher even took over. I mean, all the mayors that have been there pro- for the probably last twenty or thirty years are working with a half deck. (Laughter) I mean the--there's no corporate base and, and it's and even when they get something else, but it didn't happen, I'm gonna go into that. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: But anyhow, I, I was very fortunate to be there and to vote for Mayor Richard Hatcher. Story_ID: 460074 Speaker 1: So you basically grew up when it was--when Gary [Indiana] was thriving and as you got older it declined, but, but when you grew up it was thriving you're saying (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) When I grew up in the '50s [1950s] and you know, Gary was started I believe in 1907 [sic. 1906] or something, 1907, 1909. And it--when I grew up it was one of the largest steel producing places in the country, particularly in the '50s [1950s], I was born in the '40s, [1940s], '50s [1950s] and probably even into the beginning of the early '60s [1960s]. Excuse me, at that time I do believe that the industry shifted in America which made it, which made it--the economic shifted and (unclear) so the city changed. The schools changed. When I was in school [Froebel School; Friedrich Froebel High School, Gary, Indiana] I took things like Latin--in Gary, Indiana--biology, trigonometry, you know, geometry, calculus in high s- you know, and stuff like this. And I'm not sure if they offer Latin in public schools in Gary or anyplace right now, I just don't know, I don't know. So anyhow. Speaker 1: Yeah, the reason I re- I mentioned Marshall [William Marshall] because it just seemed like he was the--he-- Speaker 2: 'Cause he also grew up, he's an older guy, he grew up at a time that Gary nourished people. There was a drama club in my school. Marshall, William Marshall has to be at least 70, 80 or 90 now if's he still living. Speaker 1: Yeah, he'd be in his eighties I think, early eighties. Speaker 2: Okay so eighties. So if you turn the clock back, he grew up at a time that Gary was a thriving place. So it's not inconsistent for him to come there because he was nourished at a time that it was thriving. I am often a little disappointed that people sometime aren't able to make those distinguished, those distin- you know, distinguish. You know, he--if he's eighty now, he probably was, what's this 2000, he was in Gary in the '40s [1940s], the '50s [1950s], it was a thriving place then. Drama schools, you know-- Speaker 1: Yeah, I'm just--well I guess what I'm trying to get out is he grew up in a black community in Gary, which I'm sure he did probably in those days unless he's--is a real--is a real aberration or something. I just wondered what--what pecul- there's another fellow too named Darryl Maximilian Robinson who is younger than I am, who now teaches Shakespeare [William Shakespeare] in the public schools through Urban Gateways [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: He does the--he speaks with an English accent all the time. And I asked him, "Where you from, Darryl?" Darryl said Gary (laughter). So I mean it's a--so I said, wait a minute, William Marshall and him, and there's, you know. Speaker 2: Yeah but see what I don't understand--and this is part of my problem and frustration with the communication, is that if we are communicating something, we ought to be able to communicate that there is a variation and there is a change. And that the same principals and the same schools and the same things that nourished the William Marshall no longer exist. There is not even an auditorium class I bet in, in the Chicago Public Schools or in some of the private schools I'm not sure they still have drama classes and choral classes and Latin classes and you know, biology cl- things, they probably do have biology. But what I'm saying is it's not--in my mind, it's not inconsistent because that's what they did back then. Speaker 1: Yeah, and I--what I guess I wanted you to talk about was what kind of teachers did you have, were there special teachers, I mean and, and what was their dedication level like? I mean to--'cause they were teaching Latin and they were teaching guys like William Marshall and Darryl, who is even younger than me, and so at some point there's really--there seems to be a strong educational thing going on at least for some (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well there was--there was a strong educational thing going on as you put it, but mine started in my house. We had the great books. We had encyclopedias in the house. Library card, I lived two and a half blocks away from the library, or three--and you'd go to the library because you wanted to go and read. I grew up in a household where parents wanted you to read, they read to you. Some of my earliest memories are Mom [Armenta Matthews Davis] and Dad [Richard Davis, Sr.] reading to us, and also sitting and listening to drama on the radio, popping popcorn and listening and saying, oh man I wanna do this, you know. Story_ID: 460075 Speaker 1: You had mentioned growing up in Gary [Indiana], and growing up in the projects and et cetera. I never lived in the projects. My father [Richard Davis, Sr.] bought my mother [Armenta Matthews Davis] a house in 1947 and I was three years old. He just never lived to his--he grew--and there's nothing wrong with the projects because a number of my friends and relatives who grew up in there they went off to college too. They were people who worked, some of them were drivers, but drivers or whatever, whatever, and maybe they didn't do four or five different things, but they--people who worked and they had a vision. Getting back also to what you--you asked me what nourished me, it was clearly my parents. When you have music and you learn to read and write music, when you have books in the house and when you ask a question and they say, "Okay, go get the E book, and we're gonna look up an eel 'cause you asked me what it is," you learn. And then also sitting around the dinner table be- having dinner together every evening you had, you had to be able to s- to say something, you had to be able to talk, you had to be able to tell them what you did and they wanted to see your grades and they wanted to know what books you got from the library. Then there was also another particular thing, I loved the newspapers. And my father would also go--drive down to the bus station and get a Tribune [Chicago Tribune] on Sunday so we could read the papers. And maybe once or tw- a month or three or four times a year he'd also get The New York Times. I know people who lived in Chic- grew up in Chicago [Illinois] who never read The New York Times or the Tribune, you know. And so it was clearly having been really fortunate to have parents who saw the value of education, saw the value of experiencing growth and learning with your kids and, and, and being able to nourish them and also having a vision for them--and having a vision for what you wanted to do. So--I suspect that with those parents I had, my mom and my dad, it wouldn't have mattered whether I was in Gary or in Timbuktu [Mali] or in Ypsilanti, Michigan or in Chicago, they were clear about. We also, because we were close to Chicago though, we would also take the train in and go hear concerts. They used to have concerts in Soldier Field [Chicago, Illinois]. Band concerts, band competitions and music, and come to the theater. And at some time go look out at the top of Prudential Building [One Prudential Plaza, Chicago, Illinois], it was the tallest building in the '50s [1950s], so I don't know. Gary was a very nourishing place and as I said before, when I look through my pictures and I saw that there was a little picture of me when I was about five or six years old looking at a phonograph that was given to Froebel School [Friedrich Froebel High School, Gary, Indiana] by the parents association [Parent Teacher Association]. And then un- going on to realize all that we did in school and then seeing that yes I was in the Latin club and in the, and in the worlds affair forum, and the Y Chicas [Tri-Hi-Y] and this and that. It was about vision. It was about keeping youth and my parents kept myself and the other sisters and brothers, and people in the community. Story_ID: 460076 Speaker 1: Were there particular teachers that were special in terms of mentoring you or, or developing you at, at Froebel [Froebel School; Friedrich Froebel High School, Gary, Indiana], you know, when you were at Froebel? Speaker 2: Well, I remember I had--Dr. Cornell Bell [Cornell A. Bell] was a counselor who, not only with myself, but my--some of my brothers and sisters was very clear about us going to school, you know, helping us sort out which school would be best for what we thought we wanted to do. Speaker 1: Is this an African American man? Speaker 2: He was an African American man, Dr. Cornell Bell, African American man. Who else was at my school? I had, I had a math teacher who was a Polish guy, Mr. Smolinksi [ph.], he was my math teacher I believe, I'd have to look in my album. And then there was also Mrs. Robinson [ph.]. There, there, there were a number of teachers that encouraged you. But part of it was it was such a nurturing place and teachers wanted to be there and teach. I am not sure today that I would say that the climate in the classroom is probably the same as people having the focus on teaching and, and not so much test based and all that type of stuff. Speaker 1: Okay. So what was your favorite subject in, in school? Speaker 2: In high school, math was one of my favorite subjects and I liked languages, so I liked Latin. But I--and, and then on the other hand I liked sewing too, but math and sewing, and history. But I, I've grown to like history more as I've gotten older, yeah. Speaker 1: So you didn't like it as much then? Speaker 2: No I liked it, but I, I, I was a math major. I don't know it may have been the seduction of the space era or whatever. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Are there any-- Speaker 2: (TAPE INTERRUPTION) Speaker 1: We'll talk about Roosevelt High School [Theodore Roosevelt High School, Gary, Indiana] and some of your interests there. You said, said you were a math-- Speaker 2: I went to Froebel, I didn't go to Roosevelt. Speaker 1: High school? Speaker 2: Um-hm. I went to Froebel High School. Speaker 1: Froebel High School, oh, how did I get you in Roosevelt? Speaker 2: Because that's the school that a lot of people went to--Roosevelt was, Roosevelt was traditionally the black high school. Matter of fact, my mother [Armenta Matthews Davis] graduated from Roosevelt. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But-- Speaker 1: So where did you go to grade school, is that (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Froebel. I started-- Speaker 1: Oh so is Froebel--is Froebel a grade school and a high school? Speaker 2: It was the same building-- Speaker 1: Oh, okay, all right. I didn't understand that. Speaker 2: --yeah, Froebel High School. We started the kindergarten and graduated from Froebel. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: And then--that was when it was done that way. I don't think it--and then I don't know at what point they changed it, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, that's odd in cities, you know. In the North if you go to grade school to go all the way through high school. Speaker 2: But this was a very big building. It's a ver- it's a very--it was a very big building. Matter of fact when I pass it now I sometime think wouldn't it be nice to turn that into a art complex in Gary [Indiana] (laughter). The Froebel School, they could have a section where the artists could live and then theater and recreation. It's a wonderful piece of property and it's vacant, but no such luck, okay. Speaker 1: Okay. So who were the teachers there that, that influenced you the most at Froebel High School (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, well as I said my math teacher, Dr.--Mr. Smolinksi; the counselor, Mr. Bell, I liked; who else was it? Speaker 1: Well I was asking--I was trying to ask about grade school then-- Speaker 2: Well the grade school-- Speaker 1: --'cause I thought they were two different ones. Speaker 2: --the grade school I don't--I don't remember some of them. I looked at my picture and I saw Ms. Georgikis [ph.] was my, I guess, maybe second grade teacher. I, I just don't remember as much of my grade school. I'm getting a little senile. I, I just don't--I don't remember the names. If I, if I saw, if I had saw the names I would remember, but I don't remember. Story_ID: 460077 Speaker 1: Were you influenced a lot by radio and television and movies and such? Speaker 2: Radio, we didn't go to the movies much because I don't know, probably cost, I don't know. Radio, we listened to radio a lot. We listened to music on the radio, we listened to stories on the radio. We listened--all kind of music, you know, classical music, gospel music. My brother loved jazz. We listened to jazz music. We listened to the deejays. We listened--we listened to a lot of radio. And then of course when television, we also--we got a tel- we had a television, but I can't remember. We got it--I remember when we got color television, probably was like late '50s [1950s] or early '60s [1960s] we got a colored TV. Speaker 1: Did you have one before then? Speaker 2: We had a black and white, but we got a color one, I can't remember, what's a big one. Speaker 1: Now that was a big deal in the late '50s [1950s] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah. Speaker 1: --you having a color TV. Speaker 2: Yeah, late '50s [1950s] or early '60s [1960s], I can't remember, we had a color TV. And of course you watched television. And I can remember, I can remember watching on television when President Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] got shot. We, we watched a lot of public broadcasting. Of course, television wasn't as violent back then either. Now, and music programs, you know. But we didn't go to the movies. I don't remember going to the movies when I was young. I remember where the movie theater was, but I don't remember going. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Maybe in--I don't--maybe even in high school [Friedrich Froebel High School, Gary, Indiana], I just don't-- Story_ID: 460078 Speaker 1: Was there any segregation in Gary [Indiana] when you were growing up in terms of, I know you said de facto, but was there any overt segregation like not being served in a restaurant, split up and that sort of thing (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh no, none of that type. No, none, none of that type. No--not--and you know, again I was in the '40s [1940s] and '50s [1950s], and then early '60s [1960s]. Matter of fact, the Urban League in Gary [Gary Urban League; Urban League of Northwest Indiana] was also up on about oh I guess from 17th or 18th [sic. 15th Avenue] and Broadway. And I can, you know, I can remember working there one summer, you know, working there. Probably I was in high school [Friedrich Froebel High School, Gary, Indiana] or just out of high school. And there might have been incidents. I heard my brothers who, you know, they worked in the summer they worked in the mill or like different cousins worked in the mill. I would hear of little subtle racist things that were done to them in the mill, you know. My f- Uncle S.P. [Saint Phillip Davis, Jr.] who worked at the post office, I can remember him once telling off somebody and you know, because they said something to him. There was undoubtedly some more subtle things done to the adults. As the kids, I don't remember, I don't remember those type of things, yeah. I just don't. And, and partially, probably because I lived in a much more segregated world. Even though our block where I lived on, on Jackson Street was--there was a white guy who owned the store at the end of the--Joe [ph.] I think has name was--at the end of the corner, and one or two families there. But there, there wasn't--it wasn't, it wasn't that--they were living in the black community; the white people were living in the black community. And the whites lived out, you know-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --like along 5th Avenue or out in Miller [Miller Beach, Gary, Indiana] or out in Grant Park [sic. Glen Park, Gary, Indiana]. Story_ID: 460079 Speaker 1: Were you a good student in school? Speaker 2: Yes I was a good student, I was a good student. Matter of fact, when I kind of look back and, and read some of the things that was written in my high school [Friedrich Froebel High School, Gary, Indiana] annual, a lot of people referred to me as smart (laughter). And I was a good student. And I also took pretty--I took a college preparatory course, and so it was pretty--it was pretty hard I guess, but I studied. And I, I guess I was a good student. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now you were in high school when rock and roll hit, I think, it finally started hitting around '57 [1957], or '56 [1956] or '57 [1957]. I mean it became popular and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Unclear) '58 [1958]. Speaker 1: --kind of the record stations started--I mean the record--I mean the radio stations started changing their formats to play more, you know, R and B and that sort of thing and what they call rock and roll now then which included [HistoryMaker] Lloyd Price and James Brown and a lot of things then, now it's come--it's changed to--yeah, but. Do you have any memories of that switch? Speaker 2: Oh, not so much of the switch, I have memories of music and dancing, and I can't even right now think what the most popular song was when, you know, when I was in high school and you danced. I can't even remember. Oh man, and I often say when I can't remember it's because there's so much stuff up in my head; the attic is full from a lot of living. I can't-, I can't remember what the most popular song was. But we listened, we listened. Believe it or not the [HistoryMaker] Herb Kent, The Cool Gent was on the radio then. My brother listened to Daddy-O Daylie [HistoryMaker Holmes "Daddy-O" Daylie], who had (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now would they, they broadcast on special stations in Gary [Indiana] or did you tune in from Chicago [Illinois]? Speaker 2: No they were from Chicago-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --they were from Chicago. We did have a Gary station [WGRY Radio; WLTH Radio, Gary, Indiana] and the lady, her name was Vivian Carter maybe ha- was on the air at the Gary station. It's kind of coming back to me. But, we had a Gary station but we listened to a lot of the stations out of Chicago. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So when you were--were you involved in clubs and things in high school, did you run for class office or any of that sort of thing? Speaker 2: I didn't run for class officer, no, and I was not a cheerleader, my legs were too skinny (laughter). But I, as I said, I was active in a number of the clubs like the Y Chicas [Tri-Hi-Y], which is, I guess, like the YMCA--YWCA [Young Women's Christian Association] or so. The Latin club. I'm not sure if I was in the drama club. The world affair forum, and there was something else. They were kind of intellectual type things. I can't--maybe Future Homemakers of America [Family, Career and Community Leaders of America], which was kind of oxymoron (laughter) but. Future Teachers of America or something. I was in those type of clubs, you know and, clubs. And, yeah and I'm trying to think if I was any--I remember the athletic type of stuff, I don't think I was in any club, but I think I wanted to play tennis or something. Because the high school is such, it was such a big self-contained, and it had like a boys swimming pool and a girls swimming pool, a track and everything else. It would be the equivalent of about maybe a four-block area that it sat on. Yeah, from like Jackson [Street] to Madison [Street], maybe from 15th [Avenue] to about 13th [Avenue], so it was a big area that the high school sat on and there were a lot of things, yeah. I enjoyed going to the basketball game, of course, being in Indiana. Basketball, football, and then of course having a brother that played basketball, we'd do that too, you know. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, clubs you know. And then social clubs. I don't--not at high school, I don't remember being in any social clubs, yeah. Story_ID: 460080 Speaker 1: When you were a senior [at Friedrich Froebel High School, Gary, Indiana] then, what were your ambitions, I guess, for a career, what, what were you thinking about? Speaker 2: When I was a senior I was thinking about either working in the m- space program, or being an actuary scientist, you know, 'cause I like math and this is what people were gonna do. And then maybe being a school teacher if, if nothing else. But, and needless to say I was a school teacher, I was not in the space program and I was not in--an actuary scientist. Speaker 1: Now that's--that--now, you know, we're talking about 1962, this is the heart, I guess, of the, the Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] administration, the New Frontier we're talking about (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, that's what I'm saying, I was-- Speaker 1: --New Frontier that-- Speaker 2: --influenced, okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, he had this like a charisma when he talked about the future and got people going-- Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah, of course. Speaker 1: --is that--did, did you feel like, you know? Speaker 2: Well again, I can remember when Kennedy was elected and I also remember distinctly when he died. I was in school down at India- I was at Indiana University out in Gary [Indiana University Northwest, Gary, Indiana]. I came home and watched everything on the television. I mean I was going to school in the same city, 'cause that would've been, what-- Speaker 1: That's '63 [1963], November, November of '63 [1963]. Speaker 2: Sixty-three [1963], yeah '63 [1963]. Okay. So that I can remember just sort of being in shock. I also can remember well, '63 [1963] I can remember a lot of things. But, anyhow, I, I remember that, and I remember--my parents [Armenta Matthews Davis and Richard Davis, Sr.] supported Eisenhower [President Dwight David "Ike" Eisenhower] when we were real young, you know, like the late--early '50s [1950s] probably, early to early '50s [1950s]. I remember Eisenhower, like I mean, how I prayed. And then after that who was it, after Eisenhower who was the president? Speaker 1: Well it was Kennedy. Speaker 2: Oh Kennedy then, okay so then that's (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, and then Nixon [Richard Milhous Nixon] ran against Kennedy. He lost, he lost, yeah. Speaker 2: Okay, then that's what it was, then Kennedy. And then that's when they switched to Kennedy, and I guess that's when a lot of people switched, you know. Speaker 1: So they, they switched from being Republicans to Democrats, in '60 [1960]. Speaker 2: I'm not sure they were Republicans, I think they supported Eisenhower though. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I mean I don't, I don't remember. I know they supported Eisenhower. But, I don't know why I remember that. And of course the Kennedys, the space program and ask what you can do--not what your country can do for you, but what you can do for your country, was that type of thing I think that inspired people to want to, to be able to do something, yeah. To be able to do something, yeah. Speaker 1: So, so you were really in- interested in the space program and that sort of thing (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I thought I was, I thought I was. And then--and the strange thing also was because I was in math and the--there weren't many blacks in those programs and there weren't any--many black women. I don't even think in my high school there may only been one, I don't even think there were any black women in this class. And when I went to Indiana, I was like, I don't know. But I, I stayed in math anyhow, but I kind of decided that I didn't think I really wanted to go into the space program. I didn't wanna be culturally isolated (laughter). No, I'm just kidding. No I wasn't kidding. I mean at that time I was thinking, I don't wanna do this, that's, that's gonna be boring. Besides I, I got into wanting to, to do other things too. Story_ID: 460081 Speaker 1: How did you make a decision about what college to go to? Speaker 2: Well, this is interesting. When I graduated from high school [Friedrich Froebel High School, Gary, Indiana], I had actually got a--accepted at Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee]. But because my sister [Sandra Davis Turner] was away in her s- junior and senior year of college, I couldn't go unless I got a scholarship, so I didn't get a scholarship. So, it was given that I would have to stay home and go to Indiana University [Indiana University Northwest, Gary, Indiana], and then go off to school when she finished. Speaker 1: Okay, so Indiana University's campus in Gary [Indiana] was where you (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, Northwest. Speaker 1: Was that more of a commuter kind of school or was it--did, did they have-- Speaker 2: No, I stayed at home. It's, it's a--there probably are, I don't know I stayed at home though. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: (Unclear) for us it was the campus, the Bloomington [Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana] is when I went off to school down at campus. Speaker 1: Okay so you were there in the beginning in, in Gary? Speaker 2: Yes, my first two years in Gary. Speaker 1: Okay. So, to 1964 I guess, right? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Then, then you were off to Bloomington to--? Speaker 2: Yeah, in '64 [1964], '65 [1965], '66 [1966], I guess. Speaker 1: Okay. Well what was it like, I mean was it--was there a big difference between being in, in Gary and going off to Bloomington? Speaker 2: Of course it was, of course because I had been--I'd visit my sister and I think I'd probably been to visit other people on college campuses, I kind of knew what to expect. And of course though living on campus, it was very different. To some extent you go from a small, controlled world to a campus that then had probably thirty or forty thousand students on it, Indiana. And of course a small minority group. And--but it was exciting and of course being away at school and studying, and partying and partying and partying, I didn't always make the grades I needed to. I had very good grades when I was at home studying (laughter) then I went away, it was like--. I pledged, I think I pledged AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority] and I never did really go, I didn't go over, but I pledged. And I had a nice time, you know. And then at some point I told my--called my father [Richard Davis, Sr.] and said, "I don't think I'm gonna have good grades." See, we always had to tell the truth (laughter) and I figured it was better to tell before they got them that it was not going to be as good. And he said that was okay, that he promised us kids four years and after that you're on your own (laughter). But (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay so it's whatever you wanted to do with that four years? Speaker 2: In other words if you don't wanna make good grades, I mean what- whatever. But anyhow, I went--I spent two years down at Indiana University--was it two years? Yeah I think it was about two years. And then I came back to Northwest and I actually finished from Gary, from Northwest. Speaker 1: Okay. When--your college days, what was your major was it--? Speaker 2: I majored in math and minored in French, yeah, majored in math. And it was--it was very-- Speaker 1: Was your goal to become a math teacher or get a--? Speaker 2: Well at that time my goal was pretty much to find something in business, but I ended up teaching after--I ended up teaching school for, for several years. Because ironically, when I left Indiana University I had the hours to graduate, but I didn't have quite the grade point average. So when I came back, I was really just building up my grade point. So, I was allowed to teach in Gary as a temporary teacher while I finished up my work. And, and so I taught school from 19- probably '66 [1966], '67 [1967] on to--I moved to Chicago [Illinois] in 1970. Story_ID: 460082 Speaker 1: Now before I leave college, were there any special teachers in college or mentors in college that--? Speaker 2: Oh, heavens no. I can't remember the lecture halls and everything were so big. There were people, there were friends and I can't even think of some of their names. There were a couple of brilliant people who would help you always, you know. But, you know, Indiana [Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana] was so, was so--such a large university, you know, lecture halls. And that was probably the biggest shock, was that you go into a lecture hall and there's, what, three hundred people (laughter). Yeah, so. Speaker 1: So you didn't get a lot of attention from teachers or professors back in those days, I guess? Speaker 2: (Shakes head). Speaker 1: Was, was there any such thing as black studies in, in those days? Speaker 2: Not--they didn't have black studies then, I don't believe. I don't remember. I don't think--I don't so, nineteen sixty--for my--would've been 1962 to '66 [1966], '68 [1968], '69 [1969]. No I think that was just the beginning of the black studies type of stuff. There were activists on campus obviously and there were many activities. And ironically, Indiana University now has a black diaspora center [Department of African American and African Diaspora Studies], which I may very well donate some of my, you know, papers from the 'Classical Composers' ['The Black Classical Composers'] or 'Feminine Footprints' or the black architects project ['Design Diaspora: Black Architects and International Architecture 1970-1990']. Speaker 1: Yeah don't, don't they have a center for black music research (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: --there as well, I think, David [David Baker]--? Speaker 2: Well, the best Center for Black Music Research is here in Chicago [Illinois], but they do have a wonderful school of music [Jacobs School of Music, Bloomington, Indiana] down there. And matter of fact, Rene de [Dominique-Rene de Lerma]--the gentleman who was involved for a while here in Chicago I believe was there, I don't, I don't remember. Speaker 1: Floyd [HistoryMaker Samuel Floyd]-- Speaker 2: Not Floyd, there was a Rene de Lerma who used to be at Indiana University who came here I think to help do something, maybe not. It's interesting, again going through my papers I've found more interesting correspondence from people including one from him when he was getting ready to leave Indiana University and go out to maybe Morgan State [Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland] if I remember correctly. I can't remember exactly, you know. Speaker 1: Okay. 'Cause I know there's a man named David Baker in Indiana, and he's important (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, David Baker, he's a composer who was at Indiana University. And he may still be there if he's not retired or whatever, but David Baker, written some wonderful piece for cellists and other stuff--David Baker, yeah. Indiana has an excellent school of music. Speaker 1: Did you learn any music at--in college? Speaker 2: Oh heavens no. I was audience, audience. Of course, the best part about being at a good school like that is you get to go hear good music. No I qui- I actually quit, I shouldn't say quit, I actually stopped playing the piano when I was about thirteen or fourteen, fourteen. I, I sort of got distracted by boys or something, I don't know (laughter). But no, probably as a teenager yeah-- Speaker 1: Okay, okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I took for a long time. Story_ID: 460083 Speaker 1: You, you finished, I mean you, you finished here, back in Gary [Indiana University Northwest, Gary, Indiana]-- Speaker 2: Um-hm (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and taught in Chicago Public Schools you say, in '67 [1967]? Speaker 2: No, no, no, no, I didn't. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I finished at--in Gary [Indiana] and I taught in the Gary public schools-- Speaker 1: Gary public schools, okay. Speaker 2: --for probably several years, maybe, maybe '67 [1967], '68 [1968], '69 [1969], '70 [1970], for about four or five years, I can't remember exactly. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So about 19-- Speaker 2: I taught in Gary public schools. Speaker 1: Okay to about 1971 or so? Speaker 2: No, not 1971. I, I moved to Chicago [Illinois] in 1970. In the fall of 1970, I moved to Chicago to work for the American Medical Association. But I, I did teach in Gary and I taught some math and I taught French at Tolleston. I primarily was assigned to Tolleston High School [Gary, Indiana]. Story_ID: 460084 Speaker 1: Chicago [Illinois], American Medal- Medical Association 1970, here we are. Speaker 2: Okay, yes. I started working for the American Medical Association, 1970, in their department of community healthcare. And I wanted to come to Chicago because I had, had been spending a little more time over here. My buddy from college [Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana] had come to work for Johnson's Publishing Company [sic. Johnson Publishing Company, Chicago, Illinois], Valerie Jo Bradley. She worked for Ebony and Jet, and she was a writer. And I was teaching, I'd come over and do things, and I thought, oh I wanna move to Chicago. And I ended up finding a job about the same time that her and some other friends were leaving the city. And I got this job, which was a sort of a new job in the medical association because they were de- beginning to develop their outreach to the black community to s- and this, the department of community healthcare, was gonna look at systems of healthcare in black and other predominately--other minority low-income area. So I worked at the medical association where I staffed a couple of committees, helped with staff committees, and wrote probably the most influential thing that I worked on was a big report where they looked at thirty-three healthcare systems from across the country ranging from public hospitals, like Charity [Charity Hospital, New Orleans, Louisiana] or Cook County [Cook County Hospital; John H. Stroger Jr. Hospital of Cook County, Chicago, Illinois] or Mass General [Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts], to private places at that time like Kaiser Permanente, which is a health maintenance organization [HMO]. And this was before health maintenance organization had become in the public domain in terms of names. So I worked there for several years. And I had to go to many conventions, prod- you know, conventions like the Urban League [National Urban League], and NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] or Healthcare [Healthcare Convention and Exhibitors Association], and et cetera. And I also had to explain, if I recall correctly, some of the programs that were beginning to improve the delivery of healthcare. And in doing this, I often had to make television appearances. And, and I remember once being at, I don't know one of the stations, I wanna say Westinghouse [Westinghouse Broadcasting Company] or something in New York [New York]; I can't remember. And the producer there was getting it all wrong, so I was saying to him, "No, you should do it this way and this way and this way." And little did I know his boss was standing behind him, and afterwards said to me--brought me into the office and said, "Would you like a job here?" And I go like, no I don't want a job here, I live in Chicago, I work for the medical association. I was naive because I had just come from Gary [Indiana] (laughter) and moving from Gary to Chicago, I thought that was big. And, and besides, I didn't give it any thought. Well, probably within the la- next year or so, I had gotten the idea that I did wanna leave the medical association, and probably go into media and do something. And so I began to make calls to radio and television stations to try to get a job. Story_ID: 460085 Speaker 1: It was a bit naive on my part, just because I had been on a lot of radio programs and I had done some minor things that I would be able to get a job. And they would say, "Show me your reel." And I go, "Well I don't have a reel" (laughter). And then--I have--had a good friend that I had met at the medical association [American Medical Association], a lady named Nell Gifford [ph.]. And Nell Gifford had married a guy named Philip Rosenwald-Stern [Philip M. Stern] and his brother [Edgar B. Stern, Sr.] I believe owned some stations in s- New Orleans [Louisiana] or something. And one--and the news director from that station in New Orleans had come to Chicago [Illinois] to work at Channel 5 [WMAQ-TV, Chicago, Illinois]. And I said to him, "Well, why don't you all just get me an interview with this news director?" Ed Planer I think his name was. And they said, "Well we'll get you an interview, but we can't promise anything." So I get smart, I said what do I have to offer? And I remember something my father [Richard Davis, Sr.] used to say to us: when you get ready to negotiate with somebody look for what they want, and then also look for what they can benefit from. And so I, I went for my interview and of course the questions came out. "Where's your reel?" This is for a television interview. I had gone to a couple of radio stations and everything else, television. Where's your reel of the stories and stuff. And I said to him I didn't have a reel. That they were in the number two market in the world--I me- in Chicago--I'm sorry, with Chicago being the number two market in the United States, that if they wanted someone with a reel they could get somebody easily. From Peoria [Illinois] or any place else, people who had worked in markets. But if they wanted someone who could bring something, who had sit with history makers and who had sit with people who influenced the news, that I had just been part of a committee with the medical association, I had just done the staff work for this committee, who was working with Senator Kennedy [Edward M. Kennedy] on (unclear), which was health insurance, which we still don't have thirty years later, national health insurance. And that at that time, there were people like Senator Percy [Charles H. Percy] and other people who I could, I could get to, in terms of access. And so he said, hm, hadn't thought about that. In other words, you got an idea, you can only pick the people who have only written the news but have never sat down and watched the process, why the newsmakers make their decision, or you can get someone who has been with some of the newsmakers and understood the process. And, and, and, and so he said, "Okay, come back in a week and write me a newscast." I, I went, and I called up my friends. And matter of fact, one friend of mine who was getting a master's in communication at Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California] and had friends at work and I said, "Oh I need to learn how to write a newscast in a week." And they says, "No problem; it's easy. Go out and buy the newspapers, look at the head- look at the first two or three paragraphs on each paper." I shouldn't say this, people are gonna get mad. Two or three paragraphs and they say, "And then listen to the news, listen to what's on the news in the mor- at the 10:00 news." Sure enough you read the first two or three sentence, or the first paragraph that's pretty much what you get, and they add a little more on that. So anyhow, I came back and I wrote, I wrote a newscast. And he said, "Well I can only give you a job for the summer," vacation relief because you, you can't be in the union until after so long. So I got the job. So I worked at NBC as a news writer and I worked there for that whole, until I believe November or December or whatever. And of course I got laid off because I guess there was a recession in 1973, I can't remember, '73 [1973] or '74 [1974], yeah, there was a big recession I think. That must've been just before--was that about the time Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] was getting ready to resign or--? Speaker 2: Seventy--yeah he resigned in '74 [1974]. Speaker 1: Okay, that was just the beginning of that stuff, okay. So it was '73 [1973], so it was the next summer that he resigned. And so I, I got laid off. And I have to back up and say that-- Speaker 2: Yeah that is--there was a little recession then 'cause the gas prices-- Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: --there was a gas crisis, there was, you know, yeah. Speaker 1: There was a lot of things, yeah. Speaker 2: The speed was reduced to fifty miles an hour on the highways, remember that, fifty-five? Speaker 1: Yeah I remember that. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 460086 Speaker 1: I might add that most of the people I knew at that time thought I was crazy for taking the job. First of all, the educators thought I was crazy for leave teaching school to come to medical association [American Medical Association]. The medical association people didn't understand why I would take a permanent job and leave it to go to, to a temporary job. And all I thought is that it's another opportunity. I mean, there's something else to do. So anyhow, after I got laid off, I then began to do independent production and also do some public relations work and write. And, and it was during that time that I worked with some of the people like I believe [HistoryMaker] Jim Tilmon and other people as an independent production, et cetera. And basically I, I almost can say when I walked out of NBC [WMAQ-TV, Chicago, Illinois] in--whatever that was, '73 [1973], '74 [1974], I can't remember, '73 [1973], 1973 probably, was literally the last time I had a full-time job working for someone else. The other times have been products that I've created and produced and so--. So, anyhow, that was that recession time and I was--I remember I was living in South Shore [Chicago, Illinois] at 6700 South Shore Drive. On my birthday in March 1974, I was thirty years old, didn't have a job, I mean di- I didn't have a job, I had proj- I had clients and stuff and I was thinking, okay what's next. And, and then I began--I probably then started working on 'The Classical Composers' ['The Black Classical Composers']. I also was doing other work, you know. There are people like, I don't know, like what's the guy who used to have the film, Jim Taylor, somebody who used to have a (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Jim Taylor, yeah the Community Film Workshop [Community Film Workshop of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois]-- Speaker 1: --Community Film Workshop. They was a client of mine and Richard Newhouse [Richard H. Newhouse, Jr.] was gonna run for mayor. I was, I was working with Dick Newhouse. Speaker 2: So you were producing video content, or (unclear)? Speaker 1: No, I was doing public relations, publicity, sort of political consultant type of--publicity, public relations--communications, more communications consultant so to speak, and, yeah. And, I'm trying to think of some of the other people. See during the time I was at the medical association that's when I met Studs Terkel and all those people back in about 1970, 1971. And so that's how I met Dick Newhouse and a lot of activist type of people. It was through the meeting with Studs, and, and that group of activists, you know. And of course whenever anybody came to town who was gonna interview them, I would wanna kind of be a hanger on and sit around and listen to the interview or maybe go have coffee or something with them or a drink, they didn't drink coffee then, they drank--they were newspaper people and media people, they were pretty hard drinking (laughter). I didn't, I didn't--I--I've never been a big drinker. Story_ID: 460087 Speaker 1: Were there any black newscasters at Channel 5 [WMAQ-TV, Chicago, Illinois] when you--at NBC when you were writing (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not initially. I think, what's her name? Carole--she later went to ABC, oh she-- Speaker 1: Marin? Speaker 2: Not, not, she's a black girl, Carol Marin is not black. Speaker 1: Black, okay, I know. Speaker 2: What was her name? She was there and Muriel New- Muriel [Muriel Clair] who's on Channel 9 [WGN-TV, Chicago, Illinois] now, she was--she came in near the end of that time I was there, and I'm not even sure if they were on the air then or if they came like in '74 [1974] when I was still--I was around the station when I was doing the Tilmon ['Jim Tilmon's Our People'], it was produced there and it--even though it was produced by his company out in Highland Park [Illinois], it was taped at NBC and the merchandise (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This is [HistoryMaker] Jim Tilmon's talk show, it was an interview show. Speaker 2: --yeah and the Merchandise Mart [Chicago, Illinois]. What was Carole--there were only one or two. There were black cameramen and black audio people and stuff like that, but not a lot of them, one or two. And then there one or two news writers. But there was a wo- her name is Frida [ph.] and I can't think of her name. A wonderful producer who produced the nightly news, et cetera, a black woman, who later went to--when Ted Turner was gonna start CNN, she went to work for him. And everybody was saying, well why would you go to work for that? You know, 'cause she was leaving like NBC to go there. I can't remember her name (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh are you talking about [HistoryMaker] Carole Simpson? Speaker 2: No, Carole Simpson was--maybe it is Carole Simpson, yes, she was there working then. Speaker 1: 'Cause I know she was in Chicago [Illinois] on radio and on TV before she went to D- I mean I guess to D.C. [Washington, D.C.] or New York [New York] I guess to work with (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, well she was at NBC then, Carole Simpson. Speaker 1: And was Max Robinson doing a national (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well he-- Speaker 1: --no he did his national piece out of Chicago when it started, but I'm not sure when, was it-- Speaker 2: Well he was later, he was like '78 [1978]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --'cause I can remember, I'd say '77 [1977], '78 [1978]. Matter of fact, '78 [1978], because I can--one of the--going through my clippings, I noticed that one of the columns when I won for the 'Feminine Footprints' had a thing about 'Feminine Footprints' and also about Max Robinson. You know, it was just a gossip column type of thing. But he was later, he was '78 [1978]. Yeah, I mean he was like '77 [1977], '78 [1978], it clearly wasn't 1973 when I was in the newsroom. Floyd Kalber, I think, if I'm, I'm trying to remember and somebody else, but-- Speaker 1: Yeah, Carole Simpson was actually on with Floyd Kalber, that same show with Floyd Kalber at one time. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: So. Speaker 1: She had a story about him she told in her interview in, in Boston [Massachusetts]. Speaker 2: Well, yeah well people work--when they work very closely, then there are a lot of stories. I mean I, I imagine if, if I really sat down and thought about what happened in the newsroom I could probably think about it, I just haven't had (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did-- Story_ID: 460088 Speaker 1: How were you treated in the newsroom [at WMAQ-TV, Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: I was treated fine, other than the fact that I was naive. I mean I had never seen a wire tape machine (laughter). So I mean, you know, the professionals, you know, are like who is this person and why was she hired? And, and you know, and, and--but they couldn't figure it out because why I was hired, it was because of some friends of a friend of a friend I got an interview, but I also talked myself into it. Whereas, it was as an unlikely, unlikely--it was Ed Planer. I mean it was an unlikely person that would've hired, even though he said he didn't make the decision, the fact that he sent me over I think influenced it a little bit. Yeah, but--there were--yeah at the newsroom, I mean because the newsrooms are so time sensitive, one of the things I learned is people didn't have time to deal with people's drama and trauma. They had a newscast to get on. And if you fell over, then some of them would step over you and keep moving almost. Not, not that that happened. And then I also had to work weekends. Of course I got the lousy shifts. I worked Saturday and Sunday from three to eleven [o'clock] (laughter), and my off days were Tuesday and Wednesday, which turned out to be fine with me because it allowed me the wonderful opportunity after having such a structured type of, you know, you work, you teach school or you work for the medical association [American Medical Association] or some, then all of a sudden you have Wednesdays off and you realize there's a whole 'nother world out there. There's another world, there are people who, who wouldn't do anything on Saturday night, they leave it for the people who can't go out on Tuesday night, you know, 'cause they gotta go to work. So anyhow that was a--it was an interesting adjustment position to, to sort of do that. And friends that were recording at Universal studios [Universal Recording Corporation] at Walton [Walton Street, Chicago, Illinois], on Walton at that time, and you could go there and stay out all night with them 'cause you didn't have to go to work the next day. Story_ID: 460089 Speaker 1: You began consulting with people like Jim Taylor, Dick Newhouse [Richard H. Newhouse, Jr.] and others? Speaker 2: Yeah, just different clients. I'm trying to think who might've been (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What was Studs--you mentioned him a couple of times, but what, what was Studs Terkel like? Speaker 2: Oh he, he was, he was the m- probably one of the most encouraging and when I say formative adult friend, you know, like I was an adult when I moved to Chicago [Illinois]. I knew who I was. But he was a person who I could see to me came in as an adult and said, why don't you do this, why don't you go to the next level. Not why don't you, but here, investigate this. He was always opening up new things without any reservations, him and his wife, Ida [Ida Terkel], and other people. And even for instance like he'd have a whole stack of books in his office, his office was an absolute mess. I mean stuff every place. And I came--I would come in and he'd say, "Here, take these books and read them." And they would be interesting books. I mean I have a book ['Conversations with Kennedy'] maybe Ben Bradlee wrote on JFK [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy], signed by Ben Bradlee with all Studs' liner notes. And it's like, okay I'll read it and I read them, and then I'd say, "You want them back?" He says, "No you can keep them." So I mean I, I consequently have a number of books that, you know, the Toni Morrison book that she gave to Studs. I mean Studs is dead now, he couldn't use it anyhow, but he wanted me to read it. I didn't know who Toni Morrison was in nineteen-s- maybe '73 [1973] or '74 [1974] or '75 [1975]; most people didn't. But he interviewed her and loved her writing and wanted me to read it. So it's what I call one of the formative adult friends, you know. Just somebody who, who was a friend who, who wanted to see you grow and expand and nourish. Story_ID: 460090 Speaker 1: Now in Chicago [Illinois] at that time, I know from other interviews, 'cause I wasn't here at that time, but from what I've heard, there was a lot of mentoring going on in terms of--Gwendolyn Brooks, Hoyt Fuller [Hoyt W. Fuller] and others got involved with the Organization of Black American Culture, r- the old OBAC writers. People who were involved in drama in that group, you know, and visual arts. But the writers are the ones that people remember now from that group. But, but there was a--black books stores were developed and you know, publishing, you know, poetry became big, visual artists and AfriCOBRA [African Commune of Bad Relevant Artists]-- Speaker 2: Yes, AfriCOBRA movement, yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) would paint murals all over. Were you a part of--did, did you consider yourself part of that, that movement when you were--? Speaker 2: Yes and no. Yes in the sense that I was congealing my own items of what I wanted to say about the black community and what I wanted to get out there and what information I wanted to. No in the sense that I was not formally part of any movement, you know. I was writing about black composers, but they weren't interested in composers, it was too white for them, even though they were black people writing black music about so and so. And so it, it was an interesting thing because I know some of the AfriCOBRA people and I know Calvin Jones and different people. I mean I supported them. I went to the South Side Community Arts Center [sic. South Side Community Art Center, Chicago, Illinois]. So I was physically supportive where I'd go and see the things. But when it came to my own work, it, it, it was a bit ahead of the curve, a bit ahead of the curve for a lot of folks, you know. It was, it was that segment and, and, and not only that, but even with architects and things, it's that segment which have been a little slower for some of the, the movements to embrace-- back then, now it's a little bit different. And of course I wasn't a Chicagoan, and so I met people and I participated, but I also I, I kept a pretty broad umbrella for myself personally. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Well-- Speaker 2: And I was trying to get programs on the radio and they were trying to get programs on the radio, except we were trying to get different type of programs on the radio. Story_ID: 460091 Speaker 1: Which of your three big projects came first, was it the-- Speaker 2: 'The Black Classical Composers' (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Black composers, okay. Speaker 2: --came first. I worked on them probably '74 [1974], '75 [1975], and they started on the air on seventy--1976. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: 'Black Classical Composers,' 1976. Speaker 1: Okay so you had to go back two hundred years and you started with composers, black composers from 1771 to-- Speaker 2: Seventeen seventy-one [1771] to 1975. Speaker 1: --nineteen seventy-five [1975], okay. So who were-- Speaker 2: I mean there were instances like le Chevalier de Saint-Georges. This is a black man who lived in Paris [France] and they named him head of the Paris Opera and they found out he was black, they took it away from him. Okay, so I don't see that as any different as (laughter) what goes on other places. There--one of the interesting things for me have been that the pervasiveness of racism, which was created. I mean, you know, as I say to people, you know, dogs can't mate with giraffes because they different species, you know. Human beings across the millennium have mated with people as they travel, whatever reasons they travel for commerce, missionary work, or adventure. You know, they, they mate with other human beings because they all one species, human beings, you know. But anyhow, le Chevalier de Saint-Georges and then there was--there are people like William Grant Still who is an American. David Baker, you mentioned. They're, they're just [HistoryMaker] T.J. Anderson, I think, I don't know some of them may even be dead now, but there were people whose--John Work [John Wesley Work III]. There were people whose music I had heard and who--whose music was performed in black colleges and universities [HBCUs] and choirs. But the people who ran the classical music stations here in Chicago [Illinois] didn't even know some of them existed. And, and matter of fact, the program directors and people where Studs [Studs Terkel] work, I was saying to them, I'd go in, I mean I'd go in and say to them, "Why don't you all play some of this?" "Well there aren't any black composers." Well I ended up selling it to the competition. It was not on WFMT [WFMT Radio, Chicago, Illinois], it was on WEFM [WEFM Radio], which was their competition. And it was sponsored, it was sponsored by Commonwealth Edison [ComEd]. And one of the things, it was interesting for me because they misunderstood me, they thought I was much--there was--there was probably some misjudgment of the fact of me considering what I was doing was important to me that they did not have the option to tell me whether it was or was not. And therein lies a very important thing for myself, I mean it was important to me. Because you don't want it doesn't mean that there isn't a market for it. And so I sold it to the competition. They bought thirty-nine one-hour programs. And then the next project wa- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Thirty-nine one-hour programs, that's, that's-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --that seems significant, you know, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah. And they were programs that took different topics. Like I would look at two symphonies written 150 years apart, two symphonies written 150 years apart by black men. Operas, you know, people--I have not seen the current production of 'Porgy and Bess' [George Gershwin], I do hope to see it. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: Our, our cameraman saw it, our, our videographer, right here, I just thought I (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, I'm an opera buff, I've seen opera all over the world. And what I--my whole point was going to be that I think that I would love to see the Lyric Opera [Lyric Opera of Chicago] do 'Treemonisha' by, you know, William Grant Still [sic. Scott Joplin] or something or there're, there're operas written by blacks in the operatic form that are as sensitive and--to me they could be performed too. They like 'Porgy and Bess,' you know. And it's, I mean I, I, I go to--I've been to opera on five continents so it doesn't matter. I, I will go when I want to see the production. But I would love to see, I would love to see some more productions of things written by blacks. And they don't often--and I know of some composers of works that are written by blacks about blacks or not about blacks. If white folks can write operas about black folks then black folks can also write operas about white folks. But anyhow, 'The Black Classical Composers.' Story_ID: 460092 Speaker 1: And then the second--then I did the 'Feminine Footprints' series in 1998 [sic. 1978] was when it debuted. And it was on Mutual Black Network and in many ways Mutual Black Network was--it was literally one of the early black radio networks that went from coast to coast. It was on-- Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: --about ninety-one stations and Mutual Black Network, and it won an award from American Women in Radio and Television [Alliance for Women in Media]. And it included sixty-five one-minute documentaries on black women who left their feminine footprints in American history. Again, when they were doing the bicentennial minutes during the bicentennial I tried to get people to do this, you know, and they, you know, they didn't wanna do a focus on--. I think and I thought well if they don't wanna do it, then I'll do it, you know. And they vary from the first woman who, black woman, who was the treasurer who signed the American money to some of the first wo- black woman who was the first superintendent of schools here in Chicago [Illinois], a black woman I think Love [HistoryMaker Ruth Love]. There were all types of women who were first in what they were doing. And for me, it's not so much that they were a first because they had just now risen to the occasion, they were first because the roadblocks were there prior. Story_ID: 460093 Speaker 1: I think we wanna talk about Scott Joplin at a certain point as author of 'Treemonisha' (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Of 'Treemonisha,' yeah the Scott Joplin, yeah. Speaker 1: He's popular for ragtime, but he was also a classical composer? Speaker 2: Yes, absolutely, and, and a number of wonderful pieces and led, led an extraordinary life. Speaker 1: He never got a chance to see his opera performed-- Speaker 2: Performed, not completely, no. And one of the best performances I saw of 'Treemonisha' was oh, maybe fifteen, twenty years ago now with the Houston Grand Opera company with (unclear). It was a lovely performance. But, yeah, 'Treemonisha.' Speaker 1: Now historical pieces, a lot of black composers have chosen, you know, black historical themes, I know recently there was a opera based on the story of Margaret Garner ['Margaret Garner']? Speaker 2: Yes, that's the one that--but he--to my knowledge the composer [Richard Danielpour] is not black. Speaker 1: Oh I thought, okay. Speaker 2: The lyr- it was based on Toni Morrison's novel ['Beloved'], but he, he is not black. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, but the theme is. Now I also happen to know there are a number of wonderful composers that live, just every place, and one of them lived in Berlin [Germany], who's a guy from Chicago [Illinois] and probably somebody maybe you all should interview if you haven't. Maurice Weddington, who's a composer who has done some extraordinary pieces (clears throat) with all kinds of instruments and his tribute to Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] is instrument--European instruments, wonderful orches- light orchestration and a mixture of dance and Chinese screens. In other words, the--. So anyhow there's so many wonderful things that very modern, modern cutting-edge composers are doing that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Is this an opera, the, the tribute? Speaker 2: Well he's--it's classical music. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He, he--it's not an opera. I don't know how far he's gone, if he actually completed it. But he had--it was performed, part of it was performed at the Art Institute [Art Institute of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] several years ago, et cetera. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite classical composer? Speaker 2: No, unh-uh. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No. I tend to not have favorites 'cause I--there are people who do a lot of things well, you know. And I am--I like all kind of music, I like piano music, I like arias, I love opera. I love different things. So I don't really have a favorite. I mean, you know, it's sort of what mood I'm in, you know. Speaker 1: Okay. That makes sense. Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, music is for m- music is my mood music. And you know, music is for my moods, it's my mood medicine. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Some days you need a little, some days you need a lot. I like that mood medicine, I hadn't even thought about that. Speaker 1: Explain mood medicine to me, I-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) Music. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Music is my mood medicine. You know, you wake up one morning and you're in a mood and you wanna hear s- this music. And it's sort of--I should say a mood tonic or something, it, it just sort of goes through you. And another day you wanna hear something else and some days you may wanna hear James Brown, you know. I don't know, it's, it's, it's, it's you know, it's there. Speaker 1: So there's a healing kind of a aura, I mean therapeutic quality (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, it, it reverberates through my soul. To quote the French composer Berlioz [Hector Berlioz], music and the love are the wings of one's soul. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Music, I mean I, I love music. Story_ID: 460094 Speaker 1: In terms of the women that you picked [for 'Feminine Footprints']--you said thirty-five one-minute-- Speaker 2: Sixty-five. Speaker 1: Sixty-five one-minute pieces on radio. Which is, you know, one, one minute can be a long time on the radio, depending on how it's done I mean (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, if you're a good writer it's not so long. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. Speaker 2: And, and most of the women, when you think about it, women who left their feminine footprints, their stories aren't short stories, you just need to edit it down and get to the point, you know. Speaker 1: Well who were some of the women that you covered (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh it's--that's been literally thirty years ago. I have a list. I mean in, in theory--they were on the air in 1978. Some of the women were--and I can't think of the name, the first woman who signed the mu- the money in America, they were ambassadors, they were school--you know, they were doctors, they were dentists, they were businesspeople, they were educators, they were fashion designers. I remember interviewing a lady, who she was not necessarily the first but she was a, a current fashion designer at that time. I--it's, it's again my mind is just sort of so full of so much I can't br- pull the names out of the air right now. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, but I do have a list of them obviously in the program. Story_ID: 460095 Speaker 1: The third big project is the architecture project? Speaker 2: Yeah the black architects. 'Design Diaspora: Black Architects and International Architecture' ['Design Diaspora: Black Architects and International Architecture 1970-1990']. And again I saw a void in the knowledge of--void in the information about the contributions. And although blacks had graduated from architecture school in 1892, it seemed that every time I would ask someone in my architecture circles they didn't know of anybody old, living or dead. And I just--I've always liked buildings and beautiful things and architecture and design, et cetera. And I actually became a docent with the Chicago Architecture Foundation [Chicago, Illinois] probably 1981, '82 [1982] or something. I don't give tours anymore but I used to, you know, give tours, et cetera. And, and continued to read and go to lectures and take seminars on different aspects of architecture. And again noticed the void. I was also on the board of a small museum here in Chicago [Illinois], a museum of architecture and design [Chicago Athenaeum, Galena, Illinois], and there, there were no, you know, there just weren't anything shown by blacks, although there were blacks--as I used to say to a guy--they're building, you know, Johnson Publishing Company on Michigan Avenue [Chicago, Illinois] was built--was designed by Moutoussamy [John Warren Moutoussamy, Sr.] and had been open for what--I don't know--thirty, forty--it's been open for a long time, at least, at least about thirty years, right? Yeah, I, I, I just know it's a long time, I can't keep dates in my head (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now Moutoussamy, he was a--I know he's the father of [HistoryMaker] Jeanne Moutoussamy-Ashe who-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --married Arthur Ashe. He was responsible for a number--I think, oh god oh, there's a number of buildings here that, yeah-- Speaker 2: He was a well-known architect here. He also was a partner in the firm [Dubin, Dubin, Black and Moutoussamy, Chicago, Illinois] that was--I think it was Moutouss- anyhow he was--I can't call it off my head right now. But a number of projects that he was one of the leading, a well-established architect, black architects in Chicago. And since then, there've been a number of them. And--and the field has changed a lot. My project dealt with architects from around the world who are all licensed architects and built projects. And it didn't include everyone, people had to submit their work. If they wanted to be considered they had to submit it. And we got, oh probably about three hundred submissions and from the three hundred submissions, fifty projects were selected. And fifty projects but I don't remember how many studios--but I'm sorry seventy projects were selected by maybe thirty-eight studios or whatever. And represented architects in Canada, United States, Caribbean, and Brazil, as well as England, France, Amsterdam [the Netherlands], South Africa, the first architect to be licensed in South Africa, Peter Malefante [sic. M. Peter Malefane] who is now dead. Senegal, Nigeria, Cam- I think Cameroon, I can't remember. And so I knew, and it was literally the first time somebody could walk into a room and look around and see the picture of this black--of this black face or person of color and their built project and some information about them. And I often vacillate between saying people of color and black, because in certain countries like Brazil, people don't like to call themselves black, they'll say I have African ancestry, but you know, they--it's a country with I don't know a couple hundred words for variations of being black, so. I let people decide themselves whether they wanna be included or not. And Pedro Rocha which is--and I don't know how he's doing but one of the established architects down there who had done some wonderful residential, as well as some religious facilities was included. Story_ID: 460096 Speaker 1: I know we've interviewed a few architects here, John Chase [HistoryMaker John S. Chase] down in Tex- Texas (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I know John Chase, yes, yes, yeah. Speaker 1: The McKissacks [HistoryMaker Cheryl McKissack Felder and HistoryMaker Leatrice McKissack] out of Nashville [Tennessee] who are like--they're in different cities now, but they, they started in 19th century? Speaker 2: Yeah, they've been around. They're one of the oldest firms [McKissack and McKissack] in the country. Speaker 1: Right, right, right. There's another man in Wichita [Kansas] we interviewed, I can't remember-- Speaker 2: McAfee, [HistoryMaker] Charles McAfee. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, Charles McAfee, right, right. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. So, now was your association with Richard Newhouse [Richard H. Newhouse, Jr.] had any--did that have anything to with (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, no, no, absolutely not. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I shouldn't say absolutely not. I knew Richard Newhouse when he was a state senator. About the time I gotten into my architecture period, I didn't know him p- I mean I didn't see him. The Chicago Architecture Foundation [Chicago, Illinois] runs a competition, which is the Newhouse Competition [Newhouse Architecture and Design Competition]. I've been on the jury of the Newhouse Competition for maybe four or five times. I was on it earlier this--I think it was earlier this year, yeah earlier this year. That competition to me is--I think it's admirable that it has Newhouse's name on it. I, I find it very disappointing that it's something that seldom, if ever, presents anything of black architects. They give kids, you know, and it's for students and school kids in Chicago [Illinois] to tell them buildings to draw and it's a competition for them. It is not structured, to my knowledge though to, to further their knowledge on the contributions of black architects. Speaker 1: Okay, well yeah. But I think what--from what I understand he's trying to encourage the development of, of young black architects and other minority architects. And someway associated with NOMA, the National Organization of Minority (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The National--I'm familiar with the National Organization of Minority Architects, which has a student program and also does encourage students in all--across the country. In their chapters, they do, they do--have programs and charrettes, and, and encouraging and also one of the--one of their members who's been very big in nourishing young architects is Jack Travis out of New York [New York], who is also someone you should probably interview if you haven't. And Jack is a, a, a, been very, very active in nourishing architects, putting Afrocentric type of things in architecture, et cetera. NOMA is that parallel organization to the--for architects, like we had the national organization for black architect- for black--you know, black lawyers, black accountants, black dentists, and, and so the National Organization for Minority Architects [National Organization of Minority Architects], as you mentioned people like McAfee and Chase and them, they started it because they were not members of the American Institute of Architects, or if they were members, they, they felt they needed their own organization to, to further their roles. Story_ID: 460097 Speaker 1: Is there any particular work of architecture that you--I mean or what works do you think are most impressive by black architects around the world, having looked at so many, probably more than anyone else maybe at one time, I don't know? Speaker 2: Well, I would say that I probably am at the forefront of lecturing and presenting information on black architects. This year alone, I have spoken in January at the National Building Museum [Washington, D.C.] on contemporary architecture across Africa. It did not just include black architects, it also included other projects. Then in--I spoke to the Boston Society of Architects on black diaspora architects, including only black architects. And then about two weeks ago, the day after the election, November the 5th, I spoke at the Chicago Architecture Foundation [Chicago, Illinois]. I was still a bit intoxicated with Obama's [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] election but I got through my lecture (laughter) anyhow. I spoke to--on the black diaspora architects. I don't really have a favorite one again because they are so different. The architect that's practicing in America has a very different political, economic and cultural climate in one--and just for instance, in America, there's probably 1200 or more, maybe less than, some 1200 to 1800 to 2000 black architects out of 118 or 120,000, so it's less than 2 percent. But in England, there's probably maybe less than 200 black architects. So the climate from which they practice in is very different. In France, I doubt if there's 50 black architects, there're probably not even 10, okay, that are practicing. But the people who practice have good pro- the people that I've been able to connect with have good projects and projects that I've co- presented. Germany, there's black architects and Amsterdam [the Netherlands], there's a fabulous guy in Amsterdam, Lucien Lafour who's doing embassies and these type of thing. So the climate that everybody practice in is very different. Africa, there's--I spoke--there's a large number of African architects. Now even though at, at the height of decolonization, when many of these--when the European powers pulled out of many of these countries, at some--at one time there were no licensed architects, now there, there are a number of ones. Matter of fact in 1995 I spoke to the African union of architects [Africa Union of Architects] at the Jomo Kenyatta center [Kenyatta International Convention Centre] in Nairobi, Kenya. And the project was, I believe, shown then in the University of Nairobi [Nairobi, Kenya]. Although one--only half of the show opened, one crate went to London [England] and other crate when to Nairobi, so you get there and you don't have your exhibition. But anyhow, the--so all this to say it's very difficult to have favorite-favorite. There're extraordinary projects done by some of the Africans because they know the president of the com- country. If you know the president of the country you get the be- you get to design the bank for the country or the embassy for the country. You know, it would be like you getting to design Citibank here, it's not gonna happen in America right now, okay, but may happen in Senegal. You know, you design the bank of the economic community of the West African states or et cetera. So it's, it's just the climate is very different. Story_ID: 460098 Speaker 1: What I hear you're saying is very important, there's a direct power relationship between building and, and pol- politics, who's in charge and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, no. Speaker 1: --what gets built, and who gets a chance to build it? Speaker 2: No what I--that is not what I'm saying. Speaker 1: It's not? Okay. Speaker 2: I'm saying there's a direct correlation between who controls the money. Sometime the powerful people control the money and the same and sometime they don't. Here, well here in America, we have a lot of power, I mean we have a lot of power and we have a lot of money. But in certain instances some of the black people who could afford to hire white architect- I mean could afford to hire a black architect didn't. He just didn't, okay. Although--quite frankly the black architects in America would be doing extraordinarily well if even one-fifth of the black basketball, baseball or football players hired them (laughter) okay. So I'm not gonna go off on to this--but, but it is a direct relationship between the economic power, the money and the architect. Now, in the instances where the economic power and the political power are the same, which is in Africa a lot, then you get to do those things, you know. Here fortunately as I've seen in many instances when we got black mayors, more blacks got an opportunity to do some building. Of course, again, black economy is what--I don't know $800 billion economy in America, we could hire more. Just sometime people chose not to. And also there are a number of black architects who work for majority firms, they work for big white firms, and many of them are doing extraordinary work. I do keep up with them, but I don't present their work quite as much, and I am gonna start including a little more of their work in there. Mainly because I chose to focus on the black architect who has his own studio, much like Julieanna [Julieanna Richardson] here. I mean it would be one thing you're doing a database for The HistoryMakers. It would be another thing if you were doing a database for CBS or for Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. There's the whole process of the entrepreneurial spirit that I respect, which is one of the reasons why I focus on black-owned studios. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah. But--and which is very important to my spirit and I think part of that is the way I grew up, and also the legacy of our parents. To some extent, our parents grew up in an area--era where they did a lot more businesses with black businesses which kept us very strong as a community. And, and some of that was dissipated for many reasons. But then there's always been the entrepreneurial spirit of those in the community who train and go out and, and prepare themselves. And I like to salute those spirits. Story_ID: 460099 Speaker 1: Have you noticed any themes or motifs that run through black architecture from the diaspora that are-- Speaker 2: No. One of the things too, and I--and when I lecture I point it out, architecture is one of those disciplines as an art and a profession that is contextual. You do it in the context. If you live in Chicago [Illinois] you have an aesthetic that is sort of Chicago, and maybe there is some African themes that a black architect would pick. But if you're black, an American in Chicago, I mean what do you want, do you wanna look like you're in Kenya or you wanna be Ghanaian, or you wanna be Nigerian, or you wanna be black African or what? And besides it may not fit. And in some instances people do put things. Jack Travis has done a number of things in New York [New York] where he's used some prints on the outside of two buildings in Harlem [New York, New York]. And another architect has put some--but they're in Harlem and that's what the people wanted, they wanted to show the Afrocentric. Africa is a vast continent, over fifty some countries and whatever. It's like what's Eurocentric. Italian looks different than the French, the French look different then the Dutch. So, there is really in my mind no Afrocentric. There's things that look Ghana--Ghanaian. There're things that look like they are from Nigeria. There're things that look like they are from South Africa. There are things that look Kenyan or m- like Maasai. So, contextually, architecture really need--the best architecture need to be of place, it need to be locally in place. Blacks who design in England, their things, some of them look like other English designers. French, Dutch, et cetera. In those communities that want to have things to pay homage to their heritage, then they do put, you know, architectural ornaments. There are places in Africa, of course, that they design, but then they've had master builders for years who built what they needed, they don't need to have Afrocentric added to their stuff in Nigeria, they're in Africa (laughter). So it's an interesting concept. It's a question that I often get and particularly when I talk. And I do show things that have Afrocentric, but I also show a wonderful museum that looked like it could be built by anybody, just happened to be a black museum built by a black architect, you know. So the contextual aspect of architecture is most important in terms of the presentation and also honoring the client. 'Cause architecture--one other comment you had mentioned AfriCOBRA [African Commune of Bad Relevant Artists], and there all these other--. The difference between Afroc- between art and architecture is basically that you can be an artist and you make whatever you want and you have a show and people come in and select from your creativity. As an architect, your client hire you to design what they need. And architects are much more sought after when they give the client what he needs, not impose, you know. And that's the real difference. I mean, you know, you don't go in--of course you can buy a house that someone has already done, but if you're a sculptor, you build a piece of sculpture. You build twelve pieces and some people come in they like it. If you're an architect, you wait for a client, you sit down with him and your client tells you what he needs, how he's gonna use his space. How--he's got twelve kids, how he's gonna use them, et cetera, et cetera, and you design for that specific need. Story_ID: 460100 Speaker 1: And that's the easiest way to s- to different (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well you know the old Ayn Rand argument, what the book, 'The Fountainhead' [Ayn Rand]-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --that the architect does whatever he wants and then, you know, for art sake--and I don't know, there's-- Speaker 1: Well you know what if your name is Frank Gehry you can do that. If your name is Rem Koolhaas you can do that. If your name is Zaha Hadid, Tadao Ando, you can do that. I mean Frank Gehry came and said this is what we gonna do. But if you're somebody else, you--you do what the client wants you to do-- Speaker 2: But do you-- Speaker 1: --or you don't have any clients. Speaker 2: But do you get to be Frank Gehry by, you know, I mean how do you get to be Frank Gehry though? Speaker 1: You find a client who shares your vision. You find the client who shares your vision. Matter of fact, there's a, there's a fascinating gentleman who lives in, lives in Europe who I see at the Pritzker Architecture Prize every year. And I said to him, I think perhaps maybe last year or this year, I can't remember whether I mentioned we're in London [England]. I said to him, I says, "You know, you ought to really share the prize with all of these, but without your Zaha Hadid or Herzog [Jacques Herzog] and de Meuron [Pierre de Meuron] and many of these people wouldn't have built projects, you commissioned them and let them do what they want to." He smiled and he said, "I hadn't thought about it." Because they found a patron who said okay I just need a house, you come up with what you think, or I need a building--you know, they do it within a program. But they are very lucky to find somebody who say, "You do what you want." Or in many instances now people like Frank Gehry, they know what he give and they say I like his look I want him or I like Renzo Piano who is doing the Art Institute [Art Institute of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] here. I like his look, I'll go to him. There are a number of black architects, in particular I think of Pierre Goudiaby [Pierre Goudiaby Atepa] out of Senegal who at a time people would come to him because his stuff was so over the top and they knew that he would deliver. He was trained here in America as an engineer and an architect. And there are other people who do steady good work. And often the projects they get are public projects, you know, they're schools or housing things or government buildings and there are constraints, there are budget and design constraints. Story_ID: 460101 Speaker 1: One interesting aspect of what you do is probably, I probably have not asked about, but how do you--all these di- I mean you got three diverse major projects we just discussed and, and yet you didn't really go to school for any one of these specific projects, so, so how do you--at least I'm assuming you didn't, I mean from what I've heard so far, I don't know. I mean so, I mean so did you launch into an intensive independent study to, to figure out who are the black architects or who--how do you approach? Speaker 2: Precisely, precisely. It's whether you went to school or not you start what with research. I mean people write their dissertation, where do they start? Research. I started with research on all these projects. Of course I knew there were black composers and I knew some of them, but I know--I didn't know all of them, and I still don't know all of them. I still never learned all of them. The more I researched the more I realized that I didn't know anything. And I, I see my work, whether it's the classical composers ['The Black Classical Composers'] or the women ['Feminine Footprints'] or the architects ['Design Diaspora: Black Architects and International Architecture 1970-1990'], I see my work as a catalyst. I want my work to be the type of catalyst that will encourage other people to join in and help me un- unfold this body of knowledge of achievements, document it and celebrate it. There can't be enough people out there, as you well know, who could name us black composers. As we talk today, there's some composer doing something I don't know about, I mean I don't know about. Women, there are black women, needless to say in the thirty years since I did that project I could do another one, I could ten of them, black women are doing everything then. And so--and even with the architects when I--and it has been now fifteen years since that project was launched and, and it did serve as a catalyst. It, it to some extent embarrassed the architectural industry because nobody wanted to do it. I did it and it turned out to be tremendously successful with, written up in Progressive Architecture, New York Times [The New York Times], German publications, French publications, Engl- the whole-- because people were curious about the knowledge of the achievements of blacks. And, and so I do think that it is important that the work is considered to be a catalyst and not a definitive statement. Story_ID: 460102 Speaker 1: What's the next step for your work? Speaker 2: The next step for my work right now is that pretty much the last fifteen more years I've been more focused on architecture, and particularly architecture of the black diaspora, although I write on other architects and I have been published on people like Tadao Ando and Sverre Fehn, and I don't know Christian de Portzamparc, et cetera. My focus still is on trying to document black diaspora architects so I am working on compiling a book on 21st century architects from the black diaspora. But only a book that is to serve as a catalyst. Because I've learning in doing these type of things I won't take maybe twenty-five architects and as I work on those twenty-five, hopefully another twenty are being born with wonderful projects and everything else. So I see my work as a, a catalyst, and, and that's what I really hope to finish compiling a book that will look at more contemporary projects. When I look at contemporary, I'm talking about things that have been done probably in the last ten to twenty years, nothing older than that, or maybe twenty-five, depending upon who they are. Black architects, licensed architects in the Americas, meaning North, South, Central Americas, Afro-Europeans and Africans. And fortunately there are growing numbers of architects, particularly in Africa. And even in Europe, 'cause many Afro-Europeans, not vast, but growing a little bit, not a whole lot. And in America, we continue--we continue to have a strong, a strong group here. And matter of fact, you had mentioned the National Organization of Minority Architects. In Eu- in England they have a Society of Black Architects, which is now only probably about, oh maybe about fifteen to twenty years old. And there was even a friend of mine, Annette Fisher, who's a black architect who ran for president of RIBA, the Royal Institute of British Architects, several years ago. This wouldn't have happened twenty- twenty-five years ago. So the times are changing and it bespeaks of our, you know, the 21st century and our--the globalization. Story_ID: 460103 Speaker 1: Does Chicago [Illinois] have a--I know you mentioned Moutoussamy [John Warren Moutoussamy, Sr.], and I think I heard (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh don't go-- Speaker 1: --I was reading one of [HistoryMaker] Lee Bey's articles I think in the Sun-Times [Chicago Sun-Times]. He mentioned the architect of the Chicago Bee Building [Chicago, Illinois] I think which is still standing. Does Chicago have a significant history of African American architecture? Speaker 2: Yes it does. Matter of fact, two of Chicago's leading architects have died within the last year. I was--William Brazley [William E. Brazley] passed within the last two weeks, and then [HistoryMaker] Wendell Campbell, Wendell Campbell was one of the founders of the African--excuse me, one of the founders of the National Organization of Minority Architects. Chicago has some wonderful architects. I think of s- Johnson [Philip Johnson] and Lee [Christopher Lee] who did the Kennedy-King College campus [Chicago, Illinois], which is probably one of the leading--currently one of the leading black firms here in Chicago. And then there are others like Anthony Akindele who's a young Nigerian architect who's come here and has established a wonderful practice. And then there are also a number of architects that are in major firms here. I think of--there're, there're a number of architects in major firms, not a lot, but a couple of young black ones who are doing very well. Carol Lejeune [ph.] is one I think of, Carol Lejeune rather, and Dave Walker [David Walker]. I mean there're just a lot of ma- I would go forever--not a lot, but--. And then also, we haven't mentioned black women architects. Black women architects, there are a number of them practicing here in Chicago and--and Wa- in New York [New York] there's a lady named Roberta Washington who has now been running her own architectural firm for maybe twenty-five years. She is--it's her firm, it wasn't handed to her by a father or a brother or uncle, anybody, it's her firm. And she may also be someone for your database if you haven't done. So there're a number of women architects and black women architects. Sharon Sutton [Sharon E. Sutton] is somebody I think maybe you all have done. They're either in academia--a lot of them in academia, but many of them also have their own practices. Not many, but a few of them have their own practices and are continuing to, to work--do good work and to con- being able to keep a studio open, you know, commissions. And it'd be interesting to see who weathers this current economic climate. Story_ID: 460104 Speaker 1: What has been the response to your, your, your three major works, how did people respond? How-- Speaker 2: What do you mean what is the response? Speaker 1: Well, what kind of feedback do you get from the community about black architects or, or the famous black women or, or--? Speaker 2: Oh, I've gotten good feedback from the community in as much that for each one of the projects most people were glad that I did them and they would say, oh god, I didn't know that, or I hadn't thought about it, I hadn't thought about it. Particularly with the classical composers and with the architects. With the black women, everybody knows somebody who has been particularly successful and have been a trailblazer. I mean a real, real trailblazer. But really I've been pleased with the reception and I've also been very clear that whenever I'm invited to speak or whatever, I tell people I want them to--I'm enlisting them, I'm inviting them to celebrate wha- whoever is in their community and their achievements. Story_ID: 460105 Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: My number one hope for the African American community is better education. I think that the education system has really failed the African American community and, and I am way past the point of putting all the blame on white people. I think that black people now have controlled school boards and, and, and public systems for at least twenty, thirty years now. It is time for us to make a commitment, to make a commitment to, to make sure that we have our own kids educated. To draw some priorities to have better textbooks, textbooks that are much more inclusive and tell a better balance history of America. If I were sitting the head of a public school district in Chicago [Illinois]--in any place in the country now, I would simply say to the textbook com- companies, three or four years from now I am not going to buy a textbook that don't tell the truth about the Revolutionary War, that don't tell the truth about who signed some of the bills, don't tell the truth, we've only had a history that have been very one-sided and have not showed the contributions of everybody. I didn't know--personally I didn't even--of course I knew about slavery, but I didn't even know about the Japanese being interned until I was an adult. So we need to now let everybody know that America was built by everybody and that everybody had blood, sweat and tears, and achievements and contributions. So education is one--absolutely one clear thing for me. And the other thing is a re-commitment to a consistent morality. In other words, it's not okay for you to steal from me, it's not okay for you lie to me. It's not okay for you to, you know, to beat up my little sister. We need to get back to a sense of family of taking care of family, whether the family is blood relative or a neighbor. So I--and I think we need to respect our elders, especially as I get older (laughter), no respect our elders and I think that is a key thing. But I think the--for me the education is the key point because with education and I, and I mean teachers who are committed to wanna teach and not just to get their paycheck and go home and don't wanna live close to the teacher they--kids they teach. You know, teachers who would buy their own product. I am very disappointed in the amount of teachers I know who would not send their own kids to the public schools that they teach. We need to have an education system where people would buy the product. You wouldn't go buy a hamburger at a store that the man who was cooking them wouldn't eat them, would you. You wouldn't buy a car from somebody who's building them who wouldn't drive that type of car, but yet we have an education system where too many people in the education system, teachers, administrators, superintendents, curriculum developments do not and would not buy their own product. And to me this is crucial, because if you can do--if you can infuse education, you open up horizons, you open up hope, you build skills and you make--bring people into the mainstream of--you let, and you under- you help them understand. Joe don't have to hire you, you can hire yourself. I don't care whether you sell newspapers when you twelve years old, they need to learn the system and part of that comes from a certain amount of education. So I would say education and even continuing education, and also more immediately is help to re-educate and re- and retrofit literally much of our communities that have suffered from manufacturing facilities like whether it's steel in Gary [Indiana] or car manufacturing or glass manufacturing. People who were trained in that era and they are no longer needed. We need to retrofit our human capital. We need to go back and, and help them learn new skills. The second thing is, or I don't know what number I'm on now, is the public housing in America. Too many people of color live in public housing who don't work. And I'm not saying make them work, I'm saying restructure the public housing so that every public housing project has a cooperative in that housing project that hire the people who live there to paint the walls, to sweep the floors to take out the garbage, to landscape it. And, and until we do that, we are not--and they don't even have to worry about commuting. The commute is to go on the elevator or to get on the stairwell, go out, take out the garbage, sweep--and pay them so that they will have a job. There are so many things I think that we can do in our own community with enlightened progressive leadership. Again, like the school systems, the public housing projects in America too have been controlled by black people for a long time, but they have not been progressive enough to think how can I help the people there, remain there and improve their lives. They'll hire an outside contracting company to paint the walls, then let, let the company do 75 percent of the business and the people who live there do 25 percent of business. We need to rethink how we can take our community where--as they are and help rethink their future, not change them ca- as is, they have to be reconfigured as they move forward. Story_ID: 460106 Speaker 1: We always ask this question too, when you look back at everything you've done to this point in life, is there any major thing you would do differently if you could? I think this is particularly significant here 'cause you have the kind of life that I don't think you would set--sit down at age thirteen say I'm gonna do this when I grow up, necessarily, you know? Speaker 2: No, except again (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You couldn't envision-- Speaker 2: Well except I say to myself when I look back now and I look and when I was standing over my high school [Friedrich Froebel High School, Gary, Indiana] annual and there I was standing over the world affair--with five people in the world affair forum, that subconsciously I must have thought or wanted or willed the life that I have. That subsequently I say all the way from Gary, Indiana to the pyramids of Giza [Great Pyramid of Giza] to the Great Wall [Great Wall of China], to great Zimbabwe and back home again a number of time. But not just being there, being there to interact with people and being there to help, to help learn from them and also to educate them on the successes and achievements of blacks in America. Because too often the story that gets out isn't the one--is, is the same old one. Recently I told a friend of mine who worked for the French consulate here, they need to bring people here and when they give them here they need to tell them about the black universities and colleges [HBCUs]. They need to tell them about the black-owned banks. They need to tell them about a lot of things. Don't just take them to the South Side [Chicago, Illinois] and look at oh now it's Obama's [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] place and now there's the projects. In between there is a whole variation of a spectrum of lives that blacks have lived and contribute, and will contribute. So I don't know if I did not envision it or if I subconsciously envisioned it. Because where would I, in Gary, Indiana, you know, some place with parents [Armenta Matthews Davis and Richard Davis, Sr.] and a school was beginning to dream. Story_ID: 460107 Speaker 1: Likewise, when you look at everything you've done to this point are--is there any--what today would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: I think my legacy from my point of view is that I have made, I've made a good effort with my time and energy and skills to, to share the achievements of blacks and unsung heroes, black heroes and sheroes, for which was not accessible. So my legacy would be that one of a cultural historian, of a communicator, a modern griot--whatever the word is-- Speaker 1: Griot. Speaker 2: --okay, griot, so to speak, where I took the technology that was available to me and told the stories that people needed--that I felt they needed to hear to help, to help us understand who we are and what we've done, but also to help other people understand our, our era, help us to so that we can continue to grow together. Story_ID: 460108 Speaker 1: Tell me about your family now. Did--do you have any children, or--? Speaker 2: No, I don't have any children-- Speaker 1: Okay, uh-huh, all right. Speaker 2: --I don't have any children. All of my brothers and sisters are living and healthy. And only my parents [Armenta Matthews Davis and Richard Davis, Sr.] at this point are dead. My oldest brother [Richard Davis, Jr.], I guess now, is seventy-one and my youngest sister, I guess, is fifty-one. So thankfully we are all healthy. Nobody is physically ill from cancer or diabetes or whatever. One other interesting thing, my mother had an ulcer growing up. I guess raising kids can give you an ulcer. But we also had a very good diet. You know, we didn't eat a lot of fried foods, we had fresh vegetables and see. And I now look on it as a blessing, I mean we now actually look on it as a blessing where my sisters and brothers, as I said, we all--we are all pretty healthy people. And nobody is you know hospitalized with the type of lifestyle-induced illnesses that many people have and, and so thankfully with my--thankfully so, thankfully so. Story_ID: 460109 Speaker 1: Now is there anything I have not touched upon that we need to talk about before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: I don't know, seems like--I don't know. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, the last question is similar to legacy I guess, but a little different. Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: I guess how I would like to be remembered, I envision my memorial as a celebration, a celebration of life. I think the people who know me know that I have balanced work with enjoyment so I would like to be remembered for those things that I've done and the people I've helped and the people who've helped me out, of course we'll remember them. But I would also like for people to celebrate, you know, go out and play a golf game, fly airplane, tango dance or something, that's some of the things I do. Go do something to enjoy life. Don't stand over me and cry. I often say if you can't send me any flowers while I'm, while I'm breathing, don't bother later. So, how do I want to be remembered? I, I wanna be remembered as a person who was sensitive, who--sensitive to my community, respected learning, respected heroes and sheroes, those that were acclaimed and those who quietly labored. And then a person who turned off the computer, whatever, went ate some--went and enjoyed a wonderful meal of fine food and, and drink, or went off and, and looked to the sky and did whatever it was for the spiritual enjoyment. Or who knows, maybe laid out on the beach or on the park and listened to some opera under the sun or something. In other words, the balance of enjoyment of life and the learning of life...