 Story_ID: 25747 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I am the interviewer today with The HistoryMakers, our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Ma'am can you please state your full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: My name is Christine Mann Darden C-H-R-I-S-T-I-N-E, M-A-N-N, and then D-A-R-D-E-N. Speaker 1: And is there a story behind your name? Speaker 2: Well, the Darden is my husband's name who comes from Virginia just across the water here in Mansen County, Virginia and I don't know beyond that where they are from. Darden is a fairly famous name in Virginia, there was a Colgate Darden who was a governor of Virginia, there is a Darden School of Education at UVA [University of Virginia] and there is a Darden School in Old Dominion University [Norfolk, Virginia] so that's a fairly famous name in this area. Mann is my maiden name and that comes out of Georgia, I think that name comes from an Edmond Mann who owned a couple of plantations in Georgia in the 1840s-1850s and he comes from a Robert Mann who came into this country in the 1750s in Ireland and I think he may have been from Ireland or England, so that's where the Mann name comes from. Speaker 1: Okay and Ma'am what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: My date of birth is September 10, 1942 in Monroe, North Carolina. Speaker 1: What is your occupation and title? Speaker 2: Well I was an aerospace engineer, that was my technical occupation at NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] Langley [Virginia] and when I was doing research that was my generic title, then I actually had a title as program or project manager when I was working in projects, and then when I got into management I was in the senior executive service as a manager and a director of offices. Speaker 1: Okay, and you are retired now, right? Speaker 2: I am. Speaker 1: Alright and what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today is February 26, 2013. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We are in Newport News, Virginia which is on the coast of Virginia in what we might call the Hampton Roads area between the Chesapeake Bay, the Atlantic Ocean, James River. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And this church--we are in the Carver Memorial Presbyterian Church in Newport News, Virginia. A church that was formed in 1892, I believe, as blacks from North Carolina and I guess parts of Virginia, came to this area to get jobs in the shipyard that had been formed by Collis B. Huntington and they were able to get good jobs in the ship yard here. Speaker 1: Ok Huntington that's the big high school here. Speaker 2: That is a big high school here, yeah. Collis Huntington brought the railroad here and then I guess he shipped things out on boats and then he needed a ship yard to repair the boats and then it evolved into a huge ship yard that actually built boats and ships so that is a very large name here. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 25748 Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth there are five light weight questions we ask that only require short answers sort of like a warm up and the first one is do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Oh gosh, I guess I never thought much of a favorite food; I like jambalaya which I'll make a couple times a year or something; I like that, I like vegetables, I like turnip greens, collard greens and I like salads Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: I think my favorite color is green. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: I like fall, I like the hue in the sky on a very pretty fall afternoon; clear fall afternoon. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: I like mountains. I like to vacation in the mountains. Speaker 1: And the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Actually, I think I lean back toward the Bible very often in, "All things work together for good for those who love the Lord." Story_ID: 25749 Speaker 1: All right now I am going to ask about your family history. I am going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side but we will start with your mother's side so we don't get them mixed up. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please. Speaker 2: My mother's name was Desma Chaney Mann, D-E-S-M-A, C-H-A-N-E-Y and M-A-N-N. Speaker 1: And what was her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: She was born in Pennington, Alabama, August 4, 1903. Speaker 1: Okay. Alright now where is Pennington, Alabama? Speaker 2: Pennington, Alabama is in Choctaw County; Choctaw County is right on the border of Mississippi and when I tried to get there by airplane, I flew into Meridian, Mississippi and drove back across the border to Choctaw County. Speaker 1: Okay. Now what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family how far back can you trace them and what were they doing? Speaker 2: Well my grandmother was a slave; I think she was born as a slave on a plantation in Alabama. We do have a document of a slave record in the 1850s about 1854. This slave owner whose name was Green Barry Chaney passed away and I guess they did an inventory of his slaves and so Rosie and Pinkney were on that inventory and I understand that those were my great grandparents or at least Rosie was and I don't know about Pinkney whether he was or not but they were a couple. Speaker 1: Okay. So it was your great grandmother? Speaker 2: Yes, Rosie was a slave. They were on a plantation in Alabama and when the plantation owner died they moved to a plantation that was further north in Alabama, I believe it was called Oakchia and that's where Martha, who was my grandmother, was born and Martha--I think I found her as a twelve year old in the 1870 census by that time she had a stepfather named Jerry Chaney and there were several others in the family. Martha in the 1880 census had two children and she was in Sumter County [Alabama] which is a county immediately north of Choctaw County [Alabama] and I believe that is probably where Oakchia was. Martha lived next door to a gentleman named William Giles and the story is and I guess I believe that William Giles was the father of those two children but in that census he was next door to her and he had boarders in his house and I believe it was the 1900 census we find William Giles saying he had a household with twelve servants so they had, I think, ten or twelve children together. Speaker 1: But he listed them as servants because he did not know how to--. Speaker 2: That's right he called them servants but they were all there in that house and so his name was William H. Giles and he died I think in about 1914 and I did find a death record and he was buried in the white section of a colored cemetery in Pennington, Alabama. Some of my older cousins said that he owned all of his children and that he would, you know, sort of argue back to anybody that said anything about the children and he would actually ride them on horseback with him and he was there. I believe that he was at a short period of time a postmaster in Tompkinsville [Alabama] which must have been an even smaller place right there in Alabama. And then in trying to trace his background I found William Giles in the next, I guess the next eastern county; I think its Marengo County in Alabama who would have been the same age as that family. His father was Demarcus (ph.) Giles from Tennessee and his mother--he had married a Mary Jones who came from Virginia and so that is what we kind of know about my mother's family going backwards. Speaker 1: Okay. Of course this Mr. Giles he could not have been a slave master, I mean legally? Speaker 2: No I don't think--he wasn't a slave master, he was just working there you know he was there and I guess he and Martha--I guess he had various jobs and things, I don't think he had a big plantation or anything. Speaker 1: I am just saying that he could not have been a legal slave master but down on the ground in those days he might have been practically one. Speaker 2: Yeah, but, the story is that he sent the four youngest girls, his four youngest daughters to a Presbyterian boarding school in Annie Manie, Alabama. Story_ID: 25750 Speaker 1: My mother [Desma Chaney Mann] was the youngest and I can remember her talking about how she would get to that school. They would catch a boat on the Tombigbee River and go up to Miller's ferry and change boats or something and come back down to somewhere near Annie Manie [Alabama]--and she attended school. She finished the eighth grade there and I think was valedictorian of her class in the eighth grade there and I guess was very close to the principal who was a Reverend Williams and maybe he was a Presbyterian minister. He, in fact, performed the wedding ceremony of my parents so Mother stayed in touch with him and I do remember visiting him when he had moved to Chase City, Virginia as principal of the school in a Presbyterian boarding school in Chase City, so Mother stayed in touch with him and he did perform the wedding ceremony for them but Mother finished Annie Manie as valedictorian. Speaker 2: Is it called Annie? Speaker 1: I think it is Annie Manie, A-N-N-I-E-M-A-N-I-E. I think that is the town, as I recall seeing a program, Arlington ANI Industrial School or something in Annie Manie, Alabama. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And Mother--maybe he helped my mother get a scholarship or something to Knoxville Academy College [Knoxville, Tennessee] because at that time Knoxville provided schooling from elementary school all the way thru college so mother went there in the ninth grade. Speaker 2: Okay. So did she finish Knoxville Academy? Speaker 1: My mother met my father [Noah Horace Mann, Sr.] in Knoxville, he was two years ahead of she and they got married when he graduated from college. He graduated in 1928, I think, and they were married and so my mother did not go back and finish until the five of us were born and she actually graduated from Johnson C. Smith [University, Charlotte, North Carolina] in 1944. Speaker 2: Okay. Good. Now did your mother have any stories that she shared with you about growing up? Speaker 1: My mother would not talk about her childhood. And I think it was very painful to her that her father [William H. Giles] was white, that her parents were not married. And so she actually wrote us a letter that was given to us at her death saying she would not talk about a lot of things in her childhood because they were just too painful for her to talk about. She--I think used to quote her mother [Martha Chaney] about values and things about growing up, I think my mother would quote those things. She did have a picture of William Giles. I remember a trunk she had and she did have a picture of him in the house, but most of what we heard about him we heard from other aunts and uncles or older first cousins who remembered him and actually knew him and would talk about him but Mother would not. If we would ask our mother a question, she would just kind of say, "Oh, what do you want to know that for?" You know the kind of response that you hear from a lot of people who grew up in those times. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 25751 Speaker 1: Now let me ask you about your father's side of the family. Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us. Speaker 2: My father's name was Noah Horace Mann, Sr. N-O-A-H H-O-R-A-C-E M-A-N-N. Speaker 1: Now there is a story behind his name, we were talking about it before we started right? Speaker 2: Yes. The first place I found my father was in the 1900 census and his name was N-O-R-A-H, Norah. And when I did, on a couple of occasions, go back to Georgia with my father after I was older everybody down there called him "Norah," but I think when my father went away to school to Knoxville [Tennessee] perhaps somebody told him that his name really is "Noah" and that is when he started using Noah Mann. But I was sharing with you that we did an arrangement of a song about 'Noah and the Ark' here in our church last year and the footnotes say, instead of saying "Noah" please say "Norah." I actually went home and looked that up and it said that this was sort of based on Negro spirituals that were sung by the slaves in an island off the coast of Georgia. They pronounced Noah as "Norah" and so my own assumption is that pronunciation of that name came from when my father's parents named him that, and then once he got away in school and everything, folks told him that was the African dialect or pronunciation of "Noah" and he started using Noah. Speaker 1: Okay. Yeah that is interesting how people pronounce something and how it ends up being spelled, I never would have guessed. What was your father's date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: My father was born November 28th, 1898, in Curryville, Georgia. Speaker 1: Okay. Now where is Curryville? Speaker 2: Curryville, Georgia is in Gordon County, which is near Calhoun, Georgia and it is between Atlanta [Georgia]--about sixty miles northwest of Atlanta on your way to Chattanooga [Tennessee]. Speaker 1: Okay. What can you tell us about your father's side of the family? How far back can you trace? Speaker 2: Well I guess I started looking trying to see if I could find anything, I know I found an 1860 slave schedule. Once I started doing some research and found out the county my father came from and I found what I think was my grandfather's family in the 1880 census in Gordon County and that sort of excited me when I found that. I started looking for what the slave owner's name was because just by word of mouth I always thought his name was Washington Mann but I looked in that county and I looked all over Georgia for Washington Mann and I could not find any and so I actually sent for slave records and the only Mann living in the county at that time was Edmond S. Mann and then I found the 1860 census. I found the slave schedule for Edmond S. Mann and was able to sort of guess that my grandfather was four years old on that schedule and then I was guessing at some other people that I knew would have been on that schedule. I do not know if you have heard of Roland Hayes [American lyric tenor; considered the first African American male concert artist to receive wide acclaim both in the United States and internationally] or not. Roland Hayes is my father's cousin and so Roland Hayes' mother would have been on that same schedule with my grandfather. Speaker 1: Yes, Roland Hayes was a great tenor. Speaker 2: Yes he was. I guess some of the articles I saw say he was one of the wealthiest African Americans singers in the '20s [1920s]. So I actually ordered a copy of his autobiography, 'Angel Mo' and her son Roland [Hayes]' because I was looking in Gordon County but it turns out that the slave owner actually had been down on the South Side of Atlanta first in Betts County and Newton County and those areas and so I actually went back to those areas trying to track some records. I also went to some courthouses down there but everybody always said that Roland Hayes' mother and my grandfather and another gentleman named William Mann were all first cousins. So I would say, "How were they first cousins?" and nobody could answer that but Roland Hayes spoke of his grandmother being the daughter of Jessie Mann who was born in the 1700s in South Carolina and that he made it with an Indian and those would have been his grandma Mandy's parents so I am thinking that maybe my great grandmother and Mandy could possibly have been sisters or something like that and when I went back to this same Edmond Mann in the 1840s he had slaves that were little girls that were like five years old. So I am thinking that my grandmother might have actually been the child of this Jessie Mann that came out of South Carolina in the late 1700s and actually grew up on the plantation with Edmond S. Mann. He actually did not die until almost 1900, I've got his obituary. One of my grandfather's sisters died in 1958, his death certificate says "father unknown" but her death certificate says "Squire Mann" was her father and Squire Mann was this Edmond S. Mann so whether he is actually my grandfather's father, whether his son is the father because he had a son that lived in the house also, I don't know; somebody would actually have to do some DNA and I don't know that even DNA would sort that out, that would be kind of like Jefferson. Whether you can actually say somebody in that family was the father or not. We did the DNA and my brother's link of the DNA said it came from Portugal and so the question would be, I said, that these people came from England and Ireland so it might not actually be that line. My female line says we came from Sierra Leone when we did the DNA testing. So that's about what I know on my father's, father's side. Story_ID: 25752 Speaker 1: My father's [Noah Horace Mann, Sr.] mother's side, I always heard she was half Indian [Native American]. Her name--I used to ask my dad, "Well what was her maiden name?" and he would say, "Mann". I would say, "Were they related?" and he would say, "No, it's a different set of Manns." So, then I--. Speaker 2: What was her first name? Speaker 1: Her name, okay sorry, her name was Hasty Mann. Speaker 2: Hasty Mann? Speaker 1: Yes, and so somewhere along in my research I came to believe that this Wash [Washington] Mann that we had heard about all this time, must have been her father instead of the slave owner and so we actually had a family reunion, we being just my sisters and brothers and our children in Colorado some years ago. There was a gentleman named Paul Stewart who came and spoke to us about an Earl Mann who was a politician in Colorado. Speaker 2: This is Paul Stewart from the cowboy museum? Speaker 1: Yes he came and spoke and he talked about Earl Mann who had come from Iowa but who was a politician in Colorado and he said he was related to Roland Hayes. One of the hubs of the wheels used to always be, if you were kin to Roland Hayes you were kin to each other. A lot of Manns used to do that and he talks of this Washington Mann, Earl's father's name was Washington Mann. He said Washington Mann left Georgia. He said he was Roland Hayes' brother or something but Roland Hayes did not have a brother or an uncle or an aunt named Washington. So I think he might have had that confused but Washington Mann had left Georgia and he became a truck farmer in Clinton or Lyons, Iowa and so I have been trying to, you know, figure if there is a way that I could find out if that was the same Washington Mann. I guess I could find some of his descendants he had. I found two Washington Manns or they could be the same one that had married several times and that was another rumor that Washington Mann had lived several places and had several families. But I actually went to the museum in Denver [Colorado] and got a lot of Earl Mann's papers and got pictures trying to see if there seemed to be a family resemblance or anything. I don't know how to prove that that could have been a Georgia connection but he was born in Georgia. So that would have been my great grandfather on my father's mother's side. I guess that is as far back as I could go with Daddy's family. So there seemed to be a lot of Indian blood and of course Daddy--the Cherokee capital is right down there where my daddy was born so I guess there at one point had been a lot of Cherokee Indians in that area. Speaker 2: What is the name of the Cherokee capital? Speaker 1: Echota, E-C-H-O-T-A or something, it is right down in--I think it is in Gordon County. That was the capital of the Cherokee nation; I guess before the Trail of Tears [name given to the forced relocation and movement of Native American nations from southeastern parts of the United States following the Indian Removal Act of 1830], before they drove them all out and they I guess--did they auction off the land--but you know then the whites came in and actually got the land and got so many acres of land and everything. But I found records of my father's father buying forty acres of land in 1895 and things like that. I guess what I was going to say is that I did find, in trying to prove that the Georgia and Iowa might have been related, I did find a Washington Mann in Georgia, a legal record in one of the counties in Georgia where Joel Mann is the son of a slave owner, son of Edmond Mann; he was inheriting five slaves one being named Wash and there was some other names. Because he married an orphan, her father had owned these slaves and they had been held in escrow or whatever you call it until she got married and so Joel Mann was taking possession. So then this was proof that Joel Mann did own a Washington Mann and that could be the same Washington that is the father of Hasty and maybe after freedom day he left and went on somewhere else. An older cousin in Georgia told me that a Hester Mann, who was an Indian, had in fact married or mated with Washington Mann and that that was Hasty's mother because her grandmother was one of the sisters and she ended up being sort of a matriarch of the family that is still in Georgia. So you know, there are unknowns and questions but these are things that I found out. Story_ID: 25753 Speaker 1: Now, did your father [Noah Horace Mann, Sr.] talk-have any stories about growing up? Did he grow up in Curryville [Alabama]? Speaker 2: Well, my father grew up in Curryville, but as I said, I don't know what the school situation was but my father must have gone away to Knoxville [Academy, Knoxville, Tennessee] in second grade and he went to Knoxville from second grade until he graduated from college. And, so I don't know how old he was when he went there in the second grade. He wasn't six years old, he might have been thirteen or fourteen years old. He graduated--if he graduated in '28 [1928] he would have been almost thirty years old when he graduated. So in second grade he would have been older than the second grader is these days. He again stayed in touch with his teachers. I can remember my daddy corresponding with teachers. A lot of his teachers were Presbyterian missionaries and the president of Knoxville College was a Dr. James Giffen, and I have a brother named after him. So that school meant a lot to both my mother [Desma Chaney Mann] and my father. Speaker 1: So they had an elementary school and a--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 2: Yes they had the academy which started and went through high school and then they had the college beyond that and my dad stayed there and did both of those. I guess Roland Hayes [American lyric tenor; considered the first African American male concert artist to receive wide acclaim both in the United States and internationally] you know, sang with the Jubilee Singers; no that was at Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee]. I had a--my daddy's brother sang at Knoxville College and he did actually tour Europe and sing before the Queen with a singing group from Knoxville [College]. Speaker 1: Okay. Knoxville had a singing group too? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: A lot of the colleges tried to get some kind of performing group to raise--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 2: Oh yes they raised money and they toured up North and everywhere and they raised money for the schools. Story_ID: 25754 Speaker 1: So your father [Noah Horace Mann, Sr.], did he finish Knoxville [College, Knoxville, Tennessee]? Speaker 2: He graduated in 1928 and well he was twenty-seven or twenty-eight [years old] and he taught, he went back and taught in Anne Manie [Alabama] one year I think because I have a brother born in Anne Manie then he taught at Camden Academy which I think was a Presbyterian mission school in Camden, Alabama. Then in 1930 my father and mother [Desma Cheney Mann] must have moved to--they moved from Alabama, he quit teaching in Alabama and moved back to Georgia. As far as I can tell, he must have done this because his father died in 1925 and his mother was still there and I think they were trying to care for her. She went to Ohio and she was not happy up in Cleveland [Ohio] or Columbus [Ohio] and I think she came back to Georgia and my father carried his family there. So I have two sisters born in Georgia. He ran Roland Hayes' [American lyric tenor; considered the first African American male concert artist to receive wide acclaim both in the United States and internationally] school for a while and then he eventually started teaching in an adjacent county, I think he was actually principal of the school in an adjacent county and I think my mother taught there also, because of course, at that time you could teach on what they called a B Certificate without having completed your B.S. [Bachelor of Science] degree. So Mother had two years of college by then. So she taught there and they stayed in Georgia until around '35 [1935] or '36 [1936] when my grandmother died there, I think, and they moved to North Carolina. Story_ID: 25755 Speaker 1: Is there a story--I know they met in Knoxville College [Knoxville, Tennessee] but is there a story about how your parents [Desma Cheney Mann and Noah Horace Mann, Sr.] met? Speaker 2: I don't have a story but I have a little note where my daddy asked her for the first date, you know. Very mannerly, very nice, you know, I would like the honor of escorting you to such and such a thing; so very mannerly. And the yearbooks that I'd looked through, I had a couple of yearbooks from Knoxville, said that they were kind of a hot item while they were at Knoxville. After Mother went there, of course, she was still in the [Knoxville] academy, I guess because she would have been in the ninth grade when she went there and then she would have moved on to the college. So yeah I don't remember hearing much except they were dating and the notes in there said my dad was really smitten with Desma Chaney and things like that and all that was in the yearbook. Story_ID: 25756 Speaker 1: He [Darden's father, Noah Horace Mann, Sr.] embarked on a career in teaching and then he--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 2: He was in teaching, yeah I guess he had majored in education and I think he had even taught Latin for a while and he was the principal of this school in Georgia and Mother [Desma Cheney Mann] told me I guess this time--so by then they had three children and--no they had three children. Mother said that it was very difficult. I guess teachers were only paid during the school year, you know. They didn't have this twelve month way that teachers could be paid so they could make it through the summer and Mother said it was very difficult for them to make it through the summer not receiving any money and so I don't know why Charlotte [North Carolina] was chosen. I do know that Curryville [Georgia]--they were a little bit away from it then but almost the whole town of Curryville were our relatives. They were all Manns. I took my grandson back there a couple of years ago and we were in a cemetery by the church and he walked around and he said everybody in this cemetery has the surname Mann. I said, "That's right and they are all kin to you." And he said, "Oh my gosh." So I have heard this story that my father did not want his children inter-marrying with relatives and that might have been a factor in him leaving Curryville, I don't know that Mother and Daddy ever explained anything like that to me. But Dad went to Charlotte working in a publishing company and they must have only stayed in Charlotte a short time, my sister tells me. Speaker 1: Was this a Presbyterian publishing company? Speaker 2: It wasn't a Presbyterian publishing company but when they got to Charlotte they attended the Seventh Street Presbyterian Church because they decided Daddy had been Baptist, his home church was Baptist, my mother's home church was Methodist and they had such a strong Presbyterian foundation, I guess they decided to become Presbyterians. And a Mr. Spears was the district manager of North Carolina Mutual Insurance Company in Charlotte and so within months, apparently after my father got there, Mr. Spears offered him a job as an agent with North Carolina Mutual Insurance Company and assigned him to the district in Wadesboro, North Carolina which is in Anson County, its right on the South Carolina line. And so my dad took that job and they moved and by that time there were four children they moved them to Wadesboro. Mother--let's see, I don't know quite how long they stayed in Wadesboro they did not move until '43 [1943] and so they must have moved there in '37 [1937] or '38 [1938] so they might have stayed there about five years or so. Mother, at some point during that five years, got a job teaching in Chesterville County, South Carolina. Because I think my younger--the brother next to me apparently she took him over to South Carolina during the week while she was teaching. For a couple of years her sister came in and stayed with my dad and other children in Wadesboro to kind of help keep house and then when she left they just hired a nanny to kind of help stay there with them. It was during that period that I was born so the family actually lived in Wadesboro when I was born, but the hospital that I was born in was in Monroe [North Carolina] which was about twenty miles back toward Charlotte from Anson County, Wadesboro. I guess during that time also, Mother started going back to Johnson C. Smith [University, Charlotte] to try and finish her degree. Story_ID: 25757 Speaker 1: When you think about your parents' [Desma Cheney Mann and Noah Horace Mann, Sr.] personalities and their dispositions, sense of humor, hobbies, habits, the way they walk, talk, look, who do you think you take after? Speaker 2: Who do I take after? My mother is much more talkative than my dad. My dad was actually kind of quiet. She was--She even--when I was in high school my mother bought me a conversation course and told me I had to learn how to talk to people. So she, you know, was pushing saying you know you have got to talk to people. And so she would network; anywhere my mother would go she would either find that she knew somebody there or she knew somebody they knew because she would just carry out the conversation that long. She closed church every Sunday just talking to people. So growing up, she taught in Monroe [North Carolina] when she finally moved there, her job was in the county around Monroe and so I can remember as a child riding out to some of her parents' homes and she would go out to visit the family or if there was something that she needed to do for certain of the children or something, she would go out to the families, and she would help the families. And then when I got so I could drive, I was the one driving her out to visit a lot of the people in the county and things. On the other hand, Dad [Noah Horace Mann, Sr.] sold insurance but Dad would always sell other little things. I can remember he would sell Lucky Heart hair grease and you know people would always be calling the house to buy this hair grease. Or when televisions came out the first thing, before there was color television, somebody invented this plastic sheet that had these colors in it that you could tape on the face of your television set which made your TV color. Daddy sold those things and so by nature of his job Dad was out in the community. You know, he was always out amongst the people and I guess everybody knew Dad because he was out in the community and he always--I think he spent a lot of time with all his children. He certainly spent a lot of time with me. Now I used to think about me, I was the youngest child but I was eight years younger and by the time I was eight years old I was actually by myself at home with my mother and dad. So I probably--. Speaker 1: (Unclear) Speaker 2: I probably have a lot of characteristics of both my mother and daddy, an only child and a youngest child. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 25758 Speaker 1: I just wanted you to--this is a good time to name your brothers and sisters; I guess from the oldest to you. Speaker 2: Okay. My oldest brother is Noah Horace Mann, Jr. and he was, as I said, born in Anne Manie, Alabama a year or so after my parents [Desma Cheney Mann and Noah Horace Mann, Sr.] were married. He was born in 1929 and he settled in Nashville, Tennessee. He lives there and he is beginning to have some health problems now but he was a Presbyterian minister and a dentist. He worked at Meharry [Medical College, Nashville], that was his career. The second child was born in 1930 in Curryville, Georgia and that's a girl she--they were a military family. She married a young man from North Carolina. They are a military family retired in California in the San Joaquin Valley. So that's where she lives now and she---I actually spent the month of January out there with her because her husband is having some health problems. Her name is Constance Jean Mann, Monroe is her last name. The third child is a girl, her name is Joyce Mann Lofton. She went to Knoxville College [Knoxville, Tennessee] for a couple of years. She was born in Summerville, Georgia. I think that's--yeah Summerville while my dad was the principal of that school, I believe. They were living in--in Rome, Georgia which I guess is a little bigger place. But that's very close to dad's home, very close to Gordon County. Joyce went to Fisk [University, Nashville]--went to Knoxville [College] and then went to Fisk, married a dentist who finished Meharry. They settled in Chicago [Illinois], so her married name is Lofton. She's got some health problems, they now live in Las Vegas [Nevada]. And the youngest brother is James Giffen Mann. That's the one that's named after the president of Knoxville College. He was born while Mother and Dad were in Georgia but Mother went to Pensacola, Florida to stay with her sister and so he was actually born in Pensacola, Florida. He grew up in Monroe [North Carolina] until about junior year in high school and he went to--actually I guess that's a story. He went to New Jersey to stay with my mother's brother who my mother found in 1947 after not having seen him since he was sixteen years old, probably back in the teens. He ran away from home in Alabama and my sister tells me Mother saw his picture in a Jet magazine. I didn't know that until she told me that this summer and that my mother somehow got an address and wrote up there and said she thought he was her brother and she wanted to find out. She got on the train and went to Boxhall [ph.], New Jersey. I remember her talking about going into this house. She went in, and his wife--he wasn't there but his wife let Mother in. She saw all these guns and magazines about guns and she says, "Oh my gosh, I hope I am not at a gangster's house," you know, and everything. He came in--my mother's hair was red when she was a little girl but it darkened as she grew older and she said he walked in the room and looked at her and said, "I know you are one of my sisters but which one are you?" So there had been forty or fifty years in between him seeing her. And that summer, he came down to Monroe and he picked up me and my mother and we went all down to Alabama and that was probably my biggest visit to Alabama. And we went to visit a brother in Oklahoma and we went--and that was another trip up into Ohio visiting her sisters and brothers that he hadn't seen in all these years. And then after that, he took my brother, the one eight years older than I am, and my brother finished high school up there and he went to Tennessee State University [Nashville] and then he went to the University of North Carolina and got a medical degree and practiced medicine in Denver, Colorado all these years. And then there is me so--number five. So those are my sisters and brothers. Story_ID: 25759 Speaker 1: And after Mother [Desma Cheney Mann] and Dad [Noah Horace Mann, Sr.] died, the oldest brother--I think I told you there were some pretty big gaps into when we all saw each other because we lived so--we kind of spread out. Mother actually encouraged all of us to leave Monroe because there weren't any jobs. There weren't job availabilities I guess although Monroe has grown like crazy in recent years because Monroe is twenty miles from Charlotte. And Charlotte has grown and people are moving to Charlotte like they use to move to Atlanta [Georgia]. So--I lost my train of thought. Speaker 2: Well you were just talking about your brothers and sisters and--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 1: Yeah after they died my oldest brother said, well, we need to be more deliberate about getting our families together and if we don't our children aren't going to know each other. So in 1989--my parents died in '86 [1986]-- well one died in '83 [1983] and one died in '86 [1986]. And in 1889 he kind of had the first small reunion we call it, where--. Speaker 2: 1989. Speaker 1: Yeah. Where our families got together with our children and everything. And ever since then either every two or three years, we have gotten together and we had the last one this year in Houston, Texas and we probably had about sixty people there. Speaker 2: Well that's quite a family. Speaker 1: Well--and it's been good because our kids would not have known each other, in fact in October we lost one of the next generation. There were five of us and thirteen grandchildren and one of those grandchildren died in October and all of the others in that generation actually made an effort to come to his funeral in Nashville and that one that died was named Noah Horace Mann, III. Yeah. He was fifty years old. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 25760 Speaker 1: Now you grew up in Monroe [North Carolina] right? Speaker 2: I grew up in Monroe and went to high school in Monroe until I was in the eleventh grade--. Speaker 1: Now, can you describe the household you grew up in? You were there, it was basically you and your parents [Desma Cheney Mann and Noah Horace Mann, Sr.]. Speaker 2: Okay. As I said I was there until I was about eight with--my brother was there and I guess my sister. So part of the time and I was fairly young, I had a sister and brother there. Now, my oldest sister finished high school in '47 [1947] so she would have finished high school when I was five years old. So I don't remember her being at home that much with me but I think they did a lot of taking care of me; they would especially be there during the summer and Mother would go to work at summertime because Union County raised a lot of cotton; and to allow for kids to pick cotton they would start school in July and go to school for a couple of months and then go out for a month or two from mid-September to late October so the kids could pick cotton. And so my sisters pretty much cared for me while Mother and Daddy would be at work during that time but I also started school pretty early. So I can remember them being at home you know, some. I can remember saying to my mother because people in Winchester [school] would talk about my sisters so neither one of my brothers finished Winchester but both of my sisters did. I can remember the teachers comparing me with my sisters and everything. I can remember telling Mother, when it came time for me to try to go to college, that I didn't want to go to college where both my sisters and brothers had been because I didn't want to be compared with them. Speaker 1: Now you grew up in a big house? Speaker 2: The house that--you mean physically? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: The house that I grew up in had--I guess it had four bedrooms. It had a living room, a dining room, a hall, a kitchen, a screened in back porch, the four bedrooms, a bathroom; we had a screened in front porch on the side and so it was a pretty good size. Speaker 1: Okay. Did you have a frame or brick? Speaker 2: It was a frame house. Story_ID: 25761 Speaker 1: Mother [Desma Cheney Mann] always talked about building a house. They bought a lot across the street and this was, of course, where they were going to build a new house and I guess for years they discussed well should we try to fix this house or should we go on and build a new house. Somewhere during the time we were growing up and maybe Daddy [Noah Horace Mann, Sr.] always knew, Roland Hayes [American lyric tenor; considered the first African American male concert artist to receive wide acclaim both in the United States and internationally] had gone back to Curryville [Georgia], he went back there in the '30s [1930s]. He actually went back and bought the plantation that the slave owner had. And he was going to build a school down there until his wife got arrested in one of the stores in Rome [Georgia] and he got angry and they went back to Brookline, Massachusetts. But he went back to Curryville and there was this cousin there who had built a wagon and he thought that showed such talent that he took--his name was Jethro Mann, he would have been my grandmother Hasty's, this other matriarch Mariah, this would have been her grandson--Mariah Mann. He took Jethro and brought him--he sent him to Lincoln Academy in North Carolina to educate him. Jethro had become a building contractor he had his own building contracting company and so what happened was eventually my mom and dad hired Jethro. He lived in Belmont which was about fifteen miles on the other side of Charlotte [North Carolina] and he happened to be pretty much the only relative we had in North Carolina. But they contracted with Jethro to come to Monroe [North Carolina] and build a new house in that lot across the street. And Mother and those actually moved in that house my freshman year of college. They moved over into--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: They actually did realize their dream. Speaker 1: They did. They built this house, yes. Story_ID: 25762 Speaker 1: Now was Monroe [North Carolina]--you know--you were born in the days of segregation was the neighborhood black--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 2: Oh yeah. I lived in what was called Newtown. And it was a black neighborhood and the school--Winchester Avenue, was pretty much across the street from me. There were whites around our neighborhood, you know. There were stores--there were a couple of white stores that we could go in couple of directions from within our neighborhood to those stores. But I actually lived in a fairly sheltered neighborhood and I actually didn't see white people that often and as far as going to Winchester [school], occasionally the superintendent of schools would come to Winchester and that's kind of when I would see white people. Most of the people lived in my neighborhood; the teachers lived around there, the doctors, preachers, and I guess the winos and everybody kind of lived within that neighborhood. There were some other black sections in town but in my particular neighborhood it was--we were sort of self-contained. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was very segregated. Story_ID: 25763 Speaker 1: I told you my mother [Desma Cheney Mann] taught in the county and so when I was about three years old--before that she would leave me with somebody to babysit with me during the day--she took me to school with her and she was in a two-room school. She taught first through fourth grade and the gentleman in the other room taught fifth through seventh [grades]. And she told me I could--they were in a very isolated area in the country you know, there was nothing else there but the school. She told me I could go outside and play but of course there was nobody there to play with and so I stayed in the classroom and did the work. And so, that next year mother promoted me to the second grade and--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: How old were you? Speaker 1: Well I would have been--actually if you think about it she started school in July; I would have been three years old in July, I would have turned four in September into that year and so when I went to the school in town, I would have been four at the beginning of September, turning five. So I was almost five when I went to the second grade in the city school. Story_ID: 25764 Speaker 1: Yeah I did start school early almost two years ahead. My mother [Desma Cheney Mann] told me later that if she had it to do over again she wouldn't let me be ahead of myself and it wasn't the academics, it was the social. I think by the time I got to be thirteen, twelve, thirteen years old, I was beginning to worry my mother a lot about going to dances and doing this and doing things other kids in the class were doing. And my parents--so Mother was almost forty [years old] when I was born and Daddy [Noah Horace Mann, Sr.] was forty-five [years old] so they were getting older and I think they sent me to boarding school when I was--I would have been--well I would have been thirteen when I went there, almost fourteen (simultaneous) (unclear)-- Speaker 2: I want to back up now and just talk about--now you attended Winchester [school, Monroe, North Carolina] (simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 1: I attended Winchester from the second grade all the way through eleventh, through tenth grade. Speaker 2: Okay. So this is Winchester Avenue--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 1: Winchester Avenue School, I guess. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. It was a first through twelfth grade school. Speaker 2: Okay. Of course this is an all-black school. Speaker 1: It was an all-black school. Speaker 2: Okay. And now did you let's see--I take it you liked school because you were already advanced when you got there. Speaker 1: I mean--I think I liked school, yeah Dad would always--I think every day he would always say, "What did you learn today?" you know. So he would always ask and I think I probably learned to read early but by having sisters and brothers at home you know who would read or you know I could read to or things like that. I guess education was probably stressed a lot at home. I think that even if it was just kind of understood, because all my sisters and brothers started going to college while I was there too and--. Speaker 2: Okay. So you had this example of college students and parents teaching and--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 1: That's true, that's true--and teaching. While--my oldest sister finished college and started teaching down in North Carolina while I was still, you know, in upper elementary school and early high school. And my brothers would go to work in New Jersey every summer to work to earn money to save for college. Mother wouldn't let the girls go anywhere. Speaker 2: Okay. Now what were you interested in your early school days? Speaker 1: I think I used to talk about wanting to be a doctor. My dad would--I would help him change tires on the car; I would help him cut grass and, you know, do things outside. I can remember getting a bicycle. I asked for a bicycle when I was probably five, six years old. I was small and they bought me one bicycle; you know there was no getting a small one now and another size and another size. I got a 26" bicycle because I can remember as I was learning to ride it, they would take me to the top of the hill--Monroe is hilly--they could put me on that bike once I learned to balance but I would get to the bottom of the hill, I would have to jump off and run so the bike wouldn't fall on me because it was pretty heavy. But eventually that bike lost its fenders and it lost its brakes and I would have to get a coat hanger to make the brakes tight and change tires and patch tires. I learned how to take care of my Hot Rod bike. I guess Mother would say she gave me a couple of dolls and I would cut them open to see what was in them or what made them talk, to see what made them talk kind of thing. I--so I was inquisitive in that respect and I actually enjoyed playing outside, you know, skating and riding a bike and racing; sort of competition kind of things more than sitting in the house playing dolls. So I did--I think that was kind of the way--and during the time I grew up that was when on Christmas morning everybody was on the street, you know, on skates and bicycles and everything and you just kind of played all day and had to be home when the street lights came on. I was inquisitive so I guess I did like mechanical things. Daddy even taught me how to--we had an old '49 [1949] Hydramatic Pontiac and he taught me how to prime the carburetor to start the thing, you know, and so--. Speaker 2: Yes, that's interesting as a little kid he taught you how to do that. Speaker 1: Daddy would spend a lot of time--and I would go to work with him. I mean, when he would go out into the county to collect, you know--in the evenings when I was at home, I would go with him and he would let me drive and so I started driving out on country roads, you know, very early, you know, because I--. Speaker 2: How old were you when you started driving? Speaker 1: Probably twelve or so years old, just so I could see, I might have sat on his lap some. We also had an alley--there was an alley beside the house I grew up in and with that Pontiac, he would let me in that area and drive forward and back up and drive forward and back up. So I wasn't on a city street but I think I learned to back better that way. He would let me do that and I vaguely remember before that he had an A Model one of the Fords where you actually had to turn the thing in the front he had one of those too. Because, of course, Daddy had to have a car to do his job so he would have been one of the few blacks early on that had a car, you know, in the neighborhood and everything. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 25765 Speaker 1: Did you have any favorite teachers in school in Winchester [Avenue School, Monroe, North Carolina]? Speaker 2: Sure. You know--now I said the teachers lived in the neighborhood so the teachers knew the parents, the teachers would visit your home. There was an English teacher who-Winchester [Avenue School] probably wasn't your most disciplined school that you would think of although I guess I did okay. But there was an English teacher there who was a very firm teacher. You did not get out of her class to take a notice around or decorate the maypole or decorate the homecoming float or anything like that. When it was time for your English class you did English. She was very strict, she cared a lot about the kids. If there were kids who wanted to go to college who couldn't afford it, she would find them jobs, you know, in New York and so she was that kind of teacher. She actually lived in Charlotte [North Carolina] and came down to Monroe every day. But she would have plays for us and I can remember, I actually think it was a play like 'Anna Karenina' [based on the novel by Leo Tolstoy] or something we did and I had a starring role in that and we would have rehearsal every night and so we got good experiences from her. We didn't play in her class. She was that teacher that made us learn how to write, who made us learn how to conjugate and everything. Where you might walk by a classroom and see students sitting in there talking that was never the case. Speaker 1: So was this a middle school or--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 2: Well, no all this was Winchester Avenue. But this would have been early in high school. She was the English teacher in the ninth grade. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But it was all still at Winchester Avenue but--. Speaker 1: How many grades in Winchester? Speaker 2: One through twelve. Speaker 1: One through twelve, okay. Speaker 2: It was everything. It was the only school in Monroe. Speaker 1: Okay. I didn't realize that. One through twelve, alright. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: What was the teacher's name? Speaker 2: Her name was Aurelia Williams and she would be one of those teachers you would read about, you know. She was--you would see her walking around the neighborhood in the afternoon visiting homes, you know, talking about doing things or having a rehearsal or doing this and that. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 25766 Speaker 1: Do you remember when you first had any inclination of being a scientist? Speaker 2: Well, you know, I think I used to think about it and I'm trying to think; I did take a biology class when I was at Winchester [Avenue School, Monroe, North Carolina]. And I used to think about medicine, but I think I really gravitated more toward physical sciences than I did biological sciences. I liked math alright when I was at Winchester but when I went to boarding school I took geometry, Winchester didn't offer anything but Algebra 1. I believe that was the highest math they offered. When I went to boarding school I guess the only other math class they offered was plain geometry. And I took geometry there and I think that teacher really excited my love for math and I did exceptionally well in that class and I just loved geometry and I think that excited the math more than anything else. Although that was the only math I could take at this school because they didn't offer anything higher than that other than the general math and things earlier than that. So when I look back to when I really started liking the math it would have been the geometry teacher, you know. When we had to choose to be our favorite teacher, I would be her teacher--I would be her, and I would teach geometry and that's the teacher that I have stayed in touch with over the years. Speaker 1: Well what's her name? Speaker 2: Her name was Ruth Walther. Speaker 1: W-A-L-T-H-E-R. Speaker 2: W-A-L-T-H-E-R. She's from the Walthers of Wisconsin. And so I have--but she was actually--(unclear). My teachers at Allen were also missionaries, most of them. They were--this was a Methodist school. So, Ms. Walther--. Speaker 1: So where is Allen? Speaker 2: Allen High School it was in Asheville, North Carolina, which was about a 150 miles from home [Monroe, North Carolina] and--. Speaker 1: So you went to Allen--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 2: I went there in the eleventh grade. My mother [Desma Cheney Mann]--I believe I told you I was giving my parents [mother, and father, Noah Horace Mann, Sr.] a lot of difficulty especially about doing social things. They thought I might have been a little too young to do but yet my classmates were doing them and so that was putting them in a hard situation. Speaker 1: You were two years younger than your classmates? Speaker 2: I was two years younger. Speaker 1: Now, okay so this Allen High School was a boarding school? Speaker 2: It was a boarding school. Speaker 1: Was this an all-girl school? Speaker 2: It was an all-girl school. Speaker 1: Okay. And is it (unclear), is it Richard Allen [minister, educator, writer; founder in 1816 of the African Methodist Episcopal Church (AME), the first independent black denomination in the United States] or some other Allen or was it just-(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 2: It was probably named after--was Richard Allen the Methodist? Yeah, it was probably named after him but I don't know that I've ever read that anywhere. It was established for--it was established primarily for Negro girls in the Appalachian area in North Carolina to have an education. And a lot of the students were from within the mountain areas who really didn't have good schools in their areas. They could come to Allen. We all had duty work at Allen and those girls who could not afford the school actually could get scholarship work. So there were girls who cooked our meals, who worked in the kitchen, who washed the dishes, who did the laundry and things like that to pay their full way to school. And then there were--I guess maybe as other boarding schools closed, I don't know, girls came from other parts of the country to Allen also. But many of the teachers were Methodist missionaries, some of them weren't, and Ms. Walther actually wanted to be a missionary overseas but when she finished college she was too young to be sent overseas. And so the Methodist church said let us send you to Allen for a year until you are older and then, you know, we can send you overseas. And so she came as a math teacher at first and I guess once she got old enough I guess her heart was at Allen and so she stayed there. When I went there in the eleventh grade she was actually superintendent of the dormitory in addition to being a math teacher. And then when the--a couple of years after I left, she moved to be principal of the high school. Then Allen closed, you know, as with many boarding schools they just don't get the support, I guess in many areas. And she became--Ms. Walther became a principal of one of the city schools in Asheville and she invited me back to come and speak to the kids and everything. She now lives in a retirement home in Asheville, which a lot of Methodist former missionaries live there. And so, I have been down in recent years to visit with her a couple of times so I kind of stay in touch with her. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 25767 Speaker 1: Now Asheville [North Carolina] is certainly a beautiful part the country. Speaker 2: It's a beautiful part of the country and I think that's why I am partial to mountains instead of the seashore. I do like mountains. Our dormitory [Allen High School, Asheville] used to look out at some of the mountains right there by Asheville right outside our window. We used to go on picnics up in the mountains; we always took the ride on Blue Ridge Parkway in the fall. We would go to Chimney Rock, we would actually have cookouts in the water on rocks in the water. We would have cookouts and so we did a lot of things in the mountains; lot of picnics and things in the mountains which just leaves me with very fond memories. We of course went to Cherokee [North Carolina] which is right near there. I had a lot of great times. They would convert the dormitory into a haunted house at Halloween and then we would go on a scavenger hunt in that whole area of town. I guess one of the benefits for me was everybody had the same rules. So everybody had the same rules and the only time they made an exception for me my senior year--you had to be fifteen when you came there in September to be able to have male company on Sunday afternoon and I was not fifteen when I went back because my birthday is in September. So I wasn't quite fifteen yet. So they made the exception for me to take company my senior year when I went there. But it eased the burden on my parents [Desma Cheney Mann and Noah Horace Mann, Sr.] because now all my classmates had the same rules; they would have dances but they would screen, they would have certain people from the high school there Stephens-Lee [High School]--. Speaker 1: They would chaperone them. Speaker 2: They chaperone them, they would know who was on the guest list. They would invite certain young men to the dances; they would walk us across the street to the dances and on Friday nights they would take us to a football game or to the drugstore and things like that. So everybody did the same thing, and so I didn't have that same, you know, "Everybody else is doing it. Why can't I do it?" And that took the load off my parents. But I was homesick, I was extremely homesick. I think I cried every day for a semester. One day I decided I wasn't going to school. I said we all had duty work, we also had to clean our room every morning we had to go through inspection for dress going to school. I did everything I had to do and then I went back to my room and sat down. And by the time they checked roll in school and found out I wasn't there and they checked the infirmary and found out I wasn't sick, one of the dorm counselors came and said, "Well the principal wants to see you." So I went to the principal's office, and she told me I was just messing up a perfectly good record and you know she started crying and she had me crying and you know, "Is your father coming for you?" I said, "Well no my father doesn't know anything about this." So I guess that was the crisis and I got through that semester and Mother told me much later after I had probably finished college that she had decided that she was going to let me come home at the end of the first semester. The first semester was in January then, but she said when the first semester ended I called her and I said, "Send me some money, I want to buy a new dress because we are having a dance Saturday night." And she said I never mentioned coming home, and she said she never mentioned it and that was the end of that and so from then on everything was great. I guess it was a hard lesson on me but it was probably one of the best lessons for me, you know, to stay at that school and go through that hardship and realize being able to go to the County Fair at the end of September was not the most important thing in my life which I was missing, you know, I wanted to go the County Fair. I was missing that but I think I had exposure in some things perhaps that--I certainly gained some independence at that school and study habits. We had study hall every night; we had sports and whatever activities in the afternoon and then went back for another hour and a half after dinner for study hall. We had duty work that seniors always had; we had family style eating in the cafeteria. We always had to take a turn serving the teachers, serving the table we sat at. So there was some discipline involved in getting those things done and doing those things; in cleaning the bathrooms, in cleaning a teacher's room; we all had to do those things. So I think that was probably good for me. But the discipline of studying and getting my work done I think served me well when I went to college because I would get my work done and I would have it done before dinner every day. Speaker 1: Okay. Now what level of math did they teach? Speaker 2: Did I teach? Speaker 1: No did you get when you were in--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 2: Okay at Allen there was nothing but geometry. They didn't teach anything higher than that. So I didn't have anything higher than plain geometry. Story_ID: 25768 Speaker 1: Well, tell us how you chose Hampton [University, Hampton, Virginia]-- Speaker 2: How I chose Hampton? Okay there was--I had a very good friend whose father was the principal of Winchester Avenue [School, Monroe, North Carolina]. She lived about a block from me and we grew up together. We were in the same class and we just did a lot of things together. She was the friend that if we wanted to go somewhere we couldn't go unless the other one was going. There were about three of us. "Well, Julia is going to this dance I ought to be able to go too," you know. And so the parents would kind of get together and if she could do it then I could go and then one of the parents would take us and one of them would pick us up. She had an older sister who came to Hampton University. I think when this sister graduated from college they invited me to just ride with them; I guess I was out of school for the year. And so I did ride up to commencement when Berene (ph.) graduated from Hampton which would have been '57 [1957], I think. And--so my senior year I was away, I was, of course, at Allen [High School, Asheville, North Carolina] as I started thinking about colleges. I had my--my sisters and brothers had gone to Johnson C. Smith [University, Charlotte, North Carolina], they had gone to Knoxville College [Knoxville, Tennessee], Tennessee State [University, Nashville, Tennessee], Fisk [University, Nashville] and I said, "I don't want to go anywhere they've been." I don't want to be in their shadows again so I took the United Negro College Fund scholarship test and was offered--I think I applied to Hampton as a first choice and Fisk as a second choice, although I said I wasn't going to apply at Fisk. And I was accepted at Hampton and offered a scholarship at Hampton so by the time I wrote my mother [Desma Cheney Mann] I said, "Well I've been accepted at Hampton, I have a scholarship at Hampton and so there is no reason why you shouldn't let me go to Hampton." And so she wasn't too happy about sending me all the way up to Virginia by myself but she acquiesced and let me go. So that's how I got to Hampton and my home girl and I were roommates our freshman year but after that we sort of went our own ways. So that's how I got to Hampton. I can remember crossing that James River for the first time saying, "You mean this is a river, the rivers at home are about that wide." So that was my first exposure to Virginia well at least being in Virginia and learning anything about Virginia. Speaker 1: I'm sorry, you had never been to Hampton before? Speaker 2: Except to commencement for Berene and that's probably when I crossed that river the first time. I came up here then and then came back to school after being accepted here. So--but I wasn't homesick you know, I had adjusted to being away from home and kind of doing things on my own. Story_ID: 25769 Speaker 1: Now did you still have being a doctor on your mind? Speaker 2: I think yeah, you know, I even still when I took the little--you know during freshman week you come early and you take these entrance exams. I think I still put medicine down as what I wanted to do. But I think--I took my physical science class [Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] and I didn't get in any advanced classes my freshman year. Straight freshman math, physical science, biological science, you know, English, all of that was pretty standard; the basic things, not remedial but just regular freshman. And you know kids from here [Virginia] and kids from New York and everywhere they were all coming in having had calculus and advanced classes and everything; so I certainly wasn't in that category. But when I got in the physical science class again I think my interest in the physical sciences was peaked and I had a--I think that was physical science--I had him for physical science and then for physics also because I declared physics as a minor once I had made the decision there. And he could always take the physical principals that he was teaching us and he would explain it to us in everyday terms. He just seemed to make it come alive and make it so real to us and I really loved the physics and physical science under him. Speaker 1: What was his name again? Speaker 2: His name was William Fields. Speaker 1: William Fields. Speaker 2: So I took the freshman physics under him and I guess this must have been my second year after all my introductory courses. And unfortunately, at the end of the year he got sick and he died at the end of my sophomore year. Speaker 1: Was he very old? Speaker 2: I don't think he was that old but he probably got cancer or something. We had a very interesting experience when he would make up his final examinations; he would try to keep students from stealing the examinations by putting the wrong title on the examinations. So he would put "optics so and so," "electricity and magnetism so and so," "general physics so and so," or introductory physics. So when he died some of the other people in the department went into his file cabinet and pulled out these tests. And during those days and maybe today they would put us in a huge gymnasium room and we would have to sit in alternate seats and they would go through and pass out the exams for several classes. They passed out the exam that said 'Physics 101', I guess, and we looked at this exam and hands went up all over the room. This can't possibly be our exam because we have never seen anything on this sheet before. And so they actually came back and took up all our tests and said apparently we've got the wrong test for you and you know we are going to have to make a decision about what to do. So what they did was gave everybody that wasn't trying to graduate from college an I [Incomplete Grade], and they got another professor to make up an exam for those students who were seniors who were trying to graduate. And we had to remove our I. They brought in another physics professor the next year and we had to get the requirement for moving the I from him and everything. He was not quite as engaging and not quite as good a teacher as William Fields had been, but by that time most of us had declared our majors and minors and everything so we stuck with it. But I still enjoyed--I liked the physics but we would have text books that required a certain amount of math knowledge and this professor that they brought in, if you'd ask him a question he couldn't answer it and that was bad for us, you know. And so we got sort of a negative experience with that professor in physics. But we had to go on and take the classes and everything. Story_ID: 25770 Speaker 1: Okay. I will talk a little bit about Hampton [University, Hampton, Virginia] and how you had to major. They had a big teacher education department in which you could major in math teacher education or biology teacher education and so in addition to the core subjects in that area, you have to get thirty hours of teacher education courses and do student teaching. Or in general studies you took more of the core subject area but you were preparing to go to work in industry or you were preparing to go get a master's [degree] and a Ph.D. [degree] and teach in a college or something like that. For some reason, I guess, at this time, I had decided that I wanted to work in math but I wanted to do something in industry or I even thought about actuarial science or things--somewhere where you used this out in the insurance industry or what have you. But my daddy [Noel Horace Mann, Sr.] said, "If I send you to school for four years, I want you to be able to get a job when you get out, and so you will get a degree in teacher education." He laid down the law on me, and so I had to major in--once I declared math I had to declare math teacher education which of course required, like I said, me getting thirty hours of education. I did not have a language requirement in teacher education whereas the general education people had to have two years in a foreign language and took more of the math classes. And so, you know, I guess I was an obedient child and I had to do this and there were a couple of things I did while I was taking classes that I think impacted my career. First thing was there was a teacher I skipped. I had to do teacher education which required a sophomore class called 'Modern Geometry', and they only had--I had to take analytical geometry and they only--modern geometry was taught at the same time as the teacher I wanted to take analytical geometry from. There was this teacher that I heard wasn't very good over here and I wanted to skip him so I didn't take modern geometry my sophomore year, I took this analytical geometry class that I had to have for mathematics but I will come back and get the modern geometry later. Story_ID: 25771 Speaker 1: Who taught that analytical [geometry; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia]? Speaker 2: Rosalind--Dr. Rosalind--was she Dr.--Rosalind [Eagleson] Exum who in fact just died here a week or two ago [February, 2013]. She has been here many many years but I took several courses from her at Hampton University. So I took the analytical geometry class from her and as you-you know your freshman and sophomore year you take a lot of general classes. You take your music appreciation, your art appreciation and then you have room for electives. And so one of things I did as I started getting into my junior and senior years was I took the math classes that the other math majors had to take in general studies, I took them as electives. So especially in my senior year, I had four math classes each semester plus student teaching. I mean, I was just almost all math. The other thing that happened as I came up to my senior year--you asked me about calculus, I had calculus in my junior year. But I had advanced calculus-there was advanced calculus my senior year and the only--it was only taught, you know only one section of the class and the only section of the class was the same time as this modern geometry class that I had skipped my sophomore year. So I said, "Oh gosh what am I going to do?" I've got to have modern geometry to graduate but I want to take advanced calculus because I think, you know, I just want a more solid foundation in mathematics. So I went to the registrar and I asked could I take both classes and they gave me permission to take both of them. I would attend the calculus class and just go to the geometry class for the test and they allowed me to do that and that worked out well. Speaker 1: So you passed the geometry class--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 2: Oh yeah. I have a friend that was in that geometry class and she said, "We used to get so mad at you. You didn't even come to class and you come in and take the test and set the curve." I said, "Well I am sorry." I think--I don't know if it was from Allen [High School, Asheville, North Carolina] but I somewhere along the line learned to read a math book and do it on my own. I think another example was my sophomore year when I took trigonometry at Hampton and this is one of those classes where all the kids from around here [Virginia] had trigonometry and you know this is no sweat and they weren't paying attention. I, of course, had not had it but this teacher, and I will not tell you her name, I didn't think she was a very good teacher it was like she was talking to herself at the board. But somewhere I learned that you know the person who wrote that textbook has worked these examples for you and if you figure out how they worked these examples and then you know that the odd number answers are in the back of the book, you can figure out how to work those problems and you have taught yourself how to work these problems. And so I kind of learned how to do that in that trigonometry class because I did fine in trigonometry and those kids that thought they knew it, a lot of them failed it. That's a case where you were over-confident on what you thought you knew and you really didn't know it. But I thought that was a good lesson for me and so I was able to use that in that geometry class and so I was able to do the geometry and the advanced calculus. And so I did okay in my math classes. Story_ID: 25772 Speaker 1: I actually was a little jealous; one of the guys who I tutored in some of these math classes [Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] got hired by IBM [Integrated Business Machines] and went off to this big-time job. I, of course, ended up with no job. I actually graduated. I think the day I graduated, I got a card from Brunswick County [Virginia] to come up and interview for a job. My parents [Desma Cheney Mann and Noah Horace Mann, Sr.] took my belongings all back to North Carolina and I stayed up and went to Brunswick County the next day to interview. They offered me a job and I accepted it so I went there to teach in Virginia. Speaker 2: This is Russell High School [Lawrenceville, Virginia]? Speaker 1: Russell High School. Yes, I was a math teacher at Russell High school which was a pretty good school but still segregated. Russell was the black school, Brunswick High School was the white school. Speaker 2: Now let me go back to graduation for a minute. Now did you graduate with any honors or anything? Speaker 1: I graduated with high honors which is like cum laude. That's a 3.5 [Grade Point Average (GPA)], I believe. Speaker 2: This is in 1962? Speaker 1: 1962, yes. Yeah, there's an honors, a high honors and a highest honors and I was in the middle with the high honors. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 25773 Speaker 1: So you're a young graduate. Speaker 2: I was, yeah. Well I was nineteen, I was actually nineteen [years old] when I got to Russell [High School, Lawrenceville, Virginia] to start teaching so there were actually some seniors in that school who were a year or two younger than I was. I met Walter Darden at Russell. That's where he was teaching. He had gone to Virginia State [College; now Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia] and so he--as I got to know the teachers there they started talking about going to Virginia State College for these in-service classes on Saturday and so I had nothing else to do so I said, "Sure I will go up." And so I got with several of the teachers who would drive from Brunswick County [Virginia] up to Petersburg on Saturdays and I signed up for a couple of math classes there in these in-service classes. I got to know Dr. McDaniel who was the head of the math department at Virginia State College. I did well in the classes; I was probably taking something like theory of functions and maybe even partial differential equations or something, I don't remember exactly what the classes were. But I did that all the year I was teaching in Lawrenceville. After that I got married. There was a year I did not teach and then I came to Portsmouth to teach. And so when we got to Portsmouth we started talking about doing the same thing at Virginia State; going back up there on Friday nights this time for in-service classes so we started out with a car full of us. There were about five of us driving up there on Friday night to take some of the classes. I was getting to know the math professors at Virginia State and by the second semester from Portsmouth, I was the only one going, everybody else dropped out but me but I kept going. At the end of that year, my husband got a NSF [National Science Foundation] Fellowship to go to Virginia State to work on a master's degree. Speaker 1: Now what was his field and background? Speaker 2: His undergraduate degree had been in animal husbandry but I think he was trying to move on to biology, that's actually what he was going to go to school in, biology to get a master's. So I was working--I was teaching at Norcom High School in Portsmouth. Speaker 1: That's I.C. Norcom--(simultaneous) (unclear) Speaker 2: I.C. Norcom High School. I was teaching pretty much all general math. That's what they do to first year teachers; I had five sessions for all general ninth grade math. Toward the end of the year when I had already signed my contract for the next year, Darden had gotten this fellowship and I said, "Well gosh, I guess I ought to try to get a job around Petersburg somewhere." Story_ID: 25774 Speaker 1: So, I wrote to Chesterfield County [Virginia] and Dinwiddie County [Virginia] asking about applying for a job. Chesterfield County wrote back for a letter of recommendation and so I went to the principal [I.C. Norcom High School, Portsmouth, Virginia] and asked him for a letter of recommendation. He said, "I'll give you a letter of recommendation but you got to give me your contract back." He says, "I don't want to be here in August looking for a good math teacher." So I said, "Okay, I will give you my contract back." I handed it back to him. I never heard another word from Chesterfield County. So, that next week or two when I was going up for my Friday night class [at Virginia State College, now Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia], I was talking to Dr. McDaniel [head of the math department at Virginia State College] and I said, "I was trying to get a job around here; my husband [Walter Darden] is coming here for school next year and I don't have a job". He says, "Oh, well let me take you across the hall and introduce you to Dr. Hodkinson, he's looking for a research assistant in aerosol physics." So by the time I went home that night I had a shake hands on a research assistantship in aerosol physics. Speaker 2: Well how do you spell his name? Speaker 1: His name was Hodkinson, H-O-D-K-I-N-S-O-N Speaker 2: Hodkinson, okay. Speaker 1: So I went there--I had that sewn up, that was to be done. I came back--I guess we came back and we made preparations to move to Petersburg and gosh went on campus a day or two late, and saw Dr. McDaniel, "Where have you been, I wanted you to sign up for this inter-session course." This is this three week course between the main session and the summer session. Oh my gosh, "Well I didn't know you wanted me to sign up for that one." He said, "Yeah let's go over here to Dr. McDaniel to see if you can sign up for this class." So I go to Dr. McDaniel who was a physics professor who was running summer school. I guess I had missed either one or two days of class. But for a three week session one or two days of class is a lot of class. He says, "Do you realize how much class you've missed?" I said, "Well, yes but I think I can do it." And so I signed up for this class. It went well, until the end of the class. The teacher says, "Well your notebooks are due in a day or two." I said, "What notebook?" So I ended up spending the next two--I guess these were study days, I ended having to go to the library and create a notebook to turn in for that class which was probably a good study though. My hands were cramped, but I did it, you know, and got a good grade in the class. One of the teachers during that regular session in school--but of course now his assistantship allowed me to go to school, I was working with Dr. Hodkinson and I was going to do my master's thesis in light scattering which was in aerosol physics and everything but that same summer there was a visiting professor from Nebraska or someplace like that and this was probably one of his first experiences in a black university. I took--the name of the class escapes me now. He was very close to Dr. McDaniel and after the first day of class he reported back to Dr. McDaniel his impression of the class. He said, "Well I think I'm going to really love this class, there are these five or six people on the front row and they were just all talking in class and it was great except I am worried about this one young lady on the back row who was looking out the window." I was that one young lady on the back row looking out the window. Speaker 2: Why were you looking out the window? Speaker 1: Well, I guess I was--it was summertime. Anyway, I see Dr. McDaniel after he has talked to this professor and he tells me this story. He was telling me that as a learning--this is the impression that this teacher has of you. At the end of the summer I see Dr. McDaniel again, the professor has glowing remarks. He says some of those people that were talking so much were just terrible students they absolutely could not handle that class. But some of the most brilliant people I've seen were in that class and Dr. McDaniel says, "Now I'm telling you this because his first impression of you was really bad; his last impression of you was glowing but you don't always get a chance to make a second impression on people and you need to remember that." So he was teaching me you know, in all of this. So I continued on at Virginia State; I think I got a lot of support at Virginia State. Dr. Hodkinson got killed the summer after my first year there. He went sailing over in the Baltic Sea and he--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 2: This is the second professor of yours that dies--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 1: Yes, so he gets hit by the boom on his boat. Well very often when that happens unless you have somebody who can take over your research you have to change topics but there was also a visiting professor there in the chemistry department who knew aerosol physics and light scattering. He agreed to step in and direct my thesis. And so I did not have to change my thesis or anything, which was a very positive step. Story_ID: 25775 Speaker 1: Tell us about your [master's degree] thesis [in aerosol physics; Virginia State College, Petersburg, Virginia]? Speaker 2: My thesis was on calculating light scattering with different shaped particles. You can tell what sort of particles are in the atmosphere by the measurement of the traces of how they scatter light and that's exactly what my thesis was doing. This now gets to be my first experience with computers. So I come up with a computer code that you put in a shape of a particle that goes through these equations to calculate what the scattering would look like. And I would--the only time--it would take hours for this thing to do this. So to use this IBM 540 or whatever it was, first off I would have to sign up at the computer center, I want to use the computer tonight. I would have to go over there about nine [o'clock] or ten o'clock at night by myself and bring up the machine and start this code and every hour or so it would punch out one card with one answer on it. And so I would have to do that a lot of nights because that would be the only time I could get the computer for that length of time. But I learned how to program--that actually I learned how to program with that and I learned how to run that--. Speaker 1: Informally learnt how to do it? Speaker 2: Yeah. Well I think I actually--I might have taken a class on programming while I was there and I learned how to do that. This is just when computers were coming out. NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] hardly just had computers then; they were just getting them and everything. Speaker 1: So this is a big mainframe computer? Speaker 2: This was a small IBM, yeah. There was one little room--the first computers--this was an IBM--it was a 5 something--but it was just a computer in a room and like I said you would load your cards in and it would sit there and you would see the lights blinking and blinking for an hour or two and then it would kind of--you would hear this sound come up and it would punch out one card and then it would go through this cycle again for another hour and punch out one card and just how long it took it to do that calculation. You would stayed there for you know, over into the--1, 2 or 3 o'clock in the morning by yourself trying to get these numbers. So that's what my thesis was about and, you know, why is the sky blue because of the light scattering that goes on in the atmosphere. I learned a lot about that in doing that thesis with him. Story_ID: 25776 Speaker 1: What was the name of the professor that took Dr. Hodkinson's place? Speaker 2: His name was William Farone, F-A-R-O-N-E, and I forget what school he was from. I took several classes under him also, and I think some of the rigor--one of his teaching tools was, always to teach the last topic of his class on the final exam. So, you know, you build up to a certain topic; he would come up to the topic before the last one he was going to cover and that last topic was on the exam which meant you had to know everything before that, you had to read this and you had to extrapolate that knowledge to try to do this last problem, which is another good teaching-you know, it's a good stretching exercise. I think I had some good teachers there. The whole time I was at Hampton [University, Hampton, Virginia] and taking math classes, you know, I would get the pure math classes but all the applications were always at the back of the textbook, you never got to them. I had realized by the time I got to Virginia State [College, now Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia] that it was these applications that I really liked. I really liked knowing what these equations stood for; what physical experiment or what physical exercise this described kind of thing, and so I was at Virginia State, I was getting more and more into the applied mathematics; that that went with the physics or that that went with the fluid flow or that that went with things like that. And so-and it was more related to the physics. Speaker 1: Now at Virginia State is this a mix of African American teachers and white teachers? Speaker 2: Yeah, most of those teachers that I'm telling you were visiting professors were white, but the teachers there at the school were typically black. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But these visiting professors you know some of them--now Hodkinson was there in the physics department, the guy from Nebraska just came for the summer, Farone was there for maybe a year or two so that's like a university somewhere sets up an exchange program with Virginia State and a professor would come there, and I think that's kind of the thing that was going on during that time; probably connections that Dr. McDaniel [head of the mathematics department at Virginia State College] had with these universities and everything to bring other professors in. Speaker 1: Now did you publish a paper or anything when you finished your master's thesis? Speaker 2: I wrote a thesis but I didn't publish a paper, it was not published. I think another thing that helped me at Virginia State that we did, they did make us--maybe in Sigma Pi Sigma or Kappa Mu Epsilon, some of these science and math honor societies we had to get up and give technical talks on what we were doing which was the first time I had ever gotten up and given presentations on exactly what I was doing and what my results were and I think being somewhat shy and not doing a lot of talking, I think that was very good for me also. Story_ID: 25777 Speaker 1: And so it was when I finished my master's at Virginia State [College, now Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia]-- Speaker 2: So this was 1967? Speaker 1: I finished in '67 [1967] and I went to the placement office. By that time, my husband [Walter Darden] had gone back to [I.C.] Norcom [High School, Portsmouth, Virginia] to teach. So I applied at--I went to the placement office I was thinking of applying at Norfolk State [University, Norfolk, Virginia] and at Hampton University [Hampton, Virginia] because I actually did some teaching while I was at Virginia State too. But I went to the placement office and they said we wish you'd been here yesterday because NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] was here interviewing and so she gave me the standard SF 171 government application and told me to fill it out and bring it back the next day, which I did. She sent that down to whoever had been here during the interviewing and I got an offer from NASA to come. When I went to NASA and you know, of course, that was at Hampton [Virginia], I guess I knew NASA [Langley Research Center] was at Hampton and I remember parades with the original astronauts and everything but they didn't have much of any interface with Hampton [University] or anything, you know, like so many of the universities now actually work and send interns and things like that over there and there was not very much interface with NASA. Speaker 2: (Unclear)--which is different today. Speaker 1: Very different so--I got to NASA and I was assigned to what they called a computer pool and that was--as I said, they still didn't--programming was just getting in. When I went to this computer pool, I was given a Friden mechanical, not even an electronic machine, a mechanical Friden which had a carriage about so long and you sat there and that carriage would move back and forth and everything. And, so, I learned how to do the Friden and I guess--this office was a support office for the engineers on the floor. And so there were no computers to do their plots so when they did papers and they had to do plots you had to do these plots and so you had all of these French curves and you learned how to do the plots. And there was a lady sitting there with a Leroy machine, I didn't even know what she was doing for days. She would just sit there all day doing something; but she was actually doing the lettering for the plots and everything that would go in their papers. Story_ID: 25778 Speaker 1: Now one of the people who we interviewed was Katherine Johnson [computer scientist; also a HistoryMaker]. Speaker 2: Katherine Johnson who--. Speaker 1: Did you meet her there [NASA (National Aeronautics and Space Administration) Langley Research Center, Hampton, Virginia]? Speaker 2: Okay, Katherine Johnson--Katherine had a daughter that was my classmate and I can remember even when I was a student at Hampton--Katherine was like our room mother our junior year or something and I can remember going to Katherine's backyard for a cookout when I went into a sorority so I had met Katherine and I, of course, knew Joyette (ph.) very well; we actually went in the sorority together. I did get to know Katherine at NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration]. I remember going to her office, I came to--Katherine goes to this church also. The old church which is on the corner back here--when I first moved over here and I guess I actually commuted for a couple of years but when I first moved to Newport News [Virginia] from Portsmouth [Virginia] and looked for a Presbyterian church in (unclear) Katherine is one of the first people out of the choir to come and invite me to sing in the choir kind of thing. There was another lady who worked at NASA, Eunice Smith who was deceased but for years they would always leave work and come to sing for funerals and I would always come with them. So I did spend a lot of time especially outside work with Katherine and know her very well. And you know, like I said, I went to her office and things like that. Speaker 1: Now did you have, before you got to NASA, did you have a sense of appreciation for what she actually did? Speaker 2: No, No. And I did not get a sense of appreciation when I was there. Story_ID: 25779 Speaker 1: Alright, Katherine Johnson [computer scientist; also a HistoryMaker], we were talking about. Speaker 2: Okay. I do know Katherine very well, and Katherine started out as a computer also [Langley Research Center, Hampton, Virginia]. NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] was segregated too. And just before I got there, I guess when they started hiring black females, they had these computers. I've seen articles saying, 'When computers wore skirts' so they were actually called, and they were usually women, "computers." And so that office I went into, the women in there were called computers. But they had a group called the "West Computers," which were the black computers and that was a segregated unit at NASA. Speaker 1: The "West Computers." Speaker 2: They called them the West Computers and they were segregated. Dorothy Vaughan who was apparently a very outstanding mathematician was the head of the West Computers. The engineering section would come to Dorothy to ask--they would either give her a piece of work to be done or they would ask to borrow one of the computers in the office to come and work with them if they needed extra support for their work. The way I understand it, Katherine was loaned out to the flight dynamics engineering section and I guess they liked the work that she did and they kept her there. And I know of a couple of others that as things were changing some, that when they left the west computers, the people liked their work so they wanted to keep this person working for them. So I knew about that, although that was gone when I got there [1967]. Story_ID: 25780 Speaker 1: So, the whole West Computer thing [at NASA's (National Aeronautics and Space Administration) Langley Research Center, Hampton, Virginia] was over with?--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 2: Yeah. By the time I got there [1967], this Dorothy Vaughan who had been head of the West Computers was actually one of the top mathematicians in the Analysis and Computation Division [ACD]. So they had done away with the West Computers and the computer sections were pretty much in engineering sections. For instance, I guess, when I went to work there the area was called Re-entry Physics and that computing section supported the three branches or so that were doing re-entry physics work. They would do hand calculations with those Fridens before they got calculators. They would have big spreadsheets like an excel spreadsheet this big and they would sit there and they would have to take equations and assign variables values and then see what the outcome was. And they would fill out these spreadsheets and that's what a lot of the computers did or they would do the graphs or some of them would read film from experimental tests and everything and that's kind of what they did. By the time I got there some of the computers were learning to program, some of the computers had math degrees from colleges, some of them were just math aids and they had high school degrees. So typically those that had the college degrees would learn to program and they kind of transitioned over to the computers. Then you had punch cards in the office, you would punch the cards, very often the engineer might bring in an equation and say I want you to run this for such and such a value or something. So you would have to take that equation, write the computer program, and punch the cards. At that time, the only computers were over--the computers were in this huge room, the computers had gotten bigger, in this huge room over in the Analysis and Computation Division. You take your cards over to that building and submit your deck and some people over there would run this deck for you and then you would go back later that day or the next day and pick up the results they would bring. You would have a cubicle or something and you would take that and kind of that's the way the work was done. And then as time passed and things got better you got so you could actually read these punch cards and the data would transmit electronically over to the Analysis and Computation Division and so you didn't have to walk over there and take it. So that was a step forward but it took a long time to read; it would read it a card at a time and a hole at a time, you know. And then, of course, eventually we started getting terminals where everything became electronic, you got your IBMs [International Business Machines] or your machines from out in the Silicon Valley [California] and everything then the cards kind of went away. For some of us, doing away with the cards was really hard but we would have boxes this big full of cards and you draw a line across them so when you drop that box you would be able to get those cards back in order because they had to be in order, of course, for the program to run. So folks were learning to do that. First the mathematician and the people in ACD would write the more complicated programs and eventually the engineers, I tell you there was some difficulty in the communications between a person--if a person is writing a program and they don't quite understand what the program is doing or what it is supposed to do and the engineer who knows what the program is supposed to do but they don't know what you've done in that program sometime you would spend weeks looking for a problem and the problem was in the communication between the engineer and the person trying to write the program and so you found a lot of engineers started to do their own programming because they would know what was in that program and what had been done. You kind of saw that transition going on within the work at NASA. As I sat there and did that work, you know, I kind of said, "Well gee I can do what these people out here in the hall are doing." I wonder why I'm sitting here doing the support work and everything and I took a class--they offered a class called Engineering 101 or something and anyway it was just a couple of weeks. When I went to that class I said, "Gee I can do this." So I started thinking about why don't I go back to school and get more of an engineering degree. I ran into a lot of negatives at first and I guess in the meantime of this, I ended up being on a RIF list after I had been there about five years. RIF, that's "Reduction in Force." Story_ID: 25781 Speaker 1: (unclear) After the Apollo Program ended or they landed on the moon, NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] was at its peak when we landed on the moon. And so there were reorganizations and there was down-sizing. Everybody was sort of at its peak and they started saying we got to fire some people, we got to have pay-freezes, we got to have all of this. This went on for several years while we were at NASA. The second RIF [Reduction in Force] List-by the second RIF list, I had actually been moved but I sat in the computer pool for five years. I had been hired as a GS9 with a math degree, had not gotten any promotions, had not gotten anything. A young black guy over in the Analysis and Computation Division [ACD], which did more independent kind of work, had come in as a [GS]7 and had gotten two promotions, and was bumping me in this RIF and I was going out the door. Speaker 2: So do you think when you look back that this is--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 1: Well, I actually brought it up but at the time the EEO officer actually went--because almost everybody--the last hired were black; the whole RIF list was black. So the EEO officer was able to go to the director and say this is not good. You know, for everybody you fire here to be a black person. So that RIF list was rescinded and another RIF list came out and I wasn't on that one. I immediately went to a second or third level supervisor and I said, "Well look, I came here with the same degree, in fact I came here with a higher degree than many of these of people and I was being bumped by somebody who came in the same time I did who had been promoted twice. Why is it the men coming into this organization with the same degrees that I had were assigned to engineering sections or sections where they have their own projects to do their own work; they write their own papers and they move forward and the women coming in with those degrees are put into a dead-end job where they don't write their own papers, they don't get promoted?" He said, "Nobody has ever complained about it before." That was his answer to me. He promoted me immediately and that is when I went into or about the same time that I was transferred from the computer pool to a section and I actually was beginning my sonic boom work. My section head there gave me this paper on sonic boom minimization and told me to learn about it and asked me to then write a program that did the calculations for this minimizing the sonic boom. That was my getting into that work. It was a set of--a system of partial differential equations that had to be solved, and so I had to just kind of dig into that and read and learn and write that program. That program ended up being one of the bases of a lot of the work that we did for the next fifteen or twenty years when we started trying to design models and everything. We would actually get some of the criteria for designing that model, from the output of that program. That was kind of the launch of that career and that boss was one who would, if I had a question, he'd answer my question, otherwise he left me alone and just let me do the work. It ended up--my career ended up being great. And so I did that until the funding in sonic boom kind of stopped. That section went away but I went to another section. Story_ID: 25782 Speaker 1: I don't want to get away from the sonic boom--(unclear) (simultaneous). Tell us what it is and what you were doing [at NASA (National Aeronautics and Space Administration), Langley Research Center]. Speaker 2: That's right I guess I jumped on--. Speaker 1: Yeah. Tell us what it is and what--. Speaker 2: What the sonic boom is? Okay, the sonic boom is, of course, a cone of compressed air that attaches to the front of an airplane when it is flying supersonically. As the airplane goes through the air the disturbances it creates travel at the speed of sound. If the airplane itself is going faster than the speed of sound then all these disturbances end of being contained within this cone coming off the nose of the airplane. Just like the (unclear) you see in water from a boat, you see a wave coming from the nose of the boat; you have the same thing in the air from a supersonic airplane. Within this cone the air pressure is higher than it is on the outside of that cone. So it is like a balloon, if I were to blow up a balloon the air pressure inside the balloon is higher than the air pressure in the room so when I stick a pin in that balloon, there is a shock wave set up in which this high pressure air moves out at the speed of sound across your ear and the pop that you hear is the difference, the instantaneous change at the confluence of the low pressure and the high pressure. It's an instantaneous change in those pressures and that's the pop that you hear for the balloon pops that is the sonic boom that you hear when this cone drags across you on the ground. There is a cone on the back end of the airplane and one on the front end so if that airplane is long enough you might hear a boom boom; you might hear one on the front and one on the back. Speaker 1: The question I have and it may sound simple, I'm sure it is, why doesn't the cone blow up? Speaker 2: Blow up? Speaker 1: Yes the pressure, you give an example of a balloon, you know--. Speaker 2: What I'm saying is the pressure is higher, the molecules are closer together that's all. The airplane is there so it has pushed these molecules and so it has affected these molecules so they are closer together. That's what happens when you blow up a balloon; you put more and more molecules of air into that balloon and, of course, this rubber stretches, but the pressure in there is getting higher and higher and it's getting higher than the pressure outside and so it gets bigger and bigger but this pressure is higher inside. Speaker 1: The pressure inside the nose cone of the plane--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 2: Okay. The pressure inside this cone is the disturbances created by the airplane and there is a line, if you were to look at this cone hitting the ground there is a line. The air right here in front of this line is ambient or normal; the air right behind that is the air that has been disturbed by the airplane; it's a higher pressure. Speaker 1: So you are talking about air pocket really not the nose of the plane? Speaker 2: Okay, no. Yeah, it's the air that you are hearing; it is the difference in the pressure in the air here and the air here. That is the sonic boom. The sonic boom--if you were to plot the difference in the pressure--people often talk about going up steps when you are climbing steps in a building the air pressure changes; it gets thinner and thinner as you are going up but it changes gradually; when the pressure changes gradually your ear just accommodates that change but when it changes instantaneously it would be plotted like this. You come in and it's a low pressure and goes out and it's a high pressure and you hear that difference in pressure because it's happening at the same time and that is what a balloon pop is and that is what a sonic boom is. It is that difference in pressure that you are hearing instantaneously. Last week when they had that meteor in Russia and they talked--the sonic boom from this meteorite or asteroid coming into the atmosphere; that thing is coming in and it is coming in and setting up a shock wave and that shock wave keeps traveling and that is what broke all those windows over there. That is one of the complaints of sonic boom. Sonic booms break windows, they cause cracks in buildings. If that shock wave is hard enough it can do all of that. It can be used as a weapon; if that difference in pressure is high enough. So the sonic boom--there are laws, certainly all over this country, but in countries all over the world now that you cannot fly a plane supersonically over land because of the sonic boom. Story_ID: 25783 Speaker 1: Now what speed is supersonic--(simultaneous) (unclear)? Speaker 2: Super--It again depends on the altitude; it changes with the pressure of the air, the supersonic speed. But let me say 600 miles per hour. Roughly when we start talking about something traveling at Mach three, we are talking about 1,800 miles per hour at about 30,000 feet. It would be lower than that on the ground. By the time a plane starts traveling supersonically they are typically at about 30,000 feet and so that would be about 600 miles per hour; that would be the speed of sound. It does depend on the pressure of the air which changes the higher you get. So I guess, we didn't know about the sonic boom until the late 70s [1970s] when Scott--one of the astronauts or somebody actually went faster than the speed of sound in one of the airplanes; everybody heard this sonic boom; one of the first experimental supersonic airplanes that they tested out at Dryden Air Force base. After that, in the late 50s [1950s] and all during the 60s [1960s] there was lots of money spent by the [U.S.] Air Force and by NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] and everybody doing all these flight tests trying to see what exactly is the damage that the sonic boom does. Would people accommodate to this noise; does this tear up houses. They did it at Oklahoma City [Oklahoma], they did flight tests at Chicago [Illinois] and I know there in Nevada, over the Air Force base out there and around Edwards Air Force Base and Dryden Flight Research Center [Lancaster, California], they can fly supersonically because they do a lot of test flights and things out there. So they did many tests trying to figure out exactly how loud it is, how big it is, what the damage is that it generates and everything. In the late 60s they had this--everybody was going to build a supersonic airplane; the Russians were going to build the Tu-144, the French, English were going to build the Concorde and the United States, I guess Boeing had won the competition here to build the SST [supersonic transport]. There was--you got this is going to destroy the ozone layer, we don't know about the ozone layer, you are not going to be able fly over land because you are destroying houses; you are doing all these things and so the United States killed the SST program. Boeing went through a kind of a depression because they had to lay off so many people when they killed that program. Speaker 1: Is this because of the fact that they hadn't figured out how to deal with the sonic boom? Speaker 2: We really still haven't figured out how to deal with it. Yes, they, you know, we can't build this airplane and not know about this sonic boom. We don't know if it does anything to the ozone layer. Certainly we know of this noise pollution and it aggravates people. The United States voted in laws you cannot fly supersonically over the country known as the United States. So that killed that program and so the funding for the supersonic transport went back a lot but there was some funding that continued on is there a way to minimize this sonic boom. Can you shape this airplane differently such that you can reduce it and maybe people could accept that kind of thing? Story_ID: 25784 Speaker 1: And so, during the 70s [1970s] that was a major part of the work, you wanted to be able to predict what the sonic boom was, you wanted to have your equations and everything so you could predict it but then you wanted to then use that to say is there a way you can shape this airplane differently and maybe reduce that sonic boom so maybe it wouldn't just be a boom and people wouldn't be so upset about it. Speaker 2: Now I remember the Europeans did have the Concorde which was a supersonic aircraft--simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 1: That's right the Russians built the Tu-144, the Europeans built the Concorde. Concorde first flew, I believe, in '76 [1976] so they kept going, they built it. Speaker 2: Did it --. Speaker 1: But they couldn't fly over land; I mean they couldn't over our land either. Now the Tu-144, which was the Russian airplane, went to--did it go to an air show in Paris [France] and it crashed or something. That kind of knocked the commercial operation of that airplane out and they used it within Russia, within the USSR itself and so it didn't see a lot of passenger air traffic with the Tu-144. Speaker 2: So they flew over land in Russia in this--. Speaker 1: I think they were--I think they were but maybe as a cargo airplane or something. It did not see a lot of service though but probably within their own country. Speaker 2: But it was subject to sonic boom? Speaker 1: Oh yeah, if you are going supersonically you got a sonic boom. And in fact, when Al Gore was vice president [United States] and Russia was suffering so much, I guess, the USSR kind of collapsed and you had Russia, we actually took the Tu-144 and re-engined it with some of--from engines over here and did some supersonic flight test using the Tu-144 to actually pay the Russians to help them with some of their economic difficulties. So we actually did some flight tests and worked with the Russians on that. Story_ID: 25785 Speaker 1: The Concorde [British Airways; Air France], they only built thirteen. Almost all of the operations--there might have been some standard commercial flights, they had flights coming into Washington, D.C. [District of Columbia] from Paris [France] and London [England]; they had flights coming into New York and then I think they had a flight that went on to Houston [Texas] but the flight that went on to Houston had to go supersonically. In fact, in the 70s [1970s] when the Concordes were coming to the United States there rose a lot of complaints about this thunder-like noise. People would hear--it would be a beautiful day on the East Coast and people would hear all this rumbling and they would say what is that noise. So a lot of NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] scientists and university professors were called and they started investigating--when I described this cone for you, the disturbances traveled out from the nose of the airplane, the disturbances traveled out in all directions. So when the airplane was coming in from London or Europe they would be going up and so when there were certain conditions in the upper atmosphere some of these rays that were being projected up into the upper atmosphere were bouncing off the atmosphere coming back down hitting the East Coast of the United States while the airplane was still over water and that was the rumble that was called the secondary boom. It was a reflected boom from the inversion in the atmosphere and they were actually able to track the noises back to the Concorde flying in to the East Coast of the United States. And so they found that during certain times of the year when we were subject to this weather inversion that they would actually have to slow down to subsonic speeds further out from the coast so that they wouldn't get this rumble along the East Coast of the United States. People were complaining about this sounding like a little bit of thunder but they were complaining and they had to go find out what that was. So the Concorde--I actually called and checked on the price of a ticket one time; it was like $13,000 to fly from New York to Paris or London on the Concorde. Well the only people who could afford that were oil magnates and Wall Street bankers who were filthy rich and so you only had a small group of people that could fly on this Concorde and so the price stayed very high. Other than a couple of routine flights, the rest of them were charter flights. So it never made money, they were never able to build--one thing that gets the price of an airplane down is you have your development costs that have to go into what you build. So if you build a million airplanes you spread your costs over a million airplanes; if you build thirteen airplanes you are spreading your development costs over thirteen airplanes. It always was subsidized by England and France; they couldn't fly over land and so they couldn't extend their routes and the routes that they used they had to have enough people that could pay $1,300 [$13,000] for a ticket to fly and so the New York route was pretty good. They stopped when--ten years ago; it has been fairly recent that they actually stopped the operation of the Concorde. So they flew all those years but they never built anymore airplanes. Speaker 2: How much time did it save from New York to London? Speaker 1: I think that trip could be like three hours or so; whereas normally you probably got six or seven hours on a 747 or something like that. But the 747 was so much cheaper because you got 400 people on the airplane. They are flying everywhere, you know, everybody is buying the 747 and they are filling them up and so you have this issue of the competition between building all these thousands of airplanes and building thirteen and that was a major problem. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 25786 Speaker 1: You started working in the sonic boom group in what year? Speaker 2: Okay. Well, I actually got into sonic boom, I guess about in '72 [1972]-'73 [1973] about the same time I started entering the graduate program. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I actually transferred to another section but I was still working in the sonic boom area and that's when I actually got into--we used the code that I had written to actually come up with optimum or what we called equivalent area distributions and so one of my partners and I actually designed a wing body, it wasn't a very complicated looking airplane. We took a wing body and we designed an equivalent area of that wing body to match what we call the minimizing equivalent area. Once we came up with that design, we had models built out of steel about this size and we actually put those models into the supersonic wind tunnel and tested them to see if we would get the signature that we thought we were going to get based on what we were headed for based on this computer program that had been written. That was the first test done in that and then we actually had some success with that and we saw some problems with it. So, in our next iteration we corrected some of the theory that we thought needed to be changed but then we also started adding the (unclear) to that and to see what the (unclear) would do and we found out what those (unclear) do add to the shock; you get a bigger shock off those (unclear). Then we had to start dealing with that and how we would handle the shocks theoretically and because our tunnel that we were using was 4'x 4' we had to keep our models pretty small at first because our theory is we had to put a pressure distribution that was fairly close to the airplane. As our theories got better we would make our models bigger which meant we could actually put more detail into the models. Worry about how thick they were, worry about any (unclear) that we introduced into the design and things like that. So we went through several iterations of designing these models, testing these models, seeing our answers getting better and better and we are doing better at getting what we thought we were going to get. Then by this time computational fluid dynamics was coming in and that's when you--instead of taking an equation and being able to solve that equation analytically and get numbers from it, you take that equation and you solve it digitally. It's like a grid and you--the computer just goes over cycle and cycle until it converges on a solution. Once we would take these designs that we had made with the analytical methods but they had a lot of assumptions built into them. They weren't quite as precise as a computer models. Then we started refining the designs with the computational models. If you see pictures today of somebody computing a flow field around an airplane, you will see like a grid on top of the airplane and they will have lots of colors around it and those colors represent the pressures where the pressure are around that airplane and that is the result of a computational--somebody has computed that flow field with a computational method and that's the way the weather forecast and everything works now with computational methods and they used huge computers to solve those things. Story_ID: 25787 Speaker 1: So we started getting--starting with our analytical methods and then refining them with our computational methods and we actually--the Tu-144--not the Tu-144--the "Blackbird" that's an [U.S.] Air Force airplane of course that flew supersonically. We actually wanted to know if we could predict its sonic boom right using computational methods and so we actually flew an airplane right behind the Blackbird and put a pressure probe on the front of it and measured that signature coming off the Blackbird and compared it with what we were computing with some of the computational methods and things like that. So it gets to be, you know, you try your equations, you try your computational methods and then you try to do an experiment that validates that what you are doing is right. You can make mistakes with these methods or very often you have to put some assumptions into them to try and solve them and so we did cycles and cycles on that and then we spent, I spent about twenty years of my career going through these various cycles and, of course, we built teams, we got into teams that included Boeing, McDonnell Douglas [aerospace manufacturers and defense contractors] and people in universities and all of them and we would kind of say what exactly do we need to do because we actually wanted to know how these were affecting people and so some of the people were on our team who were acousticians, actually built computer models and put them in people's houses and has these noises go off randomly; generated sonic boom to see how people reacted to them. Then we went out in Nevada where airplanes flew supersonically lots of times and asked those people their impressions about sonic booms and things like that. So we tried to--then the other thing we needed to know was what happened to the sonic boom--as it came down through this 50,000 feet of the atmosphere. What does turbulence in the atmosphere do to the sonic boom; is there a difference in the loudness if it comes through a quiescent atmosphere or through a turbulent atmosphere? So we went down to White Sands, New Mexico and had some military airplanes fly through both kinds of atmosphere and measured on the ground to see what the difference would be and what we would get. We were trying to attack the problem from all directions; with the design, with the operation, with the generation of the boom, how it got to the ground and then what the response was when people heard it on the ground. We were trying to look at all of that because we had to deal with all of that. Ultimately, the laws are going to have to change before you can fly supersonically over land. It's a tough problem and right now one of the last major programs that was done and I think I showed you, they actually took the theories that we had developed and they took a small airplane and they modified--they put some gloves, I guess, on them, that changed the shape and the length of the fore [ph.] body of the airplanes but they made it match this minimizing shape that we said we needed and they flew that airplane. They flew one without the mods [modifications] and then they flew other planes; they measured the pressures off of both planes, the modified airplane, the unmodified airplane. They measured it close up, they measured it midway down and they measured it on the ground. So we could see if we really got what we were designing for and then we were on the ground; did it actually persist all the way to the ground and these were the kinds of things that we really had to be interested in. That's kind of the state of the art right now. The next thing you would really like to do is to design a full airplane that has been designed to this shaping method to see if you can build an efficient airplane that has been designed and includes this low sonic boom restriction and that this airplane could fly. It could make money because after all if Boeing is going to build, Boeing has got to make money. Or if--McDonnell Douglas is gone so I guess Boeing is the main player now; they were the ones that we ended up with but they have got to be sure that an airplane--you are going to have to have enough routes that they could build enough airplanes that this airplane could to pay for themselves. They used to say, you know, we would be betting our company to build the full size airplane and say it is going to be acceptable to fly over land; so all of those are considerations that would have to go into it. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 25788 Speaker 1: So would you say that NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] was a worldwide leader in the--(simultaneous) (unclear) Speaker 2: We actually had a team here in the United States, made up of the companies, we had university professors and we had all the NASA centers that were working in aeronautics. We would all kind of discuss our results; what is the next step we should take, what should we do. I got involved with the Japanese and I actually went to Japan. I was invited to come over there and give a couple of papers; they used to come to our conferences and give papers and things like that. So, yeah we all have the same problem because most of the countries around the world have these restrictions on supersonic flight. Speaker 1: Okay. I guess I was asking is NASA the leader on the research or is there--(simultaneous) (unclear)? Speaker 2: NASA is still doing some research. When they built the plane this last test they did, DARPA [Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency] actually took the lead on that. It was jointly NASA, DARPA and I think Rockwell [International; manufacturing conglomerate] I guess kind of partnered on modifying that airplane and doing the flight test on that. At the time they were thinking that it might be easier to build some of the general aviation jets, you know, like a G4 or G5 or something like that. You might be able to make that supersonic and make it with a sonic boom that's low enough to fly over land than a big 300 passenger airplane. You've got many of the same problems and I think they found that out but the next step is you got to build an airplane and make sure this things works. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 25789 Speaker 1: Now did your Ph.D. dissertation--well I know it had something to do with sonic booms too but did your graduate work parallel your work at NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration; Langley Research Center, Hampton, Virginia]--(simultaneous) (unclear)? Speaker 2: It did, it did. Usually what George Washington [University, Washington, District of Columbia] would try to do if you work on a degree while you were at NASA; they allowed you to take classes and they would try, with your professors, to allow you to come up with a research topic that was parallel to the work you were doing and so, since I was working in sonic boom I actually did a modified method of characteristics which is yet another computational kind of method of calculating the sonic boom, and so I did my research on that and I actually--I had two major professors I guess, one actually sat there at the field from George Washington; he taught some classes on the field, and then I worked with a man from New York University who had worked in this field a lot and he kind of came in and worked with me on the technical parts of doing this problem and everything. Speaker 1: Okay. Now who was your advisor at George Washington? Speaker 2: My advisor from George Washington was Dr. Michael Meyers (ph.) and my advisor at New York University was Dr. Lou Ting (ph.) who was Chinese. Speaker 1: Okay. So New York--I didn't realize--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 2: Well, like I said I wasn't really enrolled in New York University but Lou Ting had actually done a lot of work with folks who had done some outstanding work in the sonic boom area and was still kind of involved with people at NASA and he agreed to work with me on my dissertation. Speaker 1: Okay. So those are your two advisors. So when you think about your--well did your dissertation--how did it impact the field--(simultaneous) (unclear)? Speaker 2: Well, I think it enabled you to actually calculate the sonic boom out further than our strict computational method; that's one of the problems. Computational methods require a grid around your airplane and your answer is better and better, you know, the closer your grid points are, you know, like a picture if you got pixels closer together you get a sharper picture; in computations if your points, your intersecting points are closer together your answer is typically better but if you're talking about doing a calculation from 30,000 feet in the atmosphere to the ground that's pretty near impossible. You need to be able to take bigger steps. And one of the things that the method of characteristics allowed for you to be able to take bigger steps in your calculations. So we did some calculations using that but we also, kind of in parallel with that, still used the computational methods and then we would use some of the linearized theory methods that we had used earlier and match them and go to the ground using them also. So we used different methods to get to the ground. Speaker 1: Okay. Now you were the first black woman to receive a doctorate in mechanical engineering from George Washington University. Speaker 2: Oh, I don't know. Speaker 1: Well it says so here so here (unclear). Do you know of anybody else? Speaker 2: Okay. I don't know of anybody else--so I don't know I don't know that anybody has ever mentioned that to me or not. Speaker 1: Well the important thing is you got it so--. Speaker 2: I did get it and one of the things--a lot of people, who started out--because this was part time, I never stopped working, and a lot of people who started out with me in that program did not make it, did not graduate. Speaker 1: Now the kind of work that you did, it probably would not have been possible without computers, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, what I did I think the computer was very important. You know when I talk about the assumptions that people make in certain mathematical methods they did do things with like linearized theories by hand. They would take the governing equations and they would certain assumptions and they would say, oh well now if this is true in the situation we are looking at we can eliminate this whole part of this equation or this becomes a linear equation and you could get an equation sometimes that became simple enough that you could solve it without a computer. And that's what a lot of your mathematicians who did great things back before the days of computers. They made a lot of assumptions, and were able to use you know, within those assumptions to solve problems and so they would do that. Use linearized theory or they would you know, say well something called Euler equations which gives you another set of equations about fluid flow, but it doesn't include all the turbulence and everything that you would have in a real exacting fluid flow. So yeah--so you kind of adjust the methods you have available with how easy it is to solve with where the state of the art is and you kind of do the best you can and use each other to kind of validate that you are doing the right thing and getting the right answers and all of the above, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 25790 Speaker 1: Now in 1989 you were director of the Sonic Boom [Group] at NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration], right? Speaker 2: Yes, well no wait a minute, wait a minute '89 [1989]? Speaker 1: Yeah '89 [1989]. Speaker 2: Okay, I was technical lead of the sonic boom group. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So I was not director as far as, you know, title goes but I was the lead of the group. We--I kind of assigned the work, kind of checked the work and worked with the people at headquarters and things like that as far as sonic boom was concerned. And I guess one of the things there is every time a pitch came up or you had to talk to a group coming into the center [NASA's Langley Research Center, Hampton, Virginia] and somebody had to talk about sonic boom, I was often the one who had to do that. So it was a very visible position and, you know, all of your bosses got to know you, the center director got to know you and you got to go to conferences all over the world and things like that. From that point of view it was a very visible position; kind of got your name out there. Speaker 1: Okay. Who would you consider at the time of your work on this project--what mathematicians or scientists would be the leaders in this field of sonic boom? Speaker 2: Okay there was a guy named Antonio Ferri who was--I think he was at New York University too I believe. He did some pretty outstanding work but, I should have gone back and looked at some of my references. People do a bit by bit; there was some work done by some famous mathematicians in England that sort of lead to a lot of the minimization kinds of theories that went on. The computational methods and things that are used--Euler equations--there was this famous mathematician named [Leonhard] Euler [pioneering Swiss mathematician and physicist], I guess, who helped develop those equations which kind of explained how fluid flows and what happens to fluid as it flows which, of course, is the undergirding of how all of this happens. So, I guess I can't call the other names right now of the people. Story_ID: 25791 Speaker 1: Is a fellow named Carlson or--(simultaneous) (unclear)? Speaker 2: Harry Carlson okay, Harry Carlson was my branch head [NASA (national Aeronautics and Space Administration, Langley Research Center, Hampton, Virginia] at first, I guess, and section head. He actually was very supportive in my sonic boom work that I did. Harry would--he was very good at intuitively coming up with ways of maybe predicting the sonic boom or something. He could use a lot of data and come up--like he could measure the sonic booms of a lot of airplanes and everything and then he would take a given airplane and he would have taken that data and arranged it in such a way that you could give him a new airplane and he would predict what its sonic boom was going to be based on all of this data of sonic booms we had in the past. So he was very good at intuitively coming up with plots and predictions and things like that. And I worked with Harry for many, many years both in the sonic boom work and in the supersonic design. There was a portion of my career where I worked in classified work and then in just designing the flaps and the shape of the leading edge of the supersonic airplane and I worked very closely with Harry on that. Speaker 1: And you worked for someone named Michael Mann too? Speaker 2: Michael Mann, I worked--yeah we were office mates for a while; I guess doing some of the supersonic--some of our supersonic work that wasn't necessarily sonic boom. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 25792 Speaker 1: [In] '99 [1999], you became the director of the Aero Performing Center at -[NASA (National Aeronautics and Space Administration), Langley Research Center, Hampton, Virginia](simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 2: That's right during and about--one of my last projects in the--well I guess I actually applied and was selected for a senior executive service sort of development program, career development program and I was in the high speed research office at the time. When I came back from all of that training for that, I worked in the possibility of building a new engine for a high speed research aircraft. So I planned that project and did the advocacy work for trying to get the money for that project. Well soon after that I was selected for am SES [senior executive service] position. NASA changed how they managed projects at the time; usually they managed them from headquarters. They would give some money to this Ames [Research] Center in California, some money to Glenn Research Center in Cleveland [Ohio], some money to Langley [Research Center] here [Virginia] and so forth and so on. They decided that they were going to manage programs from centers and so they would--if it were going to be a helicopter program it would be managed out of Ames, if it were going to be a CFD program it would be managed out of Langley or design or something out of Cleveland; which Cleveland kind of excelled at. Well and so when they did that, those centers would parcel out work to other centers so if we were working rotor craft or we were trying to do some codes that would help the noise of a rotor craft, Ames would then send money to Langley. So we would end up within the aeronautics program; we would end up with funding for about fifteen programs where Langley was doing parts of that work and so the office that they created at Langley was the aero performing office and it took the money from all the other centers and it was helicopters, it was information technology, it was CFD, it was air traffic control, it was some kind of supersonic design and some engine work and things like that. So that is the office that I got in 1989 as the head of that office. So, I had people under me who were kind of managers of each of these programs; working with Ames or working with Glenn or working with the other centers to making sure that we were doing the work that they wanted and we were delivering what it was they were asking us to deliver. So that was my first SCS [senior executive service] position, yes. That was sort of my transition and in the meantime the high speed research program was not funded, I guess I started to say that. That is one of things about working on these projects, you know, Congress will fund and then Congress will unfund, and that causes ripple effects on what you're doing at these centers that depend on the funding from Congress. The high speed research program, partly probably due to Boeing [aerospace manufacturer and defense contractor], you know, Boeing says we are not going to be building this thing within the next ten years or so; Congress says we are not going to fund it and so everybody who works the high speed program kind of has to go off to work on other things and just before that happened, I had gotten the directorship of that office. I did that for several years and that was kind of part of my management--I went out of my career kind of doing management. But one of things that--before I got into management, you know, you could stay in the technical area and I did get an award for what they called the dual career award because they used to argue just like they would say you take your best teachers--you have a teacher and you take your best teacher--and take them out of a classroom and make them principal. Well, the same thing would happen there; they would say you take your best researchers and you take them and put them in management and they aren't doing research anymore. During that time they would say we ought to have some awards that we can give people who stay in research and so I guess somewhere in late '80s [1980s] or somewhere, I got a dual career award which was sort of an award for working at a higher level in a research area and not in management. Story_ID: 25793 Speaker 1: Then after that I decided to sort of move over in management and I guess one thing I should mention, in that management--in fact in even getting into the [NASA (National Aeronautics and Space Administration)] SESCDP [Senior Executive Service Candidate Development Program] program all my life I've been very active in the Presbyterian church and the Presbyterian church, you know, split over slavery back in 1861 or somewhere in there, and they reunited in 1983. And so, in Virginia, there was a white Presbyterian church, well it was the Southern Church and the Northern Churches is what it was. The Southern Church--all the churches in this area that were white belonged to the Southern Church but we belonged to the Northern Church. Our structure overlapped, we had presbyteries and we had centers and within Virginia our church, the Northern Church had one presbytery, southern Virginia presbytery which well I guess there were a couple of churches up North by Washington [District of Columbia] that weren't in Southern Virginia but we covered the whole state. The Southern Church had four or five presbyteries that covered the state and so I guess I was just kind of getting into some of the leadership from the church and so I became the chair of the Southern Virginia boundaries committee--how we going to define these boundaries. And so, over the course of a year or two, I worked with the boundaries committee from the Norfolk [Virginia] presbytery, from the Blue Ridge presbytery, from the--all the way across to Tennessee. And so I sort of got some leadership experience working with that. We defined the new boundaries in the church; then I was put on the boundary committee for the center level which is the next level up which would have been how the North Carolina center, the Virginia center and something up North, overlap with our center; our center went from North Carolina up to Delaware up to--. Speaker 2: This is a Presbyterian center--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 1: Yeah, Presbyterian--all of this--it's like the state level. You had your presbyteries and then you had your centers and then you had the national church. So, I worked with the center level on boundaries and we formed a new center that was adopted and I ended up being the moderator of one of the new centers. When I came back here and we finally got the presbytery in this area to work, I ended up moderating the counsel of this presbytery for several years. So I got, actually, some leadership experience and some management experience within the church. I actually used all of that to justify my write up to get into the SES [senior executive service] program at NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration; Langley Research Center, Hampton, Virginia] and be accepted into that program to get into the management there. So I actually kind of blended my church experiences and work with the work that I had done out there, especially for the leadership experience. Story_ID: 25794 Speaker 1: So you were talking before about how your experiences in the church and the re-organization of the Presbyterian church merging the Northern Presbyterian church with the Southern provided management skills you were able to then translate back to NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] because you were basically a researcher there. Speaker 2: That's true, so I actually used that in my write-ups for applying for that program; I used my church experiences. Speaker 1: Now you were at NASA until you retired in March 2007, so what were your activities from 1999 to 2007? Speaker 2: Okay. I had this aero performing office then I moved to the assistant director of the Center for Strategic Planning, so I was in that for several years. And I was actually in that position when--not [Space Shuttle] Challenger but [Space Shuttle] Discovery exploded and we actually, you know, the guy that was the head of the Kennedy Space Center [Florida]--when that exploded, he actually got transferred to Langley [Research Center, Hampton, Virginia] and became my boss at Langley. He brought several people who had been very much embedded in that program to Langley. One of the criticisms that we had had was that we tended to be a little bit too insular and keep people who were local there and so when we brought people here who were coming from Houston, Texas and from Kennedy Space Center, we were actually bringing people who had space experience that most people at Langley didn't have and so it kind of was supposed to be broadening our horizons again. So, I was in that position until he did a re-organization and I don't remember the year but then he kind of vacated all of the SES [senior executive service] jobs out there and everybody had to reapply for jobs after he had been there a year or so. That's when I got the job as--he combined public affairs and education and that's when I got the job as Director of Strategic Communications and Education and that's the job I retired from. Speaker 1: Director of Strategic--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 2: Yeah, it was strategic communications and education so all of the public affairs, external affairs and education office; all of that was under me. Speaker 1: Okay. You took on this job in--what year was it? Speaker 2: I don't remember. I'd have to look it up. Speaker 1: You retired in 2007--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 2: I retired in 2007 so I was there for two or three years, I guess, I'd have to look at the dates. Speaker 1: So about 2004, 2005, I guess. Story_ID: 25795 Speaker 1: All these years with NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration], where do you see NASA going now; I mean in terms of space programs canceled and I mean--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 2: Well, you know, we're having such financial problems, just like with this asteroid last week; the one that flew close by the Earth and the one that actually came into the atmosphere in Russia. Now everybody is saying that NASA needs to be doing more, looking out for things. I guess somewhere in my mind, I have trouble believing that we're the only people in this universe and I kind of think we need to know how to fly in space, we need some capability of being able to fly and maneuver and get around. I think NASA is very important there but there--Congress has to make very tough decisions on where we spend our money; they do need to make some decisions. We would spend almost all our time trying to come up with budgets and then cut budgets as, you know, Congress will cut something back. The other thing, I think money was wasted maybe in the research areas especially money is wasted when they fund a research program for a year or two and then they stop funding which they did to sonic boom twice in my career. They would stop funding it and then they would stop for about four or five years and then they would refund it. Well, by the time they would refund it, the people that were doing that work before have scattered and so it takes another year for you to try to find these people, try to pull up the codes that you had that you were running, find the people that know how to run the codes you were running, find the people that know what was accomplished before; it takes another year to do that. Even after I went into management when they were getting reading to build this airplane, I showed you a picture of, that DARPA [Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency] kind of led the program. I went to one of their planning meetings out in California and they would--because the high speed research program kept a lot of the work that they did private, secret, something because Boeing [aerospace manufacturer and defense contractor] says well you know this is our livelihood. We were kind of working close with Boeing and they said you can't tell everybody everything we're doing, because our competition picks it up, which makes it kind of complex. So we spent all this money, we had written all these papers, we had actually, I think, made some good progress but when I went to this meeting and these people were sitting there talking, they were talking about repeating the same things we had already done. And so I went to one of the young fellas that I had worked with and who was now kind of leading that area I said, "You all have got to get the documents that we worked on and you've got to get it to the people that are now working this program otherwise you're going to be spending money doing the same thing we have already done." They need to be stepping forward and so they need to know what we have done and they need to have access to that so they can move on and do the next step. That's a hazard when you fund a program and stop it and then come over here and fund it again because these people got to know what's been done. So I think that's very important, people certainly need to document everything that they do well, even their mistakes because mistakes can teach you things too. So all of that needs to be documented and written up so that the next group of researchers can come along and learn from that. I mean, sometimes things might have changed; one of the last iterations that we made with the high speed research, we says, well maybe structures has made so much progress, maybe we can build this thing out of composites because flying at supersonic speeds when you get above Mach two, Mach three, you can't use aluminum, you know, the [Space Shuttle] Challenger--the [Space Shuttle] Discovery that melted--it melted because that was an aluminum vehicle and when that shielding got knocked off that hot air coming back into the atmosphere got inside and melted that vehicle, well that's what happens with aluminum, so when you get up to Mach three speeds you're talking about temperatures of 17,000 degrees, I think that's the right number. So you've got to use titanium; well titanium is a whole lot heavier than aluminum and so now you've got this airplane that's weighing so much more that you got to try to fly through the sky. So all of those are additional problems but if you could advance your materials program enough, your composites such that they are stronger now that they can absorb the heat and yet they are lighter, you could build, you know, this airplane and it weighs a lot less. Boeing--this 787, I believe it has an all composite fuselage. It certainly has a lot more composite than it has ever had. So you are saying well you could possibly make advances in the structures area that might make you able to build this airplane differently because now it won't be as heavy as it was, kind of thing. Certain engine advances can do that and so you can get advances in other areas that come in and make you all of a sudden be able to put this system together. So I think there is definitely a place for NASA. I think the whole country reacts to the latest emergency; if somebody from outer space really did come here, NASA would, you know,--why hasn't NASA developed such and such a thing. We got to the moon quickly. Our school system was fixed when we were scared of the Russians--I told somebody, I said that when we had kind of the same problem then when Sputnik [first artificial Earth satellite; launched by the Soviet Union in 1957] went up I was a senior in high school, I remember the day I got the newspaper headline that said "Sputnik Up." So lots of money was spent fixing the schools around here teaching us math and science. We got problems, same kind of problems that we talk about now, but we aren't getting the same kind of reactions because we were scared of the Russians. Because when I was in school, we used to get under our desk for what do you call it--. Speaker 1: The air raid drills--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 2: Air raid drills, they're gonna to drop a bomb on us, so we climbed under our seats. We had bomb shelters that we would go to and everything so it scared us. So if something happens from outer space that scares us, they're going to be looking to NASA, well how can we operate, why don't we have engines big enough or strong enough to get us off this planet and or why can't we fight, you know, out there, you know. I guess the military does that; NASA and the military used to work a lot closer together than they do now. But I think it's a combination that we need it, I don't think we should do away with it. Story_ID: 25796 Speaker 1: When you look back at everything that you did at NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] and in science, how do you assess your contribution? Speaker 2: Well, I would like to think--I think that was a contribution. We have stepped forward during my career. The advent of the sonic boom problem was not long before I got there and I think we kind of see a way that might get us out of that problem. We might be able to fly around this planet a lot faster than we do. It takes a long time--short term within NASA--this was very interesting, when you go to Washington [District of Columbia] and you advocate for money, long term to them is three years, when you start talking long term within NASA and talking about how long it takes to do this research and validate this research and do the next step, we could be talking twenty, thirty years. People spend their whole careers working on one little problem out there, but the folks in Washington do not understand that. They will say their years of budget cycle is one year. Now, I understand in Europe and some places, that they won't adopt the one year budget; it will at least be two or three years so that somebody can get something done within that cycle before the budget is cut. But I heard when we were talking about the new thing in structures now where you could actually build the structures, design the structures or build such that they have strength in a certain direction and I'm thinking of the word. It is a whole new field of structures where you are working building atoms almost, putting them how they should be to be stronger and all of that. I saw a guy talking about building a spaceship and doing this by 2010 or something. Why would you get up there and say you're going to do this by 2010 you know that's important. He says when you go to Washington, you have to give a presentation; you can't get up there and say 2030, you've got to say something within the next few years otherwise those people don't even listen to you. That's a communication--it's kind of a cross communication; it's a hindrance to the research community but then they've got all their sets of problems too. Somehow we need to work together and talk together so that we can kind of get the best in both worlds but that long term has totally different meanings out here than it does inside the beltway. Speaker 1: Now, when you look back at everything you have done at this time, is there a major thing that you would go back and change or do differently in your career? Speaker 2: Well, I mean you know, I think my career could have done even better had I had been able to get into the engineering or something straight out of school. I guess I actually had a delay, because I was actually catching up with things that I didn't have in high school and experiences I didn't have. I didn't really find out what this engineer did until I got to NASA and saw the engineers working. Luckily, I had seen my interest in the physics and the mathematics and I was able to kind of bring that combination over into engineering and get the graduate degree in engineering because I had that background. I think it would have been a lot stronger and everything had I had it earlier in my career. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 25797 Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: My concern is--I have a real concern for African American black males, they--I see parents struggle and struggle trying to bring their sons up, trying to educate their sons and then their sons get a certain age and all of a sudden they are totally influenced by somebody who doesn't want to do anything and they just get pulled off. And the parents are pulling their heads out trying to keep the boys on the same track. I'm not sure where they got wrong in that, but that is a definite problem that we have. I don't know how we fix everything--there is a whole school of people out here that talk about charter schools would fix everything now, but we've got--and I see papers coming across my computer everyday that's saying that the charter schools are not the panacea that you would hear. A study at Stanford [University, Palo Alto, California], some instituted standard (unclear), has done one of the basic studies on the charters schools and there are saying that there are some that do pretty good. Now there are even charges that they don't accept everybody; that they are actually able to pick and choose the students that they have but there are charter schools that fail and I saw a report this year that some of those that are failing even though the promise was they would be closed--that there are plenty in Ohio that are for profit charter schools that have failed and they are still operating; they are still getting their money every year. Parents don't know all of this, you know, I think that's bad. The Presbyterian church--I worked on a paper in that a couple of years ago saying, you know, we got fifty million children in this country that we need to educate, and some of the charter and home schoolings are at about five million and we aren't sure they are dealing with all of the students and so we need to fix the public school systems, and we need to fix the teachers and somehow make the kids do the work. I don't know--I was horrified to find out that there are teachers, and I'm one, because a lot of teachers don't stay in the field; they stay four or five years and they leave. Especially those people who have the math degrees and who have the science degrees they go on off and get a job somewhere else. But they have got this strict teaching now where they give the teachers a book and at 9:15 on Monday morning, these are the words you are supposed to be saying to your students. Where is this thing that I took thirty hours of education to learn how to relate with this child, to see when this child is getting what I'm trying to teach them and to change my approach if I see that child doesn't know what I am talking about. But somebody is going to write a book and say that this is what I've got to say to that child at this certain time of the day and apparently that is in a lot of the schools, and maybe it is because they don't have the teachers. Because I have been here [Virginia], I've been in Atlanta [Georgia] in August of each year and they are saying we need twenty-four math teachers, we need special education teachers, we need this many science teachers and school starts next week, well who do they get to teach, I don't know. Somebody is teaching these kids and they are not learning. I have done some tutoring of students. I tutored a young lady in geometry a couple of years ago and just by sitting there watching her work problems, I found out she didn't know how to add fractions. She might understand the geometry concepts but she had missed the fractions and nobody ever picked that up and so somebody had to go back and teach her how to add fractions and what's the difference in adding and multiplying fractions, she missed this in the third or fourth grade. Speaker 1: So math is a cumulative--. Speaker 2: It is cumulative, it is cumulative and a lot of elementary teachers--maybe this is changing now; a lot of elementary teachers don't like math. I know in the past this has been the case so they have no--somewhere those kids have been missing something in math and it goes on and they get to ninth grade and they say, "I just can't do math." It's not that they just can't do math, they just missed something somewhere. There is a hole somewhere in their background and so they--from one aspect, you know, the Teach for America where they are putting all of these students from Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and MIT [Massachusetts, Institute of Technology, Cambridge] into classrooms. In one aspect, they know their subject matter, so you've got people who know the math and who know the English and everything but they are down-playing the importance of knowing how to reach that child. I think there might be some error there, especially with a lot of inner school children who have grown up in a manner that a lot of these people can't even identify with, it's pretty scary. I keep thinking maybe I should be--I have even brought the idea that this church would adopt the school across the street and be doing something with that school. This reporter wrote within the church--talked about what an individual church could do, what we could--we need to learn how the schools are funded, we need to learn how the school boards are appointed, how they work and be on top of what's going on with the schools in your area. So, I need to be preaching all of that. So I am concerned about a lot of what's going on especially in the urban areas and I wish we could just get all the drugs out of here which is a scourge on all of us. Story_ID: 25798 Speaker 1: Tell us something about your family, you have children, right? Speaker 2: Yes, I have two daughters and I have a step-daughter. My older daughter [Jeanne Edwards] teaches here in Newport News [Virginia]; she's got three kids. Her kids are twenty-seven, twenty-three and seventeen [years old]. The seventeen year old is a senior in high school this year. My second daughter [Janet Gipson] is in Atlanta [Georgia]; she works for the Dish Network Echostar. She is in business development with them and manages a couple of contracts in Canada and Mexico with them. So she was living in Colorado and her husband was military and they transferred to Atlanta, so they just let her bring her job to Atlanta. I don't know if she is going to try and go back to Colorado or not; she has hired several people working with her in Atlanta and actually manages some people in Colorado. My stepdaughter, we have kind of had--she's had a lot of problems and has never really gotten her life together so she is somewhere, I don't know exactly where she is, somewhere in Virginia. So, you know, I keep struggling between what I can do with family, what I can do with church, what I--what's my responsibility. Should I try to get another NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] contract or should I start a tutorial program here or I have so many projects going but just a tutorial program here to work with kids would be great, but it requires a total commitment. It's not something you can do one day and then say well I'm finished kind of thing. The kids need it every day and that means you are committed to doing it every day and that's a lot. I've seen that with my husband [Walter Darden], when I was working he had to work with a group of boys and he could never do anything on weekends because he was working with that program on weekends and would not be available to do anything because he wouldn't miss that Saturday morning. He needed to be here that Saturday morning with the boys. Actually a couple of the boys finished engineering school; they went through that program like eighteen years and graduated as engineers and are doing well now. But, of course, a lot of them dropped out, you have to deal with things like that. So there's a lot that we can do and we have to worry about our own families too. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 25799 Speaker 1: Ma'am how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Well, I would like to be remembered as having made a contribution to the scientific area that I worked in. I would also like to be remembered as a person of high integrity who always tried to be fair with people; one who tried to instill values in my children and--I guess those are the biggies, I think those are the biggies. Good grandma, good great-grandma. Story_ID: 25800 Speaker 1: This is a picture of Julian Bond and me. This was in 1995 at the University of Virginia; this was when I was in the training for the senior executive service and Julian would come down from Washington, I think, and give lectures at the University of Virginia about the federal government. Speaker 2: This is my family, this is in 1978, I think, my parents 50th anniversary, my husband and me, my daughter, my youngest daughter and my stepdaughter. Speaker 1: Will you go from left to right and gives us their names. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: How about start with whoever's in the front. Speaker 2: Okay. This is Janet- Speaker 1: And now the next row from left to right Speaker 2: Okay this is- Speaker 1: You don't have to Speaker 2: Okay, then next to her Jeanne, my mother, Desma-- Speaker 1: And her name? Speaker 2: Desma. Speaker 1: Oh I'm sorry. Speaker 2: And my father Noah and Mary, my stepdaughter, and then that's me on the back row standing and my husband Walter. Speaker 1: This is my father in 1926 at Knoxville College. Speaker 2: That's a Noah--. Speaker 1: Noah Horace Mann. Speaker 2: And that's my mother the same year at Knoxville College. Speaker 1: I think this picture was in the '80s [1980s]. I was speaking to a group of students at Virginia Commonwealth University in Richmond, Virginia. Speaker 2: And this picture was probably in the late--well early 70s [1970s], 73 [1973] or 74 [1974]; just as I was getting into some of the computing work. Speaker 1: This is the Office of Strategic Communications and Education at NASA, so this is the office I retired from. Speaker 2: This is a photograph of the airplane that was modified to generate low sonic boom, this was in probably 2004 or 05 and it's at Dryden Flight Research Center in California. Speaker 1: That's me in 1947 at Winchester Avenue School. Speaker 2: This is my family in 1995, we all spent Christmas together in Colorado. Do I need to identify anybody here? Speaker 1: If you want to (unclear). Speaker 2: I'm holding my grandson, Coleman, center front is Terrence Thornton, my grandson and then my granddaughter Kristen (ph. splg.), that's me and far left is Regina, my granddaughter. My daughter, Janet holding her baby Jordan and then her stepdaughter Farin (ph. splg.), Janet's husband Marcus, my husband Walter and my daughter Jeanne. Speaker 1: And that's just a photograph taken probably in the mid 90s [1990s]. Speaker 2: This is a photograph of a design I made and a study I did on aircraft design and this is in the supersonic wind tunnel at NASA Langley which is where most of the supersonic testing was done. Speaker 1: This is an exhibit that was in the air and space museum in downtown Hampton [Virginia] discussing the human element and the engineers that work on the airplanes out at NASA. Speaker 2: This is the same airplane that was validating the minimization concept and these are some of the men at Dryden Research Center who worked on this airplane there and the flight test. Speaker 1: This is me, I guess it says 1977, in the control room of the unitary wind tunnel; this is where all the controls and the data was taken from the tests. Speaker 2: This is the sonic boom group in the, around 1974 or 75, Kathy Needleman (ph. splg.), Christine in the middle and Robert Mack and the airplane there is one that we designed, one of the first--this one has the cells on it but it is one that we designed from the sonic boom minimization theory. Speaker 1: This is 1982 with President William Harvey from Hampton Institute-- University, I received the twenty year alumni award. Speaker 2: This was around 1976 or 77 [1977]; Langley had a huge inspection in which thousands of people came on center and went to many stops to hear about research going on and I was one of the speakers at one of the stops and I talked about the supersonic aircraft designs. Speaker 1: This is with Richard Peterson who was the director of Langley Research Center and one of the officials from Washington; I was receiving a medal for equal opportunity from NASA. Speaker 2: This picture was in 1983 just a week or so before my mother died. It's actually in the church yard there in Monroe. We were at home to celebrate my parent's 55th anniversary, so my sisters and brothers and a couple of in laws are in this picture and a couple of nephews and great nephews and great nieces here. Speaker 1: This is my sisters and brothers at my parents 50th anniversary and to identify those seated, I'm far left and then my mother and my father, my sister Constance Monroe, my sister Joyce Lofton and then standing to the left my brother Giffen Mann and my brother Horace Mann. Speaker 2: This was a Candace award that I received in New York and I'm not sure of the date, I guess it would be on my resume probably in early 80s [1980s] and there were some well-known people at this affair in New York. Speaker 1: Coretta Scott King? Speaker 2: Yes, Coretta Scott King, this is a movie star--. Speaker 1: Melba Moore is next to you. Speaker 2: Yeah, and then this is Ed Bradley and I think somebody else. Speaker 1: That's a--the guy we were talking about yesterday, you know--he played in Fresh Prince's unvle--he is James Avery. Speaker 2: Okay. So--they used the museum in New York for that affair that was very nice...