 Story_ID: 622368 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers, our videographer is Scott Stearns. Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Cullen Dubose [HistoryMaker Cullen L. Dubose], C-U-L-L-E-N, my middle name is Lenair, L-E-N-A-I-R, my last name is D-U-B-O-S-E. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: July 5th, 1935, Moss Point, M-O-S-S, P-O-I-N-T, Mississippi. Speaker 1: Okay. And we were saying before we got started that Moss Point is on the Gulf [Gulf of Mexico], right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: On the Gulf, all right. Speaker 2: Interesting on my name I would comment-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --my name is spelled with a small B, my whole family is spelled with a capital B, including my kids [Cheri DuBose Reid, Cullen DuBose, Jr. and Freddie DuBose] and everybody else, but when I went in the [U.S.] military my birth certificate had a small B on it, so I've never took the necessary steps to get it changed. Okay, so I'm the only one in the family that I know who spells their name with a small B. Speaker 1: Now, I notice your name has a, seemed to have a, a French influence, as a lot of names on the Gulf have but-- Speaker 2: The-- Speaker 1: --is that true? Speaker 2: It is, they are not sure who fathered my [paternal] great-grandfather [Joe DuBose, Sr.] but he was a Frenchman in Carolina and it was two brothers and they are not sure which brother was--the name came from. So yeah, it did come from the slave owners in Carolina who was French who left the country and went back to France so apparently they was not happy with that. When they went back we don't know but I guess they went back after slavery. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Now, sir, what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I am a real estate developer. We develop multifamily row properties. Speaker 1: Okay. And you're an, you're an engineer as well? Speaker 2: I'm a civil engineer (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Civil engineer, okay. All right. Now, what, what is today's date? Speaker 2: I'm sorry? Speaker 1: What is today's date? Speaker 2: Today is the 10th. Speaker 1: June the 10th. Speaker 2: June the 10th. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Twenty ten [2010]. Speaker 1: All right. And where are at the present time? Speaker 2: We're at Cultural Gardens' community house [Lester Morgan Cultural Gardens, Detroit Michigan]. Cultural Garden is a 127 unit complex that we own. Story_ID: 622369 Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that management compels me to ask of everyone and they only require a short answer. They're kind of a warm up. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: The first question is, do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: All seafood is my favorite (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: I am colorblind and my wife [Helena DuBose] dresses me mostly in blue and gray. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: The summer is my favorite time, the summer and spring. Speaker 1: Okay. And do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: No, I, that just stops it, I hate going back to the same place over and over or more than once. I rarely go back vacationing to the same place. Speaker 1: Okay. So a different place would be your favorite? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Or preference anyway? Speaker 2: Preference-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --if I'm planning it. Speaker 1: So do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Yes. There's no mysteries if you have the facts. Story_ID: 622370 Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna ask about your family history, I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Howard DuBose] side, but we'll start with your mother's side first. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it? Speaker 2: S-H-O-F-F-I-E, Edwards, E-D-W-A-R-D [sic.]. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, how do you pronounce her first name? Speaker 2: Shoffie. Speaker 1: Okay. It's, it's, what do it get, what, what's the spelling again? I must have it wrong. Speaker 2: S-H-O-F-F-- Speaker 1: S-H, okay, S-H, okay. Speaker 2: --F-F-I-E. Speaker 1: Okay. I got it now, all right. So Shoffie Edwards [Shoffie Edwards DuBose]. And is there a story behind her name? Speaker 2: The only story of that, I don't have any story behind the name, her--I, I know other than, I know who her father was and some history of him. I know no history of her mother [Loulu Stokes Edwards] other than she lived in Alabama and they was farmers and her husband, Charles, which was my mother's father, left Alabama and went on the Gulf Coast and was assumed to be white even though he never told anybody that, so he became a voter and by paying poll tax. And then he went back to Alabama and got my dad and some other people because if you were a registered voter and your, you paid for your employees you could be in business for yourself. So and the other thing that I know, that his mother was the owner of, of his dad, was a slave owner. And he had one brother, Charles and Jimmy [Jim Edwards (ph.)]. I met Jimmy it was in, after I was in school, in high school [Magnolia High School, Moss Point, Mississippi], or junior high [Magnolia Elementary School, Moss Point, Mississippi]. But my grandfather was killed about 1942 in a automobile accident or a truck accident. Speaker 1: Now, now, what was your grandfather's name? Speaker 2: Charles Edwards [ph.]. Speaker 1: Charles Edwards, and let me go back a minute. What, what is your mother's date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: My mother's place of birth was in Monroe County, Alabama and she was born in 1902. Speaker 1: Okay. And what about your grandfather, do you know when he was born? Is there, but he was born during slavery (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was born in slavery. Speaker 1: Okay. So we know he was born prior to-- Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-five [sic.]. Speaker 1: Yeah, 1865. Speaker 2: Eighteen sixty-five [1865], yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. So he, so but you don't know the exact date? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So, well, that's quite a story, now you were tell- telling me that, yeah, that his, his mother was white, right? And she was the owner (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) His mother was white. Speaker 1: --was the owner. Speaker 2: She was the owner. And when she was pregnant with either him or his brother, I'm not sure which one was born first, when they were born they were sent out to the slave camp with their father and there was no mention that she had had a, a baby and she did not expose herself to anybody while she was pregnant, she stayed in on the farm. Speaker 1: Now, the story you, you were telling before you said that that she, her, the white husband passed away (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Away. Speaker 1: And she took up with one of her slaves. And-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --the babies were raised as, as if they were not hers? Speaker 2: They were not hers. Speaker 1: Okay. Did, now after slavery was over were, was any of this revealed to the community or did they-- Speaker 2: No (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) just kind of-- Speaker 2: No. It, it, I guess it was hush, hush, for, for, for years after then. It, I'm not sure how it came up in the discussion that we, we--that I learned about it from my dad and, and my mother talking about it, but mostly from my dad who was older than my mother. Story_ID: 622371 Speaker 1: Your [maternal] grandfather, Charles Edwards [ph.], he settled in the, on the Gulf Coast? Speaker 2: He settled on the Gulf Coast and remarried. It's interested, he never divorced my grandmother [Loulu Stokes Edwards] but he remarried in Mississippi and that was never contested but raised at his des- death, there was some question of whether my mother [Shoffie Edwards DuBose] was entitled and they found that not only was she entitled but that the second family was not entitled, but my mother was a Christian person, my grandmother was a Christian person, my dad [Howard DuBose] was very Christian so they chose not--that, that he didn't have any money when he left 'em and so they did not protest the, the settlement. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It, it was not a lot of money then but it would, today if you look back they did well then, then and he was obviously somewhat an aggressive, successful person. The house was on the waterfront and just the fact that he picked up, that he could pay the poll tax and, and hire people to work for him so, but anyway he was killed though doing paper wood hauling or something to that effect. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, this is during, he was killed during the 1940s you said? Speaker 2: About '42 [1942]. Speaker 1: Nineteen forty-two [1942]. And he, okay, now are you, are you sure that he was born during slavery days because that would make him about a hundred? No, it would make him in his eighties, and well, yeah, in his eighties. Speaker 2: Yeah, he was in, he, he would have been in, in, in his eighties and his brother which I knew, would, would, would have been near-- Speaker 1: Yeah, I think he would have been in, yeah, he would have been in his eighties at least. Yeah, eighty-seven I think from what I calculate. Speaker 2: And I'm not sure, when I said he was born during slavery, I just know the story and I've heard the story not from him but from his brother who was Jim Edwards [ph.] who I know and seen after I was some age. So they may have been born before then but it's no question that the facts of the white mother was it because I got it from his brother who-- Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) lived after I was, some time. Speaker 1: Often in those days depending on the circumstances didn't, things hadn't really changed that much from slavery to-- Speaker 2: Yeah, so-- Speaker 1: --Reconstruction, so-- Speaker 2: --he may, he may have been younger but they-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --they were both very old. Jim lived with his son, his son took care of him and he didn't work and so, you know, we work until we die in most cases but he was staying with his son and didn't work. Speaker 1: There are people that today as we talk, they talk about their parents being born into slavery meaning they were sharecroppers and they, they, they will say that. Now, they (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: --say, yeah, my daddy was a slave but he wasn't really a, technically a slave but the conditions he lived under were so bad that it was almost like that. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 622372 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, the only thing else, thing I know about my mother's [Shoffie Edwards DuBose] family would deal with the, her dad's [Charles Edwards (ph.)] second family, was six or seven kids and they moved to San Francisco [California] after his death and we visited or knew each other. Since then I've met some of 'em when I went off to a Urban League [National Urban League] convention but I don't know anything specific about that family. And most of 'em worked as longshoremens. Other than that and occasionally they would come to Pascagoula [Mississippi] and would visit and come by the house and stay a few days. But other than that, that all that--my grandmother raised three kids, my mother, which was her kid, and a sister who died in childbirth with the second kid, the son was--it was another girl, was Jane [ph.] and they grew up and my dad [Howard DuBose] married her and the first cousin married the other one. The other guy was named Johnny [ph.] and he left Alabama when he was fourteen or fifteen because he got involved with a, a white woman who was the neighbor and they sent him to Chicago [Illinois]. And I met him after I got to Michigan, my dad came up to visit and we went to Chicago and looked until we found him by checking with people. He never went back and could never go back because they was afraid for his life. But that's, that's about the extent that I, I know. They had some small piece of land-- Speaker 2: This is your father's side your-- Speaker 1: No, this is my mother's (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Your mother's side, okay. Speaker 1: They had a small piece of land in Alabama, which was eventually sold to bury one of the other persons that my grandmother raised, okay. Other, other sister but other than that I didn't know. When you mentioned the sharecroppers, neither side of my family ever sharecropped on my mother's side or my dad's side. Both families homesteaded land after they left the slave in Carolina. My dad's grandfather [Joe DuBose, Sr.] and his brothers and her grandfather and they, they all homesteaded land. Speaker 2: So, so, so your mother's family was originally from Carolina? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And then-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --came, okay. So what, what was your grandmother's name on, on your mother's side? Speaker 1: Lucy. Speaker 2: Okay. Lucy Edwards [Loulu Stokes Edwards]? Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: She was a Stokes before marriage. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Lucy Stokes. Speaker 2: Okay. Any stories about her? Speaker 1: No, no. They, after my grandfather did not go back and get her, my dad went back and got her so she was, I, I was raised in the house with both grandmothers. Speaker 2: Okay. Okay. Well, did your mother talk about growing up and what it was like? Speaker 1: Very, very little. My mother married at fifteen. My dad was twenty or twenty-two. He was seven years older than her. We had ten kids, she had ten kids. There was not much discussion about her, her--passed down whether that was because of her early marriage and so forth. And I'm not sure of the circumstance, when I say the circumstance of, of her and my dad--marriage but there was no kids born before but I'm not sure she didn't marry to get out of a situation of--her dad had left and, and became, did, did not send any help back and so forth-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --so, I'm not sure. Speaker 2: Okay. Now, did, did your mother have a chance to go very far in school? Speaker 1: My mother went to eighth grade. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Which they thought was, was considerable (laughter). And she married after eighth grade. Story_ID: 622373 Speaker 1: Now, is, can you give us your, your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Howard, H-O-W-A-R-D, DuBose, D-U-B-O-S-E. Speaker 1: Is it capital B on his (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, capital B-- Speaker 1: Okay (laughter). Speaker 2: --on his (laughter). Speaker 1: So you're the only one without a capital B? Speaker 2: I'm the only one and my wife [Helena DuBose] hassles me not to go get that corrected continuously because all the kids is capital. My three kids [Cheri DuBose Reid, Cullen DuBose, Jr. and Freddie DuBose] is capital B-O-S-E, and she used the capital B-O-S-E, 'cause we didn't know. But at some time I ran into some difficulty but, some legal transaction and I, rather than, and then I just didn't change it, that would have been a time to do it then but I didn't and I have never changed it. Speaker 1: Okay. So, your father is Howard DuBose and he, what, what is his date of birth and place, and place of birth? Speaker 2: Was Monroeville and he was born November 11, 1995--1895 (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Eighteen ninety-five [1895], okay. Speaker 2: Eighteen ninety-five [1895] (laughter). Speaker 1: Yes, sir, okay. Now, well what can you tell us about your father's side of the family? How far back can you trace them? Speaker 2: I can trace them a long ways because this is, my grandmother [Ida Knight DuBose] lived with us and he lived with us. And my father's family left Carolina, grandfather [Gould DuBose] left Carolina and him and his brothers homesteaded approximately two thousand acres of land and they farmed it. My dad--my grandfather on my dad's side died at a very young age when my dad was very young. My dad only went to fifth grade and he got out and worked. His mother maintained their share of the land and did not mortgage it, even while she was raising the seven kids. And she remarried but did not, and had two additional kids after my grandfather died. But she kept the land in the name of her and her children in that day and, which I don't understand since women couldn't own property in Michigan but anyway (laughter), she kept the land and was very proud that she never sold it or never took a mortgage on it to, to raise the kids. That land is still in Monroeville, Alabama, and I own sixty-seven acres of it now. My dad grew up there farming that land with his mother. After he got married [to Dubose's mother, Shoffie Edwards DuBose], he farmed it one year with one of his brothers or two of his brothers. And when they got through he said that the person they were buying the land--seeds and fertilizer from was white and had the country store and he told him, "Howard, you had a good year, you've sold your crop and you're able to pay off all your debt and feel free to come get some seeds from me and fertilizer next year when it's time to plant." And he said he made a decision then, which was about 1919, that it was no way he was gonna work a year and when he got through he had to borrow to start over. So he contacted my grandfather, my mother's daddy [Charles Edwards (ph.)], who was in Mississippi and he came down to Moss Point [Mississippi] and, and worked for him loading lumber. And he found the same thing that my grandfather had found that even though you were black in races, my dad did not look like he was white, he was about my complexion but had straight hair, straighter hair than I have, and but that the folks that owned the sawmill and was shipping lumber didn't care and the people there didn't care. For some reason poll tax was important, you made $3.60 a week for six days and poll tax was three dollars but if you got, if you paid poll tax not only could you vote but you got free public services like if you own land instead of having to build a bridge to go across the open ditch they would come in and put a driveway in for you, put a drain pipe down for you. And you got a, a lot of, of, of things out of that. So my dad did that, worked and loaded lumber and at some point in his life after that he worked at the paper mill for a while. Story_ID: 622374 Speaker 1: He [Dubose's father, Howard DuBose] owned buses, two buses that--white and blacks couldn't ride on the same bus going to work so he said, you know, that he was riding on the white man's bus why couldn't he buy him a bus and he'd take 'em to work. So he bought two buses and, and started carrying people to and from work. They would go to work at about seven or six o'clock in the morning and they would come back. So that's all the buses did, it wasn't taking, you know, like picking up people at the corner and taking 'em other places. It only took 'em to the paper mill and brought 'em back, but they was scattered all over the country, and I mean all over the city [Moss Point, Mississippi]. And he worked at the paper mill and ran those buses 'til sometime after World War II [WWII] started. And my, one of my older brothers drove for him and drove on the bus and a cousin, depending on the shifts they had, and they all went in [the U.S. military] service, so it was somewhat difficult then to get it. And my sister was married then, her husband was in service but he was quickly discharged because he was flatfoot and couldn't march. So he started driving one of the buses for my dad. And the white company objected to it and they stopped him at the end of the route which was in the country and they beat him up, so he left town and moved to Monroeville [Alabama] and my dad just pulled the buses and the job and started doing other things. My dad never held a, a job after I was probably seven, I never remember. I knew when he was at the paper mill but I was probably seven years old, after then he ran the buses and then he got him a dump truck. And he cleaned up building sites, construction sites, then he bought some land and started selling dirt, a dirt pit. And he would pick up scrap metal on the street and when he accumulated he would sell it. And he grew gardens on small lots. And key--and one of the things that we were allowed, we had, I had a Shetland pony, me and my brother [Kirkland DuBose] had a Shetland pony and we built us a little wagon and he grew fruit, not fruit, vegetables, and we picked the vegetables and sold 'em but he also made us pick the vegetables and give 'em away to the widows in the community. And he would never carry the vegetables to them, he made us carry 'em and collect 'em out the garden. And until late in life, after my mother [Shoffie Edwards DuBose] died and he and I spent a lot of time, I knew that it was no reason for him giving 'em to 'em other than he figured God had blessed him to the extent and it was a surplus and he had ten kids and they was widows and so forth. It was nothing, no other reason there. I mean we got to know each other real well and talked about everything. So my dad-- Speaker 2: Just to go back there's a reason for him having you and your brother take the vegetables to the widows, right? Speaker 1: Yeah. The reason was that he felt that God was blessing him more than it was blessing anybody else and he was being blessed because he was sharing it. So I didn't, if I'm giving you something and it's a block away from your house can't you go in the field and pull the corn yourself? I figured that, that was me and my brother's feeling. He said, "No, 'cause, you know, people don't wanna feel like they in need and that's begging, so you gotta keep their pride so you have to give it 'em," but because they was widows and he was a male in (unclear), we had other thoughts but I can tell you that it, they, they was the wrong thoughts, you know. We had, later before he died after my mother died I used to go down four or five times a year and spend time with him. He got depressed and it, it was, that was all it was, he was giving it away. He, he was giving the vegetables away. Speaker 2: Now, it would, would have been, you know, it would have been--probably seems as suspicious if he were delivering those vegetables himself, I guess (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It would have been more suspicious then. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And that's what he explained that he didn't wanna deliver 'em for that reason. Now, we also sold vegetables so it wasn't just like we were going to pick just for them, but if we were gonna pick to sell we had to pick enough to give away some, too. Story_ID: 622375 Speaker 1: And he [Dubose's father, Howard DuBose] had dump trucks and while we were in school, high school [Magnolia High School, Moss Point, Mississippi], we could get the truck on Saturday and we could sell a load of dirt to somebody who wanted some topsoil or somebody who wanted some fertilize, when I say fertilize, cow manure and so forth. So, we started working very young. He had pecans, we could pick up the pecans and we could sell 'em and keep half of the money. So his philosophy was that you had to be taught to, to work and to take care of your money. And the story that I, I tell people often about him, I borrowed thirty-five cent from him to go to a basketball game, it was twenty-five cent for the, twenty-five cent for the bus and ten cent for the game, and I told him I'd pay him in a week or two. Two or three weeks later I went back to borrow sixty-five cent and he said you hadn't paid me my thirty-five cent (laughter) and he didn't lend it to me. And, and that was it, if you said you were gonna do something don't tell him you were gonna do something that you couldn't do. So he, he didn't lend me any more money until I paid him the thirty-five cent, okay. So he was very strong, disciplined that way. And, you know, he was quite a entrepreneur in his own right but he couldn't grow because he was afraid of debt. Yeah, he says, "If I get in debt the white people will then take everything I got." He bought land for taxes, tax revert land, so he had several small rent houses, which may have had some contribution to me getting into real estate after I left engineering. Never did make much money off of it but it got a little money and the maintenance was cheap because he taught us to do the maintenance. And in reality I did not get a college prep in high school, all blacks that attended school when I went to school had to take shop of some kind and that was a half a day. So if you go back and count the hours in the day, there's no way I could have had a college prep when I went to college. Speaker 2: So it was industrial arts, you know, training (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I'm a carpenter, I can do-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --carpenter work. I can, could lay bricks then, I couldn't lay 'em now. Speaker 2: Well, that's part of the industrial education model of Booker T. Washington in that era (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That, that's exactly what it was. And they gave majors at Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] and so forth on it. They called it industrial art, okay. But you learned a trade and it was fun to me because my dad did it. By the time I finished high school I had built two small houses, one of 'em, both of 'em is still standing I saw this, this weekend. Story_ID: 622376 Speaker 1: We were talking about your father [Howard DuBose] and is there, when, is there a story about how your parents met that they tell? Speaker 2: Nothing other than him and somebody else was competing for my mother [Shoffie Edwards DuBose] and they met at a church, they went to the same church, little church, little country church that still exists and that was the extent. Didn't talk much about their relationship. I tried to press him even after my mother's death and we got real close, how could they have ten kids and spread 'em over eighteen years in those days but they, they, we're spaced approximately two years apart. And that was always amazing to me how could you do that in those days. But no, other than that and that, my dad did not do very little socializing, so my mother may do very little like the PTA [Parent Teacher Association] and so forth. My dad went to our sport games but that was the extent. Story_ID: 622377 Speaker 1: Can you give us the names of your brothers and sisters in, in order and, and where you fit in? Speaker 2: I'm number ten, I'm the youngest. The oldest one is Charlean [Charlean DuBose Williams], who is ninety-two this year. She lives in Mobile, Alabama. She finished twelfth grade by leaving Mississippi and going to Alabama. When she graduated, Mississippi stopped people at eighth grade and then they went to Piney Wood [Piney Woods Country Life School, Piney Woods, Mississippi], you could get a tenth grade certificate and a twelfth grade. If you got a twelfth grade you could come back and teach. She later became the lab technician of some kind, would sterilize medical facilities and so forth. She's married-- Speaker 1: So did she go to Piney Woods? Speaker 2: No, no, she went to some school in Mobile, Alabama, she left and went to Mobile. The next brother was Lawrence [Lawrence DuBose], next child was Lawrence. Lawrence, again went to eighth or tenth grade, it may have been tenth grade by him. He then went in World War II [WWII], came back out of World War II, 37 percent disability, and finished twelfth grade on the G.I. Bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944] and then took a trade building furniture. Lawrence lived in Moss Point [Mississippi] the rest of his life, had a great influence on me. He eventually wound up, when he died he worked for an England shipyard, he owned his own barbershop, my daddy [Howard DuBose] did some bartering--barbering too in his day. So Lawrence opened his barbershop and then he started a laundromat with washers and dryers, then he got a liquor store with a license. Kind of a, my whole family did not stick much to, to jobs, they did something. So he was the second child. What's very interesting, was the talk of the town, he subscribed to The Wall Street Journal, which blacks wasn't supposed to do. And he talked about stocks and I can remember him trying to talk about the economy and I'm not saying he wasn't talking but as a young boy we would go outside and laugh and say if he going in there talking buying some stock they would be beat him to death (laughter) in more of a street term. But Lawrence ran the barbershop, it was a place that people stopped and the real barbershops and, and, and exchanged information and so forth. Was active and died reasonably well. One of the things, had six or seven kids, and he did reasonably well financially but was not well educated. And one of the things that I think happened to you and, and I see it in, in me now, I tell my kids [Cheri DuBose Reid, Cullen DuBose, Jr. and Freddie DuBose] they gotta run fast, jump high, and throw further, you can't make Bs, if you're a A student, you gotta be a A student and so forth. Is, is that was his, his thing. But I think it backfired on him because if you grew up in Mississippi then and in Moss Point, Lawrence had more money than most people, he was in the top earners in the city. So his kids, some of 'em, he has a daughter there which is on the city council now and owns two or three small businesses, but most of 'em did not realize the work that it took to be a businessperson, even though they were very smart with businesses. And, and they didn't pursue education and their business eventually they wound up getting jobs. But that, I think the, the disadvantage is, debated often, the kids didn't see the financial reward for, for going to college. Now, we got some grandkids who is working on their doctorates and so forth for engineering in Atlanta [Georgia] and I think a lot of my nieces and nephew look for me from what they were doing which, you know, my daughter's an engineer but she went on got a master's in business administration too. But Lawrence was the, the second one. Story_ID: 622378 Speaker 1: Then Barnceal [Barnceal DuBose Jones] is, was the next one, was a sister. And the next brother was Milford [Milford DuBose] and I'll do both of these together because their life wound, ducktailed together. They went to eighth grade in, or ninth, tenth grade in Mississippi. Then they went to Alabama to boarding school, which was two years, eleventh and twelfth grade. So they did that after they had, about-- Speaker 2: What, what school did they go to, do you remember? Speaker 1: No, I don't. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I, I, I'll, I'll try to get that information. Speaker 2: Just, I just asked 'cause I think it's like it's interesting to collect the names of these, these schools. Speaker 1: These schools. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I, there, there are people in Monroeville [Alabama] and there are people who I went to school with. And, in fact, I just saw one last week, a couple days--I, I, I will get that information. It was like Springfield [ph.] something but it was a boarding school which led my dad [Howard DuBose] to believe that all of us had advanced education beyond high school because it was a boarding school. And at that time if you could teach with twelfth grade that was college to him. So but it, Milford, Barnceal both went there. After high school, Milford went to Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] and was drafted in the [U.S.] military. Barnceal got married and then her husband, they moved to Philadelphia and she went to some junior college for some short time there but nothing more than the junior college did she have. Milford came back from service and finished at Tuskegee and came back to Mississippi and didn't stay for very long. He moved to Maryland and he still lives in Glen Burnie, Maryland, but could not settle in Mississippi. There was not a job other than the trades, which he had a trade in but you, there was only one trade job to teach in at each school so it wasn't like you could get a lot of, and men couldn't teach anything else but the trade then. So he tried brick masons for a while but then the union, he, he didn't wanna go through the apprenticeship for a dollar an hour so he left and went to Maryland and started his own mason company and he did that for a number of years and then did something with the military, [U.S.] Coast Guard, and retired from a federal job. Then Willie Howard [Willie DuBose]-- Speaker 2: That's the fifth one, right? Speaker 1: That's the fifth one. He went in service during World War II [WWII] and when he came out he went to Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, he stayed there until death. He used his G.I. Bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944] to become a body and fender work- and then he started delivering bread, selling bread on the side and, and doing body and fender work until his death. His wife and one daughter still live there. Esper [Espernola DuBose Bell] is a sister-- Speaker 2: And how do you spell, spell her name? Speaker 1: E-S-P-E-R. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: E-S-P-- Speaker 2: Esper. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Esper finished high school in Mobile, Alabama [at Dunbar High School]. I ought to be able to name that one because it was after one of the blacks like Booker T. Washington, but she's still living so I can ask her that, they can also probably tell me the school in Alabama. But after high school she went to Philadelphia, went to school for some time but got married and moved back to Moss Point [Mississippi] and her and her husband [Jesse Bell, Jr.] live there now in Moss Point and they have four kids. Her daughter [Felecia Bell Coleman] heads up one of the state's mental health program. The other son retired from the military after twenty-three, twenty-eight years in government, works as a electrician there but they moved back and stayed there. Story_ID: 622379 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Number eight now, are we, are we at eight? Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: Are we at seven or eight now, which one? Speaker 2: Esper [Espernola DuBose Bell] you got four left, you're at six. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Six, okay, so (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She, she has to be the sixth. Speaker 1: Okay. She's six. Speaker 2: Okay. So the other one was Robert Carl [Robert DuBose]. And after high school he volunteered for the [U.S.] military. Never came back. Died reasonably young in Virginia of a stroke. I didn't know a lot about him because other than he went to high school, graduated from twelfth grade by then you had a twelfth grade at Magnolia High School in Mississippi [Moss Point, Mississippi]. He left and went in service. After his service he went to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] for a while and he never came back after the military. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Then the other brother, Norris [Norris DuBose], went to Philadelphia when my sister got married to stay with her. He finished high school. My sister moved back, divorced and moved back to Mississippi. Norris volunteered for the military rather than come back. And, and he later came out of the military in Fayetteville, North Carolina, to open a restaurant and ran a restaurant there and then he eventually moved to Washington, D.C. and opened a restaurant there. And he died there. The restaurant was on, close to the Omega house [Omega Psi Phi Fraternity] there across the street from Howard University [Washington, D.C.], where he furnished food to the athletes, visiting athlete team, food, soul food restaurant. Before he left Fayetteville they had a restaurant but they also hired people and had a park, amusement park with a Ferris wheel. They hired people to sell liquor on--'cause liquor was not legal in North Carolina. So by the time liquor became legal he was a felon because they had been arrested for selling liquor so he couldn't get a liquor license so his business went broke there and he went to Philadelphia, I mean to Washington, D.C. and started over and got back on his feet and, and so forth. But he eventually died again of high blood pressure and a stroke which further, you know, emphasizes, I talk about this a lot in my family, the difference in education. He became so involved that he wouldn't spend the money to go to the doctor, okay, he was just self employed and he didn't have insurance now even though he was a veteran he probably could have went to the VA [Veterans Administration; U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs]. You know, you never knew he hired, had high blood pressure, he never understood it, even though his grandmother [Loulu Stokes Edwards] died of high blood pressure, my mother's mother. My mother [Shoffie Edwards DuBose] died of heart trouble and her high blood pressure for the lack of medical care. I mean, it, money didn't stop her from going to the doctor but I don't remember exact--whenever I got there and looked at the, what she was taking, she was not being treated for high blood pressure which raised a real issue with me and then she was going to the doctor. And my grand- my dad's mother [Ida Knight DuBose] went to the doctor every day 'cause they told her how good she looked (laughter) and she liked them compliments. But so Norris died of that. And then Kirk [Kirkland DuBose] which is two years, was two years my senior, after high school he was two years ahead of me in high school, he did not wanna go to college, would not go to college. He thought he could take over my dad's business and, and run it. And my dad [Howard DuBose] had trucks and he hauled various things. And Kirk was a very good worker, but he didn't like the business side of getting the job and doing the paperwork and deciding how much it was, so he eventually let the business go and became a plumber and then he worked at the longshoremen and he died president of the longshoremen union [International Longshoremen's Association] there. And he had eight kids, and his wife [Mildred Miller DuBose] just died, we buried her yesterday, that was the funeral I went to yesterday. Story_ID: 622380 Speaker 1: Now when you think about your parents' personalities and their talents and their dispositions, who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: My dad [Howard DuBose], my dad, I, I take too much after him. I used some of the things that he used with me to raise my kids [Cheri DuBose Reid, Cullen DuBose, Jr. and Freddie DuBose], which was a mistake. They have all, my kid in the same and each kid is different, okay. I, I did not pick that up when, when my kids was young. The other thing that I, I think the, my financial success whatever exists, I think came from him. He never believed in paying interest or debt, wait until you can afford it and then get it. And I think, when I say you go overboard in that, when I got married and sometime during that time, we, my wife [Helena DuBose] was ready for a washer and a dryer and I said, "Well, no, we can't buy one until we can pay cash or, or ninety day same as cash," that was stupid and then you'd have to go to, ignorant, and then you have to go to a laundromat and stay there for two hours waiting on a machine. And, I mean, some things you, you, you, if, if, if the, whatever you're buying on credit has a life expectancy that you can cover in that, you can do it but I think those are the things that I, I took from my dad in terms of, of the money. And I think some of it has, has backfired. Even today we've owned real estate that we probably should have refinanced and sold that that is there. But I think took after my dad, my work habits is his. I think my giving back is, is from him, he was a very giving person but was not much for congratulating you or complimenting you, you know, it was what you're supposed to do. He, you know, would tell you something once he expected you to do that and, you know. When I went to college at Tougaloo [Tougaloo Southern Christian College; Tougaloo College, Tougaloo, Mississippi] he said, "Don't leave the campus." Now, he didn't expect you to leave the campus, he was very stern. I had a brother who served two years in [the U.S. military] service and he came back a few days before Christmas from Korea and he called and said he needed to borrow some money to get home for Christmas. My dad said, "That's tough." So he called back the second time, my dad wouldn't accept the call. Says, "He been in service for all this time, he gets paid every month, he should have known to have his own money." My mother [Shoffie Edwards DuBose] then talked to my brothers who put together the money to send him to come home, instead of him coming home he went to look for his wife, okay (laughter) which, yeah. So my dad said, "I told y'all he wasn't coming anyway, he was going to look for his wife, he had sent her the check every month and he didn't have enough money to come home," but that's the type of guy--and I think that's some of the personalities I have. And I think if, you know, some of that just, just went overboard of, of doing it. One of the things that I did, I owned a substantial interest at a small manufacturing company in a all-white community, very racist. And my son went to work there and I assumed since the majority owner knew it was my son he would get treated fairly, they didn't, but I wouldn't let him quit even though what he was earning was insignificant. I said, you know, you gotta face it. That was something my dad was saying, you know, you can't run away from it, if it's a fight, you, you, you go through with it, you know, so. That's where I grew up in that that you, you gotta make your way in life, don't tell me what the excuse is, you know, we know its racist and so forth. And I, he was, so my, my personality came from him and, you know, I could go story after story that-- Story_ID: 622381 Speaker 1: We were traveling or driving down the street and somebody was getting beat up, a black man was getting beat up by some whites, so he stopped and said, "What's the problem here?" And they said something, he said, "Wait a minute now, we, we, we ain't gonna leave it with that." They said, "Well, he kicked our forms off," they were painting parking stripes. And he said, "Well, he shouldn't've kick it and they beat you, so now you get up and gone and y'all let him alone." Now, that's unusual for a black man in Mississippi in that day, okay. But I never had to jump off the sidewalk. My dad [Howard DuBose] always had fifteen to thirty votes in a small community that met at my house for breakfast on Sunday morning, the women was in the kitchen, and they decide, you know, what was the issues in, in the, in the community and how they were gonna deal with it. My family and probably twelve other families in Moss Point, Mississippi, voted the whole time I knew, there- therefore I voted. When I was eighteen I went down with a guy named Kirby Jenkins [ph.], we were both just making eighteen and they had start giving you the test then, they were typing up our registration card while we were taking the exam, so they ain't never check the exam, they knew who we were so we, my, there was some family that got some privileges. And, and, and, and today I, I can, now if you had asked me I said how tough life was, I worked a job and in the morning before my dad needed his trucks I'd get up and go to all the beer joints and take the glass bottles and pick 'em up and break 'em up and at the end of the summer I'd sell two or three truckloads of glass to the glass factory to have some money. So, you know, I worked very hard coming up. I worked on the railroad one summer and my dad had helped somebody else get a job on the railroad and I didn't have a job and I said, you know, "You always helping other people." And he said, "Boy, they'll kill you out there on that railroad, you shouldn't do it." The first day I went out, I got stung by wasps and my knees swolled up and my mama [Shoffie Edwards DuBose] had to get (unclear), but I didn't quit, I stayed there. Those are the type of things that I took from him which I think was extremes this day. Now, in his day it may not have been extreme, but my son [Freddie DuBose] shouldn't have had to work out there under those conditions, given that I own 20 percent of the company and then and so forth. So I think those are things that that lessons or personalities-- Speaker 2: But, but were you able to adjust eventually, I mean you-- Speaker 1: Yeah, I've adjusted (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) you're reflecting now about it and-- Speaker 1: Yeah, I can-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --I can reflect back, you know. Speaker 2: But is, but, but, but at some point when, when these kind of things were going on did you kind of say wait a minute I need to stop and-- Speaker 1: Yeah. I, I need, I need to stop-- Speaker 2: (Unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) this, this is after that incident with my son I said, you know, this is ridiculous. When I got ready to go to college, you know, by that time the oldest all, you know, they could afford to have cars and I bought 'em cars, they, they didn't have to, they didn't, the opportunity wasn't there for them to work and buy cars like we did, I never owned a car until I was married, my brother [Kirkland DuBose] who was two years older than me owned a car and my (unclear), but I didn't, I didn't like work, I didn't like hard work and I was committed that I was gonna be wealthy and stay up on the hill and, and have a, a nice house, a nice car, I would say, I made that commitment very early that I wasn't gonna work. And when I went to college the brother, Lawrence [Lawrence DuBose], took me and somebody else to Tougaloo [Tougaloo Southern Christian College; Tougaloo College, Tougaloo, Mississippi] without a application, we had not submitted it. So and he said, "You gotta go to Tougaloo because Jackson State [Jackson State College; Jackson State University, Jackson, Mississippi] and Alcorn [Alcorn Agricultural and Mechanical College; Alcorn State University, Lorman, Mississippi] and them aren't accredited colleges," so it was that kind of information that he passed out in the barbershop from reading various media papers. So but yeah, I, I think I took more. My mother was, you know, made, was not, she was a strong person like when televisions come out I was in college and my dad was asking, "How much you need because your mama's talking about buying a television," and so forth. I said no, the man is up there putting the antenna up there (laughter). So but my dad left home for two or three days because my mother took a job, a domestic job. He didn't believe it in those days, if you worked domestic you may have been asked to do, compromise yourself. I didn't understand why the boys always had to work and the girls never worked until I was in college and I asked my brother, Lawrence, says, "Why don't your daughters work?" He said, "You're in college, can't you read? The juvenile judge raped his babysitter and they suspended him for thirty days and you want me to--," he said, "You know, boy," (laughter). But anyway that was the, the time at which you lived so my, my, my mother took the job I think she was like fifteen dollars a week and money was tight, my dad said, "No. If you're gonna work, then I'm leaving," so he went and stayed with my oldest brother for a couple of days and she quit after then. But she was home, she raised the kids. My dad whipped me once in my life and that was for me and my brother fighting each other. It was very strong family orientated, you know, you just, as I said his relatives was there Sunday morning to have breakfast and, you know, he wouldn't eat until we all filled our plates, you know, first and so forth. He didn't believe in the minister coming to your house to visit, he said, "Pay him, let him buy his own food," you know, and, and so forth. "I don't need him at my house." Story_ID: 622382 Speaker 1: Was church a big part of growing up, was-- Speaker 2: No, my dad [Howard DuBose] was a Baptist, we was Methodist because we could get our, we was required to go to either Sunday school or church. But not, not as strong as it was with me raising our kids because my wife [Helena DuBose] was more, or family was more into, my dad probably went to church twice a month, he paid whether he went or not, it wasn't a lot of money he paid 'cause we didn't have a lot of money but no, church was not there. And in my hometown [Moss Point, Mississippi], the ministers was well dressed and in the community and the funeral home but they were not necessary the leaders in the community. They were other, I didn't know it then but my dad was certainly a leader. In ninth grade somebody gave me a watch just to, who was white, just to travel through the neighborhood with them and introduce them to people 'cause he was running for some office in the community, so he was, because he didn't go out at night, he worked from sunrise to sunset. You know, when I say he worked he did his trucks, he come in, he burnt wire off the insulation off a wire and save copper or he did some repairs on rent house, my dad probably, four or five small rent houses. Story_ID: 622383 Speaker 1: We always ask this question, and, what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up [in Moss Point, Mississippi]? Speaker 2: Some of the sights and sounds, one of the smells that you regularly had was the smell from the fertilizer factory, the (Unclear) plant [ph.], where they made, and it would be so strong and the paper mill. So you had various strong odors and it was like someone passing gas, it was horrible. That--the, the sight was the pretty beaches which had, you was challenged to go on 'em, okay, I mean 'cause they were not open to blacks in, in all locations. There was some special locations. And then as I began to mature as a teenager they were not supposed to be available to you at all, okay. And I stayed off of 'em on there. And the other sights was, was the standards of living. We lived in a four bedroom house. Eventually they had one bath in it but I know when the bath was put in it, okay. So I worked for other people, white wealthy white--at least I thought they were wealthy then, I now know they was middle class, who had bathrooms in they house and their houses was of, of, of a higher quality than ours was then. Now, my dad [Howard DuBose] built his own house. I built my house that I live in now, I built every house I've had but (unclear). My brother's house [Kirkland DuBose] and the wife [Mildred Miller DuBose] just died, I drew it up and he built it, it's a brick house, five bedroom house. But the thing wrong it's only got two bathrooms, two and a half bathrooms, and you got five bedrooms and four or five girls so it was at the level. So the scene to me was the beautiful homes on the beach that were gonna be mines. You know, it was, it, it, it just wasn't right that I didn't have that. And it wasn't right that we did only common labor. And that if you taught school you had to raise money to buy the superintendent a car, you know. I, we didn't, with, between my brother, Lawrence [Lawrence DuBose], and I, I didn't buy my invitations from Herff Jones. I didn't buy my, I wouldn't buy the invitations from him. I bought my own, had somebody print out my own invitation until the twelve of us got together and printed our own invitation. I would not make contributions or pick up a (unclear) for the money the teacher had to raise for the superintendent. Today I realize that was wrong for her, you know. I didn't like the superintendent. He came to my high school [Magnolia High School, Moss Point, Mississippi] while somebody was trying to teach us typing in the gym, in the study hall, that was the study hall was the gym. And he cussed her out in front of us, took the typewriter back in the office, and told the principal the next time he'd let those Ns do it he was gonna fire him, okay. Story_ID: 622384 Speaker 1: Now, let's recap that story you just told 'cause we, we just, the superin- let, let's just set the stage that the superintendent you're talking about is a white superintendent-- Speaker 2: He-- Speaker 1: --of the State of Mississippi who is (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He, no, not of the State of Mississippi-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --for the City of Moss Point [Mississippi]. He was the superintendent over the black school, two black school, elementary [Magnolia Elementary School] and high school [Magnolia High School], he only had one each. And he was the superintendent over the white schools too. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Which was two or three schools. And (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And-- Speaker 2: --and he was the boss of, of all of the teachers and the principal had to get his approval before he could hire any teachers at the high school or the elementary, he had to have the superintendent's approval. Speaker 1: Now, did the, the teachers in the colored schools make as much as the teachers in the white school? Speaker 2: No. And the students in the colored school had used books, okay. The white school would use 'em for four years or three years and then they would put a new sheet in there for you to sign your name on and you would get 'em then, there, I guess, so it would be used school books. Speaker 1: And were the buildings that--your school buildings comparable to the-- Speaker 2: The-- Speaker 1: --white school buildings? Speaker 2: The buildings was, was comparable. They, the buildings was comparable when I got there, they were comparable. They were built after or during World War II [WWII] and they was up to date. They, the football field was not, we just had a field that we practiced on, it was not a football field. And the white school had their games on Friday night and we had our games Saturday night on it, yeah, so. There was a lot of inequities and the first football team in suits--the black school had to raise their own money to buy the equipment. And, and-- Speaker 1: But the, the city provided the, the (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) For the white school. Speaker 1: --for the white schools. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And then the appalling thing that you said that, was that the black teachers were compelled to raise money to buy the superintendent a new car? Speaker 2: Right. The principal was required to raise money to contribute towards the superintendent's car. And as I remember the teachers each had to raise forty dollars and they had pecan cake sales and the students raised money to give him. This was the superintendent that walked in the gym where one of the teachers was trying to teach us to type and cussed her, us out--her out, took the typewriter and told the principal if he ever catch it out the office again he was gonna fire him. So a couple of us rebelled now, whether we rebelled or not the teacher was gonna have to come up with her share of the forty dollars. I mean, the forty dollars was gonna be turned in, nobody was gonna turn in anything less than forty dollars to the principal. Speaker 1: Let me go back to that again. The, the teacher was teaching you all to type on the school typewriter? Speaker 2: On the school typewriter. Speaker 1: From the office? Speaker 2: From the office. Speaker 1: That's the only one you had in typing class (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's the only one there, there. Yeah, blacks didn't have typing. Speaker 1: And he got angry because the typewriter is being used to teach you all how to type? Speaker 2: He, he, not because of the typewriter, "Those Ns don't need to know how to type." Speaker 1: The, okay. So now we're getting some picture of what kind of school system you had there-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --in Moss Point (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And, and the school system as I said we had to take trades. The only time I wrote a essay was in my senior year, one of the teachers took us out of the regular, her regular work and started trying to teach us how to write a essay. As I tell you, we took shop two years, where we spent a half a day learning how to be a carpenter and a plumber so if you just add up the numbers it wasn't enough hours to meet the requirements in English and literature and the social studies. At one time the girls didn't take biology and chemistry, they took home economics. Story_ID: 622385 Speaker 1: So this is, this is the situation of the school. So, you, now what, what was the name of the school that you started (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Magnolia-- Speaker 1: Magnolia. Speaker 2: --High School [Magnolia High School, Moss Point, Mississippi] and Magnolia Elementary School [Moss Point, Mississippi]. Speaker 1: Okay. Were they housed in the same building? Speaker 2: No, no, one-- Speaker 1: Two-- Speaker 2: --they were across the street from each other. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: One was, at one time was the high school and the elementary was in the same building. But some time during my career they built a new high school and then they used the other one only for the elementary and junior high. Speaker 1: Okay. So were you a good student in school? Speaker 2: No. I was, today I--I, I passed math and chemistry. In shop I was an extremely good students, in math and chemistry and biology. In the other classes I did very little. And I, I did not appreciate excellence but just passing. I don't know that my parents [Shoffie Edwards DuBose and Howard DuBose] knew that if I made better grades I would be better off. I had two friends, I had a lot of friends in high school and we still, at the funeral I just went to, everybody who's still living was at the funeral other than a couple of people that is left, but we were very close. One of 'em was a guy named Roy Long [Roy Long, Jr.] who died a couple of years ago, came here, worked with Ennis and Associates [Detroit, Michigan] and so forth. But anyway, Roy went on and got a master's [degree] but Roy was brilliant. So we didn't study, so whether I could have been a good student or not and I don't share this with my grandson, I, was another questions. When I got in college [Tougaloo Southern Christian College; Tougaloo College, Tougaloo, Mississippi] I was accepted on probation and they listed the name on the bulletin board on campus, who was listed, they had five groups, they had the top group and then it went down as your SAT scores would be there, it was graduate records exam went down. I was in the bottom class. I was embarrassed. So my first semester in college I was a honor roll student and was taking math and stuff and aced it and, and (unclear). And then for the next year to two years, I was a good student, for the two years I was a good student. And then I realized that I wasn't going to be able to go to Brown University [Providence, Rhode Island] at the cost and so forth and I wasn't gonna get the scholarship. So but I-- Speaker 1: You, you wanted to go to Brown University? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And, on the East Coast? Speaker 2: You couldn't go to school for engineering in Mississippi and I guess I'm jumping from high school. You couldn't go to engineering school so the way I went to college is the State of Mississippi reimbursed me for everything it cost over $425 to a level, they had a maximum, I don't know what the maximum was but you could afford to spend about two thousand dollars a year, $2500 a year they had, and all but five hundred dollars they reimbursed you. Now, it was extra money because they paid my transportation and I had to go back to Mississippi to do it. Now, they did that for not, for anything that they had at the white schools that you, they didn't allow you to take. Now, for physicians they required you to come back and work for the same length of time that you got the scholarship. It was supposed to be that for the engineering but no, no black engineer could get a job so you couldn't go back there and work so I never went back there to work, I went back there but I couldn't get a job and I left. Story_ID: 622386 Speaker 1: I don't wanna get too far ahead. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But let me, let me go back to just--when you look at your career at Magnolia Elementary School [Moss Point, Mississippi] and Magnolia High School [Moss Point, Mississippi] or, or your time there, who were your favorite teachers? Did you have a favorite-- Speaker 2: Inez Greene was one of my favorite teachers. She's still alive. I missed her at the funeral and I asked was she in good health and so forth. She was my favorite teacher, she was the one that tried to teach essays. Mr. Walker [ph.] and a Mr. Moore [ph.]. Now, I had a lot of respect for the principal but he didn't teach me very many classes, he was the principal. Speaker 1: Mr. Moore? Speaker 2: No, Mr., the principal is H.L. Whisenton. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: H.L. Whisenton. He dressed real well and carried his self real well and really emphasized education but he was the principal, he was not a teacher. He taught one class, I believe, it was business math, but Mr. Walker and them really put forth effort. We had a laboratory but they had to buy their own chemistry stuff the, you know, where you put the-- Speaker 1: The beakers and things (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) sugar and stuff. So the ingredients we had very little. They had no library, there were no books in the library, we had a library by the time I graduated but they, I didn't, when I got to college [Tougaloo Southern Christian College; Tougaloo College, Tougaloo, Mississippi] I ain't know how to use a library. But now there was other students there, Roy [Roy Long, Jr.] was very smart, he and I ran together and we stayed together the whole life, we, he invested in a radio station [WXLA Radio, Dimondale, Michigan] that we owned, and my wife [Helena DuBose] bought and so forth, so we stayed together all, all our life. He went to Chicago [Illinois] and stayed for a while and then something happened in Chicago and he called and we arranged to move back to Michigan. He was very bright. I didn't study in high school. Again (unclear) and, and my daughter [Cheri DuBose Reid] say, "Don't repeat that too much 'cause your grandson may hear it." But I, I, I was fairly quick. When we took the graduate records exam my natural science score was very high. My reading comprehension was up, but I read so slow that I memorized everything I read so they took me on the basis of my natural science to math and chemistry and so forth. Story_ID: 622387 Speaker 1: Chemistry, I was a B student which was probably as well as a A student but the professor was St. Elmo Brady and he was only gonna give one A and that was gonna go to an Alpha [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity] (laughter) okay, and I was an Omega [Omega Psi Phi Fraternity] so. But, you know, nobody else can either because we all, it was probably nine of us in there that was A students, in a class of probably twenty or twenty-five probably nine out of the, the class was A and we were all engineering students, pre-engineering (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This is at, at Tougaloo [Tougaloo Southern Christian College; Tougaloo College, Tougaloo, Mississippi]? Speaker 1: Yeah, we were pre-engineering. Speaker 2: Well, tell, tell us a little bit about Tougaloo. Now, that that, Tougaloo is a college that was set up by the American Missionary Association-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --I believe, right. And-- Speaker 1: But-- Speaker 2: --just north of Jackson [Mississippi]? Speaker 1: Right. It is in Jackson now, the city limits has been moved but they still have the zip code of Tougaloo [Mississippi]. Tougaloo was the only accredited college and Rust in the State of Mississippi when I came along. Speaker 2: And Tougaloo and Rust College? Speaker 1: And Rust College. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Rust is a Methodist College there to, owned by the Methodists. Speaker 2: Holly Springs, Mississippi. Speaker 1: Spring, yeah, Holly Springs. So those was the two choices. And as I said my brother, Lawrence [Lawrence DuBose], insisted that we go to Tougaloo. And your people then thought that by the time in four years you'd be able to be a lawyer or anything you wanted in Mississippi. Well, after I got to Tougaloo I realized that my best field was something in the natural science, okay. And I didn't think that was medicine because I didn't, the blood and so forth was just not my cup of tea and the pain and so forth. So Tougaloo had a pre-engineering program and I signed up for that and saw the guys with the drawing boards and said, oh. It was fairly new and we took that. And everybody in engineering was a good student and that included me. So in high school [Magnolia High School, Moss Point, Mississippi] I didn't do my best. In college my first two years I did my best. The last two years when I transferred to Tri State, I did well enough. And when I said I did well enough, Tri State College [Trine University, Angola, Indiana] is where I graduated from. But Tougaloo really gave me the foundation. And, and the teachers in high school was just so good, I mean, they, they put their heart and soul into education or trying to educate the kids. Now, as I said they were fighting against a weight coming against--you want me to put forth this effort? And when I get it what I'm a do? You know, I'm going to teach school? I don't wanna teach school, you know. I, I, I can't do nothing else, you know. And then I just told you they were, we bought our first TV, the first TV was brought in my house from my sister [Espernola DuBose Bell] when she moved back to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] but my mama [Shoffie Edwards DuBose] bought the first one after. Speaker 2: About what year was that when-- Speaker 1: Huh? Speaker 2: What, what year was that when you got your first (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I was there when, when we bought the first TV. Speaker 2: What, what, about what year was it? Speaker 1: That was about 1954. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Fifty-four [1954], '55 [1955]. But the teachers put so much in to you. I mean, at, at, at, in high school if you failed you had to put forth effort. I mean, because they just, just drug you along like, you know, Inez Greene had to try to teach us how to write a essay on the lunch hour. You, you, that couldn't be taught in the school (laughter). Story_ID: 622388 Speaker 1: I didn't get this but you graduated from Magnolia [Magnolia High School, Moss Point, Mississippi] in what year? What, what was the-- Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty-four [1954]. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. And, and, and you graduated from, did you graduate from Tougaloo [Tougaloo Southern Christian College; Tougaloo College, Tougaloo, Mississippi] or Tri State (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, I left Tougaloo-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --after two years. Speaker 1: Okay. And-- Speaker 2: And went to Tri State College [Trine University, Angola, Indiana]. Speaker 1: And, and you came out of Tri State in what year was it? Speaker 2: In '58 [1958]. Speaker 1: Nineteen fifty-eight [1958], okay. All right. And you said you wanted to go to Brown [Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island]? Speaker 2: I wanted to go to Brown while I was at Tougaloo. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But I realized that I couldn't go to Brown and graduate. My dad [Howard DuBose] had set four years for graduation even though he was only paying a small portion of it because I was getting the separate but equal state money. He still felt that you, you gotta get out of there in four years and you transferred, he didn't understand the whole process. So I couldn't afford to go to Brown, that's number one. Number two, if Brown looked at my transcript they weren't gonna accept me. Tougaloo had accepted me based on the graduate records exam but I didn't have the English, I hadn't had no foreign language, I hadn't had but one, half as much English as I should have had and no literature so I could never get out of Brown, I mean I could never get in Brown if they looked at the transcript. Now, there was other people from some other high schools which was better but even some of those I remember as being a good student. There was a brick mason which mean they had took shop and I had competed against 'em. Kids come to Tougaloo from Chicago [Illinois] and New York [New York] and mostly from New York, came down and, you know, in that class went with the aerospace, Saruti [ph.] went with the aerospace, Eugene DeLoatch [Eugene M. DeLoatch] is the head of the engineering department at one of the schools in Maryland [Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland]. So but that's I, I couldn't, there was no way I was gonna get in Brown when I, when, after two years at Tougaloo and I began to realize what was the requirements for going to college and getting in college. Story_ID: 622389 Speaker 1: Now, did you go into the [U.S.] military right after you graduated from Tri State [Tri State College; Trine University, Angola, Indiana]? Speaker 2: Ye- no, I went to highway [Michigan Department of State Highways and Transportation; Michigan Department of Transpiration] and worked for five months and then I went into the military. Speaker 1: Okay. So you went to-- Speaker 2: I was only in the military for eighty-one and a half days, ninety days. Okay, I was classified at, I, I came out of school, I had had my physical and I got a deferment to go to summer school. After summer school I went back to Moss Point [Mississippi] and I didn't have a job, couldn't get a job, interviewed to be a surveyor in Alabama. And the guy asked me some questions about the surveying instruments and I answered him, and he said, "Boy, you know that stuff pretty good, don't you?" I said, "Yeah, thank you, sir." And he said, "Where did you learn it?" I said, "Angola, Indiana." And he said, "Well N, get out of here and go back to Angola, Indiana, and get you a job." That was in 1958. So then I had interviewed with the highway department of Indiana, Illinois, and Michigan. And I wrote 'em all a letter because I had told 'em I wasn't interested in a job, I would call 'em after I got out of the military. But the, I didn't get drafted and I didn't wanna go to work at, well, as a laborer in Mississippi while I was waiting. So I wrote 'em, Michigan sent a telegram back and said report September the 22nd. I reported and then in November when I got drafted I told my supervisor I was drafted and he said, "Do you wanna go in?" And I said, "No." He said, "Well, why didn't you tell us what your condition was when you got hired and we could have got you reclassified as critical skill." And he said, "We may still be able to do it but I don't know whether we will or not, we'd like to keep you and--." So I later left and went to answer my draft and when I got to the draft, I was a day late getting there because the train messed up or something. And the lady said, "No, everybody who was supposed to report reported." And I said, "Well, I, I, my paper here." She said, "Well, you must have been deferred which you didn't report." So then I found out I had been deferred. I came back and worked at the highway for another four or five months and joined the Reserve [U.S. Army Reserve] and I was then drafted and I had ninety days of active duty. Speaker 1: Now, now you worked for the highway in Mississippi or-- Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: --or in, in- Speaker 2: Michigan (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) in Michigan, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, no. Speaker 1: Worked for the, for the, the Michigan, what do they call it-- Speaker 2: Department of transportation. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The blacks did not do engineering work in Mississippi then. That was in the '50s [1950s] or Alabama either. Speaker 1: So you worked for, for MDOT, I guess in, in '58 [1958] and '59 [1959]? Speaker 2: From '58 [1958] to '69 [1969] minus the three months I was in service. And I had to work for them for at least seven years. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. All right. Okay. So, all right. So were there many other black people working for MDOT in those days? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Not as engineers. Approximately five, there was no supervisors, there was one engineer who had the level of a supervisor which was a squad boss, but he had no employees up under him; he was given special assignments. Story_ID: 622390 Speaker 1: Now you had, you attended graduate school in housing and finance at Michigan State [Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan]? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Now, is this in, while you were working with MDOT [Michigan Department of State Highways and Transportation; Michigan Department of Transportation], MDOT? Speaker 2: No, no, what, what I did-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --when, when I came to Michigan, and let's go back (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 2: I came to Michigan and I worked for highway and while I was working for highway I stayed in the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] for several months because there was no housing available for blacks in the state capital in, in Michigan, other in, other than close to the factory. Speaker 1: This is in Lansing? Speaker 2: Lansing, Michigan. Speaker 1: Yeah, the state capital (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Which was substandard housing and there were white engineers, a couple of 'em was foreigners, who kept encouraging me to go look at these various apartments and each time I went to look, they had just rented 'em. So I could not get housing other than staying at the Y that was acceptable. So I stayed at the Y for several months, five or six months. Then I was working for the highway there, there. So I came back from [the U.S. military] service and was gonna be working at the Y, staying at the Y for again and I moved in with a, a black engineer who had bought a house. The first time when I got there and we got turned down, there was somebody else who got turned down too who was a, a black engineer. And he could really pass for white but he wouldn't, he's still alive now, a friend of mine, his name is Hope Bunsen [ph.] in Tennessee. And he would bother to tell the people, me and him disagreed, "You know I'm colored." And he, he, he insisted on telling them that and so we, we couldn't get the housing. In fact, there were several girls who was interested in him, bank tellers and various types of people, and he would bother and say, "Well, now you know I'm colored" (laughter), okay, so it bothered me. But anyway I had a struggle with housing there working for the highway department. And I-496 [Interstate 496] went through Lansing, which is the first time any highway in America went through a upper middle class neighborhood. They normally ran the highway through slum areas where the property was cheap or low income. Speaker 1: Now, this is something that has been long talked about in the black community now and people reflect on it, that building of the federal, the Interstate Highway System [National System of Interstate and Defense Highways] and its accompanying program called urban renewal, basically was Negro removal, you know, in a lot of major cities. That's how it turned out. Speaker 2: Yeah. But this was a upper middle class neighborhood which had just-- Speaker 1: Now, you're saying this was the first time this has (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The first time, no, no, they went through plenty black neighborhoods. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: But it was not a upper middle, these, this, this was the top. Lansing had a high percentage of people who came there and went to Michigan State, graduated, and even worked for Michigan State or worked for the State of Michigan, who had managed to get into this, this neighborhood, which was white flight. So the highway went through that neighborhood which was the upper income which it, one that it-- Speaker 1: This is a upper income black neighborhood that you're talking about. Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, (unclear), okay-- Speaker 2: They, they never went through a upper income neighborhood of any kind, white or black, until they went, 496 was the first highway that ever went through a upper income neighborhood and destroyed the house. This wasn't urban, urban renewal was, was dilapidated (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So what was the, what did they call the black neighborhood that it went through? What was the name of it, do you remember? Speaker 2: It, it, it's, it was on the Westside [Lansing, Michigan], Verlinden [Avenue], it was around Sexton High School [J.W. Sexton High School, Lansing, Michigan], it, it, it still, that highway is there. The first black that owned a Cadillac lived in it. And he had to go to Mason [Michigan] to buy the Cadillac because the Lansing Cadillac dealership wouldn't sell it to him, he was an accountant. His wife was a Ph.D. from Michigan State which said something was wrong with blacks because they had to, they run the race and when they get there they get jumped over ten holes and they should have been mad that they had to jump over ten hole and the white folks was there sitting around drinking coffee talking about what a easy race it was. And we weren't bitter, they said the blacks who succeeded was not bitter and we ought to have been bitter because we paid too much for what we got. But she lived in the neighborhood, Brunson was, was their name, Hugh Brunson [sic. Robert Brunson], Brunson was their name. Rose Brunson was her name. But that, that was the neighborhood they went through and it was upper middle class. Story_ID: 622391 Speaker 1: I was working for highway [Michigan Department of State Highways and Transportation; Michigan Department of Transportation] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So 496 [Interstate 496] went through there. Now, what, what year was it that 4- 496 went through that neighborhood in Lansing? Speaker 1: 496 went through there about 1960 [sic. 1963]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I was working for highway and active in the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]. And got involved because the highway did not pay relocation for homeowners but paid relocation for businesspeople and the Engineering News Records [Engineering News Record] said that would be a good suit to file. And somehow me talking in a NACCP meeting I was asked to chair our housing committee. And that is, is how I got involved in that. And in doing that, I began to look at the various governmental housing program and the Michigan State housing finance program [Michigan State Housing Development Authority] so that's what tipped my interest to that way, okay. And I was completing my seven years requirement at highway and I thought I could go someplace else and, and do better financially and, and be happier than, than designing bridges. So I got involved with the NAACP and the housing and that made people uncomfortable. I has also co-chaired a moral committee that the highway had which dealt with affirmative action. And as the result of this committee they hired a affirmative action person, you know, they received the committee. In those days, in Lansing, Michigan, on state property they put George Washington's, George Wallace stickers which, you know, you shouldn't have been doing political stuff on the state, that's the Hatch Act [Hatch Act of 1939]. But they did that at the highway department when I was there, okay. Speaker 2: George Wallace, the bumper stickers on the-- Speaker 1: On the desk, on their engineering desks they would put the stickers on there, okay. Speaker 2: That's when he was running for president back-- Speaker 1: And when, when he was running for president. Speaker 2: --back in '68 [1968]? Speaker 1: Yeah. So that's how I got involved there. And about that time started doing some, taking some classes at Michigan State [Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan], not in a degree program but just taking some classes and, and reading. We got, I got involved very deeply in, into housing and discrimination in housing. Story_ID: 622392 Speaker 1: Just during the break here, we were, got into a discussion about what you, your duties actually were. So I wanted you to go, go over those and then we're gonna talk about how you kind of got censured by the highway department [Michigan Department of State Highways and Transportation; Michigan Department of Transportation] later on, you know. Speaker 2: Yeah. I was a bridge design person in the bridge section. And most of the time I did super structures, the deck that go across, did the reinforcement for that and selected the beams from a chart or filled out the component part of it. But I had nothing to do with the creative part or how long the bridge was or where it was gonna go or the economics in the span, so it was strictly technical calculations, whether to use a thirty-six inch beam or a forty-eight inch beam, that type of thing, it was, it was not creative. Speaker 1: I think you were saying it was like assembly line work or something. Speaker 2: It was like assembly line work. Whatever they found out you were good at doing, that's what your assignment was. If you was good as designing the columns for the piers, that's what you did. If you were good and fast at getting the, the super structure, that's what you did. If, you know, drawing up a design in the, some other component part, that, that's what you did. They, you didn't take a bridge and go through, design the whole bridge, you, you would do a portion and somebody else would do a portion. And they would find out which portion you were good at, you just repeated that over and over again. Speaker 1: Okay. So would you say you were kind of bored with that? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I was bored. I didn't like that and most of the time I was doing it I was looking forward to completing my seven years, which I had to complete in order not to violate my agreement with the [U.S.] military deferment in critical skills. And by that time I was active in the community [Lansing, Michigan] and had learned that, you know, there was other ways of using my education other than just working on a job. Story_ID: 622393 Speaker 1: So the, the controversy about 496 [Interstate 496] is that this is the first time they're running a interstate highway through a middle class community and it's a black community. Speaker 2: It was a black community. Speaker 1: And so did you raise the red flag about that? Speaker 2: Well, yeah. The NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] raised it and then I became chairman of the NAACP housing committee. And as a result of that there was some newspaper articles which quoted or misquoted me. I never stated that I represented the highway department [Michigan Department of State Highways and Transportation; Michigan Department of Transportation]. I said I worked for the highway department, but I worked in bridge design which had nothing to do with acquiring right of way. And I did quote things like--Engineering News Record had said that the homeowners outgas--put together a organization and put a class action suit because businesspeople were getting paid for relocation and homeowners wasn't, and I had talked to the gas station owners and a few other people to ask them, the business guys was they willing to chip in a little to do that. And somehow some of the people at highway took that offensive and they reminded me who I worked for. And for several months I'd sit at a, a drawing board or a design table and I didn't do anything and I picked up a textbook and the supervisor came over and told me I was supposed to learn that in school, okay, that that was not the place to be looking at it. So you couldn't, you couldn't do anything. And there was one phone and it was strictly for business and that was on the supervisor's desk, yeah. Speaker 1: Well, this was their punishment (unclear)? Speaker 2: It was punishment that I got involved in the neighborhood talking about suing the highway for relocation and dealing with blacks. What they did, they started the highway in the middle of the highway, instead of starting at one end and progressing they started right in the middle. And they used tactics like, they would go out and start digging and break a water pipe and shut the water off all day because the homeowners was resisting the price that they had offered, so now your wife's at home with two kids all day and the bathroom ain't working, you come home from work she gonna (unclear) and say, "Take what they offering you, let's, let's, let's ride." So it, it was that type of thing which I got involved in. And a lot of the people weren't taking offers because there was no other middle income housing for them to buy. No black had ever owned a FHA [Federal Housing Administration] insured new house in the City of Lansing [Michigan]. One person had owned a new VA [Veterans Administration; U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs] house, Rudy Wilson [Rudolph Wilson] had the only new VA house. So, you know, I began to act in a way of challenging that. You know, that you're getting FHA insurance and you won't sell to blacks so we then filed a complaint with FHA on that and was able for the first black to get a house in a new subdivision with FHA insurance in Lansing under that. So even though they sold it to him and he picked his lot, they wouldn't build it until they had sold everything else, okay (laughter). So that's when we got into getting white people to buy lots for blacks or to buy houses for blacks, and, and, and in that process. And then it got more comfortable at work, as I said for several months I had no assignments and other people had assignments so I have to assume that it was deliberate and because of the activity. And-- Speaker 1: They gave you no assignment? Speaker 2: Hm? Speaker 1: They gave you no assignment and they wouldn't let you do anything else? Speaker 2: No, I couldn't read anything. I couldn't read a textbook or nothing else, okay. I, I just had to sit there and look at a glass wall. Story_ID: 622394 Speaker 1: Now, what kind of political clout--now, you, you were, you were, you, I, I think before the break we mentioned too that they around 1968 or so they began to display George Wallace bumper stickers on their desk and that sort of the thing at the Michigan Department of Transportation [Michigan Department of State Highways and Transportation; Michigan Department of Transportation], which is against the rules of the state, state workplace. What kind of clout did black people have in the legislature [Michigan Legislature] in those days? Speaker 2: Mostly in Detroit [Michigan], you had Coleman Young and some of the guys in Detroit. And I had a conversation with somebody this morning at a thing, that once I paid a thousand dollars to go to a fundraiser for Coleman Young after he became mayor, and the newspaper wrote a article wanting to know how I could afford that and I lived in the smallest house up in Lansing [Michigan] and so forth and, you know, what was in it for me, okay. It was, we had had support from Coleman Young, Dave Holmes [David S. Holmes, Jr.], Bradley [James Bradley], and the clout was in Detroit. And what is very interesting, our legislators and, and, and things, you know, we had just not had the exposure to know what to, to fight for and what to deal for but issues like that, they wasn't gonna do. They did put pressure on the highway department that blacks was, was promoted and got the supervision classification. They didn't get the squad, I was gone before any black became a supervisor, I mean had people to supervise, they had the, the class and the pay. They, I'll have to ask my nephew who worked there after I left as a engineer (background noise) to see if he had, if, if that ever occurred during his stay there that blacks got it. But no, they didn't, the one had the supervision classification and was, was a very interesting guy. He graduated from Michigan State University [Michigan State College of Agriculture and Applied Science; Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan] in 1935, the year I was born. And got some pretty rough treatment because he had, his second wife was white and she had worked at the highway department so the, that things was, was, was not, not a good place. They, they was, and along that time they had formed a human relation committee and so forth that resulted in the highway hiring a affirmative action person and they had three affirmative action people, Marvin Ray, Marvin Ray, which had went to Alcorn [Alcorn Agricultural and Mechanical College; Alcorn State University, Lorman, Mississippi] and had went, came back and went to Michigan State, who was a chemist. But that was the best job he could get with a degree. The chemistry company that he had worked for kept giving him some stock and the stock never went anywhere, okay. And then they, they, they had another one, I, I can't remember his name, but none of 'em had any real clout. They, they, before they passed the policy which we recommended, the personnel director went around us and established the position because we were trying to get the position where that affirmative action person reported to the board, they ran by highway commission then. And they ran, he went around us and got it, a civil service position, which meant it reported to the personnel director which, (laughter) you know. Speaker 1: Yeah, affirmative action reports to the personnel director what good is it? Speaker 2: None. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: So but they, they, there was steps taken to discourage. And, and then because of my activity in the highway--in the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], they put me on the affirmative action committee. So after sitting there doing nothing for a year and I guess they said, "Well, we ain't gonna let him do nothing else," I probably spent 50 percent of my time for the last year I was there working on this affirmative action committee and had all kinds of mind changes. And finally a white person that worked there, who is a good friend now, and we, we talk now, came over to me and said he was leaving going with a private company, he said, "But a interesting thing happened, Cullen [HistoryMaker Cullen L. Dubose]. There's a new organization in the state called the state housing finance agent and they got a black director and he need a engineer with your background to, to get off the ground." So I turned the job down [sic.] because I'm making more and doing--more of what I wanna do is out in construction. So I called the guy, he gave me and, and I left, transferred from highway to the housing authority [Michigan State Housing Development Authority] then but that was pretty much a, a career. Speaker 1: And this is in 1969? Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-nine [1969] I left highway and went with the state housing finance agent (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Okay. All right. So, okay. So how long you were, were you there? Speaker 2: Until 1977, October of 1977. Speaker 1: So 1969 to '77 [1977], okay. Story_ID: 622395 Speaker 1: So you, you were, you became the director of the Lansing [Michigan] field office it says here, director of construction division, director of management and marketing and deputy director of the state inner city rehabilitation, you supervised the operations of several developments in Detroit [Michigan], and processed billions of dollars in loans for multifamily mortgages, and coordinated operations to monitor multifamily housing financed by Michigan State Housing Development Authority. Is that true? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. The only thing in there, the, the billions include, I served on the loan committee and the billions included everything that was processed. Not, I didn't process the whole billion, okay, okay. I'm not sure when that was wrote and my son [Freddie DuBose] probably wrote it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Okay. But we, the, the agent processed billion, I didn't personally supervise the, the billions there. That was interesting. I was hired as a engineer with the understanding that I would get switched to a finance person, which motivated me to go back to Michigan State [Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan] and take some classes. And what my responsibility was initially was to determine whether land was buildable. The, it was not, it was a good paying job, it was a classification promotion to what was a supervisor at the highway [Michigan Department of State Highways and Transportation; Michigan Department of Transportation], but I was not supervising anybody, okay, at the housing authority, I was the only engineer on there. And what I would do is go out and look at the land and then get information from the local road commission of what kind of soil it was and determine whether it was buildable or not. I had some background in soil mechanics, not a lot, just from highway and college, and tell 'em whether the land was buildable or not. And at that point we could then start hiring consultants. And as the agent grew, the black director was transferred to Model Cities because he didn't understand the politics of the agent. The agent was created to get businesses to the bank and to create construction jobs. He was trying to get the best bond counsel he could and he was gonna put everything out to bid, New York [New York] and so forth. And the governor [William Milliken] created the agent to hire people in the State of Michigan, he didn't want no bond counsel out of New York. He didn't care how good New York may have been. He didn't want no law firm out of New York. He, so him and somebody else he hired that was from one of the banks start trying to do that and they transferred him out. Now, we assumed he was transferred because he was black but in reality that's why he was transferred is because of that. And secondly, the state housing authority was a good institution for race and money for the governor because you had builders and you were creating, building, and the economy was bad like it is now, and the governor, he was not somebody the governor could have raising money for him, okay. So he was transferred to Model Cities. And then the new director hired somebody who I know now, Phil Rhodes [Phillip Rhodes], and opened a Detroit office to, to keep down the racial tone of this director being gotten rid of. And he then hired a consultant, he hired a black in Detroit and told him one of the things the he wanted to do was to get rid of me, he told the other black that that was his responsibility was to, to get rid of me. And the guy I guess accepted it as an assignment but after checking the pulse of Coleman Young and, and some of the black legislators, and actually looking at my performance he said, you know, "There's no way I can fire him. If I fire him, then I can't do any good in Detroit, and they could--and nobody else will respect me if, if I fire him." So they then came to me and told me that, "You know, we know you're a Democrat and somewhat hotheaded but as long as you do your job, it's okay." Story_ID: 622396 Speaker 1: And then when the riots or the rebellion or whatever you wanna classify it at to, after then they asked me-- Speaker 2: In '67 [1967]? Speaker 1: Sixty-seven [1967]. It, it was after that, but there was still New Detroit and MDCDA [Metropolitan Detroit Citizens Development Authority] and all the organizations to rebuild and reconstruct the city was going on. And as I said they had opened a office down here then. This was after '69 [1969] 'cause I didn't go to the authority [Michigan State Housing Development Authority] in '69 [1969]. In the early '70s [1970s] they asked me to come in to Detroit [Michigan] and work with the young black that they had hired, and when I say young he was probably five years my junior, or six years (unclear). But anyway to work with him. He was in law school and that's about all he did was go to law school and get his check. I mean, I ain't begrudging him, I knew other whites who was doing the same thing, they, it was common for people to appoint people to appointed jobs and they went to school while they was doing it and, and didn't work very many hours, which was a good deed. He came out of law school at twenty-eight and had a master's [degree] before then so, you know. And Phil [Phillip Rhodes] and I are still friends today. But anyway, so I came down to Detroit and, and worked some days in a state car, and then it become--the state was a bad word. So they then gave me an unmarked car to come down. So we did Project Rehab which was a special HUD [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development] program to rehab after the rebellions in Boston [Massachusetts] and so forth, Bed-Stuyvesant [Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn, New York] and all of 'em. It's not rehab, they had that up in the city. And the authority was growing, the authority was new then. So then as we finished housing, you needed a management company doing, once you started 'em initially we were contracting out all the inspections for construction but after I ran Project Rehab, they decided that I could head up construction so I then started supervising construction. Now, I didn't actually do very much inspection but we hired inspectors and so forth. And then we began to occupy units and it was concluded that, you know, I could take this on, and for a short while I did both of 'em. And then they said well, you handle the inner city and now it may have been black instead of inner city but that's how the director of all the programs in Detroit and Flint [Michigan] and that fell in, in to the, the, the new title but the salary didn't change so that's what I did at the state housing authority. And then in 1977 I decided to leave. Story_ID: 622397 Speaker 1: Now, be- before we get off of this subject I, I wanted to ask you about a couple of articles you wrote, you wrote a article in '72 [1972] called 'Urban Renewal that Works.' Can you kind of summarize what you were saying in that article? Speaker 2: Well, well, yeah. There was, what we [Michigan State Housing Development Authority] did is we rehabbed the neighborhood rather than just demolishing the houses and rebuilt some urban neighborhoods. In fact, I own several of the properties that we rehabbed in those neighborhoods, still exist today but they are suffering today, still suffering some. But at that time I felt that the neighborhoods had been turned around and blacks had moved into them. These was neighborhoods that blacks had not been allowed to, to live in and white people quickly moved out so the buildings was boarded up, a very lowly, low occupancy. So we rehabbed 'em and black people moved in 'em, had some ownership, and you had united tenants and so forth and I thought it worked. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. I thought racial integration could work. I later learned that whether it's race or income, once the change exceeds 30 percent, the change accelerates and it's very hard to stop it, whether you get more than 30 percent low income or moderate income in a neighborhood it will accelerate to becoming a low neighborhood. I believe the same is true on the basis of race. If you get more than 30 percent black in a neighborhood then it will accelerate to becoming a whole black area, uh-huh. Now, I said I got more experience with the economic side of it than I had with the race side. But-- Speaker 1: There, there was another, there was another article called 'Project Rehab in Detroit' ['Project Rehab in Detroit - Phase II'] is this about the same, same-- Speaker 2: About the same thing. We were able to do it, you created a black union in that town, blacks could not work in the union, the trade union then. So somebody started a black union and that's who we worked with. In fact, on that basis we have gotten these buildings designated not as architectural historic but as historic because it was the first buildings that black tradesmens was able to work at, on other than, other than the labor. So as I said three of 'em we've got designated which we own as, as historical buildings not because of architecture, there's nothing fantastic about, one of 'em got some, but they--but the history is blacks rehabbed 'em and save 'em and turned 'em around after the rebellion, okay, and, and reopened 'em. Speaker 1: Okay. And there's another article called 'A Tale of Two Cities: Renewal in Detroit and Jersey City' [sic. 'Tales of Two Cities: Renewal in Detroit and Jersey City']. So you were comparing urban renewal in both cities? Speaker 2: I didn't compare 'em. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I, I ran the program, see I didn't write either article. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Okay. The article was written about programs that I ran. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I ran the programs and Reader's Digest wrote one and city--one of the other there (unclear), I got the Reader's Digest I'm pretty sure in one of my drawers or, or files. I'll, I'll try to get you a copy of that one, okay. Speaker 1: Okay. So you're featured in the article but you're not-- Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: You're sort of featured in the article but you're not (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm featured in those articles-- Speaker 1: --you didn't write it? Speaker 2: No, I did not write. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Okay. 'Cause they had down here that you wrote 'em on, on the stuff I have. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: So I'll change that. Story_ID: 622398 Speaker 1: So in '77 [1977] you started your own business [Painia Development Corporation, Detroit, Michigan]? Speaker 2: Yeah, I left the state highway, I mean state housing finance agent [Michigan State Housing Development Housing Authority] in '77 [1977] and started my own business. My first development was a forty units Farmers Home [Farmers Home Administration]. What happened in leaving the state, the state housing authority is I had a partner, which I had mentioned earlier that I helped get the loan, we owned a building together. And we owned that building for some time and I had got approval from the state that I could purchase the building. He then came to me with a lot, a piece of land in Coldwater, Michigan, which had been approved for a Farmers Home project, but the person it had been approved for couldn't find anybody who wanted to partner with him to use the tax depreciation from it and he was trying to sell it for thirty-five thousand dollars, the land and so forth. So I had bought that with the intent of building a development and me and my wife [Helena DuBose] both worked for the state. And then somebody else asked if they could do it. And the board said, "Well, no, it was not a good idea for us to let Cullen [HistoryMaker Cullen L. Dubose] do it, so we're not gonna let anybody else do it and we're gonna tell Cullen we'd like for him to sell it, sell his forty unit." And I said, "I will if I stay here." So I went home that night and told my wife I was quitting my job, she said give me thirty days to get the insurance on the kids switched from you to me. And I went in the next day and gave my resignation and they said, "Well, we'd like for you to stay here for ninety days because we've had three of y'all upper level people leaving and if you stay here for ninety days you'll be passed October 1st and you'll get a dollar an hour raise and you'll get that on all your vacation time, you got six weeks of vacation, and you get paid for half of your sick leave and that's worth about seven, eight thousand dollars," so it was sold. "And we will be very kind to you after you leave if you stay here. If you leave now (unclear)," the person was telling me that left before I could close my mouth before I could get out the door anyway, he was leaving too because it was the governor, end of the governor's term and he, he, his appointment was gonna be out. So he, he left and took another job too so. But anyway-- Speaker 1: Now, who was the governor then? Speaker 2: Milliken [William Milliken], we worked under Milliken. So-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: We worked under Milliken most of that time. There was a change in '77 [1977], there was a new governor [sic.] and he had left. The guy that told me he was gonna be very--those were the governor's administrative assistant. In fact, he said, "When you leave we'll give you a consultant contract equal to--." I had a unmarked car that I used for anything I wanted to use it for then, it wasn't strict like it is now, "We'll give you your hourly rate plus we'll add it up to all your fringe benefits." That added up to about fifty dollars an hour. A week before I left or two weeks before I left, somebody released to the press, "State employee leave making twenty-five dollars a hour, get contract for fifty dollars." The governor's administrative assistant denied he knew anything about it, that it was just something me and the director cooked up that was never gonna happen, (laughter) okay. So that, that killed the contract, that me staying there. Story_ID: 622399 Speaker 1: So I still had the Farmers Home [Farmers Home Administration] going. So then I knew from working at the state [Michigan State Housing Development Authority] that you could sell the tax advantages to the real estate. So I wondered why nobody had done it with the Farmers Home development. So I started raising the question, they said, "Well, Farmers Home just won't do that." I said, "Well, it's in the regulations, it's government approved, they have to do it." But I didn't go in to Farmers Home and say you got to do it. I just processed it in the name of unlimited partnership and they didn't pick up that there was a difference in a limited liability partnership and just the regular partnerships that they had been processing. Now, it hadn't gone to their legal department, okay, it went to their legal department--but their legal department was never checked into it. So my lawyer had talked to their lawyer in St. Louis [Missouri] during the process and they came back and said, "No, he can't do it with 1 percent. He has to show that he's putting 5 percent in the deal." So anyway we closed the deal and as a result we sold the tax advantages to a company out of Maryland and that was like enough for three or four, close to three or four years' salary that I was making at the state then so, and my wife [Helena DuBose] was supporting the family, she was working as a nurse. So I did the Farmers Home. And then again with the white partner that I'm, he had two other jobs that he had been trying to get closed for some time and I very quickly converted them and, and got them closed and, and within a few, matter of a few weeks. So I was working out of my basement so he said, "Why don't you come on over here and work in my office and we'll just share the desk." And then we did a couple hundred other or three hundred other job, three hundred other units, three developments together, four developments together. And they've all done, other than the Farmers Home was done in my name and Farmers Home objected to closing when we got it to closing, they didn't wanna close it when they saw that me and my wife was black. They thought him and the secretary was the owners. Story_ID: 622400 Speaker 1: Let's pick up where we left off. So, so they found out you and your wife [Helena DuBose] were really-- Speaker 2: So they would say, "We ain't gonna close." And so my attorney said, "Why?" He was white and he says, "The documents been approved in St. Louis [Missouri] and local you know, you, we, there's nothing for us to do but sign the documents here and we got to sign 'em." So they said, "Oh, we ain't gonna do it, you know, we can't do this. We've never done this." And so he said, "Well, we need to talk to the attorney in St. Louis." And he called him and they then told 'em that they had to close and we closed. And we got some harassment during the construction, slow pay, and so forth but we completed it. And then after we completed that the partner, not the partner in this but Ken [Kenneth Fowler], who I had on the twenty-eight unit non-government building in Lansing [Michigan] said, "You know, I got these two other jobs we've been trying to get closed for XY time," and part of getting it closed was, was the shortage of money and the shortage of somebody who needed the, the losses on the job, the, the depreciation. So we very quickly, quick converted those two jobs for depreciation. And about that time somebody released to the press that, "State employee leave, getting paid from two sources." I was president of Lansing Model Cities Policy Board so they assumed that you, you got paid for going to all Model Cities meetings and you got paid expense, so they assumed I had took money from Model Cities and was taking money from the state, but at the state I was at a level where I could just turn in my expense, and what we were doing in Model Cities was related to housing and, and, and the community redevelopment, so it was a, you know, I could do it there and we didn't go through the state treasury, they just did it right in, in the, the, the department, we was self supported. So all of a quick (unclear)--that scared him and his wife, my name out being investigated. So he come back and said, "Well, we're gonna close the jobs, Cullen [HistoryMaker Cullen L. Dubose], and you're gonna have to trust me but, you know, your interest is protected, but we can't move forward with you." Well, before we closed that investigation was over, you know, it would go nowhere I had twenty thousand dollars when I left, you know, so I hadn't took no money from Model Cities, you know, it didn't make sense for me to take from Model Cities when I had to fill out paperwork and I could just sign and say what I was and take the per diem at the state. So, any that way, that went away. We then was able to close another job in Sturgis, Michigan, and, and DeWitt [Michigan]. And then he said he had a site, we got a site in Alma, Michigan. And then we got a site in Gaylord [Michigan], this is the interesting one. In (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) About, about what year is this? This is-- Speaker 2: This is about 1980. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, let me ask you this before we go further, now, what, what does Painia [Painia Development Corporation, Detroit, Michigan] mean? Speaker 2: I don't know. That was my wife's mother's maiden name. And when I was organizing the corporation, we, I had it 50/50 and when I got to the lawyers office he said, "I won't do it for you 'cause the, the corporation's gonna depend on you, and corporations live forever, people get divorced and people die and your wife don't run it, so you gotta own at least two thirds of it if you want me to incorporate you." My wife wasn't happy so I named it Painia, which was her, her mother's maiden name. Speaker 1: Okay. But it's pale- okay, so it's pronounced Painia? Speaker 2: Painia, yeah. Speaker 1: P-A-- Speaker 2: N-A-I-- Speaker 1: --N--N-A-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. And I've never looked up what the family, but that's how it came, her family was Painias from Plaquemine, Louisiana, and then her brother moved to New Orleans [Louisiana]. Speaker 1: From Plaquemine Parrish [sic. Iberville Parrish, Louisiana], yeah. Story_ID: 622401 Speaker 1: All right, 1980, we're, we're at 1980 and this is-- Speaker 2: We was up in, in Gaylord [Michigan] for zoning and talking about subsidized housing, which wasn't exactly there, Gaylord is just some real estate we owned. But while we were there, I couldn't go in the meeting, he felt that if I went in the meeting we were gonna get turned down and he was probably right. So I laid in the back of the car and several times he needed questions answered that he couldn't answer so he told 'em his car phone was in the car and he would go out to his car phone and he knew somebody home number at the state housing authority [Michigan State Housing Development Authority], worked at the state housing authority, he could go back and call, but I was laying down in the backseat and he was talking to me, (laughter) uh-huh. So we laugh about it now. But he, he was talking to me but that's, that's pretty much the way we, we did the Farmers Home jobs [Farmers Home Administration]. They knew, after then it exploded, everybody started doing the limited liabilities. I think you had to come up with the 5 percent, show you had 5 percent equity in the deal, which we did. And, and after then because you were bringing in investors and they were paying like 15 percent, I don't know what it was back then, I guess, more than that 'cause see we had got a hundred twenty thousand [dollars] and the whole thing was eight hundred thousand so, yeah, about 15 percent they were paying for the losses and that was all they would get, you would get. The cash flow if it was any which was restricted, limited to the cash flow, would be limited to 6 percent of the 5 percent you invested. So the cash flow was not significant, you just simply got a management fee and the tax advantages. Story_ID: 622402 Speaker 1: What is the significance of being certified as a minority owned business? Speaker 2: I don't think it's any significance, you're supposed to get points in the county and to me, my son got that certification, I had it early in business and I found out that people, as soon as they discovered that you were minority, you got pushed back and harmed and nitpicked. So for years I let mine's expire and I didn't get it. My son has--since he came with the company [Painia Development Corporation, Detroit, Michigan], he's now rejoined then and had put it there. I don't think it's, I don't think it's been significant at all. I think the only thing that I know where we've got points, we got points with the county for being a county based business on one contract. But we don't do a lot of work for other people, you know, most of our stuff is there. But I, I think it's, in many cases it's a disadvantage because it quickly points out you may have a, it's similar to what I said about the mortgage, twice in my life, the Farmers Home [Farmers Home Administration] I told you about, the first house I built, Prudential Insurance Company [Prudential Insurance Company of America; Prudential Financial, Inc.] had agreed to finance it with never seeing me, when me and my wife [Helena DuBose] showed up to close, they wouldn't close the loan. So I, obviously my son is with the company and, and in fact, the table, he's, he's taken charge of a lot of stuff. And he feels that it was some significance but I've never seen any advantage, me and a person that work in the Lansing [Michigan] office who happened to be white, but I think she's a fair person, we both agree that in the cases when I tried to use it very early, it was a negative, not a positive. Speaker 1: So you've kind of tried to fly under the radar of, of identification? Speaker 2: I flew, yes, yes. I tried to fly under the radar and when I came out, thought I had the education and the money I got slapped pretty hard three or four times okay, or several times. And it's happened in the last, in this governor's [Jennifer Granholm] administration even though I had three, participated in two fundraisers for her and had one, there was staff who did it this time, 'cause they knew who we was and knew (unclear) there and, and I got very little support. And the rules was written that all you could do, I guess we could have filed a lawsuit but I, you know, you just go on and find a way to get around this. But no, so the, I, we are certified, I think Freddie [Dubose's son, Freddie DuBose] is certified as, and it cost us like fifteen--$1800 or $3,000 a year to go through the process. But I think it's, it's, it's, it's, it's useless. So yeah, you try to fly under the radar. And I shared with somebody who had been a major (unclear) a few weeks ago that I flew under the radar and when I came out, and I don't think it's that you can come out openly now, now obviously some of it you can get (unclear). It's a guy up in Lansing, Joel Ferguson [Joel I. Ferguson], black, he's, just forced a contract but he got a joint venture white partner, this $40 million deal. But he had the influence and the Democratic congress, the state house [Michigan House of Representatives]. And the white partner had friends in, in the Republican side. So the governor wanted to slow this down and she wasn't gonna get her budget until they got their police station, okay. So if you get at that level, you know, you know, where, you know, he was very close to the Clintons [Hillary Rodham Clinton and President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton], he got two TV license but at our level it, it, it's, it's better to get as far as you can before they know who you are, you know, even if you're gonna confront it, if you don't get down the pipe it, it's still difficult. And then you make a economic decision, do I wanna argue with this or do I wanna go somewhere else. So, yes, I, I have ducked of, of them not knowing who I was. Story_ID: 622403 Speaker 1: You were featured in a article I guess called, in 1999 about Fannie Mae [Federal National Mortgage Association] called 'Fannie Mae Helps Put Roof Over Nation's Poor.' You know, Fannie Mae gets so much criticism today, what, what do you think about that whole thing, the Fannie Mae situation? Speaker 2: Well, Fannie Mae at, at that day and, and what they were doing, they bought tax credit when other people hadn't become concerned and, and it was a super economic thing. But then at some point their rules dropped. They paid us about forty-five cent on the dollar for something that later we got a $1.05 for a dollar worth of tax credit. But you has to be successful. And they got so loose with their operations even in the underwritings that they made bad deals. It's a good organization but they just failed to follow their own rules and they--the thing that's wrong with Fannie Mae is they got too many agents. Anybody can get approved to do underwriting and pass it on to Fannie Mae. This, before you, you had people who were doing it. In other words, if I used Fannie Mae and the mortgage company do a lousy underwriting, Fannie Mae is taking a bad loan. So that's what it was. We was rehabbing in cities and the way you were making the numbers work is by using the, selling the tax credits to Fannie Mae and they are no longer buying 'em because they ain't making no money, but they were making money, the stock was going up. You, so now they ain't making no money so they couldn't use 'em. They bought too many bad deals. Our deal was one that they wrote about because they made a lot of money on it. In fact, they made so much money that later when they was ready to get out, they was willing to give the city [Detroit, Michigan], put a million dollars on the table additional to get out of the deal. Story_ID: 622404 Speaker 1: And you were appointed in 2003 to the Michigan Economic Growth Authority by Governor Granholm [Jennifer Granholm]. And well, just kind of, tell us about that and-- Speaker 2: It's a state agent, which has a board that approve tax credit to attract businesses into the state, for creating new jobs, for building buildings, you approve that. Now, it's, it's, it's, it's a great thing on your resume and it's, it's a big, a lot of dollars dealing with it and it's brought a lot of business in to Michigan. And it's, it's, I guess it's some prestige from being on there but it's, it's, it's, it's more of a ceremonial board in my opinion than it is a board with any tooth. Because if the attorney general and the staff say you qualify for it, I have to vote for it. I mean, (laughter) the legislators wrote the law and I'm still on the board just because nobody else probably will take it 'cause it, I, I, I have, I have trouble sacrificing my time to, to go to a meeting unless--now unless they have a quorum that have a full understanding of the board. But it's, it's, it's a very major part of the state's economic redevelopment is this law that you get tax credit for new money spent and the board has to approve it. But the basis is which you approve it, you're not making judgment, the staff and, and the people, if you meet the law requirement the board have to vote for it. Now, we can ask some questions and, and talk about--but you really just on the edge in, in getting the understanding of it because if the staff done worked on it for a year and a half and they bring it in, then it's been approved by the attorney general and I don't know what, you know, I, I'm voting yes, but it's, it's, it's a, a governmental, a governor's appointee and it carries some prestige to it and it--I'd learned this earlier, I couldn't resign after I really got the, the, to, to know that because it would have been insulting to the governor. But it's, it's, it's a ceremonial influential board. And in fact, my Lansing [Michigan] office [of Painia Development Corporation, Detroit, Michigan], the lady there very quickly framed the letter of the appointment and put it up on the board so it's a prestige appointment but-- Story_ID: 622405 Speaker 1: Can you kind of just tell us about the success of your, of your own, of, of your own business and, and what your future plans are? What, what do you consider the major accomplishments of, of, of, of, how, how do you pronounce it again? Speaker 2: Painia [Painia Development Corporation, Detroit, Michigan]. Speaker 1: Painia, Painia and-- Speaker 2: Painia has developed enough units in that we will fi- we have been financially strong enough to withstand the turndowns in the economy and has not had a non profitable year in all of the years we've been in business. We have done some joint venture, we are not an attractive joint venture company. When I say that because we run a construction company and a lot of time large white companies will ask you to joint venture with 'em. I have done some joint, a couple of joint ventures, but I always put in my share of money. I show up at all the job meetings, I make a contribution, and I'm a get whatever my financial share is, okay. I'm, I'm, you're not gonna mail me a check and tell me you don't need my money to open a bank account. And that has not made me attractive. We're, we're financially successful and I, and I, this is a discussion going on, my future is, is my son [Freddie DuBose] will be able to take it over. And to my pleasant surprise we were talking to a agent on the phone and he told what his liquidity and net worth was, and he's financially strong enough to replace me in deals now so I, that was my concern with the company 'cause he's given eighteen years to the company so he's strong enough and has done well with his earnings. We, the debate is, is, in, in, and I say the debate, the discussion, which my wife [Helena DuBose] and I discussed it, we, her thing is why am I continuing to work and, and, and we have plenty. And we have plenty depending on who you judge us by. We, we, as, as black companies--financially strong, our liquidity is, is strong. And, and I guess, the, the thing that I'm proud or satisfied with is that I've been able not to be flashy and not to try to be--more financial success that we have. And, and, and we, we, we're in, in, in, in, in good shape now, you know. We, we've had good, good, good, good years. Most of the deals that we do require that you have in excess of a million or $3 million in, in liquidity. We have been at that point for a long time. So I am, and I've said this, I was trying to get, my wife was saying that you ought to be satisfied and you're never satisfied. I am very satisfied with where I am but with the effort and the knowledge I should have been able to achieve more. I shouldn't have had to fly under the radar. Flying under the radar cost us millions of dollars because if I hadn't been flying under the radar and--still had a white partner--but we both could have got deals instead of him just getting deals and, and I couldn't get deals. And, and when I look around with, with people who started in my time, Joel Ferguson [Joel I. Ferguson] started before us, very few did a, none of 'em has, has survived, the black companies. So I'm pleased that that I've survived and we, we're, we don't see any, you know, I'm not saying we can't fail. God can fail you any time he want or if they just start digging but--that's the thing is that we, we kept within a low profile, did what had to be done at the time. Story_ID: 622406 Speaker 1: It's been profitable but I, there's some resentment that I had to, to, to, to, to lay in the backseat of the car and, and, and, and, and deal. You know, as I said financially it, it's not a issue. I probably give relatives and spend relatives--more money on relatives that I expected to ever have. During Hurricane Katrina, you know, we spent big money, you know, we bought houses and, and stuff. And not to, you know, you may get some back or you may not so it's, it's not significant. We, you know, we have probably spent hundreds of thousands of dollars trying to get other people to get education within the family. So we've been blessed. But, but I told my wife [Helena DuBose] when I consider white individuals that I knew when I went in business [Painia Development Corporation, Detroit, Michigan], I knew their dad and, and, and I know the sons now, having to use them, there was a $34 million deal that I was in, and we reached a point to where nobody would do a $34 million deal without borrowing some money. But at one point the company who owned or bought out the partner, so we haven't used it, we owned the bank in Pittsburgh or--in Pennsylvania, we're not gonna let the land be used as security for the loan. Now, we made a deal and got bought out and I got paid a, we got paid some money, good money, in most people's eyesight, but not what I could have made if I could have stayed in the deal. Now, I got the deal partially because of my political connection and we both had the same votes, but we were both qualified, but the white partner didn't have enough votes to get it and I didn't have enough votes to get it. So it was, it should have been good for both people but he sold the company. So that, as I said I'm not unsatisfied but I, you know, you, you earn it, you, you, I don't celebrate it, I earned it, I (unclear) in to more, you know, not because I couldn't, didn't put in the effort, but the effort it's, it's like Rose Brunson's thesis for her master's [degree], it said you find out you overpaid, you have no option to overpay in a lot of cases as a black, okay. You still have to run further and jump higher. Now, I talked to somebody, you know, and he said well, you know, the same thing but you learned the system and you got over. I didn't get over. I earned where I am. I earned it. God blessed me but every morning the priest was saying, "God, you know, the parish is suffering. Look like you would let us win the lottery?" He said, "I would if you bought a ticket," okay. So I get up every morning and try to help him with a ticket and go to work (laughter) and read and, you know, do it. But so I'm, I'm, I'm happy and, and satisfied. Story_ID: 622407 Speaker 1: You know, I guess the, the thing that I enjoy now, that I'm able to assist other blacks with advice and lend 'em money. And some of it I know I'm never gonna get back, you know, but it's, I can do it now. My son [Freddie DuBose] feels that I spend too much time and sharing too much of my time where I shouldn't because (unclear), you know. I'm at that level where I can get, do that. You know, when I, I, you know, I enjoy and I rejoice in, I've saved Tougaloo [Tougaloo College, Tougaloo, Mississippi] hundreds of thousands of dollars in construction and-- Speaker 2: And you're on the board of Tougaloo? Speaker 1: I'm on, on the board. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And it's, it's different from Detroit investment board [Detroit Investment Fund, Detroit, Michigan], where everything is analyzed by a qualified staff, so it's strictly a policy vote. On Tougaloo--does not have a lawyer on staff, they don't have a engineer on staff, they got it now, I had a building and, and grounds and something but, you know, his experience is, is very (unclear). So right now they've got a job that they bidded out that came in under construction. In twenty minutes I looked at it and read it before I got here and the guy should have known he was gonna come here, and the architecture should have known he was gonna come in from the design. It's, it's that type of things. And when contractors has done work for them, they took advantage of them by collecting general requirements and then billing them for the electrical and stuff that you're supposed to be paying for. You're letting people come in, we rehabbed the chapel [Woodworth Chapel, Tougaloo, Mississippi] down there and the contractor was gonna redo the, the pews, and the church is a hundred, a hundred something year old church. You don't need him to do that, you got a hundred year organ. Why is that gonna, just 'cause it's in the church you don't need him to do that. There was things like that that that you pick up. I don't need to pay him a profit on the insurance. We get the insurance, we get a bill of writs and we put it in place, okay. But I don't need that to get you on (unclear) and so forth for it 'cause the school county--insurance on the chapel and it's gonna keep it on there. So it's, it's, it's things like that. It's, I'm not a academic on Tougaloo, I didn't wanna serve on none of the academic, so I serve on finance and building and grounds and that type of thing. And been on there too long because it, it's, it's, as I said it's, it, it, it's not a criticism, the school is just small, you got a thousand students you can't afford this so when you say you're serving on that board, you aren't going in there making a policy decision. You, you're going in there trying to decide whether he picked the right architect or the right engineer. You're trying to review the contract. You know, one of the issues they just had was the general requirements. Said, you know, we're rehabbing this building and you're spending all your time doing it while our guards is protecting it at night and we're not including that in the construction cost. That's a construction cost that's not academic. And when you mortgage something you get a fee for that, you know, and so forth, even if you don't pay it back you gotta pay it, you can't take that out of your operational cash because then you don't have enough money to stay in operation. So, yeah, it's, it's, it's a board that you serve on. Now, there are people on there who contribute in academics and keeping the school's accreditation and, and program, that's not my expertise and, and I don't try to, to get in that, I, I stay with the construction. I'm not a good fundraiser. I make contributions and because I'm not, I'm just not good at that, fundraising, but and that's what some of the board members do, yeah, they're good at fundraising (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But you certainly have a contribution to make from what I--from what you're saying. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Story_ID: 622408 Speaker 1: I just wanted to ask you-- Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) a quick question like-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --what difference has, you, you were describing off, off camera, you know, the, this development [Lester Morgan Cultural Gardens, Detroit Michigan] and how it came into being and how Coleman Young fought for low income housing, and housing for the, the low income residents here and medium income residents in this development that we're sitting at right now which was, you know, projected as a high income, you know, living facility by some of the directors at the DIA-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --Detroit Institute for the Arts [sic. Detroit Institute of Arts, Detroit, Michigan], so. Speaker 2: Well, Coleman was, was strong in both low income and minority participation. If you were gonna do something that required a lot of city approval, participation, he wanted you to take in a black partner and, and, and if the black partner didn't know the game, learn him the game. If the architecture firm wasn't big enough to do it, he'd put two black firms together or he put the black firm with a white. That was, that was Coleman's thing is that, you know, our experience. So on this particular job here, Alfred Taubman [A. Alfred Taubman] didn't like what the city had requested for proposal. Alfred Taubman is a large real estate developer and, and has made some news. But anyway he owns shopping centers and so forth, one of the big and, and he had a real interest in the city, in the DIA and Coleman's administration. So when we got the proposal for this development it was to be a senior citizen low income. And he called and said that he wanted to meet with me. So I said fine. At first I thought it was a joke when the secretary told me, and she thought it was a joke that, "Alfred Taubman's on the phone. They wanna meet with you." I had done no business with him and didn't know any reason why he would call me, but at the time he called me. When I met with him, he told me he had talked to two or three other people and they said I was a difficult person and I probably wouldn't meet with him and some of 'em had said that, you know, they could get a meeting with me for a fee or something to that effect. And he called Coleman and Coleman said, "No," I was always a boy to Coleman, a young man, so he said, "No, call the boy, he'll meet with you, he, he ain't got no problem, just, just pick up the phone, you don't need to go through XYZ for him to meet you." So he called and I met with him. And in the first meeting we got a little aggravated at times. He said that him and Max Fisher and some of the people was tired of us building all this low income stuff in the city. And I said, "Well, you know, if your banks, you and Max Fisher are the largest stockholder in Chase Bank [Chase Manhattan Bank; JPMorgan Chase and Co.] and y'all own Manufacturers Bank [Manufacturers Bank, N.A., Detroit, Michigan] here. If y'all lend us some money we'd do it." And then, you know, we got pretty husky and he says, "Well, set- settle down, settle down, we can work, work together." And in the final analysis he said, "Can the city support a market rate development?" I said, "Yeah, but we can't get, borrow, no money from no place but the state housing authority [Michigan State Housing Development Authority], and they don't allow you to spend but fifty-five thousand dollars a unit. And you can't build a market rate unit with that, you can't get a nice unit." He said, "Well, come back in with the numbers and tell me what you need and I'll get you the mortgage." I said, "I don't--no recourse mortgage [nonrecourse mortgage]--." I said, "Do you understand, I'm not signing personally for nothing?" He said (laughter), he laughed and say, said, "Yeah, I know what a no recourse mortgage is," you know, we just got through talking about something, $300 million or something--he had just talked to somebody on the phone about a, a $30 million or something, but anyway, some big numbers. He said, "So that conversation is so--you know who I am. And I own A and W Root Beer [A and W Restaurants, Inc.] but anyway, I know what a no recourse mortgage is." So I said, "Okay, I could be back in here Thursday and give you the numbers." And I came back and told him that we needed, what we needed. And he said, "Fine, I'll have Michigan National Bank [Lansing, Michigan] deliver a, a commitment over to you." And then, and then he asked me about my financial statement. And I said, "Well, now I done told you I ain't gone personally guarantee nothing." He said, "No, I just wanna see the history of your financial statement since I'm going to make the commitment for the loan, the bank's gonna depend on me." I said, "Well, I don't wanna show no cosigner." He says, "We ain't gonna cosign. They gonna just give you one on the fact that I tell them to give you one." And so I showed him my financial statements and he looked at it and said, "You know, this is accurate." I said, "Yeah, it's accurate." He said, "Well, okay. I'm satisfied that you ought to be able to get the loan on your own." And I said, "Well, we didn't get it and I ain't gonna waste no time, wasting money with architects and so forth." So he arranged for Michigan National to bring me a letter with a $5 million commitment. So then when I told Coleman Young what happened, he said, "No, we gonna have some low income people in there." He, "Low income blank, blank, people in there. We ain't gonna let y'all come in here and just do this." So I went back and I told him, you know, what the new numbers was, he said, "Okay. We can, we can work with that." Story_ID: 622409 Speaker 1: What he didn't tell me that--and he says, "Have you hired a architect?" And I said, "Yeah." He says, "Have you signed a contract?" I said, "No." He says, "Well, I'd like for you to use this other person." And I said, "I can't use him 'cause he wanna get paid every month and I don't pay my architect unless the deal go through. They have to take the same risk I take. They get the full agreement." And he said, "Well, we'll get, lend you the money." I said, "I don't wanna borrow no money, you misunderstand. I want him to take the risk." He said, "You don't have to sign for it." So they lent us a couple hundred thousand dollars that I never signed for today that he said if you make a profit you pay it back. But he participated in the design of, of this complex [Lester Morgan Cultural Gardens, Detroit Michigan]. He was at every meeting for about six months. He said, we ain't gonna show it to the state housing authority [Michigan State Housing Development Authority]. We ain't gonna show it to the city. We ain't gonna have nobody to review it. You, me, and the architect gonna design it. And, and we did. And there are some things that different in here that I, I have to fight with the city every year on, gutters and downspouts, there's no gutters and downspouts on this job, they, the roof hang over, so this is city. So he then picked up the phone and called Blanchard [James Blanchard] who was governor and said he wanted him to finance it. And Blanchard picked up the phone and called the director, who was a black director and a friend of mine's, very nice guy, Terry Duvernay [Terrence R. Duvernay]. And Terry called me up, "Why in the hell would you go to the governor instead of coming to me, Cullen [HistoryMaker Cullen L. Dubose]? I could have went to the governor and got the rules changed, you made it sound like you fight." I said, "I ain't know anybody called the governor, Terry. I didn't." But it turn out, so I called Alfred Taubman [A. Alfred Taubman] and he said, "Yeah, I called the governor. I didn't raise any money for Terry Duvernay, I raised money for Blanchard and that's who I'm going to talk too. He ain't at the level where I'm going to ask him." So they changed the rules for this development to be built. They increased what you could borrow and took the limit off. These units cost about seventy-five thousand dollars a unit, twenty years ago. And it's right behind the, the DIA. Speaker 2: Yeah, the Detroit Institute for the Arts [sic. Detroit Institute of Arts, Detroit, Michigan] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Art. And that was built under Coleman Young. Story_ID: 622410 Speaker 1: We have another job, Marketplace [Marketplace Court, Detroit, Michigan], that in the last years of Coleman Young, it was urban renewal land that had been contaminated, it was contaminated, and they hadn't been able to get anybody to build on it. This place was contaminated and I cleaned it up. I--rather than hiring somebody to do the cleaning, clean up, I supervised it and hired some chemists and some scientists and we went through the process. So based on that some of his staff called me and told me about the other piece and we could take it. So we processed it under Coleman Young. Dennis Archer was elected and his people held it up for two years either out of ignorance on his staff part--and I served, supported him financially and co-chaired his transition for building and safety [City of Detroit Building, Safety Engineering and Environmental Department]. And we got beat up terribly. It delayed the job for about two years because they came in and said the land was worth four or five hundred thousand dollars. It that was if it was clean. So we argued and it eventually got to the point where we had a approved plan, that we had paid the state environment [Michigan Department of Environmental Quality] for, so we gave them the plan. They went out and got bids on it and they came back in at six hundred thousand dollars, okay. So then they come to me and said, "Give me $250,000 and we'll clean it up and give it to you, but you gonna, we got to have the, the six hundred thousand dollars which is the value of the land," and so forth. So I said, "No way am I gonna give two hundred thousand dollars more than the land." So at some point they agreed that I could clean the land up and certify my costs to them, and they wound up getting about twenty thousand dollars or twenty-two thousand dollars, I cleaned the land up for four hundred--just under four hundred--or just over four hundred thousand. And then we got started. But at that point when we got ready to get started, construction had gone up, income has, so the development was not economically feasible. It's a 70 percent market rate, it's 60 percent now but the documents, regulatory agreement says it's a 70 percent market rate and 30 percent mixed income. But by the time we got ready to close, we had to increase the low income or the below income, middle income, in order to get more tax credit to make the numbers work. That administration was extremely expensive to me. Now, I've gotten it out of my system but I, I thought it was awful. I attempted to meet with him, he wouldn't meet with me. Speaker 2: Archer? Speaker 1: Yeah. He met with me but he didn't listen to me. He said, "My staff wouldn't do that," and the meeting wasn't very, he had a person, the head of building and safety, we had several other encounters and the last one was we had got to the point where we were going before council for the last hearing, for a hearing, and then we were gonna sue, okay. And it was having to do with some elevators in a, that was a building we owned up the street, and his building and safety guy called me, Meer [ph.], which was the deputy then, called me, I was on my way from Lansing [Michigan] and said he needed to meet with me thirty minutes before city council [Detroit City Council]. And I said, "I can't get there, Meer, in thirty minutes." I said, "I will be there five or ten minutes before council." He said, "Well, call me when you're close. I'll meet you at the elevator." I said, "Okay." So he got to the elevator and said, "We're willing to back off, if you go before council and tell them your problem has been solved. We'll back off and we'll leave you alone the, the, the rest of this administration. We won't bother you anymore. Because if you go before council with your story, we're gonna have to get rid of Miss--," whoever she was, who was building--the head of building and safety. I went before them and Nick Hood [Nicholas Hood, Sr.]. And they say, "You put us out here on this limb and then you sawed it off on me." Because I went before there and tucked my tail between my leg and said we had resolved our problem with council. They did everything, made us put a new elevator in in a building that was less than twenty years old. And I just replaced elevators in buildings within the last five years that was built in 1919, okay. The hard mechanics, they been updated. So that administration was, was very bad for me. You know, whether and, and for a while Dennis and I just couldn't front each other and I'm over that now. I, I haven't got time to hang on to it. But he, he was not good for me whether his administration was bad for blacks or whether they were just bad for me, I, I, that is, and there's a lot of people which strongly supported him and so forth. And my son [Freddie DuBose] wish I would not talk about it, just move on, but I am moved on. I, you know, I don't have any issue with him now, I'm happy, I hope his family is doing well, certainly I'm doing well. And but his administration was terrible for us [Painia Development Corporation, Detroit, Michigan]. Story_ID: 622411 Speaker 1: What about the Kilpatrick [Kwame Kilpatrick]-- Speaker 2: Kilpatrick didn't do anything for us [Painia Development Corporation, Detroit, Michigan], but he didn't stand in the way. He was good for business, not just for me. I can't say he was good for blacks, he was good for people who, he didn't help, I don't think, people get started and so forth. We, my son [Freddie DuBose] and I talk about this and I said well, you know, now he didn't do anything for me, but I ain't got time, he didn't, he didn't stand in our way, he got, he made the playing field level for us. We were the winner of a development called Herman Gardens [Detroit, Michigan], which was probably a $100 million development, which was a joint venture. We were 55 [percent] and the white company was 45. And the secretary of HUD [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development] didn't like, after we worked out the plans and the design which was a $5 million contract, and they are using our plan, but he didn't want us to be the master builder. He decided that he, they should separate it. So then Kwame wanted to know if we wanted to be the construction manager, but we're not in the business of construction manager, we, you know, I'm the only person who could do it or we'd have had to hire somebody, other, the other company would have had to put a high price stamp (unclear). So you got a $17 million contract, they still owe us four hundred thousand--four, thirty something thousand or eighteen thousand on the job. They never did mail us the final payment. But Kwame didn't have anything to do with not doing that. He tried to get Alphonso [HistoryMaker Alphonso Jackson] who was secretary of HUD then to let us do it as master builders, and I'm glad he didn't because the economy turned and it, it just wouldn't have been a financial success. So we didn't, I don't think, and some people made the difference in there. But he stayed, it was up, a leveling field, they didn't hassle you, if you had something that, that was a good deal and you wanted to do it, you, you, you, you could, you could get it done. We rehabbed a building that I just told you, and we knew we were gonna rehab it and we put in the elevators before. Now, the elevator company agreed to give us the elevators free because we had a master contract. And we hired a consultant from, that had been head of elevators for the state, to say, "You know, you got a 50/50 chance, but the court's gonna probably say the city has got the authority to make the decision whether they think the equipment is worn or not, even though the company has (unclear) it and the thickness and so forth is there," they said, "because the elevator is shaking more than they think and there's no standards for that, it's a judgment that they could make and it's a judgment that the state inspectors could make." And he said, "I don't agree with it. My written reports show I don't agree with it, but it doesn't mean the judge gonna accept it." So the elevator company said, "We'll give you the elevator, you pay for the labor," and it was about thirty thousand dollars. Then while they started putting it in they made us put a operator on a automatic elevator and that's when we were gonna go to court. We're paying somebody forty dollars an hour to operate a automatic elevator-- Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: --because they working on the adjacent elevator. Story_ID: 622412 Speaker 1: So Dennis' [Dennis Archer] administration was not good for us. Kwame's [Kwame Kilpatrick] administration we, they didn't stand in our way, we didn't get anything or didn't do anything significant but we, we did okay with, without the city [Detroit, Michigan]. I mean, you, we got one city, the way we got some help from the city on a job. But it, in some cases it was to our best interest not to use city money and the Davis bank [First Independence Bank, Detroit, Michigan] and the federal money. We, we just rather use the state money or private money. But Kwame I, I think was, was, was pro business and I don't think, we tried to get a site on the river [Detroit River] and we hired his dad [Bernard Kilpatrick] and signed a contract and so forth, everything legal, above board. And we didn't get it, and we didn't get any help from his dad. And you ask me how do I know we didn't get any help? Because his dad never asked me for financial statements and other information that he would have needed if he had helped. And the bottom line, Kwame didn't make the decision of who got what on the river. The power structure, General Motors [General Motors Corporation; General Motors Company], and so forth made the decisions. He, the city didn't make the decision. They may have had some minor input because one of the banks came back to me, National City [National City Corporation], and asked me about joint venturing with Hines [Hines Interests Limited Partnership] or somebody out of Texas on one of the sites so he didn't make the decisions on that. So I, you know, I spent the money but it was not that significant and I was not mad because I should have known who was gonna make the decision to begin with and if I had been, did my homework, I would have known that General Motors and the downtown businesspeople were gonna make the decision. We sat on the board, Detroit Investments [Detroit Investment Fund, Detroit, Michigan], you know, there was $50 million in, you know, I had some problems with them because a, a black guy made a application, which I thought it was one of the best applications we had, and they turned it down and I thought they turned it down because he was black. But the real thing, I now believe they turned it down because he owned a healthcare HMO [health maintenance organization], and he was competing against Blue Cross Blue Shield [Blue Cross Blue Shield Association], and Blue Cross Blue Shield was contributing to the fund that they were lending out of. But if you don't have the facts you can't make the right decision. So I proposed that I would resign from the board and they sent me word that the bank, that we do a, a lot of business with and it partners with us, sent me word that, "If you resign, the newspaper's gonna make a story out this 'cause you're the only black on the board that owns his own business, everybody else represent one of the big corporations who's black. So, you know, we don't need this publicity. So what we propose is that you go to the bar and tell your boys you ain't coming to no more meeting and so forth. And we gonna put your son on the board." I said, "Well, you can't tell me I'm going to put my son on the board, he's grown, he has to make that decision. So I'll go back and ask Freddie [Freddie DuBose]." He said, "Well, no, you don't ask him, let's have lunch with me, you, and him and if he wanna go on the board, he can make the decision. You just tell him before you ain't made no commitment and I should hear it." So my son serves on the board now, they still have my name on there but I haven't been to a meeting since they put my son's name on there. Now, I told the boys at the bar what happened that, you know, I couldn't afford to get in a fight with General Motors and the banks and the city, you know, and I just couldn't afford that fight. So when they told me not to resign I didn't resign but there was no bones about and I thought Bill Brooks [William Brooks, Sr.] should have got the loan. But now when I get some facts and realize that he was running an HMO which is competing against Blue Cross Blue Shield and they want Blue Shield to lend them (laughter) money, their money, there, you know, it, so there's no mysteries if you have the facts. I didn't have all the facts so my conclusion that it was purely racist was incorrect and I'm glad I made the decision not to pick a fight over something that--that I was--businesswise wrong with. Speaker 2: That's your, that's your favorite phrase is it, there-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --are no mysteries when you know the facts. Speaker 1: There's no mysteries if you know the facts. Story_ID: 622413 Speaker 1: Let me ask you this. We, we always ask this question. And from your unique perspective, what are some of your hopes and concerns about this, about the black community here in Detroit [Michigan]? Speaker 2: I, I don't think it, I can give you a answer if you limit it to Detroit. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But I, in general I don't think blacks, young blacks, has seen enough blacks who are financially successful and, and flashy that they appreciate education. They haven't seen enough blacks who, who were wealthy because of education. That they don't appreciate education. What I would like to see is the school system improved. The way Detroit has got to improve the school system [Detroit Public Schools Community District], they got to change the way the schools are funded. The way real estate property tax funding school here does not work. You can't build a new house in Detroit. The taxes don't allow you to, even though they give you homestead neighborhood exemption. It only cuts the property by a third or, or a half. It's still too high on a new house. It, it doesn't work. So what I'd like to see in, in, in this administration, the Bing's [Dave Bing] administration, that we get a committee that come up with a better way of taxing real estate, because if you overtax me and I'm a higher income, I'm not gonna pay, come in here and pay a high real estate tax and pay a 3 percent income tax where I can move to another community and pay a zero income tax and pay a fourth in taxes or certainly a half in all cases. My taxes on my home is in the forty something mills per thousand. In Detroit, it's eighty-seven mills per thousand. It's about double, it's about double and I have no income tax. My son [Freddie DuBose] does not live in the city but he has to pay a tax, now he doesn't complain, he, you know, I, I work out of the Lansing [Michigan] office and 90 percent of the time I don't take a salary, I may have taken probably a salary twice. I don't take a salary from the company [Painia Development Corporation, Detroit, Michigan], we have other income that, that, that we take in, but I work out of the Lansing office, I don't have a computer down here and so forth. I work in the Detroit office but when I do, I work at the receptionist desk. We don't have a receptionist no more so I work at her desk or at the desk where she was. But that, I would like to see that change and, and, and, and then attract a higher income person in this state. You see I, I live in a predominantly white neighborhood, but I didn't move there because I wanted to be around white, I still go to a black church, 99 percent of my friends that I visit are black and I get in my car to drive (unclear). But I couldn't build my house in the City of Lansing and expect to get my value out of it. There was no neighborhood in my opinion, ask someone knowledgeable in real estate, that I could build my house which would accommodate what my wife [Helena DuBose] needed, at that time my mother-in-law lived with me so it was large enough to have a section of the house for her and everything that she needed on one floor, now it's a three story house but you could live on one floor completely. So I couldn't build in Lansing and expect to get my money. I couldn't do it. There, there's no-- Speaker 1: You mean in Detroit or Lansing, you mean-- Speaker 2: You, you can't do it in Detroit-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --or Lansing but I'm just saying it's, my desire for blacks is no different in Detroit than it is in any urban city. Story_ID: 622414 Speaker 1: We gotta get more motivation for education. How you do that, you know you can debate it. I, I sympathize and say we still suffer some from, from slavery, you know, because of families and so forth. And, and that, and, and we had people who would appreciate education and wealth, we don't know what wealth is. You know, as, as, as blessed as I have been, I'm not sure that my wife [Helena DuBose] and them fully appreciate wealth, you know. The wealth that I have achieved is, is not as significant as they think it is. Now, I'm in the Guardsmen [National Association of Guardsmen, Inc.], I'm in Boule [Sigma Pi Phi Fraternity], I'm in Omega [Omega Psi Phi Fraternity], a nice contributor to the church, I contribute nice to Tougaloo [Tougaloo College, Tougaloo, Mississippi], I share with a lot of family members, you know. But it's still in the circle, professional circle, it's insignificant, you know. It's a joke, when they refer to me it's a joke. You got two thousand units, you a joke (laughter). People got ten thousand, twenty thousand, you got two thousand units and you're a developer (laughter). It, it's a, it's a joke in the real world. So as a black community until we can get the education and get the exposure, certainly even, my son [Freddie DuBose] with the master's [degree] from the University of, of Michigan [University of Michigan Business School; Stephen M. Ross School of Business, Ann Arbor, Michigan], business administration, I think his definition of wealth has not transferred and that's why I say we still suffer from racism and segregation because if he had been exposed to real wealth he would think different. My daughter [Cheri DuBose Reid] who recommended me here, I, I'm not sure they understand real wealth. Now, I like a lawyer here, Copeland [ph.] told somebody--say we were talking about somebody's Mercedes [Mercedes-Benz] and eighty-seven thousand dollars or a hundred thousand, he said, "Well, I'll just get me a fifty-eight thousand dollar Cadillac, and I'll put forty thousand dollars in the glove compartment. Then I'll owe it, open it and show you the forty thousand dollars and tell you that's my wealth and I don't have to demonstrate it with a car." We have not learnt what wealth is and we flashing it when wealth isn't there. Now, do I drive a Cadillac, yeah, I drive anything I want, but now do I think I can afford a, a Bentley or a Rolls, heck no. Now, could I pay for one, yeah. Cash, four or five thousand, yeah. I can't afford a Rolls-Royce. If I could afford a Rolls-Royce I don't need to be driving it. I need to have a driver, okay. So I'm comfortable with not being flashy but I think some way we have to tell kids this hard work and this sacrifice of getting a education pay off. I live a good life. You know, but just, you know, if I get ready to go somewhere I go there. You know, I've been to Vienna, Austria, I've been to Rome [Italy], Spain, you know, I ain't been nowhere in the last, went to Spain two years ago, second time or third time, just because my wife wanted to go. But those things you, you know, once you get 'em under there, under, under your belt, that you're comfortable with it, you can move on. That is the comfort level that you get and education does more for you. And I quickly hit my brother's [Norris DuBose] dying and my mother [Shoffie Edwards DuBose] dying, that was lack of education. The lack of education denied them medical care. The doctor which was treating them, didn't appreciate the care that you needed. He simply treated the symptoms as they went there. We're not into preventive medicine, they were not into preventive (unclear) and it was on the edge, they were all on the edge. Them other brother didn't go so I can't them (unclear) but the other one did go and had just had an exam within two months of when he died with a stroke. Now, why they didn't pick up the high blood pressure and (unclear) a stroke. All I'm saying to you, what I would like for the City of Detroit [Michigan] is to change the environments, since we're mostly black, so that we appreciate education and when we appreciate education we will enjoy a better lifestyle. Story_ID: 622415 Speaker 1: Let me ask you this, when you look back at everything you've done to this point is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could? Speaker 2: There's not anything that I would be comfortable in answering you that. I think some of the time when I flew under the radar I should have took a fight on and I didn't. Now, if I didn't take the fight on and I got it I was somewhat selfish. When I was real young and my kids [Cheri DuBose Reid, Cullen DuBose, Jr. and Freddie DuBose] was young, I took risks that I later in life didn't take. When I fought for open housing and so forth, I took risks then that I really couldn't afford with, with three young kids. And later in life when the kids had had two cars and out of college, there were fights that I let pass by. So now whether I, you know, it's, it's, I don't know that I'm comfortable to say that I would do it, 'cause I can't go back and recreate the circumstance and evaluate. You know, if I got a lawsuit and the lawyer figures he need a lot of money up front, he don't figure I got a good suit, you know, if he's willing to take it on some contingencies are less than him getting his guarantee, I can evaluate the facts, you know. I got something now where, you know, we'll probably go to court on it if we don't get a solution. But I figure I got a 50/50 chance or a 60/40 chance of winning in the court. Whether I went under the radar because I ain't think I could win, and do I think it would make sense, my daughter had a, a case of, of sex and race discrimination. And the person who was involved told her she did. My advice to her, you're not gonna get enough money to sue. The money you get you'll be tagged by the system of being a troublemaker and, and you only gonna get a, a few hundred thousand dollars based on what's there. You know, you ain't proved the harm and so forth and then it's gone be a question and they gonna be large enough to drag this on. General Electric can drag it on forever and that's who you're dealing with, and I think that's who we're dealing with. And my thing is to suck it up and say I'm good and I'm going some place else and keep going, okay. And they worked out a deal where she got the same pay but didn't get the job. And there was some traveling in, in the new job. But she stayed there a few years and, and, and left. But all I'm saying, that's the only thing that I would evaluate those fights instead of, I think, I, I just ducked completely when I left the state housing authority [Michigan State Housing Development Authority]. I didn't think I could win the fight and I just ducked completely and went underground. Story_ID: 622416 Speaker 1: The next question is, when you look back again at everything you've done to this point, what today would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: I think my legacy will only be written if my son [Freddie DuBose] who take care, who's taken over the corporation [Painia Development Corporation, Detroit, Michigan] is successful. I think as, as a legacy I've touched a lot of people's life and, and I'm happy with that. The young man that, which is not a young man, that work for me now, that the state, he was interviewed at the state by three people and they turned him down and I looked at his score, and I was a division director and I had him come back for an interview. And he didn't wanna come back 'cause he said, "Y'all ain't gone hire me." I said, "Come back." I found out he didn't get hired because they didn't like the way he was dressed. He came out of a low income neighborhood, raised by his grandmother, went to college because Coleman Young put his hands on him. And he said, "Today that, you know, you, you'll be shocked by the people." He say--young lady who was here working this morning, just graduated from college, she's moving to Atlanta [Georgia]. He say, "You know, she just think the world of you because you gave her a chance to, to work part time, because she coming from a single family home, and get through school. You know, you, you didn't hassle her, her sister wanted to hire her, her sister was a good employee, but not a college graduate." And he said, "You know, when I ask you, you say fine, you know, you know, it ain't gonna change." So I think that, that my comfort is that I have sacrificed time and other resources to help other people. Am I selfish? Yes, I think all successful people are selfish, but my legacy will be that if, if it survive, that I did it right. If it doesn't survive I, there was some mistakes made that I missed, not that I wouldn't have tried it. You know, I, I, I've been basileus of Omega [Omega Psi Phi Fraternity] I've been on this committee and that committee. I think Tougaloo [Tougaloo College, Tougaloo, Mississippi] people will probably remember me more than, than most people, those people who served on the board and, and that worked there. I'm not the college type. My grammar and, and speech is direct, an issue but I think financially that I have been significant, I have made significant contribution, not cash contributions, but inputs that has, has contributed to their still being open. I'm not sure Tougaloo is gonna survive. I'm not sure, eleven of the thirty-three historic black colleges [HBCUs] is at high risk, is, is, is on oxygen, eleven of the thirty-three is, is high risk. And it maybe ten now, the eleven may have included Morris Brown [Morris Brown College, Atlanta, Georgia] which has already failed for all intents and purpose, eleven of those is on oxygen including Tougaloo now. Tougaloo is in reasonable good shape, physical, and, and reasonably good shape that we can survive four more years but the endowment is not large enough to compete for the quality of students you used to get. Tougaloo used to get a hundred valedictorians from the high schools, they don't get that anymore. Jackson State [Jackson State University, Jackson, Mississippi] and Alcorn [Alcorn State University, Lorman, Mississippi] is getting enough state money now, they both are accredited, Mississippi Valley [Mississippi Valley State University, Itta Bena, Mississippi] is accredited, you can go there for substantially less than you can go to Tougaloo for. So but I, I think that that the satisfaction of the people from all over the country who have served on that board, and I've stayed on there longer than I wanted to stay on there because they meet three times a year, it's a day and a half meeting, no other board I ever served on is it more than a ninety minute meeting and they talking about $50 million loans and, and stuff not $50 million, but they loan $50 million probably and they only do the, the gap financing. And the bank board, you know, we never served any more than two hours in a bank board meeting and they were paying you for those board meetings. So a day and half, you know, you, you, your staff, and I think it could be reorganized to and we're trying to do it now. What they was talking about was trying to cut it to one less meeting but that doesn't work because it's, it's, it's just too many decisions that they don't have staff adequate of making those decisions, the academic decisions they could make but businesswise they, it, it just ain't there. And their finances is too fluid to, to, to do it now. Speaker 1: The condition of the, the school makes it necessary I guess for the board to contribute more than they would in another situation now? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, the, the board is, is not a board. It's, they wind up being in staff positions and not meddling in who's hired and who's fired. But, you know, you know, just knowing why this building came in under budget, staff ought to be telling me instead of me telling staff. Story_ID: 622417 Speaker 1: Another question we, well did, did your father [Howard DuBose] get a chance to see you become successful in business (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My, my father did, my mother [Shoffie Edwards DuBose] didn't, I regret. My father did, uh-huh. I have a brother-in-law who is still living that I just saw yesterday who I, Jesse [Jesse Bell, Jr.] (unclear), came here to work at the highway department [Michigan Department of State Highways and Transportation; Michigan Department of Transportation]. He said, "I ain't got no money right now, Cullen [HistoryMaker Cullen L. Dubose], but why don't you go in the closet and take a couple of outfits out then." I took a pair of blue pants and a, and a jacket and some stuff. I, I've been able to, to, to, to, to convert. My dad saw it. My high school classmates have saw it. My college roommate and high school buddy that was very smart, Roy [Roy Long, Jr.], the psychiatrist, died at our fiftieth high school reunion. He went down the week before, he was dying of cancer I'm sure, but had not told anybody so he was panicking to get this reunion done elaborate and, and so forth. And by the time I got in he had given the newspaper an interview and listed some of my public assets, like how many housing units I had, that we owned a radio station [WXLA Radio, Dimondale, Michigan], and how much the radio station, two stations, how much the stations was worth and that him and two other classmates was millionaires but if you put all three. So my family has, has saw that, it just irritated the hell out of my wife [Helena DuBose], you know, that he did it and it had bothered me for a while but, you know, after a while you settle down. So, Jesse, my family have known and, you know, I'm just saying my brothers knew, my brother [Lawrence DuBose] who had a lot of influence on me knew, and my dad knew, you know. He was able to fly up for various things, shop or, he saw me give my sister cars and stuff, and it wasn't a new car, it was cars. And we now, my brother's [Kirkland DuBose], his wife [Mildred Miller DuBose] who just passed, you know, we, he wanted her to have a Cadillac so we, my wife gave her a Cadillac when she got a little something. My family has seen the success, my mother didn't see it. And, and never had, my dad had the life. I mean, when I said he had the life after my mother died he was depressed for a long time but, you know, after a while he got over it, you know, so, you know. He had one suit in my whole life until after college and, you know, every time I went down, you know, I had him go get him a suit or had, go somewhere and, you know. Then it, when he got where he couldn't drive up by his self my brother-in-law would come with him. And he died before the significant wealth. You know, he hesitated when I left the state [Michigan State Housing Development Authority], I was making about forty-five thousand dollars a year which is a $110,000 a year job. And he questioned it and the classmate that I mentioned saw some deals and he went and told his dad [Roy Long, Sr.] what we made on the deal. His dad said, "Be careful that boy is doing something illegal" (laughter). And my dad would just say be careful and I may say, you know, what you're doing. My wife have told me since that her parents almost went crazy when I quit my job. But my dad had saw it and most of my family have saw it but my mother did not. She, she did not. I, and she would have, really she came up when my second child was born and stayed with us there. And she was somewhat disappointment that, you know, you've got a engineering degree, you're living in a house, you know, not a low income neighborhood--in the hood, we were in the hood, it was a three family flat that I converted back to two families and rehabbed it, it was boarded up and bought it and so forth. She was somewhat disappointed that I was not living at a higher standard when Cullen [Cullen DuBose, Jr.] was born. And she did not see the change, she died in about 1969, in 1969 or 1970, there's a question of when she died before or after midnight so I still get confused with what they put on the birth certificate [sic. death certificate]. She, and it was at the end of the year, she died New Year's Eve. So I still remembered but to, to (unclear) but she did not see it, but my dad did. Story_ID: 622418 Speaker 1: Tell us about your family. You've got how many children do you have and (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I have three, three kids. I have a daughter who lives in Northbrook [Illinois]. And then I have a son who lives here. And then we have a son [Cullen DuBose, Jr.] who got beat up and so forth and has been in a coma for fifteen years. He's not at a low level coma, we took him home for Memorial Day, we take him home three or four times a year. You know, last night when I came in he understands command, he can swallow now, he can assist you in getting up but he can't speak or he can't walk, he moves his neck and head and so forth but, you know, I, I don't cuss the Lord, we're still in good shape. And it, it's no mystery if you got the facts. It's very difficult for a place for people like that with closed head injuries because the insurance don't cover it after twenty-one weeks or something, okay. So nobody has a place for him to go. Now, we, he's at Special Tree [Special Tree Rehabilitation System] but it's, it's, it's extremely expensive, you know. Now, we've tried a lot of things with him and I've concluded that a lot of people with closed head injuries, had the money been spent on them in healthcare when they first occurred, they wouldn't wind up permanently injured, just because the hospital didn't wanna treat him. And we had to threaten a lawsuit and he should have been moved to another hospital where they would have put a shunt in and took the pressure off the brain but I didn't know any of that because I had no reason to know a hospital had to be certified as a trauma treatment center and stuff. But anyway he's doing fine. We talked a little bit. He hasn't been in the hospital in over two years now so he, he's, he's doing good. One of us generally try to see him every day and try to feed him one meal a day 'cause he swallows now and so. But Freddie's [sic.] went to the university, he graduated from Xavier in New Orleans [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana], all of my kids went to historical black schools [HBCUs], Freddie [Freddie DuBose] went to Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia], Cheri [Cheri DuBose Reid] went to Clark College [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia]. And I'm wrestling with my daughter and, and, and her husband, their daughter applying at Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California]. I would like for her to get two years at a black school. The greatest two years of my life is being, in terms of, of, of excluding my family and so forth, is the two years I spent at Tougaloo [Tougaloo Southern Christian College; Tougaloo College, Tougaloo, Mississippi], it's the only time in my life which I believe that I was judged a hundred percent on my ability and personality. I think in every other situation of significance, race has entered into the judgment which people either made by me or I made, okay. You know, the neighborhood that my kids grew up in, I moved there because of the school and because if I stayed around blacks, the school wouldn't have been there. We encouraged them to go to historic black schools because they were deprived of the black social life. The school, the white music was different, the white dance was different, very few, same thing my grandkids is growing up with. And I think it has a, a whopping effect on their personality. I, and I can't speak for Cheri and the son which is in a coma, but the son which is with the company [Painia Development Corporation, Detroit, Michigan], I think he got some elitist in him and I think it's difficult for him to understand why a kid ain't in school and why the parents don't understand why the kid ain't in school. You know, you go to a, a site, a building we own and he gonna question, I said, "Freddie, you gotta leave that kid alone. His mom will come out here and start a fight, you messing with her kid, why he ain't went to school, he may not have went to school because he didn't have nothing to wear, a number of things." Now, when you take that and you take the young, the person who worked for me, and Terrence [ph.] stands at a good level, I mean, he's just, see, stands, stands six figures or here, okay. But they didn't hire him 'cause he didn't have a suit on, he had a Michigan State [Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan] blazer on but nobody has told him. Now, he probably did not go through Michigan State's personnel office to try to learn it because he didn't know it was necessary (laughter). So, you know, I, life has been good (laughter). Story_ID: 622419 Speaker 1: And you get satisfaction. You know, today as I said, I think I told you when we were off camera, first the call, that phone call I got out the way with my wife [Helena DuBose] it wasn't, it was the guy telling me that the meeting between the young man which is an Omega [Omega Psi Phi Fraternity] who worked for Wayne State [Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan] is, was interviewed today, he's being considered for lieutenant governor, I don't think he'll make it, but the fact he's getting interviewed is there. The family that relocated because of my efforts in NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] you know, it, it, it's, it's, you know, it's, it's, it's, it's enough. No decision that I made in the early stages when I took on race issues, did they not wind up benefitting me more that the people who I helped. If I hadn't got involved with the NAACP housing, I wouldn't have knew what I knew about housing when I went with the housing authority [Michigan State Housing Development Authority], I would have been a strict engineer. If I had stayed at highway [Michigan Department of State Highways and Transportation; Michigan Department of Transportation] I wouldn't have, there, part of my leaving the state housing authority is we had a board member who then took over, who had problems with me, a third of my staff was black when I left the state housing authority and he had a problem with that, okay. So I knew me and him were gonna have a problem and then when they come on and said I should sell property I left and he did give me a problem when I left. And then I said, oh, somebody in Las Vegas [Nevada] who was chairman of the board and when I was there he was still chairman and I went to him and was gonna ask for some help. I didn't know the people that I was asking about was dating his daughter at the time (laughter) and was out there with his daughter (laughter) so you make some mistakes, didn't have enough of the facts. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: But anyway I don't know, if, if, if any serious thing but I, I, I don't think I've refused to assist any other person period. And I think even with the race problems, I don't feel it when I'm around somebody who's white if the issue don't come up, they don't bring it up. It, it, it isn't, I don't think it has affected me to where, you know, I gotta be reminded the, you know. I, I think at one time in my life it did, you know, like my mother's--my grandmother [sic. maternal grandfather, Charles Edwards (ph.)] on my, that had the white mama, somebody asked me, told me that, "You ought to be spelling your name with a capital B, that's French, you don't how to do that? You ought to talk to [HistoryMaker] Percy Pierre and he could explain to you that the--." It teed me off and, "You need to look up your history." And I told him I said, "Well, you know, my grandmother [sic. great-grandmother] had their kids put in the barns. I don't know why I need to know something about it." You know, I told him in a more crude, crude way which embarrassed my wife but today I could, I could take that and not, not be offended. I, I would challenge him on it, you know. I didn't change it because I'm comfortable with it, it, the way it is and whether it's a capital B or not, you know, it's on my birth certificate and my wife and the kids [Cheri DuBose Reid, Cullen DuBose, Jr. and Freddie DuBose] do, do it the other way so if somebody wanna say well, he was ignorant, he didn't spell his name right, you know, I'm at the point that it's, it's not of significant to me, I think I've matured beyond that, you know. Story_ID: 622420 Speaker 1: Well, I have just one last question and that is, sir, it's similar to legacy but a little different, sir, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: I would like to be remembered as one who cared about other people and, and, and, and helped them. That was someone who was touchable, you know, if you can keep your head all about you. 'If' [Rudyard Kipling] is my favorite poem and, and it's the common touch, that one did not lose the common touch. I think I bend over backwards to try to make certain that I don't lose the common touch, and I don't quickly judge another person negatively because of their behavior because I don't know the circumstance. So I'd like to be remembered as one who cares about other people and is concerned about their circumstance. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, thank you, sir. Speaker 2: Thank you. Speaker 1: Let, let me just say that you're only one of three people I think when we're introduced by their employees as the best boss in the world that we've interviewed and I've interviewed a thousand people. So thank you...