 Story_ID: 187927 Speaker 1: (Noise) The date is April 10, 2003. I'm Adele Hodge the interviewer and the camera person is Matthew Hickey. We're talking today to [HM] Kahil El'Zabar. Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: Would you give us your full name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: Okay. My full name is Kahil El'Zabar, K-A-H-I-L, and the last name is capital E-L with an accent mark, capital Z-A-B-A-R. And aka Clifton Henry Blackburn, C-L-I-F-T-O-N, Henry, H-E-N-R-Y, Blackburn, B-L-A-C-K-B-U-R-N, which is the name that I was born with. Speaker 1: And your birth date? Speaker 2: 11-11-1953 [November 11, 1953]. Speaker 1: Can you tell us where we are doing this interview? Speaker 2: We're doing it in Chicago [Illinois]. And we're at HistoryMakers which is 1900 South Michigan [Avenue]. Story_ID: 187928 Speaker 1: Okay. And can you give me your mother's full name and her birthplace? Speaker 2: Her maiden name is Gwendolyn Marie Finch. Her married name is Blackburn. And she was born in Chicago [Illinois] in 1936. Speaker 1: And your dad? Speaker 2: Clifton Henry Blackburn, Sr. Born in Chicago in 1933. Speaker 1: How many sisters and brothers? Speaker 2: I've got two brothers. Speaker 1: And their names? Speaker 2: Shelton Blackburn and Charlton Blackburn. Speaker 1: Charlton? Speaker 2: Charlton Blackburn. Speaker 1: C-H-A--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: C-H-A-R-L-T-O-N. Speaker 1: And are you the oldest? Speaker 2: I'm the oldest. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 187929 Speaker 1: What is your favorite color? Speaker 2: Purple. Speaker 1: And what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: Brown rice. Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: I have many favorite vacation destinations, but I would probably say Accra in Ghana and Paris, France. Speaker 1: And what is your favorite saying? Speaker 2: You dig? Speaker 1: Oh, really. So can you tell me why? Speaker 2: You know I grew up around a lot of musicians, Von Freeman, George Freeman, my brother--I mean not my brother, but my father [Clifton Henry Blackburn, Sr.] played drums. My mother's brother introduced my father to my mother. His name was Leroy Finch, Candy Finch. So he played with Charlie Parker and Dizzy Gillespie, Fats Navarro. And hipness, which I've coined a highly intelligent perspective, was something stylized by segregated elegance of the African American community. And at an early age I decided to retain those qualities. And you dig was always what gave the understanding. You dig? Story_ID: 187930 Speaker 1: I'm gonna take you back to your grandparents. Let's start with your maternal grandparents. Give me your grandparents' name and tell me where they were born? Speaker 2: John Leroy Finch is my mother's father, my grandfather. And Marie Williams Finch is my grandmother. And they were both born in Chicago [Illinois] as well. I don't know the dates, but at this point they're both deceased. My grandmother would be eighty-seven. And my grandfather would be ninety. Speaker 1: So you had young grandparents? Speaker 2: Yeah, everybody married young. Everybody married about sixteen, seventeen. I married at eighteen. Speaker 1: Oh wow. What's the--which grandparent on your mother's side, had the best relationship with you? Speaker 2: My grandmother. 'Cause you know she was around and actually lived with us as she got older after my, you know, grandfather passed. So we called her Mama Re [ph.]. And, you know, the extended family, so, you know, we all--all raised in the same house. Speaker 1: What story do you have for us to illustrate your relationship with your grandma? Speaker 2: When I was about ten years old, I was, I guess, stung by some bees and the intensity of her sense of protection for me, that memory always stayed with me. She ended up taking all my clothes off in like a family picnic in the backyard so I was naked and I turned around and looking and I ain't got no clothes on, but she's--made sure that the bees didn't get me. And so there were two lessons. One, is the confidence in being naked. And I mean that symbolically and physically. And the idea of the power of protection and how even in your nakedness you're embraced. Speaker 1: And what stands out for you in your relationship with your granddad, maternal? Speaker 2: My mother's a very strong personality. And he was even stronger. So, (laughter) you know, very intense. The legend is--is that he had a fight with Mayor [Richard J.] Daley Sr. because going across, I guess, 39th Street somewhere King Drive was a border zone between black and white. And the former mayor was head of his gang or his group and my grandfather, John Leroy Finch, was head of his. And he was supposed to have won the fight with Mayor Daley. So those kinds of stories and mythologies keep you pretty strong too. Story_ID: 187931 Speaker 1: And what about your dad's [Clifton Henry Blackburn, Sr.] parents? Did you have as strong a relationship with them? Speaker 2: Yeah. You know very different, you know, kinds of folks. My grandmother's folks come from Mississippi. And my father's folks come from New Orleans [Louisiana]. And they're two--you know, it's kind of like looking at jazz and looking at the rural blues in terms of personality. So, you know, my father's people had a real strong, you know, rootedness and mythologies. So my father's grandparents pretty much became my grandparents because his mother had him at fifteen. And he had me at eighteen. So everybody was like pretty young. So actually my great-grandparents were more like my--my grandparents. And so, we called the granddaddy, Pratt [ph.], which was his grandfather. His name legally was Cap'm, C-A-P apostrophe M, Pratt. And his wife's name was Mamie, Mamie Pratt. And they're pretty deep because she had a twin named Addie [ph.]. So it was Mamie and Addie Peppers. And he was Cap'm Peppers and he a brother named Clem [ph.] and they both married. So there was double cousins three generations back. And they had Mama E.T. Ether [ph.] which is my--my grandmother. And my--and my father they were very close in age so they were almost like raised together by my great-grandparents. And so I remember all those connections. Being at the family house on the swing. Meeting everybody coming up from New Orleans every few weeks. And, you know, certain foods that were made that were passed on for generations. And an emphasis toward the music. Speaker 1: Yeah because your dad started in music very early. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Where did he get his-- Speaker 2: You know it's kind of in the DNA. And then, you know, you work with your family and your peers and play guitar, you play drums. It's not in a academic approach, but a much more emotional ethereal approach. And I think that's what makes what I do very special because there are few people at my age that have had that experience which was predominant in the community maybe forty years ago. And I'm one of the last people that retained that approach to music. Speaker 1: What stands out in your memory--in your relationship with each of your paternal grandparents? Speaker 2: My--on my father's side Granddaddy Pratt was a carpenter. Always working. Always, you know, really doing something. My mother's father that we called--we used to call him granddaddy, but Leroy Finch, really believed in qualities of male and female energy with separation and appreciation. And he identified things in that way. And he was very responsible, you know. He took care of, you know, five children and extended family. And he was very focused in that kind of way. And that probably influenced me. Story_ID: 187932 Speaker 1: What was life like growing up in the Blackburn household? Speaker 2: Oh, it was intense. You know, my mother [Gwendolyn Marie Finch Blackburn] believed in independence of personality. So, she was constantly martyring--monitoring me so--monitoring me so that I wouldn't dominate my brothers in terms of like what I wanted to do. Making sure that they did what they wanted to do. So she really focused on everybody having an independent personality. She and my father [Clifton Henry Blackburn, Sr.] were quite intense. When they were in harmony with one another and when they were in disagreement. So it was a lot of intensity in the household. They loved culture. So, you know, even when I talk to people today that grew up with me and ask them if they remember certain things, I find that most of people don't. You know, like we had to go on Saturdays to what was called Jew Town and listen to the Saturday morning music. We got to watch Chicken George with the chicken dance--chicken dance. And, you know, these things were really important to them. They were as important as going to the various schools that we went to for academic development. They felt, you know--my father was a guard backstage at the Regal Theater [Chicago, Illinois]. So we went free to the Regal Theater. So, you know, I go--you know, back to remembering in the late, you know, 50's [1950's] you know, nine years old, eight years old, whatever, ten years old of seeing Lionel Hampton jump on top of drums. Battles of Count Basie, Duke Ellington Band. And then into the 60's [1960s] of, you know, the Motown Revues and the Chicago Reviews like with Major Lance and [HM] Jerry Butler when he was with the Impressions. And all of these kind of things--Staple Singers before they were R & B, when they wore the white suits. And their brother sang with them and, you know. So all of these things were real important. You know, watching my--you know, folks when my parents played tonk and inviting their friends by. And, you know, all of these rich memories that were a part of a quality life. You know, I really had a very high quality life. And, you know, my mother would do things like--I mean she was very different, really unique. You know, she would maybe buy a coat at Marshall Field's one year or Baskins, then she'd take it back to Goldblatt's at the other end of State Street the following year and get the money back because the coat from Marshall Field's looked new to what the quality was at Goldblatt's. So I, you know, this kind of intelligence and what I consider street entrepreneurship was, you know, what I was, you know, raised with and it was--it was very exciting in my household. Very exciting. Always something happening. You know, she would take us downtown and, you know, if we didn't order our ice cream and if we stood back from other kids she would pop us and say, "You go get what you want. You don't ever let anyone stand in front of you." And as young black kids I think that was very important, you know, to give us a competitive edge in mainstream society. And so that's what the house was about. Really developing these young men. And, you know, I really appreciate it now. I mean I had, you know, I left home at sixteen. But she was very strong. You know, my father was laid back but he would reinforce whenever it was necessary. Story_ID: 187933 Speaker 1: When it was time to go off to kindergarten, first grade, which ever you started, what was that like for you? Speaker 2: In kindergarten, at Copernicus [Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] over on, I guess, that was 65th [Street] and Aberdeen [Street], Copernicus Grammar School. I had the same teacher that my father [Clifton Henry Blackburn, Sr.] had and my father's father. And, you know, so I remember coming in and, you know, the teacher saying that, you know I taught your father and I taught your father's father. Right. Speaker 1: What went through your mind, do you remember? Speaker 2: But I just, you know, that stayed with me that someone who was older told me she taught my father and she taught my father's father. And I didn't know my father's father. He didn't really know his father. 'Cause he was raised, you know, by his grandparents. But, you know, that was, you know, that was intense. And then you know we were kind of sheltered so, you know. I mean my mother is different. She used to put us, you know, in white shoes. Even when I was five years old I wore a men's five shoe. So having white high tops made it really difficult. So I had to learn how to fight early (laughter). So I had a lot of fights I remember in kindergarten and in first grade because she just did stuff differently. And so you had to learn to hold your own in criticism of the general, you know, community having the different approach to things. And so yeah, so I mean, you know, it was--it was--it was weird. School for me was always weird. I'm dyslexic and I was labeled LD [learning disabled]. So, you know, school was not the most pleasant situation for me. Speaker 1: And how did you (unclear)--how did you deal--how was it dealing with that from your side? Speaker 2: It was frustrating. You know, because through, you know, grammar school all the way to probably about the seventh grade I was taking remedial programs 'cause my parents were real concerned about why, you know. And certain things about learning disability students which is still problems today, how things were assessed. They just were never assessed properly. You know in retrospect and being an educator myself today, I probably was the kind of child that should have a special education kind of program. So being put in general education and always leading all the kids after school but being in the D group in school was psychologically frustrating 'cause it--I knew I wasn't stupid because the smartest kids in this room are following me after school. But in school I was in the worst program. So I never developed really good study habits and, you know, a whole lot of stuff. You know, and ended up always fighting. I was suspended I don't know about thirteen or fourteen times before I was out of sixth grade. Story_ID: 187934 Speaker 1: Did they identify it early enough? Speaker 2: They identified it as learning disability. They never identified really the dyslexia until maybe seventh grade. And that's where things started. You know what happened I went from public school to catholic school in seventh grade and there was little more attention there. One on one kind of attention and so I guess the, whoever the nun was at that time depicted there was some--a problem in my reading skills associated with a disability or something. And, you know, and so after that my school work, you know, I ended up having very high grades on ACT. You know, and a whole lot of stuff. But before then, you know, I was laughed at a lot, you know. You know my mother [Gwendolyn Marie Finch Blackburn] had--my mother had this funny hairdo where, you know--you know black folks had this insecurity about textures of hair. And so, you know, we moved from Englewood [Chicago, Illinois] after second--no third grade. In third grade I moved to Chatham [Chicago, Illinois]. So going from Englewood which is very gritty kind of rhythmic energy to kind of a black--kind of what I call anal community. High achieving community but very anal to things that are unique and special to the African American experience. So I was kind of weird and then having this hairdo with the hair brushed with Murray's and done like Hitler in the front and no hair on the sides and when I sweat it would--the grease would come off and so most of those kids had, you know, curly hair and straight hair 'cause everybody's striving to, you know, be more like who are the more superior people in societies. Heavy psychology. And so I didn't fit in in school. I didn't fit in--in my gait. I always walked a certain kind of rhythm. I always talked with a slur since I was a child. So those things you know just didn't really fit. So it made it good later in life because it--it helped me to just live in my own world. And that's been part of my survival, you know, I think. Story_ID: 187935 Speaker 1: Aside from the nun who helped identify your reading-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: --was there any other in--in your elementary and middle school years, any other special teachers? Speaker 2: I just remember one teacher named Ms. Harrison [ph.] you know, around fourth grade when, you know, they had come back with the testing and at that point, you know, I was fighting all the time so some mothers had gotten together and my mother [Gwendolyn Marie Finch Blackburn] had to come to school and they wanted to put me in what was called the Audy Home. And, you know, really what was going on is from third to fourth grade here I come from this Copernicus [Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] where they never really worked on your school work and I move into Chatham and everyone's telling me how stupid I am and then I'm beating up kids all the time. So the parents said that this kid needs to be put in the Audy Home. And my--both of my younger brothers were straight A students. So, you know, this teacher Ms. Harriston [ph.] said that he's a very intelligent kid. And I was writing poetry and I was drawing, doing a lot of things that she said are of a high aptitude. And so, you know, she told my mother don't let them get me in the Audy Home and that I should probably have some kind of, you know, other kinds of things. And, you know, my mother is only sixteen years older than I am so you know she didn't really know, and my father [Clifton Henry Blackburn, Sr.] they didn't really know. They tried but they didn't know. So then in seventh grade, you know, he had joined the police force, I guess, and was making a little more money so they put us in this catholic school. And that's when, you know, it was time after school and special time in the back of class to try to get my grades up. 'Cause the point was--at that school I guess you paid money so they wanted to make sure that everybody graduated. So then there's a different attention to the student in order to make sure they get on an even keel with the rest of that class. Because ratios become important. And, you know, and that's where it really, you know, it--it started opening up for me. Speaker 1: What Catholic school was that? Speaker 2: That was St. Clotilde on 84th [Street] and Calumet [Avenue]. Story_ID: 187936 Speaker 1: So you got through the elementary and middle years-- Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: --what was high school like? Speaker 2: Oh, high school was interesting. I went to Cathedral High School on Chicago [Avenue] and State [Street, Chicago, Illinois]. And I was on a basketball scholarship. And, you know, it was downtown so, you know, I went all the way from 84th and Wabash [Avenue] to Chicago and State every day. Which was an experience going through--just all the culture--dichotomies, you know, in--in going up there. It was the Rush Street area, you know. I think personally it was good for me 'cause it exposed me to competing in terms of language, competing in terms of presence. And, you know, I did well with basketball. I still didn't do well with school but I had good test scores. I was still like a C, D student but being the captain of the basketball team and from my sophomore year on I was the top scorer in the parish league for the city. I was all-state like 1968, 1969. Considered one of the top twenty basketball players of the state. So, you know, from then I was, you know, I was like celebrated and, you know, and there were only, you know, I think about thirty something black kids at the school at that time. So it was cool. It was--high school was cool. You know, so yeah high school was cool and I just played basketball. Story_ID: 187937 Speaker 1: At what point did you start doing music? Speaker 2: Well, music had always been a part of life. Like, you know, when we did parties at the house all the musicians ended up playing at the crib. So all my life I've seen Gene Ammons and Von Freeman and Clifford Jordan. And all these people they were just the regular people. So, you know, we partied and afterwards we played music. So my father [Clifton Henry Blackburn, Sr.] was taking me to McKie's--on 63rd and Cottage Grove [Avenue]. I went to the Brown Derby. I went to the Crown Propeller. I went to Keymen's Club on the west side. I was playing at them clubs at fourteen, fifteen years old, you know. Like my father might play and then he'd say, "Boy go on up there." And so, you know, I'd go up and do that. So I never thought of music--that I was gonna be a professional. I wanted to be a basketball player. You know, but I--you know I just--I did music 'cause, you know, people in my family did music and it was something we loved. My father played, you know, Miles [Davis] and Bird [Charlie "Bird" Parker]. And, you know, he didn't like Trane [John Coltrane] too much but, you know--you know Duke Ellington. He played that stuff you know--in fact I remember WN--what was it called? WNUR no--no-RNR [sic] [HM] Herb Kent, (unclear), Jesse Owens This was with [Dick] Buckley on [W]BEZ now, he started on that station. And so that was the station we listened to and then we would turn on WVON, you know, which had E. Rodney Jones, and Herb Kent. And just all them folks at that time. And when he got home we'd have to turn that off because, you know, he believed in a high level music. And he considered R & B and stuff like social music. But the music that he wanted his kids stimulated by was jazz. So I mean it was like--I'm saying that was important than school work. Like, you know, we'd do school work, but, you know, you ain't gone listen to that other stuff all day. You gone listen to some music that raises your mind. And that's how my father was. And so music was second nature. Speaker 1: So you didn't have a period where you're, like okay I'm gonna start learning this, start--it was just an evolution (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Yeah it was that--you know it was like it was put on me you know. And, you know, like today people try figure out how I scat. And it's my father's scat. I mean you know, we'd be in the car waiting for my mother, you know, at a store or something and he'd say (scatting) then he'd give it to me. Then we'd improvise. You know and he made, you know, very intelligent associations. He would take like you know Gator [Larry "Gator" Rivers] that played for the Harlem Globetrotters or Meadowlark Lemon and he would show me the rhythm and the game associated with the music. And so rhythm and improvisation were things I related to very well. Because someone was guiding me with intelligence to the value of those things and so I just translated from--everything that I've done in life has been based on really rhythm. Story_ID: 187938 Speaker 1: She put me in school at four. So I probably was put in to early too. Because see, she didn't want me a year behind. 'Cause my birthday's at the end of the year. So when I graduated from high school I was only sixteen years old. And my uncle, Candy [Leroy "Candy" Finch], you know, he OD'd [overdosed] from heroin. And him and Gene Ammons were like usually roommates at the university. Now the university was you know Joliet (laughter) State Prison. But--you know, Leroy OD'd and I think George Freeman, Von's brother, said, "Well, you know you should get Leroy's little nephew because he plays like him." So that's how I ended up on the road. You know and--you know I was coming out of high school [Cathedral High School, Chicago, Illinois] and I had scholarships to Drake [University, Des Moines, Iowa], University of Wisconsin-Platteville [Platteville, Wisconsin], you know, like five or six schools I had basketball scholarships to. But in that summer I ended up going to St. Louis [Missouri] and to the Palace Royal [sic, Royal Theatre] in Cincinnati [Ohio] and man, you know, playing with Jug [Eugene "Jug" Ammons]. And I was hooked. So I decided that I really didn't wanna go to college and I--right then knew I wasn't gonna play basketball. I was gone, you know, play music. And sixteen, seventeen years old it was fun. It was easy. And then about eighteen I started meeting people that were on a very, very high level. And so the basketball which was competitive and taught me discipline now was going to be my system of discipline to really develop as a musician. 'Cause I was just going off instinct and kind of natural personality skill. And in order to compete I knew I had to get to another level technically. And so that's when, you know, the commitment. You know I got married at eighteen to Kai El'Zabar. And, you know, we had our first little apartments and stuff and I practiced all day, you know, eight, ten hours a day. 'Cause I wanted to be one of the best at what I was doing. 'Cause I had been one of the best at basketball. I wanted to do the same thing with the music and also I wanted to represent my uncle who everybody was saying that I came out of. And he was great, so I wanted to, you know, get to a level that I felt I was representing him properly. Story_ID: 187939 Speaker 1: You married at eighteen? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Other than being in love, why did you marry so early? Speaker 2: 'Cause there were all these older women after me. And I felt if I got married, I'd, you know, be protected. And I met a really, really nice, wonderful, very smart young woman whose name was Clover McCrary [ph.] at that time. And she was going with a cat who was a medical student, and I beat him up and took her from him. And, you know, I had been on the road for a couple of years and I'd--I was playing with a group called The Sun Drummer that I was a part of. And we played at Xavier College [sic, Xavier University, Cincinnati, Ohio] and she was transferring to Lake Forest College [Lake Forest, Illinois]. And I followed her around and stuff. And I walked up to Lake Forest College and I talked to the dean and told him, you know, that I was intelligent and that my girlfriend was going here and I was probably gone marry her and we could probably be head residents. And they gave me a full scholarship to Lake Forest College. And she and I ended up at Lake Forest College and I got married and we became (laughter) head residents, you know, the dorm and the whole thing. And, you know, we were a very, very nice young couple. It was, you know, being--nice being on the campus. It was nice being in love and being with somebody who could share. And she was real helpful to what I was limited in. And I think I was, you know, helpful to her in helping her grow to a more focused cultural blossoming. Speaker 1: So how long did that marriage last? Speaker 2: The marriage legally lasted I think twenty-six, twenty-seven years, but stayed together probably about seven years. And then we broke up at one time because I was pretty rough. And we stayed together seven straight years and then I had some girlfriend or something and then her girlfriends told her that she should get rid of me. And so then we broke up and then we got back together and then finally at twelve years we realized we would be better more like brother and sister. So we have a great relationship today. And you know I thought I was gonna get married again about twenty--after about twenty-five years I asked her for a divorce and so she gave me a divorce, you know. But we stayed legally married a long time. Speaker 1: Did you have any kids? Speaker 2: No, we didn't have any children. All my children have been pretty much since, you know, our marriage. Story_ID: 187940 Speaker 1: And how was it like for you being a father? Speaker 2: Oh, it's--it is hard work. And it is--I think, you know, children raise parents as much as parents raise children. You know my oldest is nineteen. And my youngest is two going on three. And, you know, all my children have dealt with me I think in a very direct way. I remember once when my nineteen year old when Yana [ph.] was about six or seven and me, her, and my mother were out. And my mother said, "You better tell her to be quiet," you know. 'Cause we were at a store getting her some shoes and she was like my daddy travels the whole world. He plays with all kinds of women and all kinds of stuff. And so my mother was like this is embarrassing. You better tell her, you know, she--you know I said, "Well she's only saying what she knows." You know, she's being honest to what she thinks things are. And, you know, I've taught all my kids that there's nothing in life to be embarrassed about. And excellence is its own pursuit. And it can only be critiqued from the doing. So I'm not one for petty reality. You know life is bumps, grinds, and mistakes. And at the same time, you have to contribute something. And I think, you know, all my children have that kind of energy. They're focused on what they need to do. You know I have two daughters and four boys. And they're all, you know, pretty strong. I'm very proud of the way they added all the stages. And you know I participate in group activities with them. So I can see where their energy's at and how they relate, you know, what their cooperative skills are like, what their leadership skills are like. I try to pass on some of the things that, you know, my mother [Gwendolyn Marie Finch Blackburn] passed on to me. And you know every weekend when I'm at home I have all my kids. And so, you know, I cook, clean, all those things really very well. And I try to teach them those kinds of basic skills. And, you know, when people see my concerts in Chicago [Illinois] all my kids are dressed up and they've all got their little attitudes. And, you know, they walk on and, "Hey daddy". And you know people like Pharoah Sanders or Ntozake Shange these are all good friends. You know, "Hey Ntozake." Hi Auntie Ntozake, Hey Pharoah". You know, they're not, you know, anything extraordinary. You know, 'cause they're great people in history, but to my kids because this is what their experience has been. And I try to, you know, listen to what my mother says that, you know, like she says, "Don't be forcing these kids into music." You know nobody forced you into this and that's why you know your love seems to be so great because it wasn't a situation that you came in through some sterile, you know, controlled perspective. It was a desire that was nurtured suddenly and when you were ready for it, you came into it because you had the exposure and you had the experience. And, you know, give them a pretty broad platform where they can see things and make choices for themselves. And, you know, then you have some happiness about the direction that you take. So you know I'm--you know, I'm really happy to be a father and I think I'm very, you know, thankful. And the three women that I have children with are all, you know, good mothers. And we have healthy relationships in dealing with our children. My oldest daughter's mother and I grew up together. So even though we didn't stay together, our parents went to high school together and all of that. And my three boys by Dorian Sylvain Dorian's father and my father joined the police force together and went to Englewood High School together. You know, I hang out with Dorian's mother, Barbara, all the time. And, you know, so you know, I've been lucky to have those kinds of closeness so the children feel, you know, those kinds of bonds. And you know I keep them, you know, together on the weekends. So we go through all our fights and our wake ups early in the morning and everybody helps me wash the dishes and cooking. Do all those things together. And so there aren't any of these kind of like half-brother, half-sister kinds of focuses, but more about a family. And a creative (laughter) family structure. And a loving, you know, family. Story_ID: 187941 Speaker 1: Did you remarry? Speaker 2: No, I've never legally remarried. I lived with Susana Sandoval who is Mexicana. And so my two youngest children Kasan [ph.] and Cote D'ivoire [ph.] are with Susana. And she's a writer, poet. All the women that I've had long term relationships with except Gwenyana's [ph.] mother, Yolanda, have all been artists. I'm more comfortable know with people who are kind of free in the usage of time. You know like when you get up, what you do, and how you focus on where your career is. Because that's how my life works. So that's where I see my best complement, you know, with a mate. And Susanna and I have been together I guess about four and a half years now. And then Dorian [ph.] and I were together about four years so. Story_ID: 187942 Speaker 1: You went to U of I [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign, Illinois]. When did you fit in the rest of your college experience? Speaker 2: I didn't go to U of I-- at U of I, I was an associate professor in interdisciplinary studies. Speaker 1: That's right. Okay. Speaker 2: I--you know I did one year at Malcolm X College [Chicago, Illinois]. And then the following year I got recruited to Bill Abernathy's band, jazz band at Kennedy-King [College, Chicago, Illinois]. And then, you know, I went up and got my own scholarship through an oral dissertation at Lake Forest College [Lake Forest, Illinois]. And did the last two years there. And then the last year at Lake Forest I had an exchange project that I developed. I was invited to take an exchange program with Marcel Marceau at the school of pantomime in Paris [France]. And, you know, I have you know--I have street teachers that I've had that I still have. Like Von Freeman I consider one of my street teachers 'cause I've been playing with him since I was fourteen. And he really taught me how to play music. And my uncle [Leroy "Candy" Finch] and stuff like that. And [HM] Darlene Blackburn and I are cousins. And so I danced with the first Darlene Blackburn Dance Company in 1965. And performed at Afro Arts Theater with Phil Cohran [HM Philip Cohran] and all that kind of stuff. So Harold Murray [Atu Harold Murray] who was called "Black Harold" who started the Sun Drummer, he was you know--all these people are still my teachers. But we wrote [Babatunde] Olatunji, who just died last Saturday, and Chief Bey [James Hawthorne Bey] who ran the School of African Music in Harlem [New York, New York]. And I had been going up there in the summers that Atu had sent me up there. And then we wrote to Guy Warren who was living Ghana and he spoke to Nana (unclear) who was the head of the School of Music [at the University of Ghana] in Legon in Ghana. And so we got the money for the Marcel Marceau exchange for a year to go to the Ghana program, which they had never had an African exchange. I created it. It still exists at Lake Forest College today. So I went and spent, you know, that last year in Ghana in Legon [Ghana]. And I studied Yoruba, Ashanti, and Twi cultures instrument making, crafts and philosophy. Story_ID: 187943 Speaker 1: And then I came back from there [Legon, Ghana] and I was supposed to finish that last year [at Lake Forest College, Lake Forest, Illinois] out but Kai [El'Zabar] was a year ahead of me and so she got a gig teaching like at some girl's Catholic high school so I just left Lake Forest and I went to Europe and started playing and stuff. So I never graduated. And--and that was pretty much it of my academic training. All the jazz musicians moved to you know--you know like Paris like 1971. And I went over with a guy named [Kalaparusha] Maurice McIntyre when I was seventeen, you know, like for a couple of weeks and ended up meeting Nina Simone and stuff like that. And then about, I think, nineteen I went back over. And just--then just stayed. And you know and met [James] Baldwin. Leroy Bibbs a photographer. Archie Shepp. You know I was, you know, a kid you know hanging on the Champs [Champs-Elysees]. And playing at the (speaking French) the Bataclan, La Chapelle des Lombards the clubs at that time. You know at that point by nineteen, twenty I was like focused on this music and getting to be known by all the cats and you know as a player and stuff. And--and then I would come back and forth to Chicago [Illinois] and I started working with [HM] Haki [Madhubutti] with the Institute of Positive Education with teaching music for them and you know. I guess what my mother [Gwendolyn Marie Finch Blackburn] had kind of instilled with--in us at an early age was contribution. You know cause like every holiday at school we always had to make cookies, bring them to school. She was always a den leader, Cub Scout leader, all this kind of stuff. So by the time, you know, I was twenty years old I was with the Institute of Positive Education. I was director of The Sun Drummer. I was member of the AACM and, Association for the Advancement of Creative Musicians. I was teaching and working and had this community stuff. And I was always making a pretty good living. You know by the time I was twenty-one I was with Paul Simon. And I was the first percussionist with him when he left Garfunkel [Simon & Garfunkel]. I worked with Donny Hathaway. So you know we had our own home. And I'm, you know, at twenty-one years old we had our own crib. Stuff I was doing in the community I was doing by my own choice. And I was traveling to New York, Europe, San Francisco [California], L.A. [Los Angeles, California]. You know and most of what I was doing in the hood working with Kwanzaa, working with Sun Drummer, all that kind of stuff was my own sense of philanthropy. But it was real difficult for me because most of the people had very neighborhood perspectives. I'd already been traveling since a teenager. So I've always come in and out of Chicago. And I've never been able to accept the labels that come to like local artists. I've never been able to accept the degradation that most of my peers go through. That is somewhat by their choice. Regardless of the circumstances of the society. You know, I've never--I've never been on welfare. You know I've taken care of all my children through playing music and African drums. So I mean if I can do this with an African drum, I figure anybody can do it with anything, you know, in the world. Story_ID: 187944 Speaker 1: Okay, let's talk about your drumming. Well, now that we have a sense of where you've come from as a human being, growing--your growth path. Trace for me, if you will, and I know it's almost impossible but do the best you can. Your process of creation and what's going through you when you're working with your music and if--when you're solo and when you're working with others. Let us peep in and see what is that like for a creative artist like you. Speaker 2: My most enjoyable moments usually are by myself or in the privacy of collaboration with my peers. I actually like rehearsing better than I do performing. And I'm a very good performer. But it calls a response to react to outside things. And rehearsals are much more about an internal reaction. I don't have to do one of my energy things or my showmanship, you know, personas or whatever. I'm just in it. And I live to be in it. That's really what I live for. I live for whatever is the adrenalin endorphin rush of being outside of my body. And I, you know, I think you know I experienced it as a child, you know, with, you know, speaking the tongues in the church. And, you know, people really giving to the Creator and seeing that. But I didn't understand what that was. I saw it you know, you know, like being at the Regal Theater, and Aretha Franklin's there, but there's at least twenty women that can sing as good as her. And they're singing with her and everyone is spirit raises to a different consciousness to the collective excellence. So all these kinds of things kind of developed me to have this aptitude. But when I was playing ball in the streets and on 63rd and King Drive. There was one place I used to really love. And there was a thing called the Midwest Tournament that I used to play which was a semi-pro tournament and I played in that like when I was fifteen. And some of the people were twenty-two--I mean they were college kids. Some pros and so, you know, the energy of rhythm and getting to a space to where you move beyond kind of chronically doing it but not knowing, but knowing. You dig? And so it happened with ball where I was in control of it for the first time in my life. And then with music which was even a higher level, and a higher sensitivity to be in that thing, to observe others in that thing. You know like Malachi Favors, who I still play with today, who I met when I was about fourteen. You know, seeing Sammy Davis, Jr. before 1961 and Sammy Davis, Jr. after, you know, when he really, you know, before he was really trying to get into mainstream persona and articulation, when he still had to be in a certain place in the South Side of Chicago, wherever 'cause he couldn't be any other place, was a different Sammy Davis, Jr. And the dancing and all of that kind of stuff, you know, and so it's like whoa, I wanna retain, I wanna express, I wanna be a part, I wanna feel, I wanna smell. That kind of vibration. And so playing gave me that. You know I tried to translate that to the people who I played with, you know. And then I've tried to amplify that through my writing which is more difficult. To actually try to document your idea in a way that it's angles and its sense of color, in the pitch, in the note choice. In the way I write the rhythms can depict that same phenomena. And sometimes I'm successful with it, and most of the time I'm not. But that's the attempt there. Story_ID: 187945 Speaker 1: The highest moment I ever remember in my music was "Light" Henry Huff, who's deceased now, and Edward Wilkerson were original members of my band The Ethnic Heritage Ensemble and we had played for five weeks straight at a call--club called Chapelle des Lombards in Paris [France]. And usually we only have one-nighters. I mean most of my life has only been one-nighters because I'm not old enough to have been around as a player before '65 [1965] when somebody could come to a club and work there two, three weeks. And so when we were at this place in Paris for five weeks, and there was a moment I'll never forget where I was looking at myself. I was playing and I was over here and I said damn you know. And then when I wanted to tell Ed and Light where I was is when I lost it. I don't know if it was for one second or if it was for an hour but whatever that vibration was, I've lived to have that vibration again for the rest of my life, which I've not. And I've had some high levels of, you know, of experiences but that kind of existence is really what I live for. And this is what I feel in Charlie Parker. This is what I feel when I listen to the pygmy music of the Ituri forest of southern Cameroon. This is what I feel when I listen to classic Muddy Waters and he say, "I'm a man." And you feel the energy that's, you know, behind that. That passion. And many times it really hurts me when I see that kind of rhythmic confluence in people throughout the world and it's degradaded rather than celebrated. Even though we all know that's a very special energy. But it's not a part of the aesthetic of the controlling society. And you know what I've learned how to do is to use the articulation of mainstream society in order to invent opportunities for myself. And then protect the rhythmical confluence in a way that it's not degradized [sic]. And that's how I amplify my reality. Story_ID: 187946 Speaker 1: One thing I've always wondered for jazz artists--and you write music right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Since they're so improvisational how do you capture and retain what you're getting when you're in the spirit? Speaker 2: Right. You don't. I mean I never want to capture and retain the moment. I want it to be like a butterfly. How do you document an idea so it can be used as a reference point for another opportunity, to extend the improvisation? You know as a percussionist, multi-percussionist and coming through the AACM, our Association for the Advancement of Creative Musicians, you know I started working you know with Muhal [Richard Abrams] and Malachi [Favors] and cats from The Art Ensemble, you know, like when I was sixteen. I officially joined the organization at nineteen and by twenty-four I was in Time magazine as the chairman of that organization. And one of the things I learned from Joseph Jarman, [Henry] Threadgill, Muhal was how to conceptualize. You know there's always going to be great practitioners, but it's the person who can conceptualize their idea and can express their voice, that in the long term will have the greater opportunity because now you can facilitate the moment. And so I kind of took on the personality of a horn player rather than the personality of a drummer. And that is what makes me different than you'll find most percussionists. Most percussionists are in the background. Most percussionists are side musicians. Very great, but always looking for the gig that someone else provides. And if you look at my history, I'm always the leader of the band. I'm the composer of the music and that's extremely rare. You know--you know the only other drummer in the music historically that's had that same kind of position is Max Roach who played with Charlie Parker. And that's been very important, you know, to me to develop my skills as a composer. So that what I found with the musicians who've come out of my bands, Edward Wilkerson, who has a group now, an 8 Bold Souls, Light Henry Huff, who passed. Hanah Jon Taylor, Joseph Bowie, Ernest Dawkins they're great rhythmical players as--as horn players, as instrumentalists. They're able to understand the kind of iambic pentameters of the flows of time four, four, six, eight, seven, four, whatever. And they don't depend on a rhythm instrument to give them that because what I've demanded from my musicians is they give me back the same thing I give them. If I want a solo, I should be able to depend on you as a rhythmic layer, as you depend on me in the way that music is accustomed by European aesthetics which we are influenced by. Percussion is a secondary support continuum to melody and I don't concur. I see them as democratic sympathy. Story_ID: 187947 Speaker 1: That there was no specific genre but the energy of the tradition was based on the quality of the expression more so than the style. So gospel, jazz, blues, rock, funk are all valuable. And we don't place a hierarchy. We place a hierarchy on one's commitment to study. One's commitment to find their voice and emulate that voice. And one's tenacity to bear through whatever circumstances that allows them to rise above mediocrity. You know so in a way--so then going back to my thing in terms of this music and realizing that I wasn't going to be developed and stimulated as a leader that would have to be done on my own. Because the musicians in AACM [Association for the Advancement of Creative Musicians] that came up at the same time I did, like George Lewis, trombonist, electronic musician, Chico Freeman, saxophonist, Douglas Ewart, they were all being kind of like nurtured to be leaders. And I noticed I wasn't. You know and most of the drummers, Steve McCall, [Famoudou Don] Moye, were all, you know, side men. They were waiting for the gig. They were great, they're brilliant, but I didn't like that position. And I had been captain of my basketball team. I had always been a leader in my neighborhood and the streets of things that I did. And my parents [Clifton Henry Blackburn, Sr. and Gwendolyn Marie Finch Blackburn] had always told me I could do whatever I want to do. And at a point in my middle twenties I became very conflictual to the road that other musicians thought I should have and where I thought I should be. And then I never did drugs. So for me it was very difficult 'cause you know a lot of cats were getting high. People were looking at me as this drummer that's just gone do what other people want me to do. So I got these two things against me. I'm straight and I'm a drummer who wants to write his own music and lead his own bands. So you know it was difficult psychologically. And I've borne through that. And I think I've opened opportunities for younger percussionists by the example that I've given. And I'm very proud of my discography. You know I've had four recordings selected by Smithsonian in terms of, you know, jazz archives. There's works that are considered brilliant works that I've made major contributions to. 'Lion King' by Julie Taymor for Broadway for Disney those are my arrangements for Elton John. I pioneered the idea of African percussion in jazz. And I'm seeing a lot of the younger players now in the last thirty years who are emulating, you know, what I--you know what I developed. Story_ID: 187948 Speaker 1: Let me take you to that African percussion and your imagination of going to get that. Tell me what that was like-- Speaker 2: You know I was part of The Sun Drummer since, you know, fourteen years old. And in the '60s [1960s] was the first time we were being exposed to any historical phenomenon of Africa, as African Americans. So there was a lot of pride. You know I first played the regular drum kit 'cause that's what my father [Clifton Henry Blackburn, Sr.] played. But then, you know, there was Black Harold [Atu Harold Murray] from Sun Drummer. There was Master Henry Gibson with Curtis Mayfield and [HM] Phil Cohran and the percussionist was being celebrated. So I started playing percussion. And you know there is a pride when the African drummers came to an event that I wanted to extend that further. So you know when I asked Atu to write and figure out ways that I could take this university exchange and actually go to Africa, you know, first thing that I did was after I got out of Accra [Ghana] which is like the capital and went to a more like what they call hinterland or country city in Legon [Ghana] and seeing all these big breast women with no tops on and my neck--I was like woah, yeah. Man, look at these. Oh, my God, right. So after a couple of weeks there was no fascination with that because people were very comfortable with their nakedness. Going back to the story about my grandmother taking my clothes off. So I started realizing that there was a different honesty in that society. And then I wanted to mimic what I was experiencing. And my (unclear) which would be like ba-ba teacher or whatever, Ashanti teacher. You know at a point he said, "You'll be here with me Brunni [ph.]." And Brunni [ph.] is child of the white man. 'cause I was fair in skin. "You'll be with me Brunni, and you do me. Now you can do me so much that you no got be you." And I said what are you talking about? How you no not be me? He said, "You're the blues. Can you do the blues and me?" And that put a whole thing on it, I mean he was like. What he was saying was that Howlin' Wolf and Muddy Waters and James Brown and Charlie Parker were important voices. And voices that were actually coming back to his country and influencing what he was doing. So for me just to take you know more (speaking in a foreign language). Taking Yoruba and regurgitating it was not my experience. I'm from the south side of Chicago. And it's a very rich powerful worldly experience. So if I can take what I've learned in Africa and what I grew up with. And so the first band that I created coming back from Ghana was Ethnic Heritage Ensemble combining both the experience of the continent and the experience here. Not genre specific. Doing stuff that had blues, gospel, traditional West African forms all integrated. And I decided not to use a piano or a bass because I didn't want a traditional European pedal toned instrument as the controlling harmonic reference of the music. And that was an enormous discipline for my two horn players because everyone including myself had been used to playing with a piano or a guitar or a bass. So that there was a traditional transcription of chords related to the melodic extension that one would do. And so I wanted it to have another kind of voice. Story_ID: 187949 Speaker 1: And it's interesting I started the Ethnic Heritage Ensemble like in 1973. And like when you listen to hip hop music now, these kids are like sampling from other records and they're rapping and all of this, the music no longer has a traditional harmonic chordal relationship. It's more about sound quality and rhythmic integration. So it's really preparing itself now culturally for what we've been doing all the time (laughter). You know these kids, DNA intuitively, are calling for a very ancient kind of feeling. They're, you know, constricted by the acculturation and the mediocrity of education. And the improper democracy of media to give them a broader exposure. So now once we can do these things and bring in--and my most recent project, I was artisan residence at the Museum of Contemporary Art [Chicago, Illinois] last year. And for the last four years I've been the artist in residence at University of Music Bordeaux in south of France [sic, University of Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France]. And I've developed a thing called JUBA, Joined Universal Breath Ascending. It has jazz, hip hop, house music, visual arts, dance, spoken word, in French, English and Spanish. The languages that capture the entire Diaspora. Cultures of Latino, African, African American, West Indian as well as European, all, you know, combined band-ness intergenerational, interracial, multi-genre and multi-disciplined. Into that idea that the jazz personalities are the historical informers to the younger cultures creating a tie that allows us all to celebrate art in life collectively as a community and as humanity. So from Ethnics [Ethnic Heritage Ensemble] to where I am with JUBA. And you know with all my other bands in between. But that experience in Africa gave me a very holistic relationship to art making and art sharing. It's much more for utility. Whereas from a European standpoint it's much more for aesthetics. Because it comes from a history of those who have economic wherewithal, have intelligence, and culture. And those who don't are without that. And in Africa everyone has culture. Everyone shares in the art. No matter if you're a king or the poorest person economically, we are all rich with culture. And if we can learn from that model, which I'm seeing so called world music which is predominantly African influenced now coming into the aesthetics of mainstream society. Story_ID: 187950 Speaker 1: If we had a greater art sharing, there would be less of the kinds of situations like the situation in Iraq right now. If we had young people on the South Side of Chicago [Illinois] or Harlem [New York, New York] or West Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] or in Oakland [California] or in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] who would listen to Thelonious Monk. Who listening and analyzing Charlie Parker or Duke Ellington. It would be hard for them to focus on shooting and who's got the best shoes and cutting each other and ripping and raping and all of the negative qualities associated with modern culture. Which are stimulated by media which are really promoted within the education system and are celebrated through the penal system. This entire culture is completely wrong in its process of social architecture. It's completely wrong. And the results are the statistics and the numbers that we have. Art and culture as a part of general education would be a greater stimulus. And my argument technically for that is President [William Jefferson "Bill"] Clinton appointed me to the National Task Force for Arts Presenting in Education. So, in the '90s [1990s] I got an enormous amount of documents showing where things were at. And in 1967 with the first national act in terms of the general education system, making a funding decision to take arts out and from '67 [1967] to about '73 [1973] was a process of its decrease. And when you look at the aptitude scores in the '60's [1960s] and early '70s [1970s] there were at a higher rate than they are today. And statistically if arts was a part of education then it would lead to the fact of possibly it had a lot to do with the social and intellectual stimulation of each student in the inner city who experienced it. So the choice to take it out, and whoever were the individuals responsible for that choice I'm sure many of them realize, who are living today, that they made a great mistake in that. Story_ID: 187951 Speaker 1: Since we're talking about arts in education, where do you see that going? Is it gonna get better or worse? Speaker 2: It will get better because the need is very important. And so crises and the direct confrontation of conflict usually turns around results. The '50s [1950s] coming out of [Dwight David] Eisenhower and a very conservative segregated environment created in people of color a crisis of conflict in a confrontation to mainstream society. And it was considered in the twentieth century the strongest and largest human revolution culturally. If we look at today, you know, I mean you know the war in Iraq, but really the nuclear armament of North Korea and why there's a choice of Iraq rather than North Korea. The development of Asian economics the results of unfair trade and embargo in regards to countries of color Haiti, Africa, West Indies, or whatever. The enormous crime, this penal system. The games that are played that most people are not reading. [Richard "Dick"] Cheney is going around representing Target and other stores going into the penal system. There is more money put in the penal system than the education system. This new slavery that exists. Where someone makes a $1.25 to $3 an hour. If they're a three time offender even if it's for a minor offense, then they have a lifetime imprisonment. And they work for less than minimum wage to work in labor, to do telemarketing. No one's really breaking these things down and really looking at it. And if you're really intelligent you can figure these things out. The European economy, the EC, I'm there. I see how things are going. Europeans looking at the Asians and seeing where the economics are going. America trying to hold on to a sense of empowerment based on twentieth century which comes from nineteenth century and the eighteenth century. Lack of paying for--not having to pay for labor. And their advance over European countries. European countries looking back at America. America learning from the Magna Carta, create the Constitution. Now the EC combining and all of this seeing the collective state, the empowerment of Europe and global economization. The alienation of people of color in those situations. The head of UN [United Nations] being an African and him speaking to the idea that if it had been a European that the powers that be would not have taken the kinds of sanctions against Iraq. All of these things are going through an enormous change. And culture will be the conduit for us that never been looked at. Story_ID: 187952 Speaker 1: What I've contended is that artists are a part of leadership. That in a European aesthetic, it's never understood. When you look at other cultures you had--and even when you go back to the Bible, David was a harpist, he was a musician. And because of his qualities of internal opening then that was the whole thing with Goliath and this symbology [ph.] of that. The first director of--and people forget--of--of the black political caucus was Amiri Baraka. He was the first president. Why was he chosen? (Laughter) because of his intelligence. Because of his left right brain coordination and his ability to communicate both aesthetically and logically, you know. So artists are gonna be very important. Art has always been a more tolerant environment. Artists are usually exposed to plateaus of thinking that are broad so if they're brought into the picture in regards to education, if they're brought into the picture in terms of social engineering, if they're brought into the picture in terms of future planning, then they may quite--she or he--from wherever, from France, from Ghana, from Korea whatever. I think we need a culture program. I think we need to deal with principles that are considered ancient to the future. That monks from--Buddhist monks, that Native American healers, Babalawos from the Yoruba culture. Along with medical doctors, along with people of academic as well as emotional theophacy [ph.]. Great musicians, dancers, or whatever, all should be brought into a new paradigm of social engineering that speaks to humanity more so than economic gain. Because this pursuit which comes through the feudal system, a feudal game for many to suffer. Populations of the world are too large. With that kind of inequity and this has caused the confusion. Story_ID: 187953 Speaker 1: Are you doing a lot of teaching now also? Speaker 2: More consulting. In the late '80s [1980s] '90s [1990s] I did a lot of teaching. It was very interesting. My first associate position, a professor position was at the University of Arizona Tucson [University of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona]. Without an academic background, based on my experiences. You know as the chairman of the AACM [Association for the Advancement of Creative Musicians] I developed a school program. Musicians from that became the most influential music cooperative in the world--of the twentieth century. I'm considered the second most important chairman of that organization. I developed the school program. I created Underground Fest. I financed Black Life Film Festival from Underground Fest which was events that happened late night. After Chicago Jazz Festival came what Chicago has now called the Pub Crawl. That's my invention. I brought together the Hudlin brothers and Spike Lee for the first time they came together which would become the Black Film Makers Association. It's interesting people in Europe study my accomplishments and then they document the significance of what I've contributed nationally and internationally. And then predominantly white schools, you know, started hiring me to then translate what was a grass roots development, my fundraising skills. My historical, you know, background and ability to deliver that in terms of modern culture and black music. And then I went from the University of Arizona to the University of Lincoln Nebraska [sic, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, Nebraska] and then eventually the University of Illinois [at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] as associate professor of inter-disciplinary studies. And then the Headlands Center for the Arts invited me in '95 [1995] with Henry Giroux, a pedagogist from the University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and I developed Crossroads Toolbox of Success. They for four years brought me to the Headlands with a consultant's fee and put me with the Art Institute San Francisco, Art Institute Chicago, and the Corcoran School of Art in Washington, D.C. And basically took the chronology of Sun Drummer, AACM various organizations that I was a part of-- Story_ID: 187954 Speaker 1: I created 'Traffic' for Steppenwolf Theatre [Company, Chicago, Illinois]. Was the first African American executive at their company. Steppenwolf was a theater company. Once I created 'Traffic Intersection to the Arts,' I created for public radio, the 'Traffic' radio show. Speaker 2: Tell us what 'Traffic' is? Speaker 1: 'Traffic' is a multi-arts presentation series at Steppenwolf Theatre. With a radio nationally broadcast radio program of those shows. They hired me to create jazz programming and I felt that since it was a theater it was much broader than that. And I was driving down the expressway and I said that's the name, Traffic. Many people go in many different directions. So it became the most successful multi-arts presentation in Chicago. Which would lead to the series that Peter Taub now does at MCA. Which would lead to the difference in the program at Old Town School of [Folk] Music. I created that. And I put together shows like Maria Tallchief, the wife of Balanchine. Considered America's greatest ballerina of a Native American heritage. Gwen Verdon who was married to Bob Fosse, considered the greatest modern choreographer. Gwen Verdon had been in--she'd been in 'Hello Dolly.' She had been in 'Damn Yankees.' She had been in many of the greatest Broadway things as a dancer herself, actress. And [HM] Carmen de Lavallade married to the great dancer [HM] Geoffrey Holder. First black woman to dance with Martha Graham. I put them together in a performance and conversation called 'America's Greatest Divas.' I did the last performance of Allen Ginsberg before his death. And I put it together with Ed Paschke and had Ed Paschke read the [Allen] Ginsberg's script piece 'Howl.' I put Amiri Baraka and the great saxophonist Oliver Lake together in a solo saxophone poetry performance. I put together Honeyboy Edwards [David "Honeyboy" Edwards] the, you know, ninety year old blues musician and Franz Jackson a ninety year old jazz musician. Honeyboy played with Robert Johnson. Franz Jackson had played with Louis Armstrong. They had lived both in Chicago and since the 1920s had never met. I put 'em on the stage for the first time with Studs Terkel interviewing them. And then had them perform, the roots of jazz and the roots of blues for the first time ever in history and had it documented for radio. Story_ID: 187955 Speaker 1: You did 'Arrested Development?' Speaker 2: I did the pants for 'Arrested Development.' So when they came out I helped develop the look that they had, which was kind of a cross cultural Afrocentric look. The look that I've kind of worn for years. My name for it is Afro slick. I grew up, you know, in an environment where there were all these wonderful clubs in Chicago [Illinois] and really elegantly dressed people. I knew people like Scotty the tailor who invented the zoot suit for Cab Calloway. Which would become an international phenomenon. It has a lot to do with Italian couture today in terms of line that cut. It came from the body shape and the style of people like Cab Calloway and Billy Eckstine. So I took that and then in the '60s [1960s] I worked with--at a place called Zambezi. You know, 'cause as an artist it's hard to make a living. So I always did a lot of things. Painted houses, made clothes, or whatever. So at Zambezi I did all the dashikis, all the shokotos. African pants are all that. So in my own fashion there's always a mixture of the culture retention with contemporary couture. And I call that Afro slick. Speaker 1: Have you done a lot of designing recently? Speaker 2: In recent years not as much. You know, the '70s [1970s] was probably my most prolific time. There was a dress called the sundress Freda Payne was famous for, that's my design. When I met and started working with folks like Nina Simone, I was doing, you know, all of these geles and lapas and bubas all these traditional things I had learned in Ghana. And I was, you know, relating them to contemporary fabrics and mixing contemporary fabrics with African design. African design with the contemporary fabrics. You know mixing all of these kinds of things and so in the 70s [1970s] I did a lot of design for entertainers. Donny Hathaway, Nina Simone, Freda Payne, Calvin Lockhart. And actually made more money probably designing than I did playing music. And then after the '70s [1970s] no one was really wearing African culture. It was a real interesting time going into the '80s [1980s] from the '70s [1970s]. Things got extremely conservative. Even the people who came out in the '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s] they went from being in the streets into academic environments. And the articulation of culture changed in the '80s [1980s] and I became kind of covert and chameleon like in order to survive you know. Predominantly European clothes when I'm getting on planes and going to universities to do what I have to do, but always African garb when I perform. So figuring out my own rituals of retention. Story_ID: 187956 Speaker 1: In the '90s [1990s] is when there was celebration of my work. And I could really start living on my own terms and just doing things the way that I want to do them. And then you realize things take a lot longer, you know, than you want. And in trying to talk to many of my peers about why they've lost their energy and where's the flavor and where's the groove. And I find myself today associating predominantly with younger people. People my age and older are too conservative to me. And too much about petty morality. Speaker 2: Well, are they in quotes, "weary?" Speaker 1: They may be weary but I think it's more acculturation than weariness. I think that once you move into the suburbs, once you move out of the environments where things are at the edge, once you no longer see yourself a part of contemporary culture, in terms of having a voice and look at yourself more as a museum item, you set yourself apart from the moment, you know. I still go to clubs and dance at night. I had to get that together with my oldest daughter. You know she was embarrassed to see me some places. And you know I had to let her know I was going to clubs before you were born. So I haven't come into your environment, you're coming into my environment. And that just because your father's older, no matter what your mother does, I'm still a young person. And when I'm ninety I'll be a young person. Because, you know, I got to hang and see Eubie Blake. I played with Earl "Fatha" Hines, you know. And in their eighties I saw these people very vibrant and, you know, and very strong and very, you know. I've hung out with [HM] Margaret Burroughs and Tumbleweed [Marion "Tumbleweed" Beach]. And, you know, and so, you know, the way you maintain your vibrance and the way--and your vitality is that you stay active in the moment. And you stay relevant to contemporary society. And a lot of my peers at this time are not relevant to contemporary society. Story_ID: 187957 Speaker 1: Go back history and we see in the '60s [1960s] it was part of a--a fad so to speak in a sense. And everybody's in it. And at that time when they're in it, they're doing study. They're studying that this is from the Ashanti. That this is from the Yoruba. This is from the Mandinka. They're taking pride in this and the attitude associated with a sense of preservation for the sake of what one is doing. Now we look in 2003 it seems to be in a sense protocol of our day to day activity without a reference to the historical significance. And many times nobody even knows why they're doing it. So if I look at it in retrospect I appreciate more the time when one took the time to study to see what it was because then there's that greater power of retention, then when it just becomes accustomed to. Speaker 2: (Unclear) Speaker 1: You know I mean it's like, you know, when I look at many of my Asian friends and they're in contemporary society there's still a sacredness to their Kabuki. There's still a sacredness to their tea rituals. There's still a sacredness to their traditional garments that their grandparents, grandparents, grandparents wore. And as they move through JP Morgan [Chase & Co.], Morgan Stanley, through the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] through business, doctor, garbage man, police men, police woman whatever it is, there's still a sacredness to the authenticity of their cultural heritage. With African Americans it makes it really difficult because our experience is convoluted beyond our control, anthropologically speaking. I see ourselves as cousins to Africans rather than as brothers and sisters as most people contend. And I see my experience within this land base as a valid root to my cultural heritage. So even in the '60s [1960s] and even being younger than [HM] Haki [Madhubuti] or Hannibal Afrik or [HM] Val [Gray Ward] or all of them, I could never give in to the African persona as superior to my street persona. And that what I know is original in my music comes from what came the 63rd [Street] and Aberdeen [Street], 63rd and [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] Drive. 63rd and Ellis [Avenue], 39th and Cottage [Grove Avenue], Macombo. That's my heritage. I can sing the blues. I can still do the watusi, the duck, you know (laughter). You know, and I can also do house dancings. At the House-O-Matics I can do what the kids do today and I can do what my parents did. And the convolution of our experience when a people are taken away from any relationship to past language, any relationship to past aesthetics. Part of my inspiration as an African drummer and a multi-percussionist is that most people don't realize that by law, by mandate of law, and this is still on the books of Mississippi, of Georgia, of Tennessee, that slaves caught practicing their traditional arts, by law could be mangled or possibly put to death. With me playing the drum or me speaking my parent language, that I may be physically harmed because it's thought that I would inhibit the labor force and the economic gain of this society. It gives me a stronger reinforcement to be a leader as an African percussionist. Because we don't have any history to know what it takes to really do this. Because this was against the law. And it's still on the books. So that we have these so called articulate spokespersons of political and social welfare of our community and no one is really--I mean you're talking about reparations which I think is significant, but we're not talking about with any great significance that the idea that, you know, we are less than human by law which is within this Constitution, shouldn't be wiped. That should be one of the main issues. There is no way that through the history, no matter how intelligent Thomas Jefferson or, you know, Benjamin Franklin or Adams or any of these people are, and all the work of Frederick Douglass or A. Philip Randolph or Adam Clayton Powell, Malcom [X] or whatever. Then in this last hundred years of the twentieth century we haven't figured out that there is supposed to be a formal taking out of that law out of the Constitution. There is no way that any human being can judge still another human being as physically or humanly less by God than another. There is no way that there should be any discussion about a vote for our civil liberties with amendments of constitutions. You know, so I mean these are the kinds of things that I think intelligent folks should be dealing with. Story_ID: 187958 Speaker 1: And as African Americans in terms of my direct experience there's no way that I would ever look at an experience of an African from the continent, Nigeria, Ghana, Senegal, Guinea, South Africa, anyone from Lithuania, France, Germany, Norway, from China from Manila, from Japan, I'm just naming every place I've been, there's no one of any superior human experience to the African American. And what I try to do with my children in taking them around the world, taking on my tours. Teaching them to articulate with a certain sense of confidence. We shouldn't be intimidated in the twenty-first century to be workers. We're one of the only communities in the world where we don't raise our children to lead the planet. If you were raised in Germany, you're raised to lead the world. You're raised in Japan, you're raised to lead the world. If you're raised in Berkshires, Massachusetts, you know, as a white American, you're raised to rule the world. We've gotta raise our children to rule the world. Not that you're some dictator or some dominant male or female, but that you see your voice as an equitable voice of decision making for the betterment of humanity. And to evolve to that on my own, it's been very difficult. But by the things that I've done from national committees in regards to this country, from the work that I've done, you know, I've scored movies like 'Mo' Money' for Columbia Pictures. 'Love Jones' for New Line Cinema. Worked for [The Walt] Disney [Company] and worked on what's considered one of the most successful Broadway plays in the history of Broadway. And to know that my work is a part of that. Taught at major universities, without ever graduating from college. And been a part of, you know, the cultural evolution of this city from being one of the first people at Kwanzaa with Hannibal [Afrik], [HM] Haki [Madhubuti], Ron Karenga [HM Maulana Karenga] as a teenager. Being a part of Sun Drummer which was the first African American society of African drummers in America. Which would lead to Muntu [Dance Theatre, Chicago, Illinois], which lead to Kothi [Kothi Dance Company, Milwaukee, Wisconsin], and all this stuff today. And just turning fifty years old is a lot. And these have been a lot of burden in regards to that kind of cultural bounty. And to be by--what has resulted from my work to be a cultural leader and still not looked at by my own community. But by other parts of the world. I know that as I get older I have to speak to these things so the younger cultural architects don't go through that same kind of situation. Because as I've seen others of my peers in law, business, medicine, receive the grants, receive the accolades, receive certain kinds of opportunities that I haven't. I was supposed to get a different kind of nurturing and support based on the quality of what I was contributing. But because it was from this African perspective, because it was from music and jazz which we don't see as an intellectual height in our community, because it's been so abused and bastardized. We don't even have any authority to what we have uniquely in this culture. Everything that we have contributed, African Americans, is brought into mainstream society. It's watered down. You know so yet gospel music comes out the black community. Thomas Dorsey invented it. He played with Bessie Smith and Ma Rainey and with the blues musician and took those chords, translated to spirituals and created a different kind of funk with spirituals which became gospel. So you have a gospel category in Grammys but you don't honor Thomas Dorsey. It's his invention. Totally from him. Jazz is our invention. So when it becomes a part of mainstream society and you can capitalize off of it, but the community that does it, they don't even embrace it themselves to understand the unique--uniqueness of it. Story_ID: 187959 Speaker 1: You have someone like Louis Armstrong who did 341 recordings. There's no one from his family, not an aunt, aunt, mother, daughter, wife, cousin, son, that receives one royalty from his work. And you can cite hundreds of black artists where Europeans own their royalties. And we're penalized because of our ignorance of the legal system of protection, which is a responsibility. But many of the people before the 1950s were not fully aware based on lack of education. So you have all of these people who are receiving hundreds of millions of dollars for our labor and we speak to no reparation. We speak to no reparation to the cotton gin. We speak to no reparation to the--to the stoplight. We speak to reparation to all of these inventions that we've used. We give no real argument to the monumenting [ph.] of George Washington Carver and his significance to synthetics in industrialization today. Without him there really wouldn't be the work with rayon or plastics or anything. Without his contribution to that. That's not the same accord with Einstein, with Ford. With all--you know, many of the other icons and great scientific industrial and economic contributions to this society. So reparation is much broader. Our lack of education to ourselves. There's no way that our children shouldn't know the work of A. Philip Randolph of the Pullman Porters Association [sic, International Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters]. There's no way that our children shouldn't know the work of Louis Armstrong or Duke Ellington or Fats Navarro or Scott Joplin. It's just--it's inexcusable. When you look at black independent schools there's really no curriculum for these things. The idea of so called entertainment in arts and what African Americans contributed is into the hundreds of billions of dollars. When you think about the minstrels and understand that P.T. Barnum before circuses made his first money from the minstrels. And that this was a satirical negative emulation of African American personality. The buck. That's the beginning of American theater. Before that Italians did what they brought from Italy. Irish did what they brought from Ireland. French, Germans, English did what they did from their cultures. Before the minstrels they had nothing truly American. Amalga--an amalgamation of what came from this land base as a form of entertainment. And it was a derogatory pictorial relationship of the African slave personality in contemporary life of that time. It would grow to become the first million dollar industry in entertainment in America. Eventually for black folks to black face themselves. Which would eventually lead to vaudeville. Would eventually lead to the great comedians, W.C. Fields, Charlie Chaplin, Buster Keaton, The Keystone Cops, all of these things emulate from the African American personality. Story_ID: 187960 Speaker 1: So if we think about film, if we think about the personalities of the rebel personalities of the 1940s, Jimmy Dean, Marlon Brando, Tony Curtis, eventually Paul Newman, and think about beatniks, [Allen] Ginsberg, [Lawrence] Ferlinghetti, all of these European poets inspired by jazz personality into film. All of these things that I know--I know that most people don't know. And trying to use this moment to give you this information so as least let it think it about that these are billions of dollars. Frank Sinatra was given film opportunities, Melton Ray was given film opportunities. Billy Eckstine was extremely handsome. He was extremely articulate. He was extremely rhythmical. He was extremely fashionable. These opportunities weren't given. Dexter Gor--one last one. Dexter Gordon did a film with Bertrand Tavernier called 'Round Midnight.' Dexter Gordon had been one of the wonderful film images through photography from the 1940s on. You'll see many pictures of Dexter Gordon because he was tall. He was elegant. He was articulate. And he was charismatic. Why did it take him 'til he was seventy-three years old to be in film? Why was Billy Eckstine not in film? Why did Dorothy Dandridge go through what she went through? Why did [HM] Eartha Kitt go through what she went to? Well, you can't make arguments about these things unless you know it. Okay. Going back to the point about the Asian culture and protecting certain things that are sacred. If you don't know it's sacred, you don't know how to protect it. You don't know how to argue about those things. Black artists have always been told that you do it 'cause you love it. Black communities never even supported it. You know the business people have never come together besides what we're talking about reparations. What have we done in the--[HM] George Johnson says that Mr. [Alfred C.] Fuller that had The Fuller Brush Company, the Brown brothers with policy in the 1920s, 1930s. The Gardeners in the 1980s. What have we really done? The Butlers out of Atlanta [Georgia]. When we look at the significance of what African American culture means to the world, in dance, in music, in visual arts--Jacob Lawrence, Charles White. What have we done to actually create an economic base which--what's--what is considered the seventh largest spending base in the world, the African American community? What have we done through business or academic archival significance in order to protect what is considered one of the greatest contributing cultures in the 20th century from the African American? Story_ID: 187961 Speaker 1: Let me take you back to the beat generation since that was very, very thick with activity for jazz. What is your take on that beat period? What was it maybe '55 [1955] to-- Speaker 2: It started really about '47 [1947]. Speaker 1: '47 [1947] Speaker 2: To the turn of the 1960s. Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 2: And you know-- Speaker 1: Well didn't it really end about '58 [1958]? Speaker 2: No it kind of ends when [Amiri] Baraka [formerly, LeRoi Jones] decided that he was gonna go into black culture. Because black cul--Baraka was the--the last really celebrated beat poet. You know Baraka came to Greenwich Village [New York, New York] after college, went to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.]. And started hanging around you know, [Lawrence] Ferlinghetti and Jack Kerouac and [Allen] Ginsberg. And they then celebrated him. And then the academic communities. Because most of these guys were outside of the academic communities and in about '56 [1956] they kind of moved out of New York 'cause it was getting expensive and moved up to Buffalo, New York. Speaker 1: Your dad would have been a beat-- Speaker 2: He would--he would have been a beat generation, but he was more of a bebop. See the beatniks are predominantly white. And then there are a few blacks. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then beboppers are black. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And what happens is that young whites are listening to bebop music and then they are writing about it. And so it's the beat. And they are kind of romance rebels, you know, like Kerouac. And they're traveling around the country, they're reading at colleges, they're reading at coffee houses and they're reading even in people's houses. And they're playing jazz music. And then at this same time period this rebellious personality is being taken into film and so you see the jungle-'Asphalt Jungle.' You see 'On the Waterfront.' You see these motorcycle movies and these guys are wearing the motorcycle jackets and so this is like 1948, '49 [1949] '51, [1951] '52, [1952] '53 [1953]. And they become icons. This is right before Elvis Presley. And what happens as the beat generation, which is also associated with drugs and with homosexual culture, they become a subculture. And rock and roll is being invented by Chuck Berry coming from St. Louis [Missouri], Fats Domino coming out of New Orleans [Louisiana]. And yeah rockabilly coming out of southern whites. And rockabilly and rock and roll coming out of rhythm and blues becomes rock 'n roll through the personalities of Jerry Lee Lewis, Elvis Presley as the--and--what's his name, I can't remember his name--Buddy Holly. And of course the blacks are inventing it but they're a taking second step. Charlie Parker and Dizzy Gillespie and Gene Ammons and Fats Navarro and Tadd Dameron they're creating the look. They're creating the two toned shoe. They're creating the slick high water pants. They're creating all the fashion, they're creating all the language but then it's coming through beatnik poetry, and the beatniks are getting celebrated with it. And then you have people like Marlon Brando who were kind of living in the whole experience. Marlon Brando is born in Oklahoma. Is raised in Evanston [Illinois]. And goes to school in southern Illinois. Most people don't know Marlon Brando danced with [HM] Katherine Dunham and played African drums. And there's a new book called 'Quotes of My Mother' [sic, 'Songs My Mother Taught Me'] with Marlon Brando where you can see all of this, him hanging with--you know, we see the certain rhythmic sexiness about him while he's hanging with [HM] Eartha Kitt. He's hanging with [HM] Harry Belafonte. And so he's picking up these things and then you also see Paul Newman, Marlon Brando. You see them locked up with James Baldwin and Richard Wright and they're at the--you know, you see him with Adam Clayton Powell. And Adam Clayton Powell's wife was a jazz musician, Shirley Scott [sic, Hazel Scott]. You know you see all of this stuff connected. It's being broken down because by the end of the '60s [1960s], government and popular media have become sophisticated enough to now create mass manipulation of public. And so people are taken away from all of these things-- Story_ID: 187962 Speaker 1: The African Americans make a big mistake because they totally aligned themselves with African culture as their root, which anthropologically and historically is not true. So most people become disconnected with all the beauty that came from the Elks clubs, from the Masons, from the segregated kind of socialization that was quite elegant, which I call social elegance from segregation. We lose our sense of style. The way in which we dress as African Americans. The way in which we talk. The rhythmic elements of language with articulation. So what we're looking at today in our community is an extreme dichotomy. You have people who articulate in a very European way. Or you have people that are basically like street prisoners who can't even organize their sense of using the English language. Which makes it very hard to get a job. If you don't have a sense of presence to know how to dress, if you can't speak the language in a way that articulates your position in life, then how can you manipulate that towards your own opportunity? And even when we look at African fashion it's more associated with prison fashion. Because what happens in the '80s [1980s] is that the jackets and the pajama pants that are used in prison become the look of young men because they're emulating what they consider to be an important experience. You have families now that get picnic baskets and go to prison to see their kids. They got kids sixteen, seventeen, eighteen, nineteen, twenty, first time, second time, third time offenders. By the time they're thirty-five they're in prison for the rest of their life. We look at that as normal. Then we have all these clothes that are big and baggy that look just like the stuff that you wear in prison. Well you associated with a shokoto and an-a batakari and agbada coming from Ghana they look similar but we have no history. Well now it's all lumped into the same thing. And no one understands this kind of potpourri kind of existence that's based on hierarchy manipulation, you know. When I was a child I could get a wool coat, a cotton shirt, a wool pair of pants, and leather shoes. Shoes were costing twelve dollars. You could get a coat for about forty-five dollars. Today, you know, I mean, you know, I wear the finest fashion. Either I make it--I wear Versace. I wear Gaultier. I wear Claude Montana. And it's not because it's some superior position. It's that these are made from natural fibers. And natural fibers breathe. And that has a lot to do with your cosmology. You know I eat certain foods because of how I educated myself. So today I have friends that have fat stomachs and are gray, you know, are totally bald and everything else and we're the same age. So, you know, I'm wearing the same waist line that I had at eighteen years old. So self-preservation, study of these things, refinement, worldliness, are things that need to be taught. Because it creates a better life and a longevity to your being. And this whole prison kind of mainstream get along with mediocrity is wrong. It's incorrect. Story_ID: 187963 Speaker 1: You didn't name the play that you said that was a big Broadway play. Speaker 2: '[The] Lion King.' Speaker 1: 'Lion King?' Speaker 2: 'Lion King'-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --by Disney. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I didn't work on the film version, I worked on the theater version. Because the director Julie Taymor and her husband, Elliot [Goldenthal], had hired me to do the music for many of their other kind of off Broadway experimental productions. So when it came time to do 'Lion King'--in a way it was kind of hard getting around me. We need someone American who can write on a symphonic level and had studied traditional African music. Ain't too many of 'em. So that was the way I'd experienced. I was hired by Julie. I came and stayed in New York for about a year. I had people like Chief Bey [James Hawthorne Bey] who along with [Babtunde] Olatunji pretty much created the whole movement for African music in America. Ken McIntyre, a great flutist and oboist who passed. Bobby Irving, keyboardist, electronic musician who played with Miles Davis for many years. I mean I had all these great players. And we worked for a year creating this music. Garth Fagan was doing the choreography. And, you know, I was taken outside of the musicians and put on the side of staff with Disney which was very difficult. So when the union came I couldn't talk to my musicians to tell them how many instruments they were doubling 'cause when you get doubled you get paid for each instrument. They separated me from the room so I couldn't tell them how to get their best situation. They're like well, you know, you're staff. You know you're with us. So the way the union works you're over here so you can't tell them. So I can't protect my guys. I'm watching you know these executives treat people in this degraded way. Hello, who are you? What are you and--we're so frantic to get an opportunity most people are intimidated or insecure they never hold their own position. They're not raised to do that in our community. You know, so I'm seeing all my friends become insecure because they think these people are in a superior position--they need the job. I'm now trying to talk to the executives saying don't treat, you know, these people in this way, it's not cool. Nick Castle who worked with Elton John didn't dig me, because he felt I was a prima donna. And he wasn't used to an African American basically giving him eye to eye. Basically not having the insecurity that they're used to most of us having in confrontation. And, my teacher Atu [Atu Harold Murray] who doesn't wear shoes, he wears sandals, he never wears shoes, never has. They were talking about him and by the end after about a year Nick had given all the musicians like little toys, like they went to Woolworth's and gave them little things to play. He said "Well, Kahil's arrangements are too serious. He's a jazzer and this needs to be lightened up." And they gave him like kazoos and little toy things to play like monkeys and all these cats took this shit and they did it. You know 'cause they're thinking well after we finish putting this music together we wanna be in the pit band. And we wanna have those years of $70, $80,000 a year salaries, you know. And with this--it really messed me up looking at all of these people submitting to money in this kind of way. So I came out of the engineer's booth and I hit Nick Castle in the mouth. I knocked him down. And basically I told him I would whoop his ass. And I was considered vulgar and of course when, you know, you show this kind of intensity you're not necessarily a part of mainstream society which is genteel. Like the generous generals who live in Berkshires, Massachusetts who put napalm on the Vietnam. You dig? So when you're basically honest to what your emotions are and express them in the moment that's considered less than human. And so they basically said that if--Nick Castle would press charges if I wouldn't resign from my position as the music director of this project. Speaker 1: (Unclear) resign? Speaker 2: If I didn't resign. Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: Based on me hitting him. He would press charges with me and I could potentially go to jail or whatever. And so, you know, I did that. And some of those musicians I haven't spoken to the day since. That was almost ten years ago. Because they lost their little gigs and shit. And so (laughter) it's deep. Story_ID: 187964 Speaker 1: So a lot of things weren't being accepted because I was writing in a personal style. I didn't know the difference in a grant and a corporate sponsorship proposal, so a majority of the stuff I first wrote was being denied based on not knowing. Well, why aren't kids given these skills in one on one literature? Okay. So if you've got 'em in an art school you find out that 68 percent of most art students--music, dance, theater, whatever, will never practice the art form because they don't have the skills necessary to survive. And I developed a curriculum for these schools in a four year time, you know. Three months out of each year spending with professors talking about what I've learned from my own experience to have success as an administrator, have success as a band leader, as a producer of events, you know. I directed African Arts Festival [sic, African Festival of the Arts] and took that to where it is today in Chicago [Illinois]. You know, that used to be an event with ten thousand people a day. I'm the person who put Bobby Blue Bland and--and the group War. Because they were only dealing with African stuff. And I said that's not an African American experience. And so for Patrick [ph.] I put that together and put it on the level that it is now where it's got two hundred thousand people because it must be relevant to its constituency. And what we do as African Americans is African in its own right. And you don't have to prove, define by anyone else's standards, European, African, or anybody else. We are authentic. And that's--most of us don't understand that. Our food, everything we do, the way we dress, the way we talk, the way we walk, it's all authentic. And once you know it, it becomes a power. But anyway so the curriculum thing with these schools after I developed this thing over four years they let Henry Giroux teach it because they said I had no degrees and that he was a Ph.D. in pedagogical studies. So he goes all over the country now. I mean, you know, they paid me every year, my ten grand as a consultant to develop it, but it's my whole--whole pedagogy you understand. So, you know, I'm working on a whole new way of doing things now. In which we protect all of these intellectual properties that I have created, you know. And it's a lot that are in the mainstream world, not like some shit that you do in the neighborhood. Stuff that I have created has impacted the entire planet. '[The] Lion King' has influenced children all over the world to listen to African music. And it's my translation with contemporary classical forms and jazz and African that has brought it to where it's at. Story_ID: 187965 Speaker 1: Okay, as a multi-percussionist in, you know, and know, in 2002 by the International Association of Jazz Critics I was named percussionist of the year 2002. Presented to award by Bill Cosby at the Apollo Theater September 2002. But a multi-percussionist is one who plays many percussion. Multi-percussionist. I first started as a child playing drum kit because my father played traditional drum kit. And that's with the cymbals and the snare and the bass drum and the toms and you have to be what's called ambidextrous to play that instrument. Because my left hand is doing one thing, my right hand is doing something different. My right foot is doing something different, kicking a different time signature on the bass drum. And my left foot is doing different time signature with the sock cymbal. And my left hand is accenting the motion of what happens with the rhythm. And my right is articulating the swing or the pulse of each time signature. So I got this and boom, this and boom and chick chick chicking and ting a ting ting all going on at the same time. See that? See how that left hand is going that way? The right hand is going that way and the two different feet are going a different way. So that's ambidextrousness. So jazz drummers are incredible. They're extraordinary. Far beyond what people have understood. And I play congas which are a Latin American derived instrument which comes from an African inheritance. Tumba is the big conga. The middle one is called conga. And the smallest one is called quinto. Or they're called baby, mama, papa. And it comes out of the Afro-Cuban style which is predominantly from an east African heritage coming out of Tanzania. Which--where many Cuban slaves came from and translated this form of music. I played congas with people like Donny Hathaway in the sixties [1960s], a group called The Artistics. My first recording was with a young man named Dion [ph.]. Did a song when we were in high school called "People Make the World Go Around". You know love makes the world go up and down and I played, you know, congas on that. I played congas with Donny Hathaway. With Stevie Wonder with Paul Simon. And I played traditional African drums. I played the Ashiko drum which is a small cylinder bass drum with a cow skin head. And it is a solo instrument, meaning the drummer who plays out in the front of the other drummers. We play a drum that we made in Chicago [Illinois] which is kind of a prototype of a couple of different African drums. And it's more of a bass kind of drum. And with this instrument I'm considered unique because I'm one of the only people that plays a bass drum as a solo drum and it's called earth drum. And the earth drum comes from The Sun Drummer philosophy. We invented this style of drumming. So it's an authentic African American style of drumming. And there are two people superior to me, Chief Bey [James Hawthorne Bey] who is eighty-eight years old and Harold Atu Murray, who is my direct teacher, who is sixty-five. And I'm considered the third most important player of that particular instrument in the world. Story_ID: 187966 Speaker 1: I play, you know, many small percussion instruments. The shekere which is a gourd with beads. I play Agogo bells which are metal bells. I play the traditional marimba and I studied at the whatever, it's a Chicago music institute in downtown Chicago [sic, Music Institute of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] for traditional marimba. I play C flute, low B, and also alto flute, which is the curved round flute. I don't really play piano, but I use piano to compose. And so I can pick around with my fingers and I know the note value for what I'm trying to approach when I'm writing music. I've scored for symphonies, Berlin symphony. Written for University of Nebraska Symphony. I have scored film scores like 'Mo' Money' for Columbia picture. 'Love Jones' New Line Cinema. 'How U Like Me Now' filmmaker from Darryl Roberts from Universal Film. Speaker 2: Kimbah [ph.]--or timbah [ph.] finger piano. Speaker 1: The Kalimba. Speaker 2: Or the African thumb piano in English. I play Sansa which come from West Africa. Which is usually a twelve key notated kalimba. I play the kalimba which comes from South Africa. It's usually twelve to sixteen notes. I play likembe from East Africa which is usually the five pentatonic, five note system. And what I've tried to do with, you know, kalimbas, thumb pianos, the berimbau. I played the bow from Brazil which comes also from East Africa originally played by the maroons in Bahia [Brazil], Slaves who said that no European will ever own them. Which those kinds of people are never celebrated, the ones who fought against being acculturated. But anyway I took and learned that instrument from them because I wanna learn all the instruments that are instruments of rebellion from people of African descent and place them in contemporary music, which I've done. I've put more African instruments on recordings in contemporary music in--in pop, rhythm and blues [R&B], jazz, than any other musician. Story_ID: 187967 Speaker 1: Speaking of recordings and labels what are the primary labels you have--you record on? Speaker 2: Right now I'm recording for a label called Delmark Records out of Chicago [Illinois]. A record label called Creative Improvised Music Projects, CIMP, from Redwood, New York. That's up at the top of the peninsula in New York. Recently done a couple of recordings for Justin Time out of Montreal, Canada. I've recorded for Silkheart out of Stockkholm, Sweden. Sound Aspects out of Stuttgart, Germany. Leo Records from Helsinki, Finland. Recorded for Warner Bros. for the Chameleon label. I think I have--at this point I have forty-eight recordings under my name. And I don't know I'm probably on more than, you know, 300 recordings with all kinds of people from records with Mos Def. Getting ready to do something--I'm getting ready to do something with Nas. He's a rapper. His dad and I played together, his father's a trumpet player named Olu Dara [Jones]. Which most people don't know him. That's why Nas is so different than most of these rappers in terms of his poetry and his intellectual content because he was raised around us. You know, I've recorded with poets Ntozake Shange, who did colored girls when the rainbow is not enough, commit suicide when the rainbow is not enough [sic, for colored girls who have considered suicide/when the rainbow is enuf]. Amiri Baraka, [HM] Haki Madhubuti. I've published two books of poetry. One for Third World Press called 'Mis Taken Brilliance,' for Haki. Story_ID: 187968 Speaker 1: Where do you see yourself--fast forward you're seventy-five. What do you want to have added to this? Speaker 2: My, you know, I said pretty much like my mother [Gwendolyn Marie Finch Blackburn] who's at my house right now, she's visiting me. You know I said my stuff wouldn't really happen until I was really fifty in terms of like really national, international notoriety. I knew that at eighteen. Because once I decided to really commit myself to this music and when I saw personalities of a certain aesthetic quality it usually happened older. Duke [Ellington], Thelonious Monk. He was on the front of Time magazine in 1963, but most of his music was written before '45 [1945]. So, I mean Monk didn't really get credited pretty much in his 50's even though he was ahead of Monk and Bird [Charlie "Bird" Parker] and all of them in terms of the innovating. You know Duke was in his seventies recording with Trane [John Coltrane]. I always liked Frank Lloyd Wright. I always liked the way Frank Lloyd Wright dressed. I liked the volume of his work. You know, I liked the artists. I always liked Salvador Dali. You know watching him. I liked The Steve Allen Show and Davis Susskind seeing that. And I saw that kind of stuff at fifteen, fourteen, thirteen. So I prepared myself for seeing it at a long point. Most of my friends wanted things immediate, you know, and I never did. And, you know, I said that if I was sixty I would be a monk. So between fifty and sixty I wanna go crazy. I wanna be a fool. Then sixty I'll cool out, you know, if the creator gives me life. And going to a different state because what I've not seen happen, you know, I was with Dizzy Gillespie for three years. And people have not at all understood the importance of Dizzy Gillespie. Charlie Parker really didn't write music. So you know 'Manteca' and 'Scrapple from the Apple' 'Salt Peanuts' all these great songs Dizzy had to write 'em. He had to structure 'em. Chano Pozo was his percussionist from Cuba. And--and he had all these rhythms coming from Cuba that would become salsa as we know it today. Would become Latin jazz. Would influence black American music. Dizzy had to translate, transcribe all of these geniuses. He had to bring the intelligible structure so that it would be passed on. Dizzy had John Coltrane playing with him when Coltrane was twenty-two. When Coltrane played for--played with Dizzy he was trying to be Bird and played alto and Dizzy told Trane you've got to find your own voice. There's already one Bird. Well, Trane would become the next voice after Bird and Dizzy was the one that helped Bird with his drug stuff. Creating some discipline around career opportunity. Dizzy created a plan that exists with Johns Hopkins Hospital [Baltimore, Maryland] for musicians to get special treatment with a--with a lifetime endowment that nobody has celebrated. Dizzy Gillespie went to Adam Clayton Powell and said to Adam Clayton Powell that jazz needs to be a national treasure. And they created the first artist ambassadorship in America. Okay. All Dizzy Gillespie. Dizzy Gillespie took Quincy Jones and helped him develop his sense of theory to become the great composer that he is today. And that's why you see Quincy always celebrating Dizzy in a certain way. Dizzy is one of those unheralded personalities that has had more to do with the construct. Dizzy was one of the first people to wear dashikis in 1952, 1953. That Malcolm would be influenced by to wear a dashiki. So on all these levels Dizzy Gillespie. Dizzy Gillespie also went for president in 1955. He did a comedy, but Dizzy Gillespie for president which was a national campaign. So this musician, this bebop musician, that everybody's emulating wearing the tam, Paul Newman, Sydney Poitier, that's Dizzy Gillespie. Everybody's trying to be a beatnik and be with bebop and try to deal with this language stuff, phonetics, the iambic pentameter of the language this style, the rhythm, it's all Dizzy Gillespie, with him dying with no one ever giving him that kind of recognition. Story_ID: 187969 Speaker 1: I'm one of those voices that has studied these things well. That can compete with any major academic in this society and bring it down in a way that it still has the street element. Because I am not a traditional academic. I'm more out of the school of Harold Cruse, miseducation. You have the Negro intellectual that we don't have a future unless we redefine our relationship to our own experience and not codified by the academic experience. Not that it's not useful, it takes away an element of your soul. Takes an element of your energy. And those elements are important so that we can take a gangbanger and he can relate to a cat like me and see that shit, you know. I see somebody on the streets selling "Streetwise" and brothers say, "Hey, man you want a newspaper?" Okay man I'll give you a dollar. And then they're--they feel insecure they say, "Man, I'm a college graduate." And I'll let him know, "Hey, man I'm not a college graduate. I was a learning disability student. And I'm an associate professor." Not by the acknowledgments of this society's traditional sense of accreditation, but by my living experience that validates my intellectual capacity. And we've gotta have that. We've gotta have people not afraid--cause everyone's not gonna have the most fortunate opportunity. The chips have never been set that way. But if we--and I can be a part of a cooperative discovery of self-value, that we can create structures to transmit that there is too much insecurity out here. There's too many people feeling that their life is not significant because it doesn't fit into the mandate and the standards of success by general society and therefore they reject their own sense of self opportunity. Everybody's not gonna have a lot of money. Everybody's not gonna have a great education and be able to pay for that. But does everyone deserve the sense of dignity? When I get off the Metro in Paris [France] and I see someone who is an alcoholic to the point of a sick addiction, everyone still says, "Bon jour." Everyone still says, "Monsieur excuse et moi." They're still given dignity. But when I walk in Penn Station and I see wealthy people walking over people on the street and they physically do this today, a person is living on the street, a person's trying to get home and they're--they're person working at Baird Stern [sic, Bears Stearns], Morgan Stanley and you know they're executives or whatever. And they walk over this person. Everything that happens in Manhattan [New York, New York] is gonna happen in the rest of America. So I know eventually in Chicago [Illinois] that same kind of desensitization, you know, desensitizing people. We've gotta bring back human dignity. We've gotta allow people a sense of self-worth based on existence first and not merit by accreditation of any kind, money, station, education, but what we had when we had a segregated community. We had our sense of self value. My grandfather worked at the steel mill. But he wore good suits. He starched his shirts. He always shined his shoes. He took care of his children. My grandparents married at sixteen and seventeen. My parents married at sixteen and nineteen. I married at eighteen. So when we make excuses about what we can't do with teenage marriages that's not a part of our history. We always figured out ways to survive. We always figured out ways to redefine a sense of wealth and value. And so what I'm saying in terms of Dizzy, he was never allowed to mature in the image of the public. I will mature in the image of the public and be even more popular. Duke Ellington is the only example of a African American artist that ever had that opportunity and still was popular. And we need that. Story_ID: 187970 Speaker 1: You know when you look at Eric Clapton, Eric Clapton is almost sixty years old. Paul McCartney, Bobby Womack, Nona Hendryx, who was with Patti LaBelle, Jerry Butler, not as a politician, but as an entertainer, should be looked at with a certain kind of aesthetic appreciation and hierarchy because they are a refinement of our experience. You know Pharoah Sanders as a jazz musician. We don't have--we don't have aesthetics right now in terms of refining qualities in levels of development so our children don't have anything to go for. So if a kid's a rapper and they make two million dollars when they first start rapping and we don't have a chitlin' circuit where a person develops themselves--how to speak, how to have presence with an audience, how to conduct oneself, how to do an interview, how to dress. Style, charisma. All of these elements that have been great wonderful qualities, we've gotta create institutions that translate those things and are useful in a pedestrian way, 'cause we need it. Story_ID: 187971 Speaker 1: I am going to ask you about your glasses. 'Cause I think you gave an interesting answer when I asked you about having your glasses on. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: So you wear your glasses all the time? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Or just (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Except with my children. They won't allow me to wear them. You know like I come in the house and they say, "Take 'em off daddy. Take 'em off daddy. Take those glasses off daddy." Speaker 1: Tell us why you wear them. Speaker 2: Well, you know, one, my glasses are prescriptions. So they're actually my eyesight. And the reason that I shaded, you know, my glasses over twenty-five years ago--I had a conversation with Miles [Davis] in New York, you know, and yeah, he dug me. You know because he liked the way I dressed. And most people from my generation dressed what I consider very bummy, you know. Very Bohemian. You know the 60s [1960s] really kind of messed up to me certain elements of aesthetics. Because as we thought we were rejecting mainstream society we--we had nothing to come back to. So, you know, you tore down buildings. But, okay. You tear down The Boys Club where do you go now? You don't wanna dress like, you know, what you consider Sammy Davis or James Brown or Duke Ellington whatever. Okay. So you gone wear the dashikis and then you gone wear holes in your pants and so that became protocol. And then once they got back to it they dress like every other square, you know, now that they're all established. There's no, you know, rhythm in the way that most so called successful African American people carry themselves. So, you know, I said Miles I said you know I said, "Nigga, you so mean". And he laughed. He said, "You don't know the shit you talking about". I said, "Well, you know, you're just so cold man. You know you don't look at nobody. You don't see nothing." And he said, "You know I'm cold 'cause the heart is tender." You know--you know I said,"Whatcha you talking about?" He said, "You know what I'm saying." He said, "Man", you know and you know he did like this he said, "I'm a loving motherfucker." You know and he said, "Why do you think I've had so many women? 'Cause they love me. 'Cause I'm a nurturer. 'Cause I give 'em myself. Now I might go a little beyond the call of duty." But, you know, he said, "Man everybody's been in my bands." And he started running down for me. He said, "Man, think about everybody that's made a living off of me. I then had more cats come out of my bands become leaders than anybody in history." He said man, "I always had money. My daddy was a dentist. So giving weren't never nothing for me. When I came to New York I was going to Juilliard [School, New York, New York]. I had an apartment everybody was staying with me. They were taking my shit. And Bird [Charlie "Bird" Parker] was stealing from me. I was creating events. I could get with the white boys and do stuff. I was with Zoot Sims and Lee Konitz and Lennie Tristano and I was telling them what to do. And don't nobody listen to niggas, especially no black nigga." You know 'cause Miles was real dark. "So here I am up here giving to everybody and motherfuckers taking from me left and right. So I had to find a space where I could protect myself. Where I could then exist with myself inside environments. 'Cause this is a cold motherfucker out here. And I'm a giving person. And so in order to protect that essence, I keep a part of myself to myself at all times." And I took that lesson. 'Cause I'm a very similar personality. Story_ID: 187972 Speaker 1: I'm usually the cat that's hiring everybody else, giving the gigs. I took my money from '[The] Lion King' and opened 'Rituals,' you know. First African American to ever own a jazz club downtown in Chicago [Illinois]. It's never documented, never celebrated by anybody (laughter). You know, when I did Underground Fest at Sauer's [Restaurant], I was taking my money from Donny Hathaway and from, you know, pop gigs I was doing. And, you know, I started the Underground Fest and, you know, everybody was coming. I had Ed Gardner [HM Edward Gardner], I had [HM] Dempsey Travis. I had you know Dura Products all coming to my events. Was anybody giving me any money? No. I sat in with Bettianne Gardner and Ed Gardner [HM Edward Garner] at Underground Fest at Sauer's when they said, "The black community needs a space. That's what we realize from what you're doing Kahil." Well they opened the Regal Theater. Did they offer me a position to direct it? Did they ever ask me to do anything in it? It came from something I created. Okay. I put on these Underground Fests because the city wasn't hiring our musicians. So since they weren't hiring us on the jazz festival, I did a festival after the jazz festival. Okay. So every night after that's over we'll take advantage of that visibility, create our own event and people will come to our thing. Okay. Now the people from the Jazz Institute come to my festival to hire musicians because they can get directly to the stage 'cause I don't have any hierarchy, you know, with this musicians or distance. So for the first time you'll start seeing in the '80's [1980s] on the Jazz Festival, Art and Sound of Chicago, David Murray and all these well-known avant-garde musicians that got it through me. Then they create a pub crawl that kind of subdues what I'm doing at Underground Fest, becomes a city event, no one's ever said Kahil El'Zabar started it. Joe Segal didn't start it. I started it. I started it. Didn't nobody do it before I did it. And in terms of my own community, of all these things Sun Drummer, working with Kwanzaa, working you know--you know when I worked at Institute of Positive Education I volunteered. I was making $1500 a week with Paul Simon. I could come to [HM] Haki [Madubhuti] and Safisha and them and say you know I'll teach music. Jawanza Kunjufu and all these people they were on salary. Nobody offered me salary or start but what I was doing was as important as what they were doing in teaching math, you know. My students that I've taught Darryl Jones, bass player with The Rolling Stones, played with Miles, he left my band, Miles took him from my band. He's played with Sting. Keith Henderson music director of Anita Baker. Steve Coleman, saxophonist who created M-Base in New York [New York] based on what I taught him in Chicago. I mean, you know, I could on for twenty tapes in things that are historically documented by Europeans. But not even my own community has ever documented. Story_ID: 187973 Speaker 1: Where did they distribute this? Speaker 2: It just came out. So there's--the distribution they're pulling that together now. But Nimrod Systems is the printer and they print most of the, you know, top photographers. They print Skrebniski [Victor Skrebneski] they print Bill Tucker. They, Marc Hauser, who's got an exhibit at the Museum of Modern Art right now. (Unclear) you know, prints most of them. And--and about four years ago he brought me and Bill Tucker together because I've written the text for this book. Speaker 1: You wrote the text? Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: Oh. Okay. Speaker 2: Oh, I thought it was me. I was moving back. Speaker 1: The name of this book is 'Modern Jazz Masters.' Subtitled 'The Other Music.' And it's a photo document with text by photographer Bill Tucker. And it has twelve images of master jazz musicians. Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: And so in it there's Pharoah Sanders. On the outside there is Ari Brown, a jazz saxophonist. There's Cecil Payne who played with Charlie Parker. Hamiet Bluiett, who is considered today the most innovative baritone saxophonist in history. A member of the World Sax Quartet. See next is Fareed Haque of Pakistan and Chilean heritage, but a young master. Actually, a former student of mine at Northwestern College [Bridgeview, Illinois]. That's me and that's Claude Montana jacket. The shirt I designed. And that's a Jean Paul Gaultier vest under the Claude Montana jacket. Speaker 2: I have on a Moroccan Muslim fez from Morocco. Speaker 1: Okay. We'll start at. Okay. That's a--called the mbira, thumb piano from East Africa. And in the photo I'm wearing a Claude Montana jacket. Jean Paul Gaultier vest. Both are two of France's most important designers. And I have on a North African Moroccan Islamic fez. And my glasses are by Byblos. And I made the shirt that I have on. Speaker 2: These glasses are sharp. Where-- Speaker 1: Sicily [Italy], that I have in that photo there. And the ones that I have on I got in Montana. The ones I have on are Versace. Speaker 2: The photo shoot took place last year at Bill Tucker's studio which is on the corner of Madison and May. He owns the entire building. And Bill Tucker has accounts like Huggies Diapers. He shoots the photos for the covers of Charmin toilet paper. He's currently--currently doing the Joanie Cusack account for U.S. Cellular telephone. Speaker 1: You know, this--this book the paper alone for this book was $35,000. It has actually copper ink in--it has copper--the copper metal in the ink of these photos. The book is done in a classic French fold style. So each book takes a lot of work to have it folded of printing. That is the legendary Pharoah Sanders. Pharoah Sanders is considered the mentee of the jazz giant John Coltrane. He played side by side on tenor saxophone with Trane. For Trane's--the last three years of Trane's life. Pharoah Sanders is considered one of the most distinctive voices in tenor saxophone in the history of jazz. And he's one of only three people to ever have a million selling record. And that is called 'Karma' the creator has a master plan from 1971. Miles Davis with 'Bitches Brew,' and Charles Lloyd with 'Forest Flower' they three are the only jazz musicians that in the first printing of their recordings sold a million copies. Speaker 2: This is Leo Smith on trumpet. Leo Smith is an academician and incredible composer and musician. He is director of the School of Music of CalArts University [Valencia, California]. CalArts University was started by Walt Disney. And many people who go in, especially commercial areas of film music production, come out of CalArts. Leo Smith was a member of the AACM as myself. And he's an incredible player. That's Ari Brown who plays in my band the Ritual Trio. He also plays tenor saxophone with Elvin Jones. Elvin Jones has played drums with John Coltrane. And Ari has played with everybody. You know, Walter Jackson, Art and Sound of Chicago. McCoy Tyner, everybody. And he's also a great pianist besides being a great saxophonist. Speaker 1: That's Malachi Favors. Malachi's considered one of the ten most important bass players of the twentieth century. He is bass player of The Art and Sound of Chicago. He played the last concert with the great Coleman Hawkins before Coleman Hawkins death. He was, you know, with Ahmad Jamal. With--you know he's played with everyone and he's a wonderful person and he's one of my teachers. One of my mentors. Speaker 2: And the other one is Joseph Jarman. He's a great multi-reedist flutist, saxophonist. Original member of The Art and Sound of Chicago as well. Member of the AACM. And he is also a Buddhist monk with a school in New York and every year goes to Japan. One of two African Americans to the level of Buddhist monk in the world. Speaker 1: This is--this is Billy Bang, alias William Walker. Billy Bang is considered the most important modern jazz violinist. He's considered to be the exponent of Stuff Smith, you know. One of the first jazz violinist in the 1920s. He has played with symphonies. He was given the honor of playing the violin of Paganini, considered the greatest violinist of all times. With a guard and a chain he was given Paganini's violin in Italy to play because of his prowess as an instrumentalist. But he actually got his name Billy Bang because in 1967 he and Nate Archibald were the two guards in the NIT tournament to win the championship. And then he was drafted in the Vietnam War. So as little as he is at five foot four, he was considered one of New York's greatest basketball players from the famous Rutgers Tournaments and that's how he became Billy Bang. Went to Vietnam and to deal with his mental problems he took up violin which became his therapy and became one of the greatest violinists in history in jazz. Speaker 2: He took it up after Vietnam? Speaker 1: Well, he studied as a kid. But when he came back from Vietnam he played in the Village. And that's where he really developed. You know 'cause violin was considered a sissy instrument. Speaker 2: And last but actually definitely not least--first is the great baritone saxophonist and the way we did it, we put the contemporary greatest saxophone baritone, saxophonist Hamiet Bluiett at the first inner page and the last inner page is closed out. With the legendary baritone saxophonist Cecil Payne. Who was the--the baritone component of the bebop movement of the 1940s. He played along Charlie Parker. And was really well known for playing with Gene Ammons. Cecil Payne is still living. He's blind physically today. He's eighty-four years old. And he's really a living treasure. And we have him in this book because we could not be, if it was not for him. So. Speaker 1: Could I read the quote from this. It's--there's a whole a text that also goes with this book. But it's a separate insert. But the quote I have kind of has a beginning and end. It has a beginning. It really speaks to--to everything that I feel. Speaker 2: Okay. 'Portraits of the other music. In my youth I saw alchemists, magicians, saints down right holy men. Not like, oh, my Lord, but Lord have mercy. Drenched in spirit these cats have the Holy Ghost like right now. The reach and the impact of this music sometimes labeled free jazz, the new thing, avant-garde, fire music, experimental, or great black music has developed a much larger audience than what general media would have one believe. The music and its players are known in practically every country on earth. That's why the artists in this beautiful book are considered true pioneers and soldiers of the cause. We are unquestionably heirs to the enormous legacy of Scott Joplin, Jelly Roll Morton, Louis Armstrong, Duke Ellington, Fletcher Henderson, Charlie Parker, Dizzy Gillespie, Thelonious Monk, Charles Mingus, John Coltrane, Miles Davis, Ornette Coleman, and Sun Ra. Along with hundreds of other known and unknown giants of creative music. The artists mentioned above I would call systems deliverers. They are both spirit and conduit to the entire history of 20th century music. They were each able to change something about this world with their music. The life in the music expresses foremost a need for exploration. It is creativity in all of its profound intelligence, immediacy, the rawness, and realness. Each of these photos reflects the energy of the improviser in a variety of moods, Bluiett, Malachi Favors, Billy Bang, Roscoe Mitchell, Fareed Haque, Ari Brown, Pharoah Sanders, Leo Smith, Cecil Payne, are all cats that I truly love and have the highest respect for their music and cultural contribution. The--there is no in-between or quasi-hipness. It is either on or not. The music must always stay real. If so, then it will always affect you and transform life. It will make you think and feel things differently. This project is about the triumphant survival of rugged individuals who have stayed true to their mission. We are not the techno cracks who deal in the statistics of errors in order to find purpose in our pursuit. Our music and its makers would exist even if there were no critics at all. I don't think that this scenario would be the same from the reverse. We have learned how to remain open to the possibility of other worldly moments. We are agents to the mystery of creation and neither definitions nor conclusion can deter their possibilities. We are the information gatherers through the practice of our art. Like the monks of old from various cultures we serve the people. Each of the artists in this book is truly original and one of a kind. They are workers for the people, purveyors of the truth, and shamans to the soul. Our role is to touch people and inspire thought. It is great black music. Ancient to the future, a power stronger than itself.' Speaker 1: Yeah. Era Jazzu is the National Jazz Organization of Poland. And Dionizy Warjack [ph.] is the director. And I have an ongoing education program with Polish jazz musicians and students. And I bring variety of projects to Poland. And it's a combination of workshops and then performances in various cities. Poznan, Krakow, Warsaw, Rudnik--organizations which are tied in with television, education, and performances. And it's ironic that the country where the music was birthed doesn't have what other countries have created. This is interesting. I've got a photo of myself, with this. This poster was on the streets of various cities in Poland. The poster is twenty foot by twenty foot. So it was pretty amazing seeing yourself on the side of trains and on the sides of buildings, you know, at that capacity. Speaker 2: How do you handle the language situation when you're there? Speaker 1: You know we always have translators. You know in France, you know (speaking French), it's okay. Speaker 2: (Speaking French) Speaker 1: (Speaking French) But, you know, other countries we just have translators. And you know jazz has been the freedom music of most cultures. It's like during World War II the children, teenagers of Europe of Poland and Germany called themselves swing children. And so they listened to jazz as their freedom music against Hitler. And when Czechoslovakia, Poland were a part of the so called Iron Curtain and East Berlin, jazz was their focal point for freedom and democracy. And jazz musicians have always been considered you know, diplomats. Like Louis Armstrong was kind of known larger than many presidents in countries all over the world because of his gregariousness, because he was considered the godfather of the music. And as he traveled, people embraced him all over the world because of that gregariousness and sense of democracy that was related in the music. In the sense of always looking toward the future with improvisation. And so it's incredible, I mean, you know. In Sweden--in Holland they have a whole resource center which now all musicians, all over the world use so that you can get gigs just by going on the Internet and people calling you from different countries for your services. And the Dutch set that up. First for their own musicians, but it came from doing this for jazz because it was more obscure and the Internet gave a greater exposure. So all of these countries are further ahead than our own country where this music comes from and embracing it in their national policy...