 Story_ID: 495443 Speaker 1: Today is August 8th [2007]. My name is Adrienne Jones, and I'm the interviewer. Neculai Burghelea is the videographer, and we are interviewing [HistoryMaker] Dr. Josephine English. Would you please state and spell your name for us on camera? Speaker 2: My name is Dr. Josephine English. I spell it J-O-S-E-P-H-I-N-E, English, E-N-G-L-I-S-H. Speaker 1: Thank you. What's your date of birth and where were you born? Speaker 2: December 17, 1920. Speaker 1: Where were you born? Speaker 2: I was in Ontario, Virginia. Speaker 1: Where is this interview being taped? Where are we right now today? Speaker 2: We're at 1275 President Street in the Crown Heights section of Brooklyn [New York]. Speaker 1: Thank you. And what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm a retired physician and I'm an entrepreneur. I work with the theater and with the community, and the community groups. Story_ID: 495444 Speaker 1: To start out, I'm gonna ask you five, very quick, what we call People magazine-ish type questions. Speaker 2: People, who, what? Speaker 1: People magazine-ish type questions, just some very quick questions. So I'll just ask you a question, and you just tell me the first thing that comes to mind. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: What's your favorite food? Speaker 2: Chicken. Speaker 1: What's your favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Summer. Speaker 1: What's your favorite color? Speaker 2: My what? Speaker 1: Favorite color? Speaker 2: Blue. Speaker 1: What's your favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Virgin Islands. Speaker 1: And what is your favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: My favorite phrase? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: I don't have any (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) If you have one. You don't have one? Speaker 2: No, not really. Speaker 1: That's quite all right. Story_ID: 495445 Speaker 1: So I'd like to start by talking about your background and, in particular, your parents. So could you tell me about your mother and could you start off by telling me her name, and where she was born? Speaker 2: My mother's name was Jennie English. Speaker 1: Will you spell it, please? Speaker 2: J-E-N-N-I-E. She was born in Virginia, in Ontario [Virginia]. That's where she lived. Speaker 1: And did she grow up in Ontario? Speaker 2: Yes, she did. Speaker 1: What do you know about her growing up? Did she ever tell you any stories about when she was growing up? Speaker 2: Not too much because my mother died when we were very young. So we didn't get too much from her. But I know she was a teacher. She was a very educated woman, and especially for that time of the, of the century. Speaker 1: Do you know where your mother was educated? Speaker 2: Was she what? Speaker 1: Do you know where your mother was educated? Speaker 2: No, I don't. I don't know any of the details, but I know she was educated at a time when there were very few women who were educated. Speaker 1: And did you have an opportunity to meet her parents? Speaker 2: No, I did not. Story_ID: 495446 Speaker 1: And how about your father? What is your father's name and if you can spell it (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My father's name was W-H-I-T-T-I-E, Whittie, English, E-N-G-L-I-S-H [Whittie English, Sr.]. Speaker 1: Where was he born? Where-- Speaker 2: He was born in Columbia, South Carolina. Speaker 1: And is that where he grew up? Speaker 2: No, they both grew up in, in--he grew up 'til teenage years down there, and then they grew up, up north, came up north. Speaker 1: So did your father tell you any stories about when he was growing up? Do you know anything about his childhood? Speaker 2: Well, he told us that he was, they were very poor and that his father had worked and his father had gotten money because he was the child of a lot of slaves--his father was, had been a slave. And we met him before he died. Speaker 1: Do you remember your grandfather's name? Speaker 2: Yes, I do. I remember his name was Whittie, and I remember that he told us he was a slave. Speaker 1: And did he tell you any stories about-- Speaker 2: Not too many. He did tell us some, but he, he let us know. Speaker 1: And did you know where he was a slave? Was that in-- Speaker 2: In South Carolina, but I don't know exactly the city. Speaker 1: Okay. So did your father tell you any tales about growing up? Speaker 2: Not too many. Before they came north--he and my mother [Jennie English] came north, and they came to Englewood, New Jersey. And that's where they lived, and that's where I lived when they came here. Speaker 1: And you said you got a chance, an opportunity to meet your grandfather? Speaker 2: Yes, I did. Speaker 1: Where--how did you see him? Speaker 2: He came up. He was very old, but he did come out once, we met him. And he was a very intelligent man. Speaker 1: About how old was he when you met him? Speaker 2: I--he was way in his eighties. Speaker 1: Just a ballpark? Speaker 2: In the eighties (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He was in his eighties. And how old were you at that time? Speaker 2: Young, in teens. Speaker 1: In your teens? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Story_ID: 495447 Speaker 1: How many brothers and sisters did you have? Speaker 2: I had two sisters and one brother. Speaker 1: Could you name your siblings, including yourself, in order? Speaker 2: Oh, surely. My brother's name was Whittie [Whittie English, Jr.]. He was the older. And my, next to him was my sister, Jennie [Jennie English], and I was the next one, and my youngest sister was Hattie, H-A-T-T-I-E [Hattie English Harper]. Speaker 1: Okay, so could you tell me now about your--what was your father [Whittie English, Sr.] like? Like how would you describe him if someone said, "What kind of a person was your father?" Speaker 2: My father was a very a likeable person, very affable, very nice person, and he worked hard because he brought us up by himself after my mother's [Jennie English] death. And he worked as a sand hog. Speaker 1: And what is a sand hog? Speaker 2: Well, they do the--dig the tunnels. I think he did the Holland Tunnel, Holland Tunnel. Speaker 1: From New Jersey into the City of New York [New York]? Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hum, yeah. Speaker 1: And so was he a diver or was he-- Speaker 2: No, he did, was the one who put off the dynamite that blew up the hole. Speaker 1: I see, I see. And so how did he make sure that you all were taken care of while he was away at work? Speaker 2: We had different people, a lot of different people taking care of us. Speaker 1: Were they relatives of your father's or-- Speaker 2: Not really. We didn't have too many relatives. They were just friends and people that he met in Jersey. Speaker 1: And at the time, where were you living in-- Speaker 2: In Englewood, New Jersey. Speaker 1: Englewood, New Jersey. Speaker 2: Um-hm. And Englewood's a very close-knit, it was a close-knit society, very close (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was it an all-black community? Speaker 2: Yes, we lived in the black community. Speaker 1: And so--and what kinds of ways was the community close knit? Speaker 2: What kinds of what? Speaker 1: In what--how was the community close knit? Did you know your neighbors? Speaker 2: Well, they lived close together. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They were all poor. We lived in the worst part of the community, and we lived in a very rich town. Speaker 1: You lived in the worst part of the community? Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Speaker 1: And was it located in a (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We lived near the dump-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --where they burned the garbage. Speaker 1: So was it an uncomfortable place to live? Speaker 2: No, not very comfortable, and the town itself was very, very rich so most of the blacks here worked for the big people. Speaker 1: Who lived in the town? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: As domestics and so forth? Speaker 2: Yeah, they all worked for the big people. Speaker 1: So, can you describe what your family life was like? Speaker 2: Well, we lived a very meager life. We didn't have much money, were poor, and we all worked. Speaker 1: And what jobs did you do, you and your brothers and sisters? Speaker 2: Well, we did menial jobs after school and around in the community. But it was a poor community. Speaker 1: And did you, at that time--were you at that time sensitive to the health issues of the other people in your community when you were coming, when you were growing up? Speaker 2: Did I--the issues in the community? Speaker 1: With, of health? Speaker 2: Health? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: They had a lot of health issues, yes. Speaker 1: What kinds of issues existed for people who lived near you? Speaker 2: Well, they had a lot of asthmatic and bone things, problems at that time. Speaker 1: Can you describe--what street did you live on? Speaker 2: We lived on Smith Street. Speaker 1: And can you describe what your block was like? Speaker 2: Well, it was an unpaved road. And there were a lot of houses, not too close together, but not good houses. Speaker 1: And can you describe your house? Speaker 2: Our house was a one-family house that my father had spent a lot of time building and fixing up. But it was adequate. It had about, I think two bedrooms and the attic. Speaker 1: And an attic? Speaker 2: Attic, yeah. Speaker 1: And then, so it had three floors? Speaker 2: Yes, it had--well, one--three floors, yes. Speaker 1: And did you have yard space outside? Speaker 2: Not really too big. Speaker 1: So was it, was there room for you and your brothers and sisters to run and play outside or (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yes. Speaker 1: --was it the kind of thing where-- Speaker 2: Playing outside was no problem. Story_ID: 495448 Speaker 1: Where did you attend elementary school? Speaker 2: Elementary school? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: In Englewood, Englewood, New Jersey. Speaker 1: No, what school was it--what's the name of your elementary school? Speaker 2: Lincoln School [Englewood, New Jersey] was our first school. Speaker 1: And what kind of student were you when you were in elementary school? Speaker 2: Well, an excellent student. We were all good students, my whole family. Speaker 1: Do you remember any of your teachers from (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, some of them, yeah. Speaker 1: --from school? Speaker 2: One was Claude [ph.]--some of the teachers lived a long time and we were able to go back. Speaker 1: And visit with them? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And did you have any particular interests when you were in elementary school? Speaker 2: No, I just wanted to teach. I wanted to go into teaching. So that was my whole interest. Speaker 1: And then a couple more questions about your, where you grew up. Can you tell me what sights and smells and sounds remind you of growing up, if you hear them or smell them now, today? Speaker 2: Remind me of growing up? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: What sounds? I don't know. Speaker 1: Any sights, do they remind you? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Which ones? Speaker 2: Which ones? Speaker 1: Is there anything that you see, perhaps, daily or of late that reminds you of when you were a child? Speaker 2: Not really. Speaker 1: And no smells? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay, and where did you go to junior high school? Speaker 2: I went to junior high school in Englewood, New Jersey. Speaker 1: I know. But I wanna know the name of the junior high school where you went to? Speaker 2: I think it was Englewood Junior High School [Englewood, New Jersey]. Speaker 1: Okay, and what grades were included there? Speaker 2: What, what? Speaker 1: What grades? Speaker 2: Oh, grades. I think at that time they were eighth, seventh, eighth and ninth. And went to high school, I think it had tenth, tenth, eleventh and twelfth. Speaker 1: And what high school did you attend? Speaker 2: I went to Dwight Morrow High School in Englewood. Speaker 1: And were you a good student throughout that time? Speaker 2: Yes, we were all good students. Speaker 1: And did you continue to have an interest in teaching throughout your grade school years? Speaker 2: Throughout my high school or my grade school years? Speaker 1: Grade school and high school. I was-- Speaker 2: I don't remember too many of their names. Speaker 1: No, no. I was asking what your interests was? Speaker 2: I'm, I--interested in reading, languages and I read a lot, and I wanted to teach. Speaker 1: Did you study languages? Speaker 2: Yeah, I did French and Latin. Speaker 1: And so when you graduated from high school, you still wanted to be a teacher? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And when you were in high school, did you think that you were gonna go to college? What was your impression about what (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yes. Speaker 1: --you were gonna do with your future? Speaker 2: Well, I was determined to go to college. Speaker 1: And why was that? Who influenced you in wanting to go to college (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, not really anybody except that in reading we, I was determined to go to college. Story_ID: 495449 Speaker 1: When you were living at home, what were--what was the most important holiday when you were still in high school [Dwight Morrow High School, Englewood, New Jersey] and grade school, and how did (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Holidays? Speaker 1: Yes, and how did you spend that with your family? Speaker 2: The most important holidays were Thanksgiving and Christmas because that's when we got together and had a good time. Speaker 1: And so did other relatives in your family come to visit? Speaker 2: We didn't have too many relatives close by. Speaker 1: So who would, how would the holiday be spent? Who would come? Speaker 2: Just of getting together and eating, cooking big food, a lot of foods, and, and giving, exchanging gifts. I still love the holidays. Speaker 1: What kinds of foods would you have on the holidays? Speaker 2: Oh, turkey and stuffed with good stuffing and sweet potatoes, collard greens, or greens. Speaker 1: And do you remember any gifts that you received when you were little? Speaker 2: Not really 'cause we didn't get too many gifts. We were poor, and we didn't get too many gifts. Speaker 1: So it was more a celebration. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Did you attend church with your family when you were growing up? Speaker 2: Did I do what? Speaker 1: Did you attend church? Speaker 2: Not--yes, we attended church. Speaker 1: Which church did you attend? Speaker 2: We went to the Baptist church, First Baptist Church [Englewood, New Jersey] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And did you do that-- Speaker 2: Ebenezer Baptist Church [Englewood, New Jersey]. Speaker 1: Ebenezer Baptist Church. Speaker 2: Um-hm, was the name of the church. And we attended church. We had to go to church. We were forced to go to church and Sunday school. Speaker 1: And were you active in your church? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: What kind of activities did you participate in? Speaker 2: Well, we had, you know, you had usual plays and recitals, dress recitals and so forth. Speaker 1: And what about during school, did you have extracurricular activities that you participated in? Speaker 2: Not too many because we went to a school where there was great disparity in the economic theater because Malcolm X was in our--Malcolm Forbes was in our high school. They had a lot of very rich people going to the high school (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I see. Speaker 2: --and a lot of very poor. Huh? Speaker 1: And very poor. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 495450 Speaker 1: So what was that atmosphere like in the school [Dwight Morrow High School, Englewood, New Jersey]? Did that make going to school difficult, the fact that some people were very (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, it made-- Speaker 1: --had a lot of advantages? Speaker 2: It took a lot of the energy, a lot of the excitement from the poor people. They were not interested merely in school because they saw the whites had so much money and so much everything. They had big ol' automobiles and so forth, and we had nothing. Speaker 1: So what was the racial makeup of the school? Were there (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was, mostly white. Speaker 1: So would you say 90 percent white and 10 percent black? Speaker 2: Yes, about 90 percent, yeah. And the other 10 percent were very poor blacks. Speaker 1: So, did that cause racial tension in the school? Was there, were there any problems amongst students while you were attending school? Speaker 2: Not too many problems. The blacks just went into the background and did not fight or do anything. Speaker 1: And how did that affect you? How did you feel about being black (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, it made me wanted to, want to do better to compete with them. So you either wanna drop out or you either compete. Speaker 1: And did a number of people drop out? Speaker 2: Oh, yes, and they did very poorly. Speaker 1: So how many black students would you say began school with you and how many ended, grad- were able to graduate with you? Speaker 2: Maybe about seven or eight, smaller amounts, small amount. Speaker 1: And how many people were in your class at the, when you were in tenth grade, when you began high school? Speaker 2: How many were still there? Speaker 1: How many were there to begin with? Speaker 2: I don't know. Speaker 1: You're not sure? Speaker 2: No. Story_ID: 495451 Speaker 1: How did you make arrangements to attend college? Speaker 2: My father [Whittie English, Sr.]. My father always inspired us to do better. Speaker 1: I mean actually--when you were in high school [Dwight Morrow High School, Englewood, New Jersey], did you apply to colleges? Speaker 2: Yes, I did. Speaker 1: How did you decided what, how, which college you were gonna go to and what was the process for you getting enrolled in that college? Speaker 2: Well, we had very little money. So I went to, I started off at NYU [New York University, New York, New York]. And I, about--I got scholarship money and so forth. Speaker 1: What year did you go to NYU? Speaker 2: I went as soon as I got out of high school? Speaker 1: And (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And that was in, in '37 [1937]. Speaker 1: So '37 [1937] or '38 [1938]. Speaker 2: Got out of high school? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: I'm not sure. Speaker 1: And what did you major in when you went to NYU? Speaker 2: I went, I just took a liberal arts course. Speaker 1: And did you stay at NYU? Speaker 2: For one year. Speaker 1: And (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I transferred to Hunter [Hunter College, New York, New York]. Speaker 1: Okay, and what motivated you to transfer to Hunter? Speaker 2: Because Hunter was an absolutely free college. You had--didn't have to pay anything. Speaker 1: And in order to get into NYU and then to Hunter, did you have to make an application? Speaker 2: Yes, yes, and take tests. Speaker 1: What kind of application and what kind of tests? Speaker 2: Well, they had, you had to take a test in a lot of things, English, mathematics and so forth. You had to high--score high in order to get into Hunter. Speaker 1: And when you went to Hunter, what did you major in? Speaker 2: I was a French major, and teaching and Latin minor. Speaker 1: And were there other black students there with you? Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Speaker 1: Quite a number? Speaker 2: Quite a few, quite a few girls. Hunter was a girls' college at that time. Speaker 1: And was that a comfortable environment? Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Speaker 1: Was it improved from where you went to high school? Speaker 2: An improvement? Speaker 1: Yes, in terms of the comfort level that you felt there? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So when did you graduate from Hunter College? Speaker 2: I graduated from Hunter College in 1937. Speaker 1: And what was your major and minor upon graduation? Speaker 2: I was a French major and a Latin minor, Latin and teaching minor. Speaker 1: And had you studied languages before? Speaker 2: Did-- Speaker 1: Did you study languages in high school or in grade school? Speaker 2: Yes, yes, I studied language. I liked languages. Speaker 1: And so did that influence you to study languages once you got to college? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: And what did you plan to do? You planned to teach languages or what did you plan to teach? Speaker 2: I planned to teach in elementary school. Speaker 1: So after you graduated from Hunter College, what did you do? Speaker 2: After that, I went back to Hunter--went back to NYU and got my master's in psychology. Speaker 1: And how did you choose to get your master's in psychology? Speaker 2: Because I as interested in doing psychology at that time. Speaker 1: Okay, and no longer in teaching elementary school? Speaker 2: No, I wanted to do psychology. Speaker 1: Can you tell me a little bit about how you came to change your mind? Speaker 2: Because there was such difficulty in teaching that I felt that psychology was a very important element in the teaching process. Speaker 1: What was--it was difficult to teach? Speaker 2: Difficult to teach, to get the kids, the children ready for teach--for learning. Speaker 1: And what kinds of things, in what kinds of ways were students not ready for learning? Speaker 2: They did not want to advance. They had no idea of getting ahead, of succeeding in society. Speaker 1: And are you speaking about black students? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So, how, in what kinds of ways were you able to motivate children through psychology in order to encourage them to want to advance? Speaker 2: Just to let them know what they, what was ahead of them and how they could fight the system and how they could do better and, and have a better world. Speaker 1: Well, what was the system like at that time? Speaker 2: Well, it was against blacks. It, it was to keep them in the same position they were, very little effort made to, to advance them. They had to be encouraged. Speaker 1: How many black students went to Hunter College with you? Speaker 2: Went to Hunter College? I would say there must have been, in the (unclear)--in the whole college? Quite a few, maybe in the '30s [1930s], maybe. Speaker 1: And you said that Hunter was a women's college. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: And NYU was not. Were there still a number of women at NYU? Speaker 2: No, that--Hunter was a women's college. Speaker 1: No, Hunter was a women's college. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You said then that you went to NYU? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Were there a fair number of women students at NYU? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, oh, yeah. Speaker 1: And black students also? Speaker 2: Not too many. Speaker 1: Not as many. So once you began your study of psychology, did you graduate from NYU-- Speaker 2: Yes, I did (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) with a degree in psychology? Speaker 2: --I got a master's in psychology. Story_ID: 495452 Speaker 1: Okay, fantastic. And then what did you decide to do with that master's in psychology? Speaker 2: I wanted to go into psychiatry and that's why I went to medical school. Speaker 1: So, how did you decide to go to Meharry medical school [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee]? Speaker 2: I decided that I, I wanted to go further in psychology, but when I got to medical school, I did not like psychiatry. I was really turned off by it. I, I didn't--that was not for me. So I went into, I went into the field that was the most, that was the happiest, and most interesting, and I thought helpful, and that was obstetrics and gynecology. Speaker 1: And when you went to, when you entered medical school, how did you make the decision about where you were gonna go to medical school? Speaker 2: But--I didn't have too many choices. Speaker 1: What were your choices? Speaker 2: I had Hunter [Hunter College, New York, New York]--I had Howard University [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.] and Meharry. Those were the two major choices I had at that time. Speaker 1: And did you make applications to those schools? Speaker 2: Yes, I did. Speaker 1: And did they accept women (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They accepted me at Meharry. Speaker 1: --in large numbers? Speaker 2: I was accepted at Meharry. Speaker 1: Did they accept other women at Meharry? Speaker 2: Yes, as I said, there were the war [World War II, WWII] years, and they couldn't get any men. So they ended up taking many more women than they had ever taken before. Speaker 1: So about how many women were in your class at Meharry? Speaker 2: Well, we had thirteen. Speaker 1: And how many women were in classes before yours at Meharry? Speaker 2: About three or four was a maximum they ever had in a class. Speaker 1: I see. So how did you find Meharry? Who was the dean when you were there? Speaker 2: Oh, well, I knew about it because I had asked around. I had friends who were interested in medicine. So we knew about the schools. Speaker 1: And when you went there, who was the president and the dean at Meharry when you were there? Speaker 2: I don't remember the name. Speaker 1: And did anyone else who you know from your career attend Meharry with you? Speaker 2: Oh, quite a few, who went to Meharry-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --at the time that I went? Speaker 1: Doctors, perhaps that you worked with later or who have become significant? Speaker 2: Well, I made a lot of friends and the girls that had gone to Hunter, who had gone--had went to Howard, I kept up with them. Speaker 1: Do you remember any of the names of the people (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yes, yes. Speaker 1: --you attended school with? Speaker 2: Yes, um-hm, Dr. Jane Williams [ph.] and Dr. Perivale Mayer [ph.]. They were doctors who went to Howard. Speaker 1: And other doctors who went to Meharry? Speaker 2: That doctors in, that were in my class? Oh, I know the names of them, a lot of them. I had Patricia Turner, and quite, quite a few 'cause I had thirteen. So that was a whole lot. That was news, never had that many women in the history of the school. Speaker 1: And how--did you--did your class make a big impact at Meharry? Speaker 2: Yes, they did. Speaker 1: What kinds of changes did you and the women in your class impose upon the school? Speaker 2: Well, men were not used to having the women, and a lot of them did not accept them. So it was quite, quite a change. Speaker 1: Would they--how did the other students who were not accepting behave? Did they not speak to you? Did they (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They were hostile. Speaker 1: --make it difficult? Speaker 2: A lot of them were hostile. Speaker 1: Can you give us an example? Speaker 2: No, a lot of the men, of course, at that time, a lot of the men did not want to cooperate with the women. And they, and now what we call sexual exploitation, that was very common. In other words, they tried to make to you feel bad and talking about different things. Speaker 1: And what about your teachers? Speaker 2: The teachers? Speaker 1: How were you treated by the teachers? Speaker 2: Excellent, very well. The teachers were very good. Speaker 1: Were there any teachers that you remember who had a particular influence on you? Speaker 2: I don't remember their names, all of them now. Story_ID: 495453 Speaker 1: You changed your major to OB GYN [obstetrics and gynecology]-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and what do you do after you complete your degree? Speaker 2: You go to the hospital. At that time, we had to do an internship. You don't do that anymore. You have to do a rotating internship, and then you go into your specialty. I did a rotating internship at Harlem, and I did my specialty at Harlem Hospital [Harlem Hospital Center, New York, New York]. Speaker 1: And what was your specialty--is your specialty OB GYN? Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes. Speaker 1: And then your rotation is in the general subjects? Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: So you are at Harlem Hospital? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And what year do you get to Harlem Hospital? Speaker 2: I went--I graduated from Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] in '49 [1949]. So I went straight to Harlem Hospital. Speaker 1: And what is the atmosphere in Harlem like when (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, it's-- Speaker 1: --you arrived there? Speaker 2: Harlem had just started admitting black doctors. So it was a peculiar atmosphere all together. Speaker 1: Were there any other black doctors (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yes, yes-- Speaker 1: --at Harlem when you got there? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: Who was there? Speaker 2: There was (unclear) Dr.--there were quite a few, Jimmy Thomas [James Thomas], and the guys from Sydenham [Sydenham Hospital, New York, New York]. It was a, quite--it was a transition period. But they were just beginning to get the black doctors in Harlem Hospital. It seemed impossible, but that was the beginning. Speaker 1: But all of the patients that you handled at Harlem Hospital, were they from the Harlem community [New York, New York], for the most part? Speaker 2: Oh, yes, yes. Speaker 1: And so they were mostly black? Speaker 2: Oh, yes, they were all black. Speaker 1: And what kind of health issues were people in Harlem having at that time? Speaker 2: Well, at that time, they had a lot of venereal disease, the same things, a tremendous amount of venereal diseases, and pregnancies, a lot of early--cancers, cancer of the cervix was very prevalent at that time. You don't see it anymore, very prevalent. They had wards of nothing but cancer pati- cervical cancer patients. Story_ID: 495454 Speaker 1: So we're talking about Harlem Hospital [Harlem Hospital Center, New York, New York] when you arrived there in about 1949? Speaker 2: Um-hm, 1949 (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And you were saying that Harlem Hospital at that time, didn't--sort of gained its black doctors one by one. Speaker 2: Yes, they did. Speaker 1: Can you just tell us a little bit about that and about where the hospital is going now? Speaker 2: Yes, it seems impossible that a hospital would just be accepting black physicians. And that's when they had Aubre Maynard [Aubre de Lambert Maynard]. He was one of the first black physicians. He became an outstanding surgeon. They were the first ones to come into Harlem Hospital. Speaker 1: Can you repeat his name for me? Speaker 2: Maynard, Aubre Maynard. Speaker 1: And (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He became an outstanding surgeon. At the time that Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] got stabbed, they called him in. He became an outstanding surgeon. And to think that now, that it became totally black and that now it's going to go through another episode which has already started of whites. Speaker 1: What's happening now with Harlem Hospital? Speaker 2: Well, they're building, they're building a new hospital, state-of-the-arts and it's gonna be totally white. It's gonna be a top-notch hospital under Columbia Presbyterian [New York-Presbyterian Hospital, New York, New York]. Speaker 1: Under Columbia Presbyterian? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And does that have anything to do with the changing, the gentrification of Harlem [New York, New York]? Speaker 2: That has to do with it. That's the whole thing. If you're gonna change a population, you're gonna change your hospital. And you're not gonna have a second rate hospital that nobody wants to go to. You're gonna have a top hospital. Speaker 1: And how quality--what was the quality of Harlem Hospital like when you arrived? Was it a top quality hospital (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) When I first came here-- Speaker 1: --at the--in 1950? Speaker 2: Yeah, its quality was excellent because the whites were just being replaced by the blacks. And they took outstanding black physicians. Speaker 1: And by what year--just give me an approximate, would you say that Harlem Hospital became an all-black hospital? Speaker 2: I would say it took about five years. Speaker 1: So by 1955, 1960, Harlem Hospital was majority black. Speaker 2: Totally. Speaker 1: And over the years has the reputation of Harlem Hospital gone down? Speaker 2: It has gone down. Speaker 1: And why has that happened? Speaker 2: Because they took away the good, white physicians and they had only blacks. They took away a lot of money, a lot of the research money, a lot of the money for supplies. You know how to get hospitals to get lower. Everything gets lowered. The staffing is lowered, the scale of employment, of types of employment is lowered. It's very easy. So now, it's going in the other direction because it's gonna be a top-rank hospital again. Speaker 1: And those doctors--it's not gonna be predominantly black. Those doctors are gonna be (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, they're not gonna be black-- Speaker 1: --pushed out. Speaker 2: --by no means. And the city is gonna put money in the building. The city is gonna put up a top-notch hospital. Story_ID: 495455 Speaker 1: Were you living in Harlem [New York, New York] while you were working at Harlem Hospital [Harlem Hospital Center, New York, New York]? Speaker 2: I lived, I worked at--I lived at the hospital. Speaker 1: Ah, what was that like? Can you tell us about that arrangement? Did you have an apartment (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, that's how I really became interested in theater because that was the time when Harlem Hospital--Harlem, itself, as a community, was at its height, and there was a lot of theater. You could go-- Speaker 1: Which theaters did you visit in Harlem at that time? Speaker 2: I don't know the names of all of 'em. I know there was a 137th Street theater, and there was one on 125th, the Furman Theater [Roger Furman Theater, New York, New York]. It was so many, and they were putting on excellent performances. They had--now, there's nothing. Speaker 1: Now, in 19--in the 1950s when you were in Harlem attending these theater events, were they highly popular so that a lot of people were attending? Speaker 2: Yes, they were. They were very well attended. Harlem was very, very--the arts were really up (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And I know you're not--might not remember specifically, but do you remember any of the shows that excited you when you were living in Harlem that you went to see? Speaker 2: I know that I saw 'Equus' [Peter Shaffer], 137th Street theater, and I was just, it was devastat- it was just excellent. They had good theater. The Y [Young Men's Christian Association (YMCA)] had good theater. There were a lot of good--and I meant, NEC [Negro Ensemble Company] was really producing at that time. Speaker 1: Say--can you repeat that last part? Speaker 2: National Theatre, and now Harlem has one theater, and that's the National Black Theatre [New York, New York] on 125th Street. That's all, no other theaters. Speaker 1: What else is happening in Harlem during this period? You said that, you've remarked that Harlem was at its height. What other kinds of energy is happening? Speaker 2: Well, they had a lot of entertainment, a lot of bars, a lot of clubs, a lot of musicians. It was just a lively place. Speaker 1: And did you--who were you friends with while you were living in Harlem? Speaker 2: I, I--my friends were, the friends with the doctors at the hospital, mostly. Speaker 1: What other doctors were there with you? Speaker 2: We went to a lot of the things that they did. We attended a lot of the theater, a lot of the shows. Story_ID: 495456 Speaker 1: Now, I asked you earlier about the health issues that you saw when you were at Harlem Hospital [Harlem Hospital Center, New York, New York] in the 1950s. And you began to name a few of them. Can we talk about that a little bit more? Speaker 2: Of course, um-hm. Speaker 1: So you were speaking specifically about cervical cancer. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: How much cervical cancer did you see, say around 1955? Speaker 2: As I said, we had a whole ward of people with far advanced cervical cancer that there was nothing they could do with them? Speaker 1: And how were people getting that particular disease and was that disease particular to black people? Speaker 2: Yes, it was particularly a very high, high percentage of blacks. We don't know why, and they feel that it has to do with a virus. And that's why they had the vaccine. But it was very prevalent among blacks. And as I said, we had a ward of nothing but cervical cancer there. Now, you don't see it because people get their pap smears, and they pick 'em up early. And they go to the doctor and they get checked. Speaker 1: So in 19--in the mid-1950s, did people operate similarly? Were they willing to come into the hospital and get checked? Did they have pap smears (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No. They didn't do that because it was just beginning now. They were just finding out that pap smears detected early cancer and could prevent it from going into cervical cancer. And, and the cervical cancer rate is very low, and now, with the vaccine, they're hoping to eradicate it. Speaker 1: And then what other health issues did you see? What kind of health issues did men have in Harlem [New York, New York] in the mid-1950s? Did you see men with (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I didn't know too much-- Speaker 1: --particular problems? Speaker 2: I know they had prostate, the prostate, but that was not to the extent that the cervical cancer was. And to tell you the truth, I don't know too much about that men, male issues. Speaker 1: You wouldn't with the OB GYN [obstetrics and gynecology]. Who did you, who became your patients during this period of time while you were at Harlem Hospital? Speaker 2: The patients were there. We treated the patients (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Just the-- Speaker 2: --who were there in Harlem. Speaker 1: So what did you--did you stay at Harlem Hospital? Speaker 2: I stayed there, yeah, I lived there. Speaker 1: How long did you stay there? Speaker 2: I was at Harlem Hospital for four years, four years, about four years-- Story_ID: 495457 Speaker 1: And what did you do after you-- Speaker 2: I came to Brooklyn [New York]. Speaker 1: And why did you move to Brooklyn? Speaker 2: Well, I had friends who were here, who had come to Brooklyn. There were quite a few women, and they were my friends. And they had all gravitated to Brooklyn. Speaker 1: Were they doctors also? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And were they OB GYNs? Speaker 2: No. Only one was an OB GYN. Speaker 1: And what was the--were there a number of black OB GYNs in Brooklyn when you got here? Speaker 2: No, no, no. I was the first one--another doctor and myself, Dr. Romeo and myself, we were the first two black OB GYN, female doctors in Brooklyn. Speaker 1: Can you repeat the name of the other? Speaker 2: Dr. Pearl Romeo, R-O-M-E-O. Speaker 1: Were women in Brooklyn having the same kinds of OB GYN [obstetrics and gynecology] issues that you saw in Harlem [New York, New York]? Speaker 2: Yes, in the black community in Brooklyn, yes. Speaker 1: What other kinds of issues were they having? Speaker 2: Well, they--as they had for a long time, they had thyroid tumors, a lot of issues with tumors, ovarian cancer, the same issues. Speaker 1: Where did you practice once you moved to Brooklyn? Speaker 2: I practiced in Bushwick [Brooklyn, New York] on--I practiced--first I practiced on Eastern Parkway. Then I moved to Bushwick. But I--the patients came to me from all over because there wasn't--there were not many doctors. Speaker 1: So patients would come to you from all the five boroughs? Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: And do you--who were your most memorable patients? Speaker 2: Well, it's so many of them I remember. I don't know. Speaker 1: Well, let's talk about Malcolm X and his family. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: How did you come to know Malcolm X's family? Did you meet them in Harlem? Speaker 2: Yes, I met--his wife was a nurse, Betty [Betty Shabazz], was a nurse that I worked with at Harlem Hospital [Harlem Hospital Center, New York, New York]. So when she got married, she and her husband, they lived in Queens [New York], and they came to Brooklyn. So he came with her every visit. He accompanied her, and with delivery, I delivered all of--even those that--two that died. After his death, I still delivered the twins. I delivered all of those children. Speaker 1: How many children did Malcolm X have? Speaker 2: Six. Speaker 1: And you say two of them died? Speaker 2: No, two were born after his death. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Posthumously, the twins [Malikah Shabazz and Malaak Shabazz]. Speaker 1: And did you have a good friendship with them? What was your relationship like? Did you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We were very close. Speaker 1: --spend time socially together? Speaker 2: Yes, we're very close because after his death, which she continued to come. Speaker 1: And did you take care of her children (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I did not. Speaker 1: --or did they go to a pediatrician? Speaker 2: No, I just did the deliveries. Speaker 1: Can you describe Malcolm X for us? Speaker 2: Malcolm X was a very devoted husband. He came with her on each visit, very quiet and unassuming. Speaker 1: And what about Betty Shabazz, his wife? Speaker 2: She was a very nice, because we were very friendly. And she continued. She helped us with the theater [Paul Robeson Theatre, Brooklyn, New York] after his death. Speaker 1: And what about Ron Brown? Did you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Ron Brown-- Speaker 1: --take care of his wife [HistoryMaker Alma Arrington Brown] while she was--(unclear)-- Speaker 2: Yes, I did. I delivered his daughter [Tracey Brown James], yeah. Speaker 1: Can you tell us a little bit about them? Speaker 2: I didn't hear you. Speaker 1: Would you mind telling us a little bit about the Browns? Speaker 2: Well, he was always busy, so I didn't get to know him as much as I did Malcolm because Malcolm always came. She didn't come without him. So I didn't meet him as much as I did Malcolm. Speaker 1: And what about Tracey Boylan [ph.]? Speaker 2: Uh-huh, Tracey Boylan and her brother, Tracey, I delivered them both. I'm friendly with them now. In fact, they call me or they come to see me. Speaker 1: And do you remember any other patients that we might-- Speaker 2: Every time I go someplace, somebody says you delivered me, and I don't even know who they are. There's so many. I delivered quite a few patients. Speaker 1: So you practiced at Bushwick for how long? Speaker 2: At Brookdale [Brookdale Hospital; Brookdale University Hospital Medical Center, Brooklyn, New York]. Speaker 1: Oh, you said Brookdale? Speaker 2: Yeah, Brookdale Hospital. Speaker 1: You practiced at Brookdale Hospital for how long? Speaker 2: Oh, about thirty years. Speaker 1: And what was the racial makeup of that hospital? Were there a mix of black and white doctors? Speaker 2: It was a mix, yes. Speaker 1: And what about the community that the Brookdale Hospital was in? Speaker 2: Well, the community became black totally, totally black. It was originally a Jewish community, and they left. And it was a black community because that's East New York [Brooklyn, New York]. So it was a totally black community. Speaker 1: So would you, would you venture to say that when a hospital takes on black doctors, that the community eventually becomes a black community? Speaker 2: No, I think it depends on the community. It's dependent on the community. If you're in a location like they are, in the heart of East New York, there's no other way for you to go because you're not going to accept--white patients are not gonna come into that community. It's not, it's not necessarily because you're a black. It's just that nobody's gonna come to that community, except the people who live in that area. Story_ID: 495458 Speaker 1: After, or after working at Brookdale [Brookdale Hospital; Brookdale University Hospital Medical Center, Brooklyn, New York] for quite a while, why did you decide to start your own medical center? Speaker 2: Oh, I had my own medical practice from when I first went to Brooklyn [New York]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I was never employed by Brookdale. Speaker 1: Can you tell us about that? What was the name of that practice and how did you, how did you organize it? Speaker 2: Well, it was, it was very easy to organize. All you had to do was say you were a doctor, and you were an OB GYN and a black female. That's all you needed. I got patients from all over so that it's very--it was very easy to do. Speaker 1: And where did you see those patients? Did you see them at Brookdale? Speaker 2: I saw them at Brookdale or at my office. Speaker 1: And where were your offices located? Speaker 2: My office was in Brook- was in Bushwick [Brooklyn, New York]. Speaker 1: What kind of a community is Bushwick? Speaker 2: Bushwick is a very, now it's highly Hispanic community, edge of Bed Stuyvesant [Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn, New York]. It's like a--it's off of Bushwick Avenue, so it's a thoroughfare, easy communication, easy community, commute. Speaker 1: So is there ever a time that you open a medical center? I have that you opened a medical center (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes-- Speaker 1: --on Greene Avenue? Speaker 2: At where? Speaker 1: On Greene Avenue? Speaker 2: Yes, I had a--a lot of people didn't wanna come to Bushwick, and I opened a center in Greene Ave- on Greene Avenue. Speaker 1: And what city is Greene Avenue located in? Speaker 2: It's in Fort Greene [Brooklyn, New York]. Speaker 1: And how close are--is this the, is this home where we are now, is this where you have lived since you moved to Brooklyn? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And so how close are Brookdale and Bushwick and-- Speaker 2: From here? Speaker 1: From here. Speaker 2: About ten minutes. Speaker 1: So you had--you would service a number of (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Easy commute. Speaker 1: --communities? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Story_ID: 495459 Speaker 1: And what motivated you to begin the Adelphi Medical Center [Brooklyn, New York]? Speaker 2: Because I went into the area because it was really--you wouldn't believe it. Now, I don't know if you know Brooklyn [New York], but Fort Greene [Brooklyn, New York] was the worst community. And I went into that community with ten other people, and they all left me. But I stayed there. But that was really the lowest, the poorest part of Brooklyn was in Fort Greene, which is now the epitome of everything. It can't--things have changed. Speaker 1: Why did the ten associates leave you once you established the medical center? Speaker 2: Because there was no money, and it was a poor community, and we got no money. Speaker 1: Are you saying that you got no financial assistance from the city? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: And why not? Did you apply for financial assistance (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: --to the city? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And what was their response? Speaker 2: Well, they don't give you--as a city, this City of New York [New York] is not pro-black in respect in terms of healthcare or housing or anything. Speaker 1: Has it mattered who was the mayor of the city, who was the governor of the state? Have any changes happened based upon the political (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, Mayor Dinkins [HistoryMaker David N. Dinkins] was in, but nothing happened in terms of Dinkins-- Speaker 1: So (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) that helped us along. Speaker 1: So in terms of applying for money, it was just impossible. Speaker 2: No, it's the same thing today. There's been very little progress as far as the politicians are concerned. Speaker 1: Why did you remain in the Adelphi Medical Center even though your ten associates left? Speaker 2: Why did I stay there? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: I guess I was crazy (laughter). It was, I had started there. I had put a lot of money in. I ended up being financially, totally outpaced by the City of New York. And that's why I left there. They took the building. They did everything so that it--at that time, it was very low in all the health issues. Now-- Speaker 1: Tell me about some of the health issues that you're treating in Fort Greene at the Adelphi Medical Center. Speaker 2: Well, at that time, because Fort Greene had the lowest poverty level, the lowest Medicaid. The doctors were not taking the Medicaid. So they had all kind of health issues, no doctors. But now, it's, it's totally changed. Speaker 1: How has it changed? What is Fort Greene like now? Speaker 2: Well, it's gentrified 100 percent. Speaker 1: And has the hospital become--or which hospital is in Fort Greene? Speaker 2: I had a clinic. The city took the clinic, closed it, put a housing development there and fined me for being there. Speaker 1: How much did they fine you for being there? Speaker 2: Well, they said I should not have occupied the building. And now it--the community is totally gentrified. It's right around the corner from BAM [Brooklyn Academy of Music, Brooklyn, New York]. It's near--one block away from where the Nets [Brooklyn Nets] are gonna be there with their ballpark. So that it's a totally different thing. Speaker 1: And what hospital is available in Fort Greene now? Speaker 2: They have Brooklyn Hospital [Brooklyn Hospital Center, Brooklyn, New York]. Speaker 1: And is that an all-white hospital? Speaker 2: No, it's gotten to be some blacks, but it won't be long. It won't be there long, won't be there. Speaker 1: What other kinds of things are you doing to supplement healthcare in Fort Greene? So, I know that you're providing services directly to people, but how is it that you're informing people about healthcare and about what their needs are? Speaker 2: Well, we have a foundation, and we also have a place out--my theater [Paul Robeson Theatre, Brooklyn, New York] is not just a theater. It's a cultural center. So that we have a chance to address all the issues, primarily youth issues, job, youth issues, health issues. Speaker 1: But I mean during the time when you were in Fort Greene-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: --did you begin to do health campaigns to spread information about-- Speaker 2: Oh, yes, oh, yeah. Speaker 1: And so can you tell us about how that worked and what kind of information you spread? Speaker 2: Oh, we, we spread information about care for children, about the vaccines and inoculations and so forth. And for women, about getting their pap smears and getting examined and so forth, about health, issues about HIV [human immunodeficiency virus] and how to prevent the spread. Those are the kind of health issues that we, our community really needs. Story_ID: 495460 Speaker 1: Did you open a senior center? Speaker 2: I have a senior center. I had a senior center in my building [Adelphi Medical Center, Brooklyn, New York], but they subsequently left. Speaker 1: What kind of services did you provide for seniors (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What they did--it was a daycare where they came for activities like they play--they ate, they had a meal, and they learned different things like macrame and sewing and physical ed [physical education] and so forth they did. Speaker 1: Why did you begin the senior center? Speaker 2: Because there was a great need in that area for seniors and because things have changed. Now, there're quite a few senior citizen centers. But there was a time there was one or two. Now, there're maybe twenty. Speaker 1: And what were seniors doing without centers? Were they just housebound? Speaker 2: They were, they had nothing to do. Speaker 1: And did you feel that opening the senior center improved the health of the people who came to visit? Speaker 2: Yes, it improved the health, and it improved their mental status because it was something for them to do. And they got together and enjoyed themselves 'cause a lot of the seniors are just confined to the home, had nothing to do. And this way, they had--and they had good, one good, hot meal which is very important to a lot of seniors who live alone and have no one to--even though they do have the Meals on Wheels, it's nothing like going out to have a good, hot meal. Speaker 1: After making, after establishing a senior center, you established a daycare for children? Speaker 2: Yes, I had a daycare. I had a daycare at Fort Greene [Brooklyn, New York]. Speaker 1: And what was the daycare called? Speaker 2: I had preschool kids in the--from the area primarily. We taught them academics and educated them in different things, how to enjoy themselves, the rules of health and regular daycare things. We were early daycare, so we had--we, we really started off teaching the kids, not necessarily academics, but teaching them about life and about history, about black history, about black heroes, a lot of things. Speaker 1: When you say early daycare, you mean very young children? Speaker 2: I mean young kids. We had I think from two, three, up to kindergarten age. Speaker 1: And what made you decide to have, to establish a daycare center? Speaker 2: Because there was such a need. People had nowhere to send their, put their kids. But since that time, the city has established a lot of daycares. And people have home day care. A lot of things happened. Speaker 1: So did these centers, the one that you made for seniors and the daycare that you did for children, did this--did these ideas come out of your healthcare service? So were you servicing people with their healthcare needs and decide that they needed this additional support? Speaker 2: No, they were separate. Speaker 1: Can you tell me about (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But they were different areas and different groups of people. Speaker 1: Can you tell us about how you developed those ideas? Speaker 2: Well, we started the daycare because of working mothers in that area that needed care for their kids. And the seniors, that was in Bed Stuy [Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn, New York], and Bed Stuy has a tremendous number of seniors because they've been there a long time. And it was natural for them to want to have some place to go near them, where they could go to eat and congregate with other seniors. And mainly, it's a social, socialization more than anything else. Story_ID: 495461 Speaker 1: How did you get into the theater business? Speaker 2: Because I was over there at Fort Greene [Brooklyn, New York] at the building where I had the daycare, and there was a church there owned by the Catholics. And they never helped me, but they saw the work I was doing. So when they got ready to leave, they offered the, the church. And that's where I made the theater. Speaker 1: And did you have that idea to make a theater already? Speaker 2: Yes, but I didn't have a facility. And they gave me the--and it was very easy. We started the theater with the pews, and then we built it up and built, built--and we haven't done what we should have done because we've been there twenty-six years. And we still have not renovated the way we should. Speaker 1: And why not? Speaker 2: Because we never got any funding or any recognition from the city. What we did, we did on our own, but we need, we needed money. And BAM [Brooklyn Academy of Music, Brooklyn, New York] is around the corner, and they had a $600 million. They never gave us a penny. But we continued, and now, I think we got--they're going to give us something, but up to this date, we never got anything. Speaker 1: What kind of theater is the Paul Robeson Theatre [Brooklyn, New York]? Speaker 2: It's a general community theater. In other words, we do plays, all kinds of plays. We do--people can come in with their play and production and put it on. We help them put it on. We do our own productions. We've done over a hundred different plays since we've been there. Speaker 1: Can you name a few of the plays that you've done? Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Speaker 1: Those that are particularly memorable? Speaker 2: We do--we've done quite a few of [HistoryMaker] Ntozake Shange's plays. In fact, we just did 'Colored Girls' ['For Colored Girls Who Have Considered Suicide / When The Rainbow Is Enuf,' Ntozake Shange] and we've done the popular black writers. We're one of the few theaters to do great works of black artists. Speaker 1: Are you an all-black theater? Speaker 2: Am I what? Speaker 1: Are you an all-black theater? Speaker 2: Yes, we are all black. And we hope to remain all black, in terms of management because around us, they're building--they have what, six theaters that they're putting up, the city's putting up. And they're not gearing, geared to the black audience, either financially or otherwise. In other words, they charge a lot of money. BAM, you have to have money to go there, sixty-five dollars, and--we are community. We charge twenty, twenty-five dollars. We're glad to--we do the school kids. We have a lot of school kids who come to the theater. So we brought the theater on the community level. But the community has no money, and they have not fought for the theater. Speaker 1: Well, what is the importance of theater to the community? Speaker 2: It's very important because as I said, in terms of the children alone, it's fantastic because we've done the play, 'The Meeting' [Jeff Stetson] which is with Malcolm [Malcolm X]--Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], and the kids love it. And we taught them a lot about black heroes that they otherwise would not know about. It's really a help to the community. We provide good entertain- clean entertainment for them and for the kids, the community, church and so forth. Story_ID: 495462 Speaker 1: And we've been talking about your work with the Paul Robeson Theatre [Brooklyn, New York] and with the senior sitter--senior center and the daycare center. While you are establishing these centers, are you continuing to practice medicine? How do you develop into a full-time theater person? Speaker 2: No, I haven't practiced in the last five years. My health is not the best, and I just can't get around that well. So I had to give up the practice of medicine. I devote my time to the theater and so forth. You asked me about the theater. The theater is a great teacher. There is no better teacher because it helps the kids learn poise, how to speak, how to work with other people, and learn about different pioneers and stars and so forth. That's the only way they know our black heroes. The people used to come by the Paul Robeson Theatre asking, "Are you Mrs. Robeson?" I was a, I was just--said, "You mean you never heard of Paul Robeson?" It's a disgrace. Even the high school around the corner, Paul Robeson High School [Paul Robeson High School for Business and Technology, Brooklyn, New York], they don't even know who Paul Robeson is. So we have got to, to teach. It's a teacher. We gotta teach these people that black people have some, good (unclear)--they have a good past. Speaker 1: Why did you choose the name Paul Robeson for your theater? Speaker 2: Because Paul Robeson happens to be my greatest hero, and he was everything to do with the theater. He was a singer, an actor, activist. He was everything. Speaker 1: Did you get an opportunity to meet Paul Robeson? Speaker 2: I met him in--not as an individual, as in a crowd, with a crowd, yeah. And his (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you get to see some of his performance? Speaker 2: Yeah, and his son [Paul Robeson, Jr.] lived around the corner up until a year ago. His son lived here. Speaker 1: Here in Crown Heights [Brooklyn, New York]. Speaker 2: Around the thea- from the theater. Speaker 1: I see. And did his son participate in-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --in the theater? But your son has participated in the theater? Speaker 2: Hm? Speaker 1: Has one of your sons participated in the theater? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. My sons participate in the theater all the time. Speaker 1: Which one? Speaker 2: All of them, especially my youngest son, Michael [Michael Sheppard], the one that's here. Speaker 1: And what--how do they contribute to the theater? Do they direct and produce? Speaker 2: Well, he's been with me since he opened the doors. And he got--just getting out of high school. So he grew up in the theater. So he knows all about theater, how to put on a production and how to make a success of it. So it's in their blood. Speaker 1: And you also, have you been directing and producing-- Speaker 2: I do everything. Speaker 1: --theater? Speaker 2: With the theater. You have to. If you don't have money, you learn how to do the producer and the everything, the clean-up man too. Story_ID: 495463 Speaker 1: I intended to ask you about some other physicians in the New York [New York] area. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So maybe we can talk about them first, and then we can talk about some theater people in the New York area. Do you know Harold Freeman [HistoryMaker Dr. Harold Freeman]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And can you tell us a little bit about him? Speaker 2: Well, I don't, I don't know him that well. I know he's a great surgeon. I know he came out of Howard University [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.], and he worked at Harlem Hospital [Harlem Hospital Center, New York, New York]. And I know he has a great reputation. Speaker 1: And what about Muriel Petioni [HistoryMaker Dr. Muriel Petioni]? Speaker 2: Petioni. She's been a great inspiration. Her father [Charles Petioni] was a physician and she followed in his footsteps. And she's been working with Harlem Hospital her whole life. I think she had--she's older than I am. And I think she retired about ten years ago, but she's worked consistently to bring money back to the hospital and to keep the name up, to keep the, the services up and did everything. She's been a great inspiration to the physicians and so forth. Speaker 1: And was there ever any interaction between Harlem [New York, New York] doctors and Brooklyn [New York] doctors during (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, at one time-- Speaker 1: Any kind of organized-- Speaker 2: We had some kind of an organization involving all of the bars, all the doctors. But it was not very successful. Speaker 1: About what time period? Speaker 2: Well, it, it was about ten years ago really because-- Speaker 1: So 1996? Speaker 2: Yeah, and they still, I think they still have it, but a lot of things happened to medicine so that we're, we're now getting foreign doctors, very few, very few Americans. They don't wanna American doctors. And they don't want blacks so that it's, it's a--it's not a good field. And they're not encouraging the kids to come into it. Speaker 1: What about Beny Primm [HistoryMaker Dr. Beny J. Primm]? Speaker 2: Beny Primm has been a great inspiration. He's been a--done a lot for the community besides, he worked with Dr. Matthews [ph.], who is one of my classmates. And they worked with the early psych patients, psychology patients and did a lot of work. He's a excellent person (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And-- Speaker 2: --really community minded. Speaker 1: Did you feel that you used your psychological training when you were practicing medicine? Speaker 2: I find it's very, very important, very important. Speaker 1: How so? Speaker 2: Well, you have to learn how to get to people and how to make yourself so they will appeal--talk to you and feel that you're part of them, and, and otherwise, you're not serving your purpose 'cause a lot of times the people come to you, they don't have really a physical ailment. They wanna talk, and, and medicine is not geared to that today. Medicine is not good. Speaker 1: And when you were talking with patients during your medical career, what kind of issues would they want to discuss? Speaker 2: They wanted to talk about housing, primarily housing and things like that, food, how to buy--how to shop, just a lot of issues. I think number one is housing, and healthcare for their children, after-school issues, educational issues, how do we encourage these kids to get an education? How do we encourage them to do well in school? What incentives do we have? It's got to be something there. Story_ID: 495464 Speaker 1: And in the theater community, can we talk about Woodie King [HistoryMaker Woodie King, Jr.]? Speaker 2: Yes, Woodie King has been the most prominent person with the theater. He's been with them longer than anybody else. And he's internationally known. We have an organization coalition that he works with, and he's probably your most prominent person in the, in the theater. Speaker 1: In the coalition of black theatres [Coalition of Theatres of Color]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And what kind of work do you do within the coalition, what kind of the support does the coalition provide? Speaker 2: We try to provide advertisement, education and some kind of interchange of the different communities, Brooklyn [New York], Queens [New York] and so forth, you know, so we're not separate out there, that we're all united. Speaker 1: And so Woodie King is the leader of the coalition of black theatres? Speaker 2: He's the most--he probably the most prominent person in the theater. Speaker 1: In the Brooklyn area? Speaker 2: In all the areas, inter- and throughout the states. Speaker 1: And have you met him and worked with him closely? Speaker 2: He works with all the theaters. In fact, they just had a conference last week of all the black theaters in Winston-Salem [North Carolina]. Speaker 1: In Winston-Salem over the weekend. Speaker 2: And he was there. He's, he's the most outstanding black person in theater. But we have a long way to go in theater because we've lost--the last ten years, we've got--we haven't done anything in theater, black theater. Speaker 1: What do you mean you've lost in the last ten years? Speaker 2: Well, at one time, as I said, when I was in college and so, it was a lot. Those things all closed. The avenues closed down. Speaker 1: Why, why has there--why have those closings occurred and is it because of a lack of interests? Speaker 2: I think it was a--the interest has to be cultivated and has to be fed. And otherwise it dies. Speaker 1: How was that interests fed in the 1950s in ways that it's not fed now? I mean clearly there were a number of places to be, but how did you motivate people? Speaker 2: People were very interested in theater because I know that it used to be packed. They never had a problem finding an audience. But now people--I guess it's the movies, the movies and the thea- and the television and the what, DVD and all these things. So the emphasis has been taken away from theater and there's nothing like theater. And the movies, they go to the movies all the time. So we have to let them know that theater is another thing. Speaker 1: And what's different about theater that you can't get from the movies? Speaker 2: Well, it's a real day-to-day experience. You're a part of it. You're a part of the experience, and it's not episodic. It's a whole thing with theater. And you can concentrate on different people. You get a different perspective, different than the movies. Speaker 1: Do you think that there is a black theater perspective? Speaker 2: I think there is, and I think there should be. I think it's gotta be a big one. Speaker 1: Can you tell us a little bit about the black aesthetic, what you think it is made up of? Speaker 2: What's the, what's going to bring it forth is our own efforts, people like Paul Robeson and the other theaters--there're seventeen black theaters throughout all the boroughs. They have to make it so that it's entertaining, informative, reasonable in price and it has to be a real part of the community. Speaker 1: What--can you tell me what specifically makes black theater, black theater? Speaker 2: What makes black theater, black theater is it tells the heart, it comes from the heart of the black people. It tells of their struggles. Nobody can tell it better than, than we can, and it tells mainly of the heroes and people who have been--have gone before. Story_ID: 495465 Speaker 1: Can you tell us about the Dr. Josephine English Foundation [Dr. Josephine English Foundation, Inc., Brooklyn, New York]? Speaker 2: Yes, the foundation is for health issues. In other words, the purpose is to go out and disseminate information to help people to prevent these different diseases and to make them accessible for control. You have no idea how many people have things wrong with them. They refuse to go further, refuse to go to have them checked out. We've gotta make it important to people that this is important to go out and follow up on it, continue with your treatment. A lot of people begin cancer treatments and never finish. They have all kind of eating habits and so forth they have to address. The dietary habits alone are very important because you have obesity, you have diabetes, and the only way to attack it is through diet. So we have to make it much more important. And you go by all the fast food places, and they're full of people who don't need the fast food. They're the ones who are consuming them. So that I--the foundation is to help people to prolong their lives with knowledge, with knowledge. Speaker 1: Is the foundation operating today? Speaker 2: Yes, today it's still operating. That's right. Speaker 1: Can you tell us a little bit about some of the recognition that you've received? Some of the recognition that you have received? Speaker 2: I haven't received very much recognition. Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: And I know I'm not looking for it. I'm very low key. I'm merely out there to help people. I'm not interested in a lot of recognition. So. I'm behind the scenes. Speaker 1: How--what do you think can be done to improve the quality of healthcare for black people in the New York [New York] area? Speaker 2: Well, first of all, I think you have to try to improve the physician care which is bad. I can tell my, my own experience, it's just terrible. The new medicine is terrible. Speaker 1: What is new medicine and what's terrible about it? Speaker 2: One example was I had, I fainted and I was taken to the hospital. And my cardiologist was called. He never came. He finally sent an intern to see me. And they discharged me. And the one thing the intern told me was, to be sure to call your doctor so he can check you out. I tried. I gave up. I never got him. He never called me. I never got any follow-up at all. That is, the physician follow up is unbelievable. The way it is now, the groups--the people who are making the money in medicine are the administrators. It's not the doctors, and they have a scale--they can only see you for so many minutes, you know. You got to--in order for me now to go back to the cardiologist, I have to get a referral and my doctor to, back to a cardi- I gave it up, gave up. I said, well, I'll just continue taking my medicine. Eventually, I'll get to the doctor, but that's not the way medicine is supposed to be. Speaker 1: So improvement on physician follow up, and what else needs to happen in order to improve care? Speaker 2: Physician follow and physician care, physician care. It's not a matter of, of visits for them so they get paid. It's a matter of taking care of the patients, and I'm a physician, and he doesn't have the decency to either--to call, to number one, come to see me. He didn't do that. Call me and at least answer my call when I call the office. I get nothing. Speaker 1: Has that culture changed from the 1950s to today? Were physicians (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Of course. Speaker 1: --a lot more attentive when you began your career? Speaker 2: It's a different world. If somebody called you that had problems, you, you heard from them in the next--in a few minutes, ten or fifteen minutes. Not forever. The way it is now, you'll never hear. I'll never hear from him. It's a new world. But everything on that, on that computer, the way of the computer (laughter). So. Story_ID: 495466 Speaker 1: What needs to happen in order to encourage black theater? Speaker 2: What has to happen with-- Speaker 1: I'm asking a similar question about what we need to do in order to promote black theater into the future? Speaker 2: We have to work now, the way we're doing with the young people 'cause they're the ones who have to wanna do--want to do it. A lot of them had never been in a theater. They don't even know what a theater is all about. When we have the kids come, they say, this is a theater? If they know about theater, they'll come. Rather than go to the movie, they'll go to the theater. So these are things that we had to--it's a new, it's another venue. It's like the game, the games--they tell me the games (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Game Boy or Nintendo? Speaker 2: Yeah. What about theater, learn about some of these people who helped us along, who came along, and worked for others, and who are working for us today, you know. That's what we have to do. Speaker 1: How important is theater to the social and political wellbeing of the community? Speaker 2: It's very--it should be very important, but it isn't. The community should be more involved with the theater because a theater is a teacher, and we need teaching. We need--our kids need education. They need to know the value of education, and I think the theater can help to put--to push that forward. Story_ID: 495467 Speaker 1: If you had your entire career to live again, would you make the same choices that you've made? Speaker 2: Yes. I enjoyed, I loved medicine. I enjoyed it. It was a pleasure to--it was really a pleasure to me. And OB [obstetrics], there's nothing more exciting than delivering a baby and the family is so happy. And you're a good person because you've delivered the baby. There's nothing better, absolutely nothing more enjoyable than doing deliveries. Now, it's so expensive, people can't afford it. They say the malpractice is $170,000 a year for OB. So the midwives are doing, gonna do the OB. So, it doesn't look good. But I loved it. There's nothing better than delivering a baby and, and then see 'em on the street and say, "Oh, doc, how are you. You delivered me." Oh, my goodness (laughter). It's very enjoyable. Speaker 1: And would you make the same shift that you made from medicine into theater? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, in fact, I (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Would you have started theater earlier? Speaker 2: Yes, yeah. Speaker 1: What kind of theater choices would you have made? Perhaps you would have studied it in school? Speaker 2: What kind of theater? Speaker 1: What kind of theater choices would you have made if you had it to do again? Would you have studied theater in school? Would you have begun your theater [Paul Robeson Theatre, Brooklyn, New York] earlier? What kind of choices would you have made to put more theater in your life? Speaker 2: I don't think I would have studied it because I think you can learn more out there in the field than you can in the classroom. And, but I would, I would know, I would have learned--I learned, I learned the hard way. I think it could have, it would have--could have been easier. And I never learned how to get money (laughter). I'm still learning that. And that seems to be the most important thing. Story_ID: 495468 Speaker 1: You said that they, that your medical center [Adelphi Medical Center, Brooklyn, New York] was closed. How difficult was that process with the city? Speaker 2: It wasn't difficult at all. They just came and closed the doors. They closed the door and they fined me $500,000. Speaker 1: And did they inform you before that happened to give you some opportunity to raise that money? Speaker 2: No, they didn't. They made me sell property and so forth to pay them. So that this is a difficult city for black people. Speaker 1: Did you interact with any of the city management in order to earn their persuasion? Speaker 2: This city is so tied up, they can do to you what they wanna do. And that's what they do. Speaker 1: So how could a person who was interested in having a successful time with the city, how would a person go about doing that? Speaker 2: I don't know. I was crazy. You can't, you can't dance with the city. They're anti-black because all the programs in the schools, they spend money on arts in school. But most of the arts programs are white, not black. So that it's difficult. It's the same problem of racism, racism. And we have to fight it, but we're not. So. Speaker 1: Do you think we will not fight it? We'll simply be relocated and-- Speaker 2: Who, I didn't fight, didn't fight it? Speaker 1: Do you think that we will not fight it? Speaker 2: I can--I don't-- Speaker 1: In the future, do you think that there's a chance that there's gonna be a-- Speaker 2: I don't see any fighters out there. I don't see them. I don't know whether they don't know, they don't have the background, they don't know or they don't care or they don't think it's important. They don't think it's important. And, unfortunately, we have very few leaders. We have few leaders. We need leaders. Speaker 1: Today, do you know a lot about the kinds of healthcare issues that people are having or have they changed (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No-- Speaker 1: --for black people? Speaker 2: --they're just getting bad 'cause people call me every day. I'm not going back to practicing medicine. I'm too old. They--and I can't even find a physician to refer them to. It's bad. Or somebody they get that doesn't speak English, doesn't understand them, they can't understand them. It's a whole new medicine. But I understand it's gonna be a computer age. You're gonna talk, tell your ailment to the computer, and they're gonna tell you what to do. So. Story_ID: 495469 Speaker 1: After your life is over, what would you like your legacy to be? Speaker 2: My legacy, I'd like to be--good health, I'd like to see good healthcare. I'd like to see people interested in health issues and how to take care of themselves. And as far as the theater is concerned, I'm interested in really getting down and getting the young people interested in theater, in good theater, producing better plays, better everything. That's, that's what I hope to leave behind. Speaker 1: We wanna thank you for your work with the community as a doctor and with the Paul Robeson Theatre [Brooklyn, New York]. And we wanna thank you for taking the time to speak with us today. We really appreciate it. Speaker 2: Thank you. Story_ID: 495470 Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): What are we looking at, please? Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: Can you tell us about this picture? Speaker 2: Oh, yes, this is a big dinner that we had, and that's my husband and myself. That was years ago. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): And where are you in the picture? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: What's your husband's name? Speaker 2: Daniel Sheppard. Speaker 1: And this is you here in the corner? Speaker 2: Yeah, uh-huh. Speaker 1: And what's the event? What are the other (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was celebrating my brother's [Whittie English, Jr.] birthday. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Go ahead. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So who's in this picture? Speaker 2: Oh, these are my three boys. The top one is Barry Sheppard, the middle one is Michael Sheppard and the other one is John Sheppard, my three sons. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Go ahead. Speaker 2: Okay, now, we're ready. Speaker 1: That's myself and my husband, Daniel Sheppard, and above that is my husband and myself, and that's a picture of my husband, all those are pictures of my husband. Speaker 2: What is your husband doing here? Speaker 1: My husband's a big golfer. Speaker 2: Was your husband in the [U.S.] military here? Speaker 1: Yes, he was in the military, um-hm. I can't see that far. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Go ahead (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's my oldest sister, Jennie English. She was a nurse anesthetist...