 Story_ID: 6765 Speaker 1: In this photograph, we have my maternal grandmother and her siblings and parents. And there were thirteen of them. They lived in Chester, South Carolina in the early days. And then my grandmother and grandfather moved to Orangeburg [South Carolina], where they were at South Carolina State College [later South Carolina State University, Orangeburg, South Carolina]. My grandmother is in the second row. She's the girl to the right. In the second row. Speaker 2: Right here? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Okay. And what's her name? Speaker 1: Her name is Leathia Minnie Lightner Lewis. That's the Lightner clan. Speaker 2: And what year is this? Speaker 1: I don't know what year it is. But if she was say six years old, then it was probably turn of the century. Speaker 2: 1900, okay. Speaker 1: She was among the younger children. Speaker 2: [Ramona Edelin's maternal grandmother's family, the Lightners, Chester, South Carolina, ca. 1900; Leathia Minnie Lightner Lewis is in the second row, second from the right. From the collection of Ramona Edelin.] Story_ID: 6766 Speaker 1: This is my mother Leathia Annette Lewis Hoage Fenezie. And she married Joseph Fenezie my stepfather when I was sixteen years old. So that's Mr. and Mrs. Fenezie. Speaker 2: [Ramona Edelin's mother and stepfather, Leathia Annette Lewis Hoage Fenezie and Joseph Fenezie, not dated, from the collection of Ramona Edelin.] Story_ID: 6767 Speaker 1: These are my children Kenneth Carlton Edelin Jr., Kimberley Sabel Edelin [Freeman] and Ramad Kwame Spate. That was made about eight years ago. It was a gift to them-to me on my fiftieth birthday. Speaker 2: [Ramona Edelin's children, Kenneth Carlton Edelin Jr., Kimberley Sabel Edelin-Freeman and Ramad Kwame Spate, ca. 1995. From the collection of Ramona Edelin.] Story_ID: 6768 Speaker 1: This is my maternal grandmother Leathia Minnie Lightner Lewis. She had both a bachelor's and a master's degree and she wrote a book on the life of George Washington Carver. She was a teacher in the Orangeburg County [South Carolina] public school and later in the Orangeburg public schools for many, many years. Speaker 2: [Ramona Edelin's maternal grandmother, Leathia Minnie Lightner Lewis, not dated, from the collection of Ramona Edelin.] Story_ID: 6769 Speaker 1: This is my grandfather William Charles Lewis, II. He was a great educator and coach, professor at South Carolina State College [later South Carolina State University, Orangeburg, South Carolina] and one of the founders of the MEAC. The Middle Eastern Ath-, I think it's the Middle Eastern Athletic Conference, M-E-A-C [Mid-Eastern Athletic Conference]. Speaker 2: [Ramona Edelin's maternal grandfather, William Charles Lewis, II, not dated, from the collection of Ramona Edelin.] Story_ID: 6770 Speaker 1: Family gathering in 1990 when Nelson Mandela had been released and made his victory trip to the United States. On the left in the middle row is my uncle William Charles Lewis, III. He is a coach, an educator in South Carolina. And right-Standing right below him on the first row is his wife Miriam Graham Lewis. And then their children from left to right Robert Redd Lewis, Michael Allen Lewis, Pernell--Vincent Pernell Lewis. Right below him is Derrick--Lyndon Derrick Lewis and to the far right William Charles Lewis, IV. And the daughter next to my uncle and aunt with the blue is Denise Lewis. So my uncle and his wife have five sons and a daughter. And they were all there. My son [Kenneth Carlton Edelin Jr.] is at the top in the-near the second from the right. My daughter [Kimberley Sabel Edelin-Freeman] is right below him on the front row and my son [Ramad Kwame Spate] right next to her to the far right on the front row. And I'm standing between the two of them. And two of my aunt and uncle's grandchildren Shantae and Kindell--Kendra are the babies in the picture. So you have my aunt and uncle, their five sons and one daughter and two of their grandchildren. And my three children and I celebrating Mr. Mandela's victory. Speaker 2: [Ramona Edelin (front row, second from right) and her extended family celebrating Nelson Mandela's release from prison, 1990. From the collection of Ramona Edelin.] Story_ID: 6771 Speaker 1: This is my maternal great-grandmother. My grandmother's mother Daphney Lightner. And this is one of those ten photographs we've been able to retain. So I believe this would be around the turn of the century as well. Maybe a little earlier. Speaker 2: [Ramona Edelin's maternal great-grandmother, Daphney Lightner, ca. late 1800s. From the collection of Ramona Edelin.] Story_ID: 6772 Speaker 1: My mother's father's father. William Charles Lewis, I. This gentleman was enslaved as a young person. And yet you see him standing in a suit having educated himself and bought property in South Carolina. Speaker 2: [Ramona Edelin's grandmother's father, William Charles Lewis. ca. early 1900s. From the collection of Ramona Edelin.] Story_ID: 6773 Speaker 1: This is my mother's father's mother. The wife [sic, mother] of William Charles Lewis, II. I do not have her first name. But again this is one of those early turn of the century photographs. Speaker 2: [Ramona Edelin's grandfather's mother, ca. late 1800s. From the collection of Ramona Edelin.] Story_ID: 6774 Speaker 1: I understand that I was going to a fashion show. This was in 1947 when I was two years old. Speaker 2: [Ramona Edelin at age two, 1947. From the collection of Ramona Edelin.] Story_ID: 6775 Speaker 1: This is Mom [Leathia Annette Lewis] and me in front of our house on Beckwith Street in Atlanta, Georgia. In the background you can see the Oglethorpe Elementary School [Atlanta, Georgia], the lab school of Atlanta University [later Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] that I attended. And we lived in Atlanta University faculty housing. Speaker 2: [Ramona Edelin with her mother, Leathia Annette Lewis, Atlanta, Georgia, ca. 1953. From the collection of Ramona Edelin.] Story_ID: 6776 Speaker 1: This is my mother Leathia Annette Lewis when she graduated from Fisk University in 1939 at nineteen years old. Speaker 2: [Ramona Edelin's mother, Leathia Annette Lewis, as a graduate of Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee. From the collection of Ramona Edelin.] Story_ID: 6777 Speaker 1: This is my uncle, a great athlete and coach 'Pap' Lewis--William Charles Lewis, III. He was a five letter man at Hampton [University, Hampton, Virginia] and was the only African American to retain a head coaching position in the state of South Carolina after desegregation. And I think one reason for that is that he was a five letter man. And even after they picked off the plums of football and basketball, he still had five or six other sports that he could coach. Speaker 2: [Ramona Edelin's uncle, William Charles 'Pap' Lewis, III, throwing a javelin for Hampton, University, Hampton, Virginia, ca. 1930s. From the collection of Ramona Edelin.] Story_ID: 6778 Speaker 1: 1963 at Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee]. Stand--seated outside the administration building. Speaker 2: [Ramona Edelin on the campus of Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee, 1963. From the collection of Ramona Edelin.] Story_ID: 6779 Speaker 1: These are the Phi Beta Kappa inductees in our class. And I would think that would be 1966 or early 1967. No that would be '66 probably. Speaker 2: [Ramona Edelin with other Phi Beta Kappa inductees at Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee, ca. 1966-1967. From the collection of Ramona Edelin.] Story_ID: 6780 Speaker 1: I served at Miss Sophomore. And this is me with my court at homecoming in '64. Speaker 2: [Ramona Edelin (center) with her homecoming court at Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee, ca. 1964. From the collection of Ramona Edelin.] Story_ID: 6781 Speaker 1: And here I was the Alpha queen--Alpha Phi Alpha fraternity asked me to become their queen. And that was in 1965. that's also part of the Alpha celebration coronation. Speaker 2: [Two views of Ramona Edelin as queen of the Alpha Phi Alpha fraternity at Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee, 1965. From the collection of Ramona Edelin.] Story_ID: 6782 Speaker 1: Every year the 'Fisk News' which is our magazine captures a picture of the children of Fiskites [alumnae of Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] who are coming in. So that would be in our freshman year in 1963, second and third generation Fiskites. And I'm in that picture along with as you can see quite a number of my classmates. Speaker 2: [Ramona Edelin with students whose parents attended Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee, Fall, 1963. From the collection of Ramona Edelin.] Story_ID: 6783 Speaker 1: This was from 'Jet' magazine. As you can see I'm calling somebody out as a result of the student--the fact that police actually came on to our campus [at Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee]. Utter disregard for the distinction between town and gown. And actually fired some shots into some of our dormitories. And we had what we hoped would be a private meeting. And when I realized that there were press there, I asked that the racist white press be ejected from the meeting. And 'Jet' caught it. Speaker 2: [Ramona Edelin demands the white press be removed from a meeting between town locals and college students, Nashville, Tennessee, ca. 1960s. Photo reproduction from 'Jet' magazine. From the collection of Ramona Edelin.] Story_ID: 6784 Speaker 1: Yes, that's graduation day which was in 1967. Speaker 2: [Ramona Edelin as a graduate of Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee, 1967. From the collection of Ramona Edelin.] Story_ID: 6785 Speaker 1: That picture of the campus queens was in the 'Fisk News' journal. And that was also the year that I was Miss Sophomore. Speaker 2: So is that 1964? Speaker 1: Mm-hm 1964. Speaker 2: [Ramona Edelin with other homecoming queens from black colleges, 1964. From the collection of Ramona Edelin.] Story_ID: 6786 Speaker 1: While John Oliver Killens was on the faculty at Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee] he convened some writers workshops. And put together a wonderful visit during one of our spring festivals that included Harry Belafonte and Sidney Poitier. And the picture at the podium is Fisk President Stephen J. Wright with Mr. Poitier. They stayed with us for a whole week. They did workshops and had one-on-one sessions with young people interested in entertainment and the arts. And they also did major addresses to the whole university campus. It was a wonderful time. Speaker 2: [Two views of Sidney Poitier, Harry Belafonte at a writers workshop at Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee, not dated; (Top photo): Harry Belafonte and Sidney Poitier; (Bottom photo): Sidney Poitier and Fisk University President, Stephen J. Wright. From the collection of Ramona Edelin.] Story_ID: 6787 Speaker 1: Oh, this is my one glamour shot. 'Ebony' magazine asked for a glamour shot one year. (laughs). This is it. Speaker 2: [Ramona Edelin, ca. 1990s. From the collection of Ramona Edelin.] Story_ID: 6788 Speaker 1: My name is Julieanna Richardson and I'm the interviewer. And Scott Stearns is the videographer. And Larry Crowe is an observer, along with Kelly Nevins. Right Kelly? Speaker 2: Navies. Speaker 1: Hmm? What? Speaker 2: Navies. Speaker 1: Navies. Ok. Navies. Ok. So-- Speaker 2: Are you on a mic? Speaker 1: No, I'm not on a mic. Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] You don't need to be on it. Speaker 1: I'm not miked. No. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: They can hear me. Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] I see. Speaker 1: And I want you to start out by stating your name and spelling it for us, including your middle name. And I'd like to have your date of birth and today's date. And we'll continue from there. Speaker 2: Ramona. R-A-M-O-N-A. My maiden name is Hoage. H-O-A-G-E, Edelin E-D-E-L-I-N. And I was born on September 4, 1945. Speaker 1: And can we have today's date? Speaker 2: Today is July 14, '19--2003. Speaker 1: And our location? Speaker 2: We are at my home, 8120 Eastern Avenue, Northwest, Washington [D.C.]. Speaker 1: And I'd like to have your occupation. Speaker 2: Right now I'm an executive consultant and a writer having become semi-retired in June of 2002. Story_ID: 6789 Speaker 1: I'd like to know what your favorite food is? Speaker 2: (laughs) My favorite food? I think my favorite food might be groundnut stew, from Ghana in Africa. Speaker 1: Favorite time of year? Speaker 2: My favorite time of year is spring I believe, although fall runs a very, very close second. Speaker 1: Favorite color? Speaker 2: Purple. Speaker 1: Favorite place to vacation? Speaker 2: Jamaica. Speaker 1: Favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: "Keep the faith, baby (laughs)." Story_ID: 6790 Speaker 1: I'd like to start out by asking you about your father. And if you could give his name and tell about his, you know, what you know about his family background. And--. Speaker 2: Okay. My father was George Lafayette Hoage. And I don't know as much about him as I wish I did, because he died two weeks before I was born in 1945, in August. He and my mother [Leathia Annette Lewis]--he was a little older than my mother. And they met in Jefferson City, Missouri, when she went to take her first teaching position after finishing Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee]. And even though they had already fallen in love, he asked her to wait until after the war, because he was a soldier. He didn't want her to be widowed by the war. And sadly after he got back and they married, eleven months later, he was in an accident in downtown Los Angeles [California]. A motorcycle and a truck, which proved to be fatal. And so I was born two weeks later. I did meet his parents, who were from St. Paul, Minnesota. And I do know one of his cousins. Who's still alive, she is a hundred years old, living in Chicago [Illinois]. Edith Donegan is her name. But I did not know any of his other relatives--many of his other relatives. I think we did visit some people, who were in Evanston, Illinois, who may have been cousins and maybe one aunt. But basically--and my mother tried to keep me in touch with his side of the family, but his parents were older. And they died when I was quite young. So I have a few photographs. And some of his folks tell me that I'm like him in some respects. But I didn't know him very well. I didn't know him at all, and I don't know his history very well. Story_ID: 6791 Speaker 1: Can you talk about your mother and give her name? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yes. Speaker 1: And, you know, what you know about her background? Speaker 2: Well we know a great deal more about my mother's side of the family. My mother was born Leathia Annette Lewis. And she was born in Orangeburg, South Carolina, on the campus of South Carolina State College [later South Carolina State University, Orangeburg, South Carolina]. Which is where my grandfather [William Charles Lewis II] was a professor. She went to Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee] very young. Graduated at nineteen in 1939. She was there when the amazing class of 1935, which included John Hope Franklin [activist, teacher]. And so many others were seniors. After she was widowed, she went back to school to the University of Illinois [Urbana-Champaign, Illinois], because she had prepared herself in foreign languages and music. And then as a widow with a young child, had to retool in order to get into the workplace. Which was a tough workplace at that time. So she went to the University of Illinois for library science. And then she went later and became the first woman and the first African American to earn a Ph.D. in library science, at Columbia University [New York, New York]. Her dissertation, I understand from people in her field, is still seminal. It concerned The Library of Congress classification. Cataloging was one of her loves, but she was a library educator. She taught and developed special collections at Atlanta University [later Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] for more than twenty years. And then she went to North Carolina Central University in Durham [North Carolina], in 1970, to become Dean of the School of Library Science there. She [Leathia Lewis] got that school at--its first and second accreditations. And when she died in 1983, she was Dean of the NCCU [North Carolina Central University], School of Library and Information Sciences. Her mother [Leathia Lightner Lewis] and father were--and by the way, I said a little bit about them when we were doing the photographs as well. But her father was William Charles Lewis, II, who was a professor at South Carolina State College and a coach. A well-respected community organizer. One of the men, who organized, in fact, the boycott of downtown Orangeburg that lasted for nearly a decade. Strong elder in the Presbyterian church; one of the leaders of the church, St. Luke's Presbyterian Church for many, many years. And had both a home there on the university campus and a farm. And I used to just love going out in the afternoons after school and work--to the farm, to spend the rest of the daylight hours attending to things there. Had a number of people who lived and worked on his farm with whom we shared produce and all. Everything we ate came from that farm. The milk, the cheese--I used to churn on the back porch. And all the fruit, all the vegetables, the chicken, the eggs, the beef and the pork, all came from the farm. So my grandfather was, in a very real sense, self-sufficient and he is the only person, I've ever known, who was that close to being self-sufficient. He was very, very clear--a man of few words--very, very clear ideologically and highly principled and spiritual and an educated man. His father [William Charles Lewis I] had been enslaved during his childhood and yet, got himself an education and bought some property and owned land. And one of the photographs that I showed you shows him in a suit standing in front of his own home even after being enslaved, until his teenage years. My father--my mother's mother was Leathia Minnie Lightner Lewis. The Lightner family are well known in North Carolina. Clarence Lightner, the first African American mayor of Raleigh [North Carolina] was my mother's first cousin. His father and my grandmother were siblings. You've also got a picture of the Lightner family. There were thirteen of them. My grandmother was one of the youngest. I think the third youngest out of the thirteen. She was feisty, proud, an educator. I remember very, very well as a young child going out to her one-room schoolhouse in Orangeburg County, South Carolina, where she would teach all the children whatever their ages, right up and down the line. And I remember wondering where they were in being told during harvest season that they had to leave school and go out and pull cotton or bring the crops in so that their families could survive. I remember seeing them in my clothes from time to time. And having my grandmother clamp her hand over my mouth when I was about to say, "That's my dress!" (laughs) Because she was so discreet and so thoughtful. That anything that I was no longer using she would always put to good use for someone else. And she taught me to be respectful of that whole process. She wrote--she first of all--she not only had a master's degree from Shaw University [Raleigh, North Carolina], she finished Barber-Scotia [College, Concord, North Carolina] and then went to Shaw [University, Raleigh, North Carolina], like so many young women in South Carolina. And she also got a master's degree at a time when very few women were getting advanced degrees or even college degrees. And she [Leathia Lightner Lewis] wrote a book about George Washington Carver called, 'A True Fairy Tale'. And as these values books are being resurrected these days I've talked to my family about possibly re-releasing that with different illustrations perhaps because of the story she tells is value-laden. It speaks to all of the traditional values that African Americans have held. My mother [Leathia Annette Lewis] has one sibling, a brother. And my uncle Charles is William Charles Lewis III, also an educator and a coach, in South Carolina. Married to Miriam Graham, from Detroit [Michigan], who was Miss South Carolina State [University], while they were in school. He went to Hampton [University, Hampton, Virginia]. He was also in the [U.S.] Navy. And he came out of Hampton as a five-letter athlete. And he was the only African American to retain a head coaching position in the state of South Carolina after desegregation. And I think the reason for that is that coming out of Hampton [University] with expertise in so many different sports even when the plum of football and maybe one other sport were taken from him for the white coaches after desegregation. There were still several others in which he excelled. And he was a coach in South Carolina until very recently. We had retirement festivities for him that we all attended down there. Story_ID: 6792 Speaker 1: Can you tell me did you grow up having a sense of your rich legacy? Or, you know, that--about your family? Or was that something you just acquired, sort of over time? Speaker 2: Oh no. No. No. (laughs) I was so blessed to be steeped in the legacy. First of all, I described the black college campuses that I grew up on Orangeburg, South Carolina State, Atlanta at Atlanta University [later Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] as the villages that we are striving to find again now. They were in those days in '40s [1940s] and '50s [1950s]. All the adults had the same expectations for each other and for all of the children. Someone losing a parent or a mate resulted in the whole community embracing them. And making sure that they had everything that they needed and that they were included. And they knew that they still belonged. Children, of course, is legendary how we were all corrected by everybody up and down the street. And they know--just one look would tell you, "You know, your mother [Leathia Annette Lewis] or your father [George Lafayette Hoage] wouldn't expect you to be doing that. And neither do we." So it was the classic village small, well self-contained. And it was also where the intelligence here resided. So I was explicitly raised in the tradition of those. Pride of our heritage, knowledge about our heritage, exposed to the thinking and writing of [W.E.B. or William Edward Burghardt] DuBois and other more local leaders from infancy. I think I was on my first picket line at three years old, against Sunbeam Bread [Company]. Because they treated us poorly in Orangeburg. I was definitely a part of the boycott. I used to go out on the truck with my grandfather to meet the farmers, who would come in town on Saturday. Then explained to them and we were not buying anything in town. And my grandfather [William Charles Lewis, II] would take lists from them. Make lists if they couldn't write and go and make sure that they got their provisions from somewhere else. So that we wouldn't, as he said, "We are not even buying a spool of thread until they understand how they must respect us." So I was blessed in a way that very few are. With quite explicit, present, everyday through stories, through examples, as well as through moral teachings and formal education and brought up as an African American. Story_ID: 6793 Speaker 1: Now how would you describe your grandfather [William Charles Lewis, II]? What kind of person was he? You talk about what he did. But what kind of person? Speaker 2: He was fair, meticulous, always well dressed, a man of very few words, an organizer, very meticulous. And we had what was called The Orangeburg County [South Carolina] Colored Fair. And that was--you know, the big state fair was one thing. We had our Orangeburg County Colored Fair. And he was the organizer and the taskmaster that pulled that whole thing together, which was big business, as well as big fun. Yes. He was looked to. Everybody called him 'Prof' in the neighborhood. When we would go by, old and young would say, 'Prof' to him. And he and my grandmother [Leathia Lightner Lewis] called each other 'Partner.' "Partner this. Partner that." And he was not only self-sufficient, but so fair-minded. Of course, he was older by the time I came along. And others knew him differently than the way I did. I adored him. I absolutely adored him. And he loved me. And sometimes we just sit out on the porch and swing. And not say very much. But I learned a great deal from my grandfather. My uncle [William Charles Lewis, III] was still a young man in college [at Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] during those days--an athlete, a magnificent athlete. And I remember his interactions with his father, even better than my mother's [Leathia Annette Lewis]. Because very often when I was there, it was because my mother had to be away in school. We'd all be there together. Sometimes in the summer, certainly for Christmas and Thanksgiving and holidays. But I spent a good deal of time with my grandparents, while she as a young widow went back to prepare herself for the workforce. And spent long hours with my grandfather on the farm, as well as on the campus. Speaker 1: When you say, you had a different--with--of--view of your grandfather than other people. Was he viewed as sort of a strict and no nonsense guy? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) He was always strict and no nonsense. He was very strict and no nonsense. But he was always fair. I don't know of anyone, who thought of him as mean or as abusing the wonderful position of power and influence that he had. And another experience that I remember that I love so much was the men of South Carolina State [College, later South Carolina State University, Orangeburg, South Carolina] at least of my grandfather's cohort used to play croquet every Sunday evening. And he would take me. And I remember sitting on the bench and being young enough so that my legs would swing on the bench. And I would hear this low murmur of talking. I can't remember a thing that was said. But they were planning the life of South Carolina State College and our relationship to the downtown, the boycott and the other major issues of the day that we were facing as African people. And he would just take me by the hand and I would go and listen, and watch. I wish they were doing that all over this country now, the way they were at that time. Very effective, they were close. Those were men who could talk to each other. I don't think they were gossiping. But they would plan together. They thought it was their duty. And duty was a word you heard a lot in those days. It was your obligation. It was your duty to uplift the race, and they planned it. Story_ID: 6794 Speaker 1: And your grandmother [Leathia Lightner Lewis]? What kind of person was she and, you know, as his partner? Or what--or she period? Speaker 2: She was feisty. She was much more outspoken. She was proud. And she was a teacher. So she was always teaching. She taught us all to read when we were three. I remember her saying, "Well Monie [Ramona], you're about three now. It's time for you to sit down and learn how to read." And she actually did teach us how to read. Each one of us grandchildren who came along in time to enjoy that with her. I remember her in her classroom with all those children. Mothering them--guiding them, teaching them life skills and life lessons. Very religious. Not proselytizing, but using religion as a way to teach morals and ethics and to help guide you in making decisions and solving problems. And she would do that as well as teach the actual lessons that we had to learn. So I think of her. She was not stylish in the way that some women can really look like they just stepped out of a bandbox every time you would see them. But she was always meticulously well dressed. She was old school with respect to how young ladies comported themselves. And she was always very careful to pass that on to us. And she expected all of us, all my friends and I, as their mothers and grandmothers did, to conduct ourselves in appropriate ways. She was middle class, but she was not elitist. She never looked down on anyone. She always spoke to everyone. But she did not expect us to carry ourselves as anyone would. And she made a point of saying, "Well a young lady does or does not do." Story_ID: 6795 Speaker 1: And your mother [Leathia Annette Lewis]. What about your mother? And, you know, what she had of your parents? And, you know, I'm also looking at what you have of your mother too? Speaker 2: Well my mother having experienced being widowed [from husband George Lafayette Hoage] at such a young age certainly had a different spirit about preparing yourself as a young woman to face whatever life brings. And not to be dependent upon anyone to take care of yourself and your children. She, unlike my grandmother [Leathia Lightner Lewis], who was also feisty, but who was never in that position, because of her long partnership with my grandfather [William Charles Lewis, II]; used to actually stress that. And I think my mother told me more about the realities of life as opposed to this myth, that so many young ladies, especially in my generation were expecting. Now, I was not expecting prince charming to ride up on a white stallion and take me away and take care of me for the rest of my life like so many--even young black girls were during that period of time. I don't think that myth is around as much today as it was in those days. But I was clear. My mother taught me from a young child to be prepared to take care of yourself and your children, no matter what happens. And education, of course, is the key to doing that. We're all educators. I'm the third generation college professor, because of these forbearers I'm talking to you about. She also did not want me to think of myself in terms of physical appearance. Lots of people used to say, "You're so pretty. You're so this, and you're so that." She said, "Beauty is only skin deep. I can't tell you how many beautiful girls I've known and who I went to school with, who are so unhappy in their--even as early as their young twenties, because beauty changes. And if you put all of your eggs in that basket, you'll be sorely disappointed. Cultivate your mind, cultivate your character, cultivate your interdependence and independence and your ability to think and do for yourself. And if you're also blessed with a physical appearance and it's pleasing to others be glad about that. But don't stress that. Don't even think that, that's what's the most important thing, because its not." She also taught me, and I don't know too many other mothers who stressed this the way she did, to be efficient. She was so good at organizing the details of things. And she used to tell me all the time, "That's not efficient." For example, if you're seven years old and you come in and you take off one piece of clothes, as you come in the door. And another piece of clothes as you go in your room. Then there's something else on the floor and then there's something. Then she said, "That's not efficient. Now you've got to go back and pick up every one of those things and put them where they belong. Why don't you just put them where they belong in the first place? Then you'll have more time to do things that are important to you." So she stressed that in many different ways. And one lesson she told me that many people in the work place say that they wished they had learned is to handle paper efficiently. You know, how many mounds of paper we can have in these jobs that we have or even in school. She said, "Ideally, you can't get to it right away, but ideally you'll wanna handle each piece of paper one time. It's awfully difficult to do, but the closer you get to it, the more efficient you are and the more, and the better you feel about the time you have. 'Cause we never have enough time to do the things we wanna do. But you feel better about how you use your time and about the time you have left to do some of the other things." So those were particularly [Leathia] Annette [Lewis] lessons. (laughs) Story_ID: 6796 Speaker 1: What's your earliest memory of growing up? Was it with your grandfather [William Charles Lewis, II] on the, you know, on the picket line? And--. Speaker 2: Oh no. It's with my mother [Leathia Annette Lewis]. Speaker 1: You--what--what is your earliest memory? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) My earliest--I've--I guess I must have a very early memory. (laughs) Because I remember--I remember at two and three knowing when my mother was going to be there, when she was going to have to be away. I remember being potty-trained, sitting on that little wooden potty that they had at my grandmother's [Leathia Lightner Lewis] house. And looking down the hall to see if my mother were coming. I remember my uncle [William Charles Lewis, III] playing tennis with my mother and grandparents out on South Carolina's State's [College, later South Carolina State University, Orangeburg, South Carolina] tennis courts. I remember when we moved to Atlanta [Georgia] very well. Which was in--when I was three years old which was in 1948. I remember our neighbors. I remember--I have a lot of rich childhood memories. I remember Christmases and birthdays and Thanksgivings and, that was the longest time my grandfather ever talked, was the prayer before dinner on Thanksgiving. When everybody was so hungry. (laughs) And it wasn't just our imagination. He did vest a lot in that Thanksgiving prayer. I loved it. I loved it. But we'd be smelling those biscuits and rolls. It was so funny. And everybody would say, "Granddaddy you talk longer on Thanksgiving than any other time of the year (laughs)." Story_ID: 6797 Speaker 1: Were you born in South Carolina when your--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) I was born in Los Angeles [California]. Speaker 1: in Los Angeles. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) This accident [the death of her father George Lafayette Hoage] occurred in Los Angeles. And my grandmother [Leathia Lightner Lewis] had to get on a train. This was before airplane travel was commonplace. And I think it--I think they told me it took her two weeks to get from Orangeburg [South Carolina] to Los Angeles. And she brought my mother [Leathia Annette Lewis] and me back to Orangeburg when I was six weeks old and old enough to travel. Speaker 1: And (unclear)--. Speaker 2: And another story about my birth. On this tragedy is one of the reasons I am so strongly loyal to my sorority. Delta Sigma Theta sorority is that my mother as a young person in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] for the first time in her life, literally didn't know a lot of people. And when my father's [George Lafayette Hoage] accident occurred, it was one woman in particular. And a couple of other friends, in the sorority. Because she had immediately reached out to them when she moved there, who saw her through that very, very difficult time, until my grandmother got there and took us home. Including the fact that my father though mortally wounded checked himself out of the hospital. And she nursed him at nine months pregnant through a fatal head injury, until he actually succumbed. And they were right there with her all the way through that process. And I'm close to her now. Her name is Tysine Webb (ph.). And she still lives in Los Angeles. And I have been blessed to see within the last year, which is wonderful. And she still loves my mother. Speaker 1: That was a traumatic time for your mother. Speaker 2: Very. Story_ID: 6798 Speaker 1: Let's take you back to South Carolina State [College, later South Carolina State University, Orangeburg, South Carolina] campus. And I'd like to ask you, if you take yourself back since you have such a memory. What sights, smells and sounds remind you of growing up? Speaker 2: The houses that we lived in were beautiful, old roomy wooden structures. And our house abutted the president's house. The president's house was on the main street and ours was on the street adjacent to it. But the houses themselves connected. And I remember being able to talk to Elizabeth Ann and Butch through the walls late in the evening when we were supposed to be asleep. We had these little tapping signals and so forth. And we could talk to one another. It was a wonderful village. A swimming pool, tennis courts. Felton [Lab School, Orangeburg, South Carolina] was the lab school there [on the campus of South Carolina State University]. And I went to Felton for both summer programs where we used to do operettas every year. And for third grade which--when we were there. It was a sophisticated college setting, it was not rural, the way the one-room schoolhouse was. When you go out there, you're in the country. You lift up or roll over a log and a snake comes out. You know, the grass gets too tall. You're told where to walk and where not to walk, as young children. So you won't run into various kinds of little animals out there. And the one-room schoolhouse had a different smell, had a different feel entirely from being in town. I'm trying to think of--. Speaker 1: Sounds. Speaker 2: Sounds! Nothing distinctive. The hustle and bustle of campus life. Not a lot of cars. A few, but not a lot of cars. But just a little bit of people and very, very close people. People who were close to each other. We all knew one another, loved one another, looked after one another. So there were very seldom any jarring sounds. Just the sounds of people in harmony working towards a common purpose. Story_ID: 6799 Speaker 1: Do you think you were very aware of what was outside of the [South Carolina State University, Orangeburg, South Carolina] campus arena? I know, you know--I mean I know your grandfather [William Charles Lewis, II] was active all--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) I was aware of the downtown. And I was aware of the farm. And I was aware of the campground, where we would have the camp. I can't say that I know a lot about the other towns around there too much. Other than Columbia [South Carolina] which was about forty miles away. Right now I can't--and I knew about the river. The Edisto River, because my uncle [William Charles Lewis, III] was a lifeguard out at the river every year. And then--that's where he taught me how to swim. And people laugh when I tell the story now, but it's absolutely true. He would have me in the canoe. And at three, he just lifted me out and started rowing away and said, "Come on baby, swim, swim." And that's how I learned to swim (laughs). I've been swimming ever since. None of this fancy water babies classes or any of the rest of that. But yeah, the river. The places where my family would be. The church where we would have--oh this is interesting. It's in fashion a bit more now. But at the time, not a lot of African American churches had black depictions of Jesus, the Apostles or anything else. But my grandmother [Leathia Lightner Lewis], who helped to run the Sunday School. If we ordered these books and they'd come in and they had all white children and white faces, the first thing she would say, "Children get out your crayons. We're going to color these people. So that they look like us. People have to worship gods who look like them." And that was always the case throughout my young childhood. I never had any white Jesus's upon the walls or anywhere else. We're Presbyterian, which is a little different and we're--I'm a fifth generation black Presbyterian. And most of them did come out of--especially during those--that period of '30s [1930s] and '40s [1940s], South and North Carolina. I don't know exactly sociologically why that is. But Presbyterians, unlike some of the other denominations have a balance of power in the management scheme, just like the United States government. We have three distinct branches of governance. And the minister is not the primary authority. The elders are. The elders hire and fire the minister and determine what will be done with the money and so forth. So these are some very thoughtful and educated African Americans who made a choice to move away from a setting in which for example a preacher could be autonomous. Could do as he chose, could spend the money, however, he chose, and so forth. And so I don't know how much that has to do with it. They're also more reserved. Congresswoman Carrie Meek [former U.S. Representative from Florida] teases us and calls us, 'The frozen chosen'. (laughs) Because Presbyterians are known for their staid, punctual services. And, you know, not a lot of whooping and hollering. No calling out from the pulpit and all of that. But I think is was a reflection of the requirements on these people and their professional lives, to be restrained and controlled and sophisticated. And able to carry forth the business. Whether it was in the business world or on the campus that we had to follow. And needing to put a hedge around what may have been more raw outrage and other more extreme emotions. And certainly one could feel in those environments that they chose to channel in other directions rather than to express. And I think that had a lot to do with it. But in church, we children were always encouraged. We would always be in programs. They would create programs. If, any occasion that they could, they would. You know, not just Christmas and Easter and the obvious things. But other kinds of programs. So that we could speak. We could be in plays. We could sing. And my grandmother would always have me up there singing and speaking and--along with the other children. Which gives you an enormous amount of confidence, even though it's just a small congregation. When you are three, and four and five [years old] and, as you grow-up before people in such a supportive way it really does bring out a number of traits and characteristics. And above of all a certain level of confidence that so many don't have today to my regret. Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite hymn? Or any song from that time? Speaker 2: My grandmother's favorite hymn was '[The] Old Rugged Cross'. She loved 'The Old Rugged Cross'. My stepfather's [Joseph Fenezie] favorite hymn was 'In The Garden'--"And he walks with me and he talks with me." And I love both of those. My mother [Leathia Annette Lewis] was a pianist. I think I mentioned that when she was at Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee], she studied modern languages and music, under John [Wesley] Work [III] by the way. I should bring out the--we'll get to the Fisk part. The wonderful people, who were there during her time and my time. But her favorite was 'Jesu, Joy Of Man's Desiring'. And we played that at my wedding and at her funeral [1983]. My own, I don't know that I have one favorite. I love music. I love spirituals and gospel more than they did. Gospel was not a part of the Presbyterian service. I do still--I do now enjoy gospel music, as well as, you know, all the genres of jazz and rhythm and blues, and some rap, and some classical music, and some international music from the African world. Reggae, high life, you know, West African and South African forms of music. Story_ID: 6800 Speaker 1: Now what precipitated the move to Atlanta [Georgia] when you were three? Speaker 2: My mother [Leathia Annette Lewis], after getting her master's in library science from the University of Illinois [Urbana-Champaign, Illinois], got a teaching position at Atlanta University [later Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia]. And that is when we moved to Beckwith Street. Which is a famous--it should be better known incubator for the black intelligentsia here. It was Atlanta University faculty housing. And the people, who lived on that street when we were growing up was absolutely incredible. John Morrow who went on to be a major player in Paris [France] at UNESCO [United Nations' Educational Scientific and Cultural Organization]. Bill [William] Boyd, who was the first--who was the President of NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and did the first political discussions on black radio. One the first of the, the first black-owned radio station WERD [AM, Atlanta, Georgia]. Mozell and Manesba Hill, Lucy and J. Howard Grigsby. The--further down the street, you had Whitney Young and his family before they went on to do the other things that they did. The Nesbits [Robert D. and Frances Neely] next door. It really would take a thorough going--I need to sit down with some of the elders and just--and I've said this before, we need to do a history of Beckwith Street and who has been there, who came through there. What they meant to the African American intelligentsia. The Jarretts. The--I mean you can just name one after the other. So many of the people, who were influential in not only Atlanta, but who left Atlanta and went on to do things. The young [Moses] Carl Holman went on to do things nationally and internationally were there. We grew up with them on Beckwith Street. So it was to go to the faculty of Atlanta University [now called Clark Atlanta University] that we moved to Atlanta. Speaker 1: Did you ever ask your mother why she had an interest in library science? Speaker 2: Not exactly. What she told me as to why she needed to go back and get another degree was that she needed a degree that would be marketable. And she needed to get a degree in something that people needed, as opposed to music and foreign languages. And I think that, because I know that she's so meticulous, and so--and that cataloging was her--became her great love within library science. But that was probably a natural gift. There is no African American librarian over the age of forty that my mother did not touch, at the time of her death, in 1983. She either taught them directly. She mentored them, or they had some relationship with her. It's a fairly small universe. But she was so well known and loved among that group. Because of her outreach. She wrote some books on librarianship in the southeastern United States. And as I say, her dissertation was seminal. Story_ID: 6801 Speaker 1: Let's talk about your growing up in Atlanta [Georgia]. And, you know, I'd like you to share, you know, some memories, just as you're doing really so well. Speaker 2: Well the thing about it is that I left after sixth grade. We moved. But from first to sixth grade we were at Oglethorpe [Elementary School, Atlanta, Georgia]. The old Oglethorpe, there's a new Oglethorpe there now, not that one. But that tiny building right behind it. That was the lab school for Atlanta University [later Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia]. There again, need to do a history of that setting. Because everybody I can think of, who was with me in elementary school has gone on to do service and uplift for the race, ever since. We were taught by wonderful, wonderful people. The lab school--I don't know if they did the kind of research that my daughter [Kimberley Sabel Edelin-Freeman] does now with all the wonderful statistical ways of proving out everything. But they did follow what was being done. They did know that the methods they were using were having results. We had a tremendous, tremendous background there. One thing we did every day was sing 'Lift Every Voice and Sing'. Every special ceremony began, you know, absolutely began with it. All of our teachers were conscious of who we were and reinforced this village notion of expectations for each child, of duty, of service, of giving back and above all of excellence. They expected a great deal from us. And I remember coming home the first week of first grade and asking my mother [Leathia Annette Lewis], what a president was. And she said, "Why do you wanna know?" I said, "Well I was elected president of my (laughs) class today and I need to find out what it is!" (laughs) So she told me, "You know, that means you provide leadership. You--if you have meetings you preside over the meetings and so forth." So we had class officers and everything. Even though it was a very small lab school. Story_ID: 6802 Speaker 1: How did your name come to being? Speaker 2: My--it's very funny. My mother [Leathia Annette Lewis] being as devoted as she was as a daughter and as traditional was going to name me after my grandmothers. Which would have been Leathia Maude. And my father said (laughs), "Oh no, you're not. You're not gonna make that baby Leathia Maude." So he named me, Ramona Marguerite. And he had a lot of Native American blood. And I think Ramona was a name, I certainly have found among Latino and other women from other--from Native American, as well as Latino communities a recognition of that name that I don't always see among African Americans. Story_ID: 6803 Speaker 1: So you were talking about the lab school [Oglethorpe Lab School at Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia]. And I was wondering, you know, just that experience, and your teachers, you know, that you had. And if any of--you know, that had a particular influence on you? Speaker 2: Oh yes. There are a few that you can remember better than others. But what I remember most of all is the uniformity of the standards and the expectations. They were uniformly high for each of us. And you didn't find that unevenness that you sometimes find among teachers either. They were--I don't know if they went to school to learn how to do that. Or if that was an outgrowth of their experience there together. Or if it was explicitly stated that this is an outcome that we want to see here. But they all felt very strongly and very clearly that they were preparing us to go on for leadership. And we had very limited means. We didn't have, you know, fabulous athletic grounds and all of that. But we did run track and field. We had a beautiful dance program. We used to love our dance teacher and do some lovely modern dance. Had a little gym. You know. Not a lot in the way of fancy buildings or equipment. But it was all in the teaching and in the care. And, of course, our parents were all involved in our education as well. Speaker 1: Now, do you know about the concept of the laboratory school, and how it developed, you know, within the black college campuses? Does it have a parallel track with, you know, lab schools period in the country? 'Cause you found them on college campuses. Speaker 2: Yeah, I don't know the history of it as well as someone in the field of education would know it. But it's my understanding that some schools in their departments of education formed laboratory schools, where they could monitor the development of their teachers and their practice teachers. And above that, I don't remember any practice teachers. It must have been some, but I don't remember it, being in anybody's care, but my teachers. You know. And we didn't have--because we were just elementary school children, we didn't go from one teacher to another. You had your same teacher all day, all year. But they tried to be up on the latest methods, but not just to try everything that came across the transom, and to monitor and evaluate very carefully what their outcomes were. I know we were tested. We got a lot of the different tests that were going around. Taking tests was not something new to me when I moved on to the next level of education. And they did profiles on us. Every now and then doctoral students would come and do studies. I remember one lady following me pretty much a whole semester in writing a report on me, who was studying at AU [Atlanta University, later Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia]. So it's--and it is done in majority as well as historically black colleges. But not every school has it. And I think some schools of education would benefit from having lab schools. And I don't know how much they're still going, you know, still being used that way. But certainly, to me, it was a very good way of enriching both the students, the teachers, and the prospective teachers. And then whatever learning they had being translated into the curriculum of the teacher preparation courses at the college itself. Story_ID: 6804 Speaker 1: As a young person, what were you--what subjects are you gravitating to? Speaker 2: The languages. Science, but less math. Not so much history, but social studies, comparative things at the grade school level. Now if you wanna move on to some of the higher grades I think it became very clear to me very early, that philosophy would be the direction in which I would go. I remember being just indignant in junior high [Lincoln Middle School, Carbondale, Illinois] at reading Plato and [Jean-Paul] Sartre. And thinking to myself, "I've thought about that. What are they doing writing about that already?" And somebody said, "Well make the connection. You know, (laughs) if you're already thinking that way maybe that's a field you're interested in." But my first reaction was to be indignant that, I thought, I had thought of it, you know. (laughs) So I did really love--I read everything about existentialism and especially Sartre very early on in high school [Stockbridge School, Interlaken, Massachusetts]. My mother [Leathia Annette Lewis] moved, we moved in '57 [1957], to Carbondale, Illinois from Atlanta [Georgia]. Because my mother became the first African American on the faculty of Southern Illinois University [Carbondale, Illinois], there at the library school. And that was one of the low points in my life. I hated it! I was the only black child in my class. It was a town that was literary divided by railroad track. All the black people except for one dear old lady, who was kind of well to do, a widow. My mother and I lived on the other side of the tracks. I hated my experience in school. I found out that people can be malicious and hypocritical. And I learned what the old folks used to mean when they said, "Give me a good old cracker any day. 'Cause at least you know where they're coming from." Because these people, even children and their parents and certainly a lot of teachers would smile in my face and then stab me in my back the first chance they got. I developed a peptic ulcer in trying to deal with those people at twelve years old. And my mother then decided that though it was her best effort to keep me out of an overcrowded public school system in Atlanta [Georgia] where they were going to three shifts a day--at Booker T. Washington High School [Atlanta, Georgia], which is where I would have to go, it was her best effort to get me into a good public school system, that it wasn't working for those reasons. And that was when I went off to Stockbridge in western Massachusetts, in the Berkshires of western Massachusetts to boarding school for--well, I was in Carbondale [Illinois] through junior high, seventh and eighth grade and then the ninth grade. And then I went to Stockbridge for ten through twelve. Story_ID: 6805 Speaker 1: First of all, I'd like to just see what the young Ramona was like? What were you? Were you an introspective child? Were you outgoing? Were you--I mean I'm just trying to--. Speaker 2: I had been outgoing. I had been in everything. You know, president of the first grade class. (laughs) Running through sports, dance, music, Brownies and Girl Scouts, church. Loving all of that. Loving all my friends. Very, very much popular and very much a friend to lots of people. And that was just shut down immediately upon going to southern Illinois. Of course, you make new friends. And, you know. The problem is you can't see them very often. And I had some white friends. There were a few kids at school. I saw though one of the lessons that one learns in those environments especially in that day. Kids, who would like you and who would almost follow you around in an adoring kind of way during the day. But when their parents would drive up outside they would leave without saying goodbye. Because their parents had a different attitude. And especially as you get older and it gets into puberty, and it gets into the little group things that you do before you start dating. They didn't want us in the group. And so I found it very hard to deal with them and all their questions and all the things that they like about you during the day and then to be shut out of that when they would go home. And then you're not able to get to your friends until maybe the weekend. You know. Speaker 1: And you went from such a free sort of nurturing environment--, Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Um-hmm. Speaker 1: --to something that wasn't like that at all. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And you--Carbondale [Illinois] at that point, what is the black community majority? You know, what is it like? 'Cause it's very different from the community you've been in at Atlanta [Georgia]. Right? Speaker 2: Yes. They had their own school. They had their own professional class. They had their own teachers. And I would assume that some of the people, who ran the government and so forth, the local, you know, city government were among the African Americans. Those who my mother [Leathia Annette Lewis] befriended and whose children I befriended we're all like teachers at the high school or the grade school. I used to go to their games. I loved sports. And, you know, almost all my friends were athletes or involved in the school in some way. But it was a poor community. Most of the girls were probably not going to school. Probably get married, have babies and stay right there for the rest of their lives. They had no black consciousness. That was kind of foreign to most people there. Certainly not as explicit and upfront as my experience and my own proclivities were. So there was no movement going on there, whatsoever. Speaker 1: And the classes you attended when you were primarily, they were all white, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) They were white. Speaker 2: Just about all of them. There were two or three other kids at our school, but we wouldn't necessarily find ourselves in the same class. So most often I was the only. Story_ID: 6806 Speaker 1: Like the first day of class do you remember that in Carbondale [Illinois] when you went to school [at Lincoln Middle School, Carbondale, Illinois]? Did that have--does that--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) I don't know if I remember the first day. But I do remember early on experiences. And I remember two girls who befriended me. And who I was able to study with. And whatever little singing or clubs or whatever we did, they, I would be able to count on them. I became a cheerleader, which was in competition. And, because I was an athlete and those were the only outlets for girls, they didn't really have girls' teams, I won in the competition. They begrudgingly, especially the teacher who was over the cheerleaders was one of the worst teachers I had. And I remember having to learn every stunt, in stunt and tumbling, which she taught, better than everybody else. To force her to give me the grade that I deserved. And my mother [Leathia Annette Lewis] taught me then, that right then, "White teachers will either punish you for being black and never give you the grade you deserve. Or they'll punish you for being black by giving you a higher grade than you deserve, because they don't think you really can do it. Don't let them do either one. Make them give you the grade that you deserve and make sure you deserve the grade that they give you." So it was a constant struggle. And this was partly what led to this peptic ulcer. Because I was used to having straight As and getting rave comments from teachers about my intentions, about my work habits and about my success in actually achieving those grades. And I just detested the way some of those people treated me. Some of those teachers as well as some of those students. And I still do right to this day. I hate that. I hate to see it. As it still demonstrates itself. It's just so unfair. Speaker 1: Can you be a little more explicit? Just about--just even an incident or two? Speaker 2: Well the tumbling is the main one, 'cause that was physically punishing. I was--would be physically aching from head to toe trying to practice splits and leaps and, you know, tumbling routines on mats. So that I would be so perfect that this woman who was particularly hateful, would had no choice but to give me an A in that class. That was--it hurt. And it was physical as well as emotional. In other cases it would be much more subtle. Like you write an essay or you bring in a poem. When you're asked to bring in a poem by Langston Hughes, and they don't get it. You know. "This is so simple. What could this--how could this be important?" You know. And you try to, at twelve years old explain to a teacher the meaning of, 'I've Known Rivers'. And I remember that conversation. That was one, she said, "Oh this is so simple! What's the value of this?" So, of course, your longer papers. Topics you choose of no interest to them. They're so subjective the way they grade those things. I know why a lot of African Americans students go into sciences. Because it's more objective. The grades that you get are not as subject to the whims and the particular interest or disinterest of a teacher. But in my fields which had to do with conceptualizing and new ideas and different ways of looking at things and more philosophical approaches to things, very often by those people was met with disdain. I mean I would still get my grades. But what did I have to do to contort myself and my mind into something that they would recognize? It was tough. Speaker 1: So you're still a straight A student, at this point? Are you? Speaker 2: Pretty much. Speaker 1: Ok. And are you having contact at this time with your grandparents? If, you know, I mean--, Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) My grandmother [Leathia Lightner Lewis] is still alive. My grandfather [William Charles Lewis, II] has passed on. Story_ID: 6807 Speaker 1: Now--so your mother [Leathia Annette Lewis] sees that this is sort of a problem after what length--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Oh yeah. I make it very clear there is a problem. She says, "You can do it." at first. And I did. I got through junior high [Lincoln Middle School, Carbondale, Illinois]. But by high school it was ridiculous. And so she--that was when she said, "Well, I'm just going to have to do something different. I don't want you to go off to boarding school. But it looks like that's what we're gonna have to do." And there was another family from Atlanta [Georgia] whose daughter was there. That's how she found out about it. So at least I had Sylvia there. Speaker 1: So how was that experience then? Because it's you're first time going away, you know for--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Not really. I've been away. 'Cause I've been to Orangeburg [South Carolina]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) to my grandparents. For the camp-- Speaker 1: (Unclear) Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) every summer. Speaker 1: Oh! You've been on--now where were you going to camp? Speaker 2: Oh this is a good story. I went to camp at eight. I went to sleep over camp for the first time at eight. And then every year after that. And the camp that my mother chose was an interracial camp in Americus, Georgia called Koinonia. That's an interesting--that has an interesting history itself. But the second year that we went the Ku Klux Klan actually rode up to the camp on horses in robes. Firebombed the place and shot the director of the camp who was Myles Horton. And after that, we used to meet up in [Monteagle] Tennessee in the mountains at Highlander Folk School. Which is where I met Septima Clark and a number of other people, because Highlander has its own history as well. But we were all given Indian [Native American] names. We had to choose our own Indian names. And we were all given Indian identities, as white and black kids in the raw segregated South. So that we could step in another person's shoes and get past the black and white polarities and have a different kind of experience. And I loved those camps. We had great times. We didn't have any racial problems among ourselves. We learned lots of life skills and survival things, and crafts, and all of that fun stuff in this explicitly interracial thing. And the point mother was making was that she didn't want me to have a totally segregated experience. Remember now when I'm a girl in Atlanta we're getting on the back of the bus. You still had the segregated water fountains, bathrooms, restaurants and everything else. When my granddaddy [William Charles Lewis, II] comes to get us to drive from Atlanta to Orangeburg, he has already mapped out the whole route before he left home as to where he would get gas, because he wouldn't get gas anywhere where we couldn't use the restrooms. Where we would eat. And every stop along the way that we would make. He had it figured out down to the mile and down to the gallon of gas. This was the kind of life you had to live if you had any dignity during segregation. And we didn't have a car. So we really did literally ride on the back of the bus. I remember when everyone got engaged with the boycott of Rich's [department store in Atlanta, Georgia] and how we ultimately prevailed with that because they wanted a major league [baseball] team. And one of the things we were able to do in addition to the boycott was make the argument that, "You can't have people coming here from all over the country and all over the world to enjoy your professional league team in a segregated environment." And ultimately we prevailed. It was the leadership on the campus of Atlanta University [later Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia], that same village that lived on Beckwith Street, as well as others who were at the college. Who worked together the church leadership and some of the old guard white leadership including Mayor Ivan Allen [Jr., of Atlanta, Georgia], who just died recently [July, 2003], to make that happen. So all of this was very explicit in my upbringing. And then you make a move to a place that is just the opposite of it in every way. Story_ID: 6808 Speaker 1: So was Stockbridge [School, Interlaken, Massachusetts] any better? Speaker 2: Stockbridge was better in some senses. Stockbridge--very interesting. We flew the U.N. [United Nations] flag. The director and founder [Berta Rantz] of the Stockbridge School was a German who had hated [Adolf] Hitler and all that he represented, and had left to come to the United States to set up an educational setting in which young people would learn internationally. A student body made up of international students would learn how to live together and how to prevent the kind of thinking that had led to Nazism and the Fascism--governmentally, and the Holocaust as it was played out against not only Jews, but also people of color. And so we had very interesting people there. Some celebrities' children, but also the ones who I think you might have an interest in were the children of the 'Hollywood [Los Angeles, California] Ten' [group of screenwriters and directors who were accused of being Communists]. Some of them. Those who had been blacklisted during [U.S. Senator Joseph] McCarthy's [from Wisconsin] vengeful purge of anything pink, let alone red. And those writers and actors in Hollywood who he accused of being un-American. And we had people there from the House Un-American Activities Committee [HUAC] from time to time. And I'm sure I was on an FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] list before I ever got out of high school just, because I went there. And we used to make trips somewhere, in addition to the curriculum being geared this way. We would make trips as a whole class each year. And we'd sort of try to coordinate it with the studies going on at that time. So we went to Canada as sophomores. And then we lived in Europe for a semester as juniors. Right outside of Paris [France] in Sevres [France] for three months and then in London [England], for a month, while we were studying European history. A very interesting period of time. So yes. It was different. It still wasn't explicitly black. There were only ten percent of us. And some of them were African students, which I still have livelong friends, who are from Ghana. And one who's died and one, who is still alive living out on the West Coast. Kids from Mexico and Venezuela. We played soccer. (laughs) We had an awesome women's team, as well as a men's team from--with an international group of young people playing soccer. Very interesting time. Story_ID: 6809 Speaker 1: What subjects now are you gravitating to? Still the English and, you know, the social studies, or-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Philosophy. Speaker 1: Philosophy. Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: Okay. Philosophy that's right. Speaker 2: I had an excellent history teacher. Alex had been part of British intelligence in his younger days. And he brought some perspectives beyond any that I'd been exposed to that were very helpful in broadening my understanding. As well as I say living in the--well, we lived in Paris [France] at the height of the Algerian War! There were tanks rolling down the streets. And there were student movements of young people of color from all over the world that I was adventurous enough to go out and meet. I had close friends who would show me the newspapers and say, "Look what your government is doing!" At a time when I had never been exposed to that kind of thing before. And I would not be affected the way some of my white classmates would be affected, because I came out of our movement. So I was at least aware that the government and the people of the United States were capable of great unfairness, great historic injustices and contemporary injustices. But I had never seen body parts on the front pages of papers. And accusations of about how the government, this United States government, was imposing itself as CIA [Central Intelligence Agency] and Interpol [International Police Organization] and others were imposing themselves in other nations--in the affairs of other nations of peoples of color especially in Angola. So it was quite an eye-opening period of time. I also was able to just spend hours and hours and hours alone in the Louvre [Museum, Paris, France] and the Rodin Museum [Paris, France] and to read things and meet people I never would have met before. Speaker 1: Now how are you then changing internally as a person during this time? Speaker 2: This is when you began to see yourself not only as an African American child of the South, out of the womb and cocoon of the village there into some hostilities among whites that you know something about, but had never experienced that way personally as one did in southern Illinois, into being called and referring to yourself as a young adult who's a citizen of the world. An African (with emphasis) citizen of the world but nevertheless having a much broader perspective of who you are and what your obligations are. I thought that my set of responsibilities were enlarged to include other peoples around the world. Other peoples of color, but also everyone around the world. And that was a new experience. Story_ID: 6810 Speaker 1: Now your mother [Leathia Annette Lewis] is she still at this point at--in Carbondale [Illinois]? Speaker 2: She was until I was sixteen. At which time she married [Joseph] Joe Fenezie and moved back to Atlanta [Georgia]. Speaker 1: And anything else important, about the Stockbridge [School, Interlaken, Massachusetts] experience? How large was the school? Speaker 2: Small school. Small school. Maybe a hundred and twenty. Speaker 1: Total? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) In your class? Speaker 2: In my class. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Okay. Speaker 2: And--but anything else important about that time? Any other relationships? Any other teachers? Any other, you know, experiences? Speaker 1: There are some. But I'm not sure they all are appropriate for this kind of documentation. But I did meet people from a quite a number of places in the world. And I did come to understand the workings of the government. Not as benign neglect or just old Southern tradition, but as a conscious force in peoples' lives and in the lives of people in other countries around the world, and sharply honed in on that. One other thing that would probably be interesting. I organized for Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.]. Not for him personally, but for the [Civil Rights] Movement. A fund drive up there in the Berkshires [Massachusetts]. And actually got to present this little check to him at this wonderful Carnegie Hall [auditorium in New York, New York] program that they had. I believed that must have been in '61 [1961], but I'm not sure. But they had put together--Sammy Davis Jr. was there and a number of others. And they had put together a tribute To Dr. King. And I was the only student that I can remember who came to present a check having gone door-to-door. And that was an eye-opener. Because although those people were hardly as raw as the southern Illinois folks, they were cold and they did not really come out with a lot of support for the movement. They expressed support verbally. Pardon me. They would express support verbally perhaps. But a lot of them acted like they didn't know anything about it--da, da, da, da--but anyway nevertheless, I know Human Rights Committee which I chaired on the campus was able to present a little check upon--on the stage at Carnegie Hall. Going out of that. Not just from the school, but from the neighboring community. The other thing about that setting in the Berkshires of Massachusetts was we were about a mile away from Tanglewood [classical music venue in Interlaken, Massachusetts] and [Berkshire] Music Barn [folk and jazz music venue in Lenox, Massachusetts]. So we were able to be exposed to some wonderful cultural folk music as well as classical music. Some jazz, but mostly folk and classical music in those generated settings. One of my classmates--I hesitate to talk about some of the celebrities who were there, but one of them was Arlo Guthrie. He was right behind me. And he was the son of Woody Guthrie and the godson of Pete Seeger. And this was in a period of time when folk music was very, very big. And I sang. And I started to play the guitar a little bit--nothing like Arlo or his six string guitar. But we used to sing for hours and hours and hours, all of us. And I remember in particular that most of us had never heard most of the verses to 'This Land Is Your Land, This Land Is My Land'. But Arlo knew. I swear it must have been a hundred or a hundred and fifty verses. A lot more "subversive" verses and raw and to the left of those that were publicly known. And we used to listen him and we used to sing with him and others who played. Lots of people played guitars, but nobody like Arlo, of course. But we used to have great, great music fests just ourselves. Story_ID: 6811 Speaker 1: Now its time for you to graduate [from high school at Stockbridge School, Interlaken, Massachusetts]. What--how is it that you--is it always assumed that you're going to Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee], because your mother went to Fisk? Speaker 2: No. Its not assumed that I'm going to Fisk. It's obviously it's assumed that I'm going to college, and I was so surprised--that's another story about Stockbridge--I was so surprised when one of my friends, real tight friends from back when I first got there, who was a Jewish young man from New York, asked me in all seriousness one day whether I was going to college. I looked (laughs) at him like he was crazy! It had never occurred to me that anybody there or, you know, in any way privileged at all would even consider not going to college. It was the first time it had ever, ever occurred to me. He in fact didn't go, and he was a brilliant, brilliant young man. But that's just not the choice he made. But, of course, I said, "Of course!" Well, you know. But I--and they tried to steer me towards the Ivys [Ivy League colleges] and some of the girls' schools. I remember particularly they wanted me to think about Vassar [College, Poughkeepsie, New York] and Bryn Mawr [College, Bryn Mawr, Pennsylvania] and Wellesley [College, Wellesley, Massachusetts]. But I told them, "No." And I only applied to Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee]. It was the only school I applied to. Mr. Donnelly, who had known my mother [Leathia Annette Lewis] when she was there wrote me directly back and said, "Yes." And I went on down. Story_ID: 6812 Speaker 1: Now so how was that experience? You're going, you know, to your mother's [Leathia Annette Lewis] alma mater. And you said--did you called them Fiskites [students attending Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee]? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. That's what the legacy kids are called, huh? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Well everybody. Speaker 1: Okay. Everybody's a Fiskite. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Everybody's a Fiskite. Um-hmm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Everybody is. Speaker 1: It was a wonderful experience. And one that I absolutely relished from day one. I had been going to Fisk throughout my childhood with my mother for her various reunions or whatever activities were going on there, so it was not new to me. A number of people who had taught her were still there when I went. Including her French professor, Dr. Jean Catin (ph.). And I did have all of my French with him. Mr. [John] Work's [III] son [John Work, IV] was there. The wonderful musicologist and musician. And composer and arranger John W.[Wesley] Work. The whole legacy of the Works and their chronicling of the spirituals and the secret codes and meanings within the spirituals and the excellence of the world-renowned [Fisk] Jubilee Singers grow out of their works. They were there. I never shall forget my first day in art appreciation were in this great well. You know, how they have these auditoriums that sits two hundred or more people and you're just looking down. And there the teacher or the professor is at the bottom of the well. It's a tiny figure by the time you look down that far. And I realized that it was [artist] Aaron Douglas! And I was just awe stricken! And then shortly there after, I heard all this clambering and clowning and going on and I realized that I may be the only one in the room who knew who Mr. Douglas was. And he was so patient and quiet. He was waiting for these rowdy underclassmen to get their act together. And I found myself weeping that he would be in that position because we didn't know who he was. Well, of course, by the time you're finished, you know who he is. But that was a sobering moment. Arna Bontemps was there in the library. And just so many wonderful--Robert Hayden, the poet was there. I didn't--I majored in Philosophy and minored in English and History. So that I could take everything (laughs) that Mr. Hayden and others were teaching while I was there. It was a wonderful rich experience. I jumped head first into all the student activities. You know, Stagecrafters [Fisk's drama company], student paper [the 'Fisk Forum']. We organized an Honor Society, which was to bring the honor system to Fisk. So that when you took exams, if you were in the honor system you would have unproctored exams. That was a two-year struggle to get that passed. And we did that. Of course, we also had our own demonstration--the [Civil Rights] Movement was in full bloom. And there was a history on the legacy of Fisk students being involved in the movement. Diane Nash Bevel, John Lewis and a number of others who had been--who were older than we, but had already blazed that trail. I was also one of the leaders of the strikes against our own administration and our own system there. I remember being in the vanguard of the first major strike and the university was caught. The administration was caught completely unaware. We had the local TV, print and radio people out there on the lawn. And we had a teach-in out there on the grass protesting in loco parentis, the way we were being treated. And we thought we were young adults and we shouldn't have these curfews. And some of these rules were just so archaic. As well as more mundane things like food. But also that there were no real black studies being taught. And we had an effective strike. President at the time, Stephen J. Wright was very patient, very. He was stern. He was--he did everything he should have done from a trustee's point of view. But at the same time he also mentored us, unbeknownst to us. He would require us to come to meetings with him once a week to talk things through once we settled the strike itself. And I know now and have known since for some time, but didn't know at the time that he was teaching us how to handle negotiations at that level even at that point in time by taking us through our paces and preparing us. And years later he took me, pointed to the brand new library we had across the street and he said, "I don't ever want you to look at this library without giving yourself a little silent pat on the back. Because you are responsible for the fact that we raised the funds to get this library at Fisk University." And he didn't mean the whole group. He meant me. Because he would ask me following our meetings with him to come to the trustee's meetings. And go before this one or that one when they were coming on campus to talk about funding and represent the student point of view. And I never even knew it at the time. But later after it was built that's when he told me. So he prepared us in a very significant way to handle our affairs properly, respectfully, but to succeed, to prevail. And I really thank him for that. He's passed on now. Story_ID: 6813 Speaker 1: Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee] was a freeing experience in many ways? You got a socially active as you got, you know, because you were with the campus queens. You know, you-- Did you join the sorority at that time? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yes. I join--I pledged Delta Sigma Theta while I was at Fisk in '65 [1965]. I was already the editor of the paper [the 'Fisk Forum']. A Stagecrafter [Fisk's drama company] with leading roles in some of the plays. The Honor Society was one of the things that I did some--you know, started as opposed to joining something that already existed there. So we were--we were very active. We were very active in that period of time. Speaker 1: Can you describe the campus sort of at that point? I mean, you know, what was it like there then? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) It's a small campus. It's always been a small campus. At that time it was beautiful. It has gone down in times since. And some restoration is now beginning to occur again, thank God. But it was--I thought it was beautiful. Magnolia trees, historic Jubilee Hall actually built by the ancestors who became the Jubilee Singers, who went all over the world bringing spirituals to the world in order to raise money to save Fisk. Newer buildings as well. The old academic--main academic building is one where all of the murals--Mr. [Aaron] Douglas's murals are literally on the walls. Not so much now. Unfortunately. I don't what has happened. We had a burgeoning art collection. We had a little theater. The student center was a hub of activity. The canteen was a place where we loved to go and dance and eat snacks. We really didn't have much of a life off of the campus. Not much. We mainly centered all of our activities right there on the campus. Speaker 1: And who were the people who primarily mentored you or influenced you during that time there? Speaker 2: Dr. [Stephen J.] Wright, the President [of Fisk University], himself. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) The presi--okay. Speaker 2: Because of the negotiations. In addition, Dr. [Jean] Coutin, who had been there when--my mother [Leathia Annette Lewis] had majored under him and who had loved my mother. To a lesser degree, Steven Currier (ph.). The legendary professor of history, John Hope Franklin professor of history was still there. And I say a lesser degree, because I minored in history. But I really didn't take that many of Mr. Currier's courses. I took mainly from Puchigi Anwachian (ph.) and some of the other African scholars. And my major professor in the Department of Philosophy--and by the way, even though I had this bent towards philosophical thinking, the real reason I took philosophy, majored in philosophy at Fisk, was I could do so much independent studying. I would have at least two and sometimes as many as three independent studies in a given semester where I could choose the topic. And I chose [W.E.B.] DuBois. I decided to read everything that Dr. DuBois had written before I finished school. And that was really, because I went to the March On Washington, right before coming as a freshman in '63 [1963], and Dr. DuBois had died on the eve of the March On Washington. And I was so struck with regret that I had never had a chance to meet him or to, you know. I had read, of course, I had read 'Souls of Black Folk'. But I had not really studied anything by him. So that was when I was able to start really, even though Fisk didn't have African American studies, I was able to start independently on a course that would take me into African American studies. It was wonderful. So Dr. Oswald Schrag was my major professor Chair of the Department of Philosophy. And he was just the most patient, careful--he would make sure those studies were authentic. And he would guide us along the way. He would challenge us along the way. But he would let us do our own thinking. And that was very important to me. Also Dr. Myron Lunine, who started the honor's program. And I participated in every aspect of the honor's program, the entire time I was there. And he was very tough. He brought a lot of rigor. A lot of new ways of looking at things for all of us. Which I enjoyed a great deal. Story_ID: 6814 Speaker 1: What did you learn about W.[E.] B. DuBois that, you know, was sort of surprising to you, or instructive, or--anything in your research of him? Speaker 2: About his life? Speaker 1: Um-hmm. Speaker 2: Not really. Nothing about his life was--he went to Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee], you know, he was a Fisk man. And he was born in Great Barrington, Massachusetts, which is not far from where I had been in the Berkshires. So I understood a little bit about that. What Dr. DuBois represents for me is just the highest, and sharpest, and most incisive form of thinking that an African person in the United States has ever done. He created the black intelligentsia here. And he sustained it. He created it with 'Souls Of Black Folk', which is a hundred years old in 2003. He sustained it through his 'Crisis' writings and other studies such as the 'Atlanta University Studies [of the Negro Problem]'. Which really is the seminal set of studies leading to black studies as a discipline, which didn't exist at that time. The 'Philadelphia Negro Study' that he did was the first sociological study ever done in the United States. Fifteen years before sociology was a discipline was offered in any of the major universities, Dr. DuBois conducted that study. At Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] his thesis, when he finished school was 'Suppression of the African Slave Trade [to the United States of America, 1638-1870]'. Nobody had ever done a monumental work of that nature. So how do we look systematically at our life as African people in the United States. How do we define it? How do we shape it? And then how do we change it to make conditions better? How do we understand that the economy and economic factors are every bit as important as some of the social factors? Dr. DuBois was bitterly castigated and demonized by the McCarthyites [followers of Sen. Joseph McCarthy vehemently opposed to Communism], because of his Socialist beliefs. But nobody with any sense in the '20s [1920s] and '30s [1930s] looking at the condition of African people in the '40s [1940s] as well could fail to question whether capitalism was the only way we ought to be approaching things and giving the conditions that we were facing. So it was perfectly logical. And a lot of members of the Jewish community, who were partners in labor and civil rights efforts also were Socialists during that period of time. And a lot of the kids I went to Stockbridge [School, Interlaken, Massachusetts] with had parents or grandparents, who had come out of that era as well. Story_ID: 6815 Speaker 1: What are you thinking you wanna do you know, once you graduate? Are you thinking you're gonna follow in the family tradition of teaching? Speaker 2: Teaching. Um-hmm. Absolutely. And I did. I taught at the University of Maryland [University College Europe] overseas division while my husband [Kenneth Carlton Edelin, Sr.] and I were stationed in England. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Can you talk about your getting married (laughs). Speaker 2: Okay. I skipped right over that did we? I got married--In fact, I got engaged to Kenneth Edelin in my sophomore year. He was also in Nashville [Tennessee], a sophomore at Meharry [Medical College, Nashville, Tennesee]. We beca--we were there the same four years '63 [1963] to '67 [1967], and he got his M.D. at that point. He was stationed first in Dayton, Ohio, which is where our son Ken [Kenneth Carlton Edelin, Jr.] was born at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base. And then in '68 [1968], shortly after Dr. [Martin Luther] King's assassination we moved to England for three years, where he was stationed at RAF [Royal Air Force] Lakenheath. And my daughter, Kimberley [Sabel Edelin-Freeman] was born while we were there. I got my Master's degree at the University of East Anglia, in Norwich, England while we were there. And we did a little bit of traveling which was good. It's good to know you've got exactly three years. And even though you're just starting out in a different economy the little resource that you have goes a little further. So we were able to plan and do a few things during that time. And so we came on back to Boston [Massachusetts] at the end of that period. But I took the masters in philosophy a one-year course of study including the thesis, very tough, very tough. You realize for the first time what people in England mean when they say, "Americans don't speak English." They speak a different language and their approach to philosophy was very different from the classical course of study that I had, had at Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee]. They were talking about philosophy of mind and [Ludwig] Wittgenstein and much more empirical approach to philosophy there than anything that I had been exposed to. Which was very good. I'm glad I got exposed to that. But it was all brand new. Speaker 1: (Unclear)--. Speaker 2: And I had this young child and I was commuting on the train three times a week from Bedford [England] to Norwich [England], because--and the reason I ended up at East Anglia was very few of the British universities permit non-residential students. But as a woman with a family and a young child, of course, I had to have a non-residential arrangement. So I ended up going there. Speaker 1: So you had one--did you have your second child? Did you say you had your--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Kim was--Kimmy was born there after I got my Masters. She was born in '70 [1970]. And I completed that work in '69 [1969]. And the day that I called my mother [Leathia Annette Lewis] to tell her that I'd passed my oral exams was the day she told me, my grandmother [Leathia Lightner Lewis] had died. That same day. And while we were there, in fact, the day that we called back to the states to announce Kimmy's birth my husband found out that his father had died. He, in fact, just barely got us home from the hospital and had to come back to the states for his father's funeral. So life has these powerful coincidences of birth and death. Speaker 1: And that was a lot. And you're still a young, you know, newlywed couple-- Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: --and in a, you know, foreign country. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) In a foreign country. Speaker 1: Now let me--just let me ask you which--you know, because you had been active, you know, aware of, you know, in the [Civil Rights] Movement. But you sort of--but you know, you said you just left, you know, when [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] died. And so there's all this activity. Not to say there wasn't activity before. But there's still this continuing activity. I mean you're not being active over there. You're raising, you know, you're-- Speaker 2: No. We were active a different way there. But let me back up though for one moment. I shall never forget. You know, a medical intern is never home. My husband was never home. He would be on thirty-six hours and off twelve. And that meant that he could barely drag in and get something to eat, and then go sleep, and then go back. So my young son and I were pretty much on this base [Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, Dayton, Ohio] with only one car. And there again, after all the activity of--in the world just a shutdown. But also with people, who were very different from us in terms of being overwhelmingly white and military. I am not military, culturally at all. But I never shall forget the day that Dr. King died. And I skipped over another important part that I have to come back to. I worked for Dr. King in 1965, as a student in the summer. And I was close to him. And, of course, being a person of the Movement we all felt close to him. And so when--his assassination was particularly difficult for me. And I remember looking out, with my baby in my arms, looking out of the blinds at these military people not only just going about their everyday affairs as though nothing had happened, but in some cases jubilant that he was dead. So I was ready to leave this country when we were able to leave some months later to be in England for a while. I was ready not to be here at that point in time. It was devastating. And I just wanted to get away for a while. That may be why we put in for an overseas assignment. Anyway the Movement was going in that direction. But he had not been assassinated when we made that request. But I was very glad to be able to leave when we did leave. Story_ID: 6816 Speaker 1: Can you talk about the work that you did for Dr. [Martin Luther] King? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) I worked for Dr. King in the summer of '65 [1965] as a college student [at Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee]. I was a--I think the official title was clerk typist which was you do everything. (laughs) Right? That somebody else is not already doing, who's more senior. I worked in [Andrew] Andy Young's office and we had the convention that summer was in Birmingham [Alabama] and was very historic because that was the convention at which the Anti-War Resolution was passed. And I don't know how many people really realize it. But Dr. King had a terrible internal struggle with his own people, his closest people in some cases. They didn't want him to come out against the war. Of course, the press were all--said, all said, "You know, you know civil rights you don't know foreign affairs. This is none of your business. Don't even discuss it." But he just had a principle position that--pardon me, he had a principle position that the war was wrong and it was unjust. And moreover that the resources for the war were taking away from the war on poverty, which had barely gotten off the ground. And so it was hurting us at home and abroad. And he could not in conscience be silent about it. But it was a bitter struggle. And somebody in my position kind of gets the brunt of that when you work for an organization and you're pulling a convention together. 'Cause remember now this is before computers. There's no word processing. You've got those old typewriters that, you know, you really have to press down real hard. If you make a mistake you gotta take out that piece of paper and start out all over again. Well they reworked, and reworked that resolution on Vietnam at least twenty times. And I never shall forget it was 3:00 or 3:30 in the morning when I thought I had almost finished the draft they had just brought me. That Bayard Rustin brought me a new draft in and threw it on the table and very haughtily said, "Tear that up and start all over again!" with no concern or regard for this child, (laughs), who was sitting there trying to work through this stuff. And this was the day of the old purple mimeograph where you had to run them off one at a time. And you're talking about 10,000! I mean I worked that summer. But it was exhilarating. It was exhilarating. And when that resolution passed I remember being among those who leapt to their feet and cried and shouted with joy that we had prevailed, because of that--taking that position. But it was tough. Very tough. Story_ID: 6817 Speaker 1: Can you talk about some of the players at that time, you know, who were out of the office and, you know--, Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah. Speaker 1: --as you assess, you know. come to even, you know, what--who was for? Who was against? You know, what the issues were? Speaker 2: I don't wanna go into who was for and who was against. Because I don't know that they ever have. I think once they worked it out, they came out as a unified front. But there was very serious opposition. One person I like to tell a story about is [Rev.] James Orange. Because he used to come back from the field. This was a big man! Rev. Orange. He's still alive. Used to come out of the field from the voter mobilization and voter registration drives and tell stories to us in the office about black people up in trees on plantations down South throwing rocks and sticks down on the organizers who were trying to get them to register to vote. Because their white master--it was like they were still enslaved. Had told them that, "These were dangerous people and drive them off if you see 'em coming. Drive 'em off and don't listen to 'em and don't let 'em talk to you." And having to figure out ways to get to know these people over time and bring them around and get them in to register and vote. Some you could, some you couldn't. It was also Rev. Orange, who told me--I said something about being non-violent. And he just laughed. He just threw back his head and laughed. He said, "Little sister, you can't be non-violent. You too little to be non-violent. Now I can be non-violent," he said (laughs). It was that choice. It was so choice. But he's a wonderful person. He's still on the scene today. The organizers were--the field organizers were always of interest to me. They weren't in the office everyday. They would go out and come back. And I would listen to their stories raptly when I had a chance. We had people throw bombs in the office. We had people throw Molotov cocktails in the windows. There were times when security was of the utmost concern. We got tons of hate mail. I didn't have to see a lot of it, thank goodness. They were just--they could sort of recognize it from the envelope and they'd just get it to one person. So that, you know, someone like me didn't have to really to deal with that. But I learned a lot about office decorum. I learned how to talk to important personages and to move an agenda forward in that office. It was very, very instructive and tense period of time. Xernona Clayton, who is now at CNN [Cable News Network]. We call her, 'Big', you know, she's a twin and small as she was, she was Big and her twin was 'Little', right? But she gave me an award at the close of the summer for the employee of the summer, which I've really relished. And she. Said a little special thanks to me in the convention book that they put--the program book that they put together. Speaker 1: And what was her relationship then? Speaker 2: She was in public relations. She's always been in public relations. Speaker 1: Now, you know, 'cause people talk about that--you know, that Andrew Young was on one side the, you know. And then at this point Rev. [Jesse] Jackson was getting involved. And then there's-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Rev. [Jesse] Jackson was not in Atlanta [Georgia] that summer. Speaker 1: At that--. Speaker 2: He was-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --at the convention probably. But he was not one of the Atlanta-based--headquarters-based people. Rev. [Joseph] Lowery was in and out. He was not there all the time. Rev. [James] Bevel was there a lot of the time. Rev. [Fred] Shuttlesworth was there a lot of time and Rev. [Fred] Bennett. Of course, Andy [Andrew Young] and Rev.[Ralph] Abernathy. But a lot of the other SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] offices or branch offices around the country were only really--I only really came across them at the convention. Story_ID: 6818 Speaker 1: Martin Luther King, did he remember you, you know, from, from--? Speaker 2: I'm not sure. I think maybe at the closing little thing he may have. But I'm not sure that he did. I couldn't say for sure. I'd like to think so. You know. Andy [Andrew Young] certainly did. In fact, Andy was one of the ministers, who officiated at my wedding. And then I've seen him many years since. So he-- Speaker 1: He told M. [Moses] Carl Holman when I first came to the National Urban Coalition [for Unity and Peace], "I know you've got a good one there. 'Cause we trained her (laughs)." You know. So he remembers me. Speaker 2: So would we--he wasn't on Beckwith [Street, Atlanta, Georgia]--was he--when you were going up on Beckwith? Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) No. He was not in Atlanta University [later Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 2: Okay. Okay. Now so you--you say, you leave and, you know, you're spending--when you're in England you're spending a lot of time by yourself really is what your saying. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) This is what's different in England. This is how the [Civil Rights] Movement continues in England and it's heartbreaking. When you finish your tour of duty in Vietnam, you can choose your port--your next port of call, your next base where you will be stationed. And many of the African American men, who had--who were being deployed out of Vietnam chose RAF [Royal Air Force] Lakenheath [military base in England]. Because they had recently closed a lot of the bases in France and, because you didn't have to learn another language in order to be there. So I was one of the--we were among the few young black couples with children, who had a home environment that a lot of these young boys found some refuge in. So we would find ourselves talking to them. I'd find myself feeding them. And above all we would find ourselves learning about the absolutely horrible situations that they had been in, with respect to the Vietnam War. The racism that they encountered. The fact that many times the drugs that were exposed to came from our own government. Tragic circumstances of life and struggle and addiction that many of them have met--I really would like at some point someone to do a study, cultural anthropological study of the impact of the Vietnam War on black family formation. Because I have never seen such devastation as our men encountered in that war--more than women. There were not as many women involved in the Vietnam War as they have been in some of the subsequent frontiers. But it was devastating. Whether you went or you didn't go and whether you were in a different theater like we were [Royal Air Force] Lakenheath as opposed to Hanoi [Vietnam]. It affected so many lives. Those are the men, who should be the fathers and the grandfathers of these children that we have such concern about now. And many of them were never able to function after that encounter. Story_ID: 6819 Speaker 1: I remember on Beckwith Street [Atlanta, Georgia] how we all collectively mourned the murder of Emmett Till [1955] and watched every day with the 'Little Rock Nine' [group of students who integrated Central High School in Little Rock, Arkansas] as they integrated. And Charlayne [Hunter-Gault] and [Hamilton] 'Hamp' [Holmes] were kids from Atlanta [Georgia]. Some of us knew when they went to the University of Georgia [Athens, Georgia]. So these were collective vigils and we were actively morally supporting all of those desegregation efforts. I remember that we got out of school in celebration when Brown v. Board of Education [1954] was announced in '54 [1954]. So this was not like I say, none of it was happenstance. It was all very conscious and explicit cultural work. Story_ID: 6820 Speaker 1: And the other thing I wanna mention, this is going up, you know, past Atlanta University [later Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia], but you had mentioned it during the photos about the week with John Oliver Killens (unclear), and you said--you know and I'd just like you to describe that. Speaker 2: At Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee] we were blessed for two years to have John Oliver Killens as a writer-in-residence. And he organized the African American writers workshops at Fisk. All of the wonderful writers of that period of time would come. And we had a real tough session one year between [Amiri] Baraka and [Robert] Hayden and some of the others. That was when Baraka first read 'Up Against the Wall' (with emphasis), you know, and some of the old school folks was just--could not get to it. And they, they would fight. They would yell and we were all witness to that. But in addition, he worked with students and writers. I remember Mignon Holland [Anderson] who has gone on to become a writer and Nikki Giovanni who finished with me. And several other very good young writers who were already writing at the time. Just had a tremendous exposure to him and to the others that he brought on to the campus. It was a wonderful cultural experience. Speaker 1: And you were talking about the two weeks, I think, with Harry Belafonte. Speaker 2: And one spring festival he also brought Harry Belafonte and Sidney Poitier and they stayed a whole week. They did convocations that involved the whole campus, but they also did smaller workshops. They met particular aspiring artists. They gave coaching. They gave, you know, little talks and they listened and they watched and they took part in the life of the community throughout that whole spring festival. It was one of the highlights of our whole college life. Story_ID: 6821 Speaker 1: When it's time for your, your husband's [Kenneth Carlton Edelin, Sr.] tour of duty, you know, when it's up there [at Royal Air Force Lakenheath, England]. Where do you come back to then? Is it--do you (unclear)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) We came back to Boston [Massachusetts]. Ken was at Boston City Hospital as a resident. That was where his residency--where he found his residency. So we went there. And Ken, you may recall a legal case where the first African American Chief Resident of Obstetrics and Gynecology at Boston City Hospital was tried and convicted of manslaughter, in the case of a legal (with emphasis) abortion [Commonwealth of Massachusetts v. Kenneth Edelin, 1973], that was my former husband. What it was a test case that they were able to drag out for three years. And the right to life movement really got a lot of momentum behind what they were able to do there. They had an all-white male, Catholic jury who convicted him of manslaughter, calling it manslaughter for the performance of a legal abortion. And, of course, it was overturned. But it was overturned three years and I don't know how much money later by the Supreme Court of the State of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. In the mean time, they got a lot of publicity, a lot of money was raised around the whole issue of the right to life. And that's--the real attempt was to was to have a go at Roe v. Wade [1973], but this case had nothing to do with Roe v. Wade. But they were able to make a lot of hay out of that. Speaker 1: So this is 1970, '71 [1971], '71 [1971]--, Speaker 2: '71 [1971] and 2 [1972] I believe. Speaker 1: Okay. And you--okay. Was that devastating? And (unclear)--, Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) It was devastating and it was doubly devastating, because we had separated before this but we were not divorced. And I actually got death threats from these right to life people against my own children. So I'm now a single mother, founder and chair of the Department of African American Studies at Northeastern University [Boston, Massachusetts], which itself is a battle royale, finishing up my Ph.D. work at Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts], which is another battle royale, and also confronted with this kind of devastation. Story_ID: 6822 Speaker 1: And then '71 [1971], do you apply for the program at Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts] before you--and get accepted before you come back? Is that how it worked or--, Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) No. Not before I got back. Speaker 1: Okay. But when you get back--, Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) When I got back. Speaker 1: And you had decided that you wanted to go, I mean at that point you wanted to sort of go on and get your Ph.D.? Speaker 2: I started by teaching at Emerson College [Boston, Massachusetts]. I was teaching in their undergraduate program. Emerson is a wonderful preparatory program for speech and drama. And they wanted those young people before they specialized to get a good general background. So I was one of the people who developed their first level studies program and taught in it for one year. And during that very first summer, Northeastern University [Boston, Massachusetts] asked me to come and help them with a pre--a summer program for pre-entrance. Kids who could only be admitted if they successfully completed that summer program. And that accelerated through the African-American Institute [at Northeastern University] into a full-time struggle there at the campus. And in an effort to enlarge their curricular offerings from the African-American Institute which were not courses for which you got any credit and they were free as well--most of them, into a fully fledged department of African American studies recognized by the College of Liberal Arts. So I took that struggle on and won the acceptance of the Department of African American Studies within the college of Liberal Arts, and started that program. Speaker 1: So how long a period did it take you to do that? Speaker 2: Two years. Speaker 1: Two years. So is that from '72 [1972] to '74 [1974]? Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: Okay. Now tell me, I mean 'cause this is the time when departments are coming about. Well, you know--, Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Well this not among the first. Speaker 1: This was not the first, this--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Was not among the first departments. We had the benefit of what had been learned. We didn't have to reinvent the wheel. Although we did do things that were particular to Northeastern. But I had the benefit of Richard Long from Atlanta University [later Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] and James Turner from Africana Studies at Cornell [University, Ithaca, New York] and some other close friends who were able to give me the benefit of what they had learned and what they had developed in African American studies since, really since the late '60s [1960s]. And so we were not reinventing the wheel entirely. What we were able to do, however, because Northeastern University was the largest private school in the country and is the granddaddy of cooperative education, and had a largely working-class population even though it was a private school. We were able to bring in business and criminal justice and pre-law and other disciplines. And not simply be history and literature focused. We had fifteen full-time faculty and about fifteen or eighteen adjunct professors who came from law, archaeology, anthropology, business, a lot of business people out in the community. People who were actually working who could then help these young people find work as well as apply their knowledge in an academic setting. So it was--it was new in that respect. But the corpus of the studies curriculum coming out of history and literature we did not have to invent. Speaker 1: Okay. And what were your challenges that you sort of experienced and sort of overcame even in starting a department like that? Speaker 2: Oh it was a tremendous struggle. Boston [Massachusetts] is one of the most racist places on the planet. Especially during that period of time. Remember in '76 [1976] when we celebrated the Bicentennial, one of our friends, Ted Landsmark, was impaled on the American flag right in front of [Boston] City Hall. That's a photograph that went all over the world. [Anna] Louise Day Hicks, it hadn't been long since she was riding around town with bullhorns talking about not having forced busing with these niggers. Children were being stoned to death and stoned and maimed on school buses. They had to send out decoys and every glass, every pane of glass in the bus would be gone. I don't know how they did that. I'll never--coming from Atlanta [Georgia], I will never understand how the black community in Boston permitted that to happen, but in any event, all of that was going on while we were doing this. So there were--there was a tremendous racial (with emphasis) environment. What happened to my former husband [Kenneth Carlton Edelin, Sr.] was racial in nature, even though he's very fair [skinned]. And he had a Brahman lawyer who decided to "Take the high road," and not introduce race into the equation from their point of view. One of the jurors was quoted after the verdict as saying, you know, "The nigger is guilty as sin." And that was the position that they had, had ever since day one. So it took the Supreme Court of the Commonwealth [of Massachusetts] to overturn--and by the way the sentence was probation. Because the judge knew that, that was all political. You know, he was convicted, but he never--all he had was probation. But what a tremendous drain of psychic, emotional, professional and financial resources to have to have dealt with that. Speaker 1: Did your husband--your ex-husband, did he recover from that? Speaker 2: Oh yes. Story_ID: 6823 Speaker 1: Who were some of the people that were your colleagues at Northeastern Illinois University [sic, Northeastern University, Boston, Massachusetts] and, you know, just even within the larger community that you got to know. Was [Melvin] Mel King was he-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) [Melvin] Mel King was at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] leading a program that helped develop young people interested in policy. And Elton Lewis, Elton Jackson, everybody. We were connected with all of the leadership. We participated in women in politics, which was one of the--Ellen's main organizations. We had radio, TV, press, a lot of press attention. We were right in the mix, right in the center of things. Speaker 1: And, so what did--you did this for how many years you said? Speaker 2: Five years all together. I moved to Washington [D.C.] in '77 [1977]. Speaker 1: Okay. And what brought you to Washington then? Speaker 2: I was very fed up with the Boston [Massachusetts] scene and with the scene at Speaker 1: Northeastern [University, Boston Massachusetts], where a hostile administration was always trying to undercut your budget, your credibility. So having gotten the department on its feet and it still stands and it's still doing good work, which I'm very proud of, I decided I didn't want to be in that Boston community with my young children any longer. So without knowing what I would be doing or why I was coming to Washington, I acted on an intuition to come to Washington. Speaker 2: Okay. Now at this point how many children? You-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Two. Speaker 2: --still the two, two children. I wanna ask you though--there were people--the arts community, they had gotten very integrated at Northeastern Illinois [sic, Northeastern University, Boston, Massachusetts] (unclear)--. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) I started the consortium that actually became a real breeding ground for the arts there. Dana Chandler [artist] came and asked me at a point and time whether that was really roo--he was on the faculty. But whether there was really room in that building that could be converted into studio space for lots and lots of artists. And that was another fight that we had. But I thought that that was a good idea. And I took it, followed and we prevailed. And for a period of time there were a number of wonderful artists who had space there, unlike any space they had ever enjoyed before. Speaker 2: 'Cause it was Dana Chandler. There's--why am I forgetting some of their names? I know all of them. Oh well. Okay. I'm forgetting. Speaker 1: And I may not be able to remember right now. But they were all there. Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. So you come here. Now had you had contact with Washington at this point? No. Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: You're not part of the--you know, any part of the Washington fabric or scene. Speaker 1: Not really. My former husband [Kenneth Carlton Edelin, Sr.] was from Washington as a child. But he had lived in other places since then. And I had not really had any experience with any of his people to speak of, just in passing. So the answer is no. I had no orientation for Washington. Story_ID: 6824 Speaker 1: Why is Washington [D.C.] a choice at this point? Speaker 2: I don't know. That is a purely intuitive move. Speaker 1: Hmm. And this is 19--so we're at like 19--is it 197--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) '77 [1977]. Speaker 1: Okay. I was gonna say '78 [1978]. Okay. So in 1977, you move here and you have two children and no job. Speaker 2: Correct. Speaker 1: Okay. And so what do you proceed to do? Speaker 2: Well I started looking. Of course, I looked at some of the colleges. I looked at some of the think tanks. I looked places where policy could perhaps be developed. And then I went to the--I had a good friend from Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee] who was here who--Diane Kenney (ph.) who said, "You know there's one--if there's somebody who knows all the openings that there might be a--there's somebody everybody talks to and I used to work for him. And I'd like for you to meet him. He may not have anything, but he knows everybody and everything that everybody wants. They kind of call him the '[Black] Godfather'. His name is M. [Moses] Carl Holman and he's President of the National Urban Coalition." So I went on her advice and had an interview with Mr. Holman. And to my amazement found out that his executive assistant had just been stolen from him by Eleanor Holmes Norton who needed her help at EEOC [Equal Employment Opportunities Commission], and that he needed an executive assistant. And so my interview of two hours after the first ten minutes consisted of arguing with him that I was not overqualified for the position and that it would work out just fine. (laughs) And I went home and called mother [Leathia Annette Lewis] and told her that of all the things I had looked at, the one that was the most interesting to me was at the Urban Coalition with Carl Holman. And she said, "Carl Holman! Don't you remember him? He lived down the street in the [William] Boyd's house on Beckwith Street [Atlanta, Georgia]. (laughs) Well I didn't remember that. But she remembered him and his wife Mariella and their children. And one reason that we connected up is obviously he was cut out of the same cloth as my mother and that whole generation of people from Atlanta [Georgia]. When I told him that, he was absolutely speechless. He could not believe it. But that's one of those things that happens in life. You are just brought to some situations. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Right, right. And can you describe the work that he was doing there with his--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) I thought Mr. Holman was head and shoulders above the rest of the leadership at that point and time for two reasons. Number one. He was a poet and a writer and a journalist and an enormous humanitarian who was authentically looking to improve the lives of the poor. He remembered where he came from. He was still in close communication with his mother. He grew up in a poor neighborhood in St. Louis, Missouri, and went on through education to accomplish what he did in his life. And so his focus was always on education and on empowerment. And he was always looking to genuinely authentically improve the lives of the poor. And secondly because to be a coalition builder, and to be the glue that holds everyone else together, which is what he was, he had to suppress any desire to jump up in front of the camera and take publicity or steal headlines or any any of the rest of that. Which he was naturally inclined to do anyway. So he was never--was always self-effacing and he was never out there just for the celebrity or just to be seen or appreciated for the work that he was doing. And I thought that was quite remarkable, given his stature. So he really was the glue that was holding everything together. We had programs looking at displacement, which other people called gentrification, years before HUD [Department of Housing and Urban Development] or the Census Bureau acknowledged that it was taking place. We did the seminal work on that. The [National] Urban Coalition in that day was not as robust and vigorous and well-funded as it had been when John Gardner was the first chairman. But, of course, one hundred and eighty-five cities were in flames at that point in time. So he had the undivided attention of those at the pinnacles of power in both the private sector and the government. But that didn't last any longer than the flames did. And so by the time Carl Holman became president of the Urban Coalition in '71 [1971], many of them had already walked away and resources were depleted. And we had to really build from the ground up in cities all around the country, affiliated organizations and partnering organizations to continue that work. Very, very meaningful work. Very meaningful work. Mr. Holman and Vernon Jordan founded the Black Leadership Forum in '78 [1978]. I was a part of that whole process and staffed it for ten years, until his death. And then I became President in '88 [1988]. Mr. Holman and Raul Yzaguirre founded the National Committee on Concerns of Hispanics and Blacks also in 1978. Raul was on the board of the Urban Coalition. And that was an opportunity to bring the leadership from the Latino community together with the leadership from the African American community and way ahead of its time as well. So it was an exciting period. I felt it was deeply rewarding work. Some of the best work that was being done on these issues. Because the civil rights fights and battles had morphed into urban fights and battles for the most part. One of the reasons why the word "urban" right to this day is code is that it really means black or people of color and poor people. And it was an extension of the Civil Rights Movement. It was the next frontier and one where a lot of the economic dimensions of the problems became the most obvious. Story_ID: 6825 Speaker 1: Can you just for purposes of this interview just tell a little history about the [National] Urban Coalition. I don't think--its not a group that people really know about. Speaker 2: The National Urban Coalition was founded in 1967 literally in the flames of the urban riots. Andrew Heiskell who recently died at 'Time' who was then chairman of Time Inc. and A. [Asa] Philip Randolph were the co-conveners of an emergency convocation that became the National Urban Coalition. And they brought together big business, municipal mayors, leaders of organized labor and civil rights and human rights activists really for the first time to look at cities as cities. Because even though the United States was heavily urbanized, nobody had really looked at cities to see what had created the disinvestments. What policy, highway policy, tax policy and other policy had resulted in the disinvestments of the inner city core and how that could be reversed, as well as the overlay of race and class. So it was the first public, private partnership. It was the first look at cities per se. And in those days it just took a call from Wall Street to the White House to get certain things done. Because as I say so many cities were in flames and the devastation and the unstable business environment was intolerable. Unfortunately there's this wonderful picture on the front page of the 'New York Times' with David Rockefeller and George Meany and Mayor [John] Lindsay and A. Philip Randolph and others holding hands and praying and vowing to get to the root cause of urban problems. Unfortunately they did not stay long enough to get to the root causes of urban problems. But the National Urban Coalition worked on those problems including fiscal policy, community development, education, human experimentation. Lots of work in community development; very vigorously for a number of years until resources no longer permitted. Story_ID: 6826 Speaker 1: So you have really morphed out of the academic environment and more are--I mean probably started [at Northeastern University] in Boston [Massachusetts] with it, you know, being, founder and chairman of the department. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) I was still teaching. I was still teaching in Boston [Massachusetts]. I loved teaching. I love the classroom. And even though my administrative responsibilities were quite large, I always taught Intro to Afro-American Culture. But, yes. Basically coming to Washington [D.C.] and to the [National] Urban Coalition took me out of the classroom. Now one of the things that I did do was start the Emerging Leaders Development program. The executive leadership program, which was a rigorous yearlong course of study for African American and Latino emerging leaders. And that has been rewarding. It actually started in '84 [1984] when [Rev.] Jesse Jackson made his first run [campaign for President]. I had one fellow funded at that point and time. Since then I've had three classes of ten each who are still a formidable network of brilliant young, well-prepared activists. Not always scholars. Some come in from business. Some come in from other non-profit organizations. Some come in from academia. Speaker 1: And what was your goal with that program? Speaker 2: To prepare them to actually move into the leadership about civil rights and other organizations. To be better prepared, or in business if that's what they chose. Speaker 1: And you did that because you saw a gap. I mean there--Okay. Speaker 2: Yes. The young people desperately needed it. And this is one of the things I want to devote the rest of my working career to. Desperately need better preparation. When I look back and talk about the preparation that we had--that I had, precious little of that is available today. And certainly as they get into that eighteen to forty year old cohort where everything is on the line, and they're already demonstrating their own leadership, and they're already doing everything they can and they have so little support and so little preparation. It just seemed to me that cultural leadership, being networked with mentors, learning the inside reality of how these things are done, being exposed to the people who are getting it done is terribly important. Story_ID: 6827 Speaker 1: But '83 [1983] your mother [Leathia Annette Lewis] had passed away. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. And that-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) My mother passed in '83 [1983]. Speaker 1: I mean it's hard to lose one's mother. They say that you really grow up. Speaker 2: It is. It's--I think it's true of everyone I know. It certainly was true of me. Just an astonishing profound vulnerability that one has never felt before. Suddenly one--[pause] You lose your ledge, you lose--you just have to regroup on so many levels. And for me planning a large memorial service on the university campus that involved not only people in that town, but people from all over the country who were in that discipline or among the leadership. And then being a single mother and come right back to work and all. [pause] I thought I was bearing up. But in fact I went to a doctor about three months after my mother passed and she took my blood pressure about five times. And she finally said, "I have to--I'm taking your blood pressure over and over because I don't believe what I'm seeing here. Your pressure is off the charts and you have never had a problem with pressure before. What is going on?" And that's the first time I realized the extent to which I had internalized and repressed and bottled up all of that. And I was just so close to a devastating stroke or a heart condition or something else. So I had to take some time off. And I went into biofeedback and all that type of thing. Meditation and all to really--The problem was never having taken the time to grieve and then never having really dealt with the enormity of my loss. Speaker 1: 'Cause that was your last anchor. I mean your grandfather [William Charles Lewis, II], your grandmother [Leathia Lightner Lewis] and your mother. Speaker 2: Um-hmm. My uncle [William Charles Lewis, III] was still alive thank God. Story_ID: 6828 Speaker 1: Is it under Mr. [M. Carl] Holman's lead--that you become integrated within the Washington, D.C. community at that point? I'm not-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Actually you know, it's funny. In Washington D.C. a lot of your national organizations are based here. And a lot of them don't have anything to do with local [Washington] D.C. work. And ours really didn't. I'm involved in my neighborhood because I chose this neighborhood because of its school. All of my children finished--Shepherd Elementary [School, Washington, D.C.] down the street. So I'm involved it from that point of view. I have slowly become involved in the political life of the district. And we took a great interest in the education of it. Now that was one place where we said, 'We would not be all over the country and not in our own backyard with these wonderful enriching programs that we're developing in education.' So I've been involved with education. I was asked by various mayors and superintendents to serve on a number of panels. So I have been engaged at the policy level. But, no it was not just through working with Mr. Holman at the coalition that I became involved in D.C. We were more national. Speaker 1: Hmm. So who are the people you are interacting with nationally under--You know, with the--? Speaker 2: Everyone in the leadership. Everyone in the African American leadership, lots of business. This is where I first become exposed to lots of business CEO's [chief executive officers] and some of the people in the labor movement at the higher echelons. Because the Urban Coalition explicitly was a coalition of all of those different segments of the population who had an interest in cities and a vested interest--, Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Now who were some of these people? What was it-- (unclear) Did you come across Louis Sullivan [President of Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] at that time? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Mr. Sullivan was later--Dr. Sullivan was later. At that time Andrew Heiskell as I said was chairman of 'Time', Mayor Richard Hatcher [of Gary, Indiana]--gosh I would have to get a board list. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But there are a number of--the board member of the Urban Coalition when I first came were a very interesting group representing the different sectors who had a vested interest in cities at the highest levels. Speaker 1: So that--let me ask you to comment though on what was happening in cities and, you know, the inner city in that time period? And I'm asking this sort of from a, you know, hindsight perspective. Do you think that there were some opportune--you know, things that were done that were positive during that period? And also some opportunities missed, you know, in this whole discussion of the urban community? Speaker 2: Well yes. And I think it--it's also reflected in Dr. [Martin Luther] King's decision to oppose the war in Vietman. The Great Society [President John F. Kennedy's ideals for policy and government developed in the 1960s] did work. The programs of The Great Society did work in great measure where they were allowed to function properly. Where the funding or the rug got pulled out very prematurely, obviously they did not. So that I think that Head Start, which was one of those programs, the nutrition and feeding programs that reduced hunger so drastically were very effective. On the other hand model cities and some of the other community development and housing efforts didn't work as well. Because they did not develop. Early mistakes weren't able to be caught and corrected. And the resources dried up before a lot of that could be done. Some of the ideas may not have been sound. That's what you use developmental periods for. Nothing is already perfect when you first bring it out of the--you know, off the drawing board. But I think that some of the community development efforts certainly bore fruit. This was also the period of time when community development corporations and community action agencies were formed. And it was clearly a time when grassroots leadership on the ground had their first opportunity to really impact policy in a systematic way. And I think it was good for the communities and the leaders, but I think it was also good for national policy. Because benefiting from ground up advocacy certainly is what has made some of these programs work better later on. Story_ID: 6829 Speaker 1: Mr. [Moses Carl] Holman became ill. Mr. Holman succumbed in 1988 to prostate cancer, but he started I think probably a couple of years before that really understanding that he had the illness and beginning the transitioning process. And there was never a thought in my mind to become president of the National Urban Coalition, it was a thought in his mind. And so he orchestrated the transition before he died. And we had a wonderful--we usually had an annual meeting, an annual dinner. And at that dinner he--that's a picture I could bring too--at that dinner he officially passed the torch. And then in '88 [1988], he, he succumbed in August of '88 [1988] I believe. So that my role as Senior Vice President for Program and Policy--carrying the whole program and policy side of the house then changed to that of CEO [chief executive officer]. The programs that we had been working most on and for which we were getting most support at that time had to do with education. The executive leadership program that I was speaking of was a little, came back again. I was able to resurrect it a little later. But at that time the main focus of the organization around which we had done some strategic planning, what to do in light of the political reality and the [President Ronald] Reagan administration, the drying up of funding for all the kinds of efforts that we were engaged in, a deliberate effort on the part of some to "Defund the left," which we were not really. But compared to right-wing conservative Republicans [political party] we were perceived to be--anybody in the civil rights community was perceived to be. In light of shrinking resources, "What should we focus on that would make the most impact?" And we decided on an early intervention for students of color in largely--in public schools, largely black and brown, involving them, their parents and their teachers. So that it would affect the whole community. And it was called 'Say "Yes" to a Youngster's Future'. And this program looked at the fact that math and science were the critical filters for success, not only in the academic arena, but in the marketplace. And we looked at the demographics that were beginning to be presented as early as '84 [1984]. That by 1991, at least 40 percent of all college age young people in the United States would be black and brown. And the fact that that meant if they were not better prepared in math and science that would mean that half the work force would more than likely be in prison, rather than in school. Because of the critical filter of math and science and the fact that they were doing least well. They had the least well-prepared teachers, in many of our school systems they didn't even offer the higher-level courses in math and science. So we said--Mr. Holman wrote a wonderful article that was carried in 'Ebony' [magazine], which was in fact the clamoring of the bell, of the sounding of the alarm, the clamoring of the bell--"Wake up people. We've got to get on the case of math and science preparation for our young people." So it started with the general mobilization, and it quickly--people got it very quickly and it quickly drew to a demand for--grew to a demand for, "Okay, well what do we do about it?" and so we started developing it programmatically. And we ended up with a very robust comprehensive approach to math, science education, which involved service for teachers through summer institutes and continual reinforcement. Saturday and other kinds of regular programming that involved the parents were very explicitly in it. And large community develop--community presentations like science fairs and other kinds of programs that would ultimately involve the larger communities as well. At one point we were functioning in over two hundred systems. We had--National Science Foundation had recognized the importance of our work and had funded through the school systems in several places our involvement in the urban systemic initiatives, which was how do you get to it so systemically that you change the entire way that it's being taught. We had hundreds of parents involved. More men coming out than the teachers had ever seen, and major (with emphasis), major impact in the lives of these teachers, who are now many of them leaders in their schools, growing out of the retraining and the experience they had in leadership the planning in 'Say "Yes" [to a Youngster's Future]' activities. So it was a powerful demonstration. Still going on in some places. But it was very vigorous at that point and it was one that we were able to sustain with major funding from private sources and through the schools from public sources as well, for a number of years. Speaker 2: And so that, that program was an award-winning program, right? Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Yes. Speaker 2: Okay. Now was, was--Dr. Holman, would you consider him a father figure in some respects to you? Did he serve (unclear)--? Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Not to me. Not a father figure. He was a leader, he was a leader. And he was the kind of leader that I think--as I say because he was the glue--actually was the leader's leader for a number of the organizational heads, even many who were older than I. Speaker 2: So you started as his assistant [at the National Urban Coalition], and then next (unclear)--. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) His executive assistant, which meant at that time everything in the front office. And quickly also became Program Director, and very quickly after that Vice President for program and then Senior Vice President for Program and Policy over the course of the years. I was there--I was at the [National] Urban Coalition from '77 [1977] to '98 [1998] all together. So twenty-two years. Story_ID: 6830 Speaker 1: Was there anything influen-, important about your working with Westat [Inc.]-McKenzie Group Consortium [later The McKenzie Group, Inc.]? Or was that just part of--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) That was a good one. As the federal government took more and more interest itself in math and science education, because we--remember now we were harbingers. We saw it before its time and we put something in place that others later were looking for fortunately. But when they started funding and looking for opportunities to lift up exemplary models the Westat-McKenzie Group was one of those who did the evaluations for some of the systems and reported out on them. So we were able to work with them. We were able to work with the Mid-Atlantic Lab [Laboratory for Student Success], which is one of the big government funded labs. We were able to bring the effort to them. Once again the NSF [National Science Foundation] urban systemic initiatives. Some people used local Title I [U.S. Department of Education's funding for improving the academic achievement of the disadvantaged] or [President] Eisenhower funds [Dwight D. Eisenhower Mathematics and Science Education State Grant Program] within their school systems to bring it. We did full blown programs with the parents and teachers, or we did trainer of trainer models. Which just involved training some of the teachers through the years. Speaker 1: Now what were some of the other organizations in the country that were either sort of forming as a result of what you were doing or who were--you were working with on? You know, (unclear)--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) We were working with most of the other civil rights groups--anybody who wanted to do parent training or teacher training. So I would work with the National Education Association, the American Federation of Teachers. We would do speeches. We would lift up what we had learned. We would go out and do trainer of training. Dr. [Dorothy] Height had us to come and work with some of the National Council of Negro Women's Head Start people, the Urban League had us to work with some of their Head Start parents as well as teachers who were working at--in Head Start. The problem though was we never were able to achieve the scale that the effort deserved. It's terribly important that the federal government figure out how we will achieve scale when good innovative community projects begin to work. Because right now and from inception we were among those who helped bring the department of education into being from HEW [U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare]. The [National] Urban Coalition was one major player in that coalition forces that worked together to do that. But the [U.S.] Department of Education funds schools, universities and local education systems. Not community based organizations and others who were really at the cutting edge of creating the innovative programs that are working. So we had private sector partners. And we had to--I had to go around school superintendent by school superintendent and then try to match them with corporate or foundation interests in their arena. And I can tell you that we targeted the twenty-five cities where the vast majority of black and brown students were in public schools. And by the time I would get a corporation on board, the superintendent would have changed and I'd have to start all over again. Or by the time a really solid superintendent had had to--identified a couple of potential partners, their leadership would change or they would merge or be acquired or be downsized or something. So that one by one by process just will not work. This is an effort that should have been scaled up long ago. And only the federal government can put you in twenty-five cities at the same time. But they have no apparatus to do it right now. Story_ID: 6831 Speaker 1: What was changing also about the African American community during this period of time? Speaker 2: Well one thing that was disappointing to me was that in the [President Ronald] Reagan and [President George H. W.] Bush twelve years those presidents refused to meet with the African American leadership. So that organizations like the Black Leadership Forum that had been quite active in developing policy and discussing it with the President and the Vice President and others in the Cabinet and so forth had no way of impacting on policy during that period of time. In addition, almost all of our public money went away. When I inherited so to speak the leadership of the National Urban Coalition in 1988, all (with emphasis) of our federal funding had disappeared. And in fact, we had about a $2 million deficit that I had to try to work to overcome and get new program monies going. Because the work that we were doing with CEDA [Community and Economic Development Association] to train workers, the work that we were doing with school financial form and some of the other areas we had historically enjoyed, both public and private funding for, it disappeared. President [Ronald] Reagan said, "The private sector will take up the slack." And people in the private sector said, "He never asked us about that." And in fact they did the same thing the federal government did and discontinued a lot of the support, at least for the kind of work that we were doing. So people with the greatest need once again least able to pay for it themselves found themselves without. Speaker 1: You know, it's interesting. I--you know, I was thinking back about the discussion of your grandfather [William Charles Lewis, II]. And how he was so self-contained. You know, he grew his own--he had everything that he needed. So he would never have (unclear). Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) That's right. Speaker 1: That they (unclear)--. (laughs) Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) That's right. That's absolutely right. Speaker 1: He (unclear). Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) I thought about that more than once myself. And who has that understanding or that capability today. Very few, very few. He had a job with a state university [South Carolina State University, Orangeburg, South Carolina] so that even in depression the government functions--and a farm. Story_ID: 6832 Speaker 1: '98 [1998] I left the Urban Coalition. But '97 [1997] I was asked to serve--I was a member--I had been a member of the Board of Directors of the Congressional Black Caucus Foundation [Inc.] since '91 [1991]. And when an abrupt change in the leadership was made in '97 [1997] I was asked to serve as an Interim Executive Director while I was still President of the National Urban Coalition. Speaker 2: That's what--and that was in '91 [1991]. Speaker 1: That was '97 [1997]. Speaker 2: '97 [1997]. Okay. Speaker 1: '97 [1997]. I became a member of the board in '91 [1991]. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) I see--joined it. Okay. Speaker 1: I became a member of the board in '91 [1991]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Now how was--was it because--how did you come to become member of the board at that point? Was it because of your, you know, the role you had as Executive Director for the [National] Urban Coalition? Or--? Speaker 1: People knew my work at the Coalition. They also knew my work through the Black Leadership Forum. I was also doing some media work on policy and education and serving a lot of local boards. So I was known to many of the members of the board and had been part of the leadership network or leadership family really since the late '70s [1970s]. Speaker 2: So now talk the work--your work as a board member, you know with the [U.S.] Congressional Black Caucus--its foundation right? Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And then, eventually, you know, taking over as (unclear)--. Speaker 1: Well as a member of the board--the Congressional Black Caucus Foundation is a 501(c)3 organization. Which means it must be nonpartisan. It's tax-exempt, which means that it cannot lobby but a certain amount, and it has to focus really on educational programs. I had served as treasurer, as chair of personnel committee and as chair of the programs committee as a volunteer board member. And when it was time to stand in the breech because a change in leadership had occurred, I was really drafted by the other members of the board to take the interim directorship. And a little over a year later when I was asked to take a permanent position I accepted it and segued over full-time. Story_ID: 6833 Speaker 1: Can you tell just about though the found-, because the [Congressional Black] Caucus is separate from the [Congressional Black Caucus] Foundation [Inc.]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Can you talk about how the Foundation even came, you know, to be dur--okay. Now who were your predecessors too? Speaker 2: I know some of them. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The Congressional Black Caucus was founded in '71 [1971] [sic, formed in 1969, officially recognized in 1971] by the members of [U.S.] Congress who were African American. And their purpose in those years of considerable strive which we have talked in connection with Boston [Massachusetts] was to meet each other and able to have a unified voice and to present platforms and programs to help African Americans. They were shunned by [President] Richard Nixon in a desire to meet with him, and one of the first things they did was to sort of boycott his first State of the Union address. And that got enough attention that he--they finally did meet with him. But the organization was then "formed" in the eyes of the public because of that act. They are partisan. They are the members themselves. They plan their group decision around policy and around programs that move their agenda forward. But they wanted to have an educational arm. They looked around and saw how few staffers there were on the [Capitol] Hill [neighborhood in Washington, D.C.]--African American. How few of our kids are young professionals are getting any opportunities? So some of the early programs that they and their wives and husbands, in the case of the few women that--who were there, wanted to put in place--had to do with providing opportunities for young people to learn about the legislative process and about how the Hill functions. And so they had internships and fellowship programs and the spouses also instituted some scholarships. Not for Hill work but for young people in their districts to be able to get at that first rung, that undergraduate rung and at least get prepared in that way. So when I came on board those were basically the programs that were in place. In previous years there had been a more robust research capability than there was when I came on board. Speaker 1: And what are the things that you're proud of that you did during that time? I know that, you know, in 19--you came on board in 1997. In 1998 you were--well let--you were--also at that time though, President [Bill] Clinton's in office--at this point. And so you were appointed to his--the HBCU. Speaker 2: Right. The President of the United States has a commission on HBCUs, Historically Black Colleges and Universities, and President Clinton asked me to be a member of that, which I was. I also chaired for the District of Columbia the Goals 2000 [Educate America Act] education panel for the five years of its existence. It's been lined out by the Republican [political party] House [of Representatives] now. But the entire time that it existed we helped guide educational reform in the District [of Columbia]. And, in fact, developed the only comprehensive plan for education that's ever been accepted in [Washington] D.C. So I was quite proud of that. It took a lot of work in every ward and with all the different interest groups to make that happen. But it has been helpful. And three or four superintendents have come and gone during that span of time. So we're very glad about that. But what I'm really pleased about at the Congressional Black Caucus Foundation, there's several things. First of all, that institution ought to be an international resource for African people. It should be endowed. It should not have any funding worries be doing research and education programs on a much larger scale. So I had a bigger vision of the foundation than already existed there. So one of the first things we did was take what we had, develop the existing educational programs into a full-fledged leadership institute for public service. We got more funding. We got some programs for high school young people to supplement what the college kids can do in the summer as interns, and we are able to train more fellows. Which is a year long graduate and professional level opportunity--still a lot of work that could be done in that area, and I hope very much that they will do it. Another area was--we really didn't have no website to speak of. We really didn't have any interactive capacity with the rest of the nation and the rest of the world. And we developed not only the regular CBCF [Congressional Black Caucus Foundation] website, but also an excellent extraordinary public health website, 'CBCFhealth.org'. And we developed new programs in housing and home ownership and a website that goes along with that. Which is called--the program is called 'With Ownership Wealth' (WOW). And showing how home ownership really is your first asset, and therefore your building block to wealth for you--something you can pass on to future generations. So we also have a wonderful website for WOW--With Ownership Wealth. And in connection with that, better connections to the members themselves and to other scholars doing research in the areas out there priority area for CBCF. There's a lot more that can be done in that are as well. And I think that I'm most proud of the fact that I helped to change the mindset of event-to-event funding. You know the annual legislative conference of the Congressional Black Caucus Foundation is the premiere event in African American policymaking. But you can't build your budget around just that, which is essentially, not completely, but essentially what was being done. That and a couple of spouses special events like the golf and tennis tournament--that's not viable. So I'm really proud that I helped us think more in terms of institutional growth and that working with members of the board over a period--and especially the chair, [U.S.] Congresswoman Eva Clayton from North Carolina, working with them over a period of three years, developed and got approved by the board the organization's first strategic plan. And that strategic plan lays out a roadmap for how the institution can become that global resource that it should be. And I pray that it will be fulfilled. Story_ID: 6834 Speaker 1: Who were the people that were, you know, sort of instrumental during the time that you were there [at the Congressional Black Caucus Foundation]? That's what I'm trying-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) On the board? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: The board is comprised of some members of [U.S.] Congress, some spouses and a group of business and professional people who have a vested interest in the members and in the African age--African American agenda. So my predecessor as--I mean Mrs. [Eva] Clayton's [U.S. Congresswoman from North Carolina] predecessor as chair was [H.] LeBaron Taylor, who was the legendary philanthropist person who worked with Sony Music Entertainment--really created the black music market within major corporations. Very visionary. Devoted to the Congressional Black Caucus and Foundation for many, many years before his death. The members, Congressman [William] Bill Clay [Representative of Missouri] who had been--who was a founder of the CBC [Congressional Black Caucus] itself and had been a longstanding member of the foundation's board. Congressman Louis Stokes [Representative of Ohio] had been a long time member of that board. Congresswoman Maxine Waters [Representative of California] is on the board while I served there. A number of other members and people in the private sector like Toni Fay of AOL [America Online] Time Warner [Inc.] now. Ingrid Saunders Jones, Coca-Cola [Company], Esther Silver-Parker of AT&T [American Telephone and Telegraph Corporation] Foundation would be names that you would know. Larry Lucas of PhRMA [Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of America]. [Robert] Bob McGlotten who used to be in the labor movement and now has his own lobbying firm. One could go down the list of [Arthur] Art Collins. Janice [Bumphus] Griffin. I could go down the list of all the board members. That is a very, very engaged board. Speaker 1: Now you left two years ago. Right? Speaker 2: I left one year ago. Speaker 1: Right. I'm sorry. Speaker 2: In June, 2002--, Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Okay. Speaker 2: --at the end of five years. Speaker 1: And so what--now you're leaving. Was it because you wanted to transition? Or you had--. Speaker 2: Yes. I was ready to transition. And a new chairman had come in. And generally that's a good time for the--end of a contract period, a good time to make your next move. Speaker 1: So what--where is, where is--where are you now? Where are you--? Speaker 2: I am, I am in my own space and finding my own voice and doing some writing which is very long overdue, for the first time in thirty years. I will be as I think I indicated earlier I will be looking for opportunities to create and participate in serious leadership development and life development programs for that eighteen and forty-year-old cohort of young African descended people here in the United States and globally, for the rest of my working life. Because I think there's no greater need. I hope to work with all of our organizations, all of our colleges, our churches, individual scholars, business people and get our communities. Get as close to that village as I can for our young people at a time when I think their leadership is more needed than ever, and they are least well-prepared to undertake it. Story_ID: 6835 Speaker 1: You're talking about really implementing some theories that have been in your head for some time. And I'm wondering what are those, you know, theories? And what do you think is needed now for that age group? Speaker 2: Well it's for everybody, for all of us. A more explicit understanding of culture, of what's behind and underneath and before so much of what we think is going on. I really believe that we need to renew that vehicle which will move our group forward through processes of developing group consciousness and working together. And these are--this cultural offensive is what I had in mind when in 1989 at Rev. [Jesse] Jackson's meeting I introduced the idea and introduced the whole notion that some of us have consistently--have decided to consistently refer to ourselves as African American. The media trivialized into a name change debate. But that was never what it was intended to be. Speaker 1: That's right. I almost for--(unclear). (laughs) Okay. Can you talk about that, because it was so incredible. I may have a quote or something. But, but can you talk about how that came about? Because those of us, you know, who were fine calling ourselves Afro-American--I knew I was like, "Why we got--," You know. But it became a very--after the initial it became a very easy transition. But talk about, you know. Speaker 2: And then we have--well I was, you know--. Speaker 1: And it happened, I mean, it did happen. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) It did happen. Speaker 1: It happened. Speaker 2: It did happen. It was not a new idea or an original idea. But it was an idea whose time had come, apparently. Because it did take root. But simply Rev. [Jesse] Jackson had one of his planning meetings. We were gonna look to the year 2000. It was in '89 [1989] at O'Hare Hilton Hotel [Chicago, Illinois]. And a number of us had been invited. And the typical Rev. Jackson form, the media had been advised that we were meeting and that he would have a press conference directly following the meeting. So he--and he had asked me to be the scribe. So I had been dutifully journaling this important meeting, and leaders had come from all over the country. And towards the I said, "Rev. Jackson, before we open the doors I--there is a point that I would like to make. We have set agendas before and we will set agendas again. But unless and until we establish the cultural context for that agenda setting, we're not gonna ever be able to measure any results and know whether we've done any of these things or not. Some of us have decided to consistently refer to ourselves as African American to establish a correct geopolitical context of who we are. And I would like to propose that this is one of the things that this group consider." Well it was the only thing in the room to be voted on other than the date and the place of the meeting for the year 2000, which was New Orleans [Louisiana] in 1989. So when the doors opened and the media--it was a media consensus around the room. And I talked a little bit about how that could lead to a cultural offensive so that we were not always on the defensive with respect to who we are and what we're trying to do, how we educate our children, how we intervene. Because at that time the children were being murdered in the streets every day at even a higher and more alarming rate than they are now. The educational failures were--we were discussing matters of urgent importance to the young people. And so I said, "Only through a collective consciousness and some group decisions and some group interventions can we answer the questions our children are answer--are asking us right now." So there was consensus in the room. So when the media were addressed, Rev. Jackson announced that this decision had been made. And they immediately, you know, took to be a name change debate. But never the less it took root. The 'Chicago Defender' and a couple of other sources attributed it to my having raised the point in a meeting. But to me that was not important. I was very glad that Rev. Jackson mentioned it, because he had the bully pulpit and he could get the word out. And in fact, I got some calls from the 'New York Times' and others. And they said, "You know, we're not gonna use it until we find out whether you all are gonna use it or not." And I was very pleased to, in a very short time, start seeing it being used in the major dailies and in the journals and periodicals. So I knew that they had surveyed us and they had been satisfied that this change was good. And one thing we wanted to insist on was that unlike the '60s [1960s] when we made--and I was also part of that name change with Stokely Carmichael, for whom I did some organizing at Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennesee], and later on in Boston [Massachusetts]--Stokely became a friend to me and my children. And I would always have him speak to my classes if I knew he would be in town and so forth and I organized for him in the early years. But when he--when the Black Power proponents urged us to stop being 'Negro' and start being 'Black'. In some instances it created a lot of upheaval and a lot of friction. And one of the things that we wanted to make sure of that this change did not (with emphasis) do, was pit us against one another and set up "Blacker than thou" kind of syndromes again. So we simply said, "You know, it's not a requirement. We think it's a good idea. If you don't, just keep saying black. But we just don't think that the polar opposites of black and white define us very well." Story_ID: 6836 Speaker 1: So you were talking about what the intent with the word, and you were saying to, you know, also extend--that the meanings--Go on to the meaning [of the term 'African American']. Speaker 2: Okay. The cultural offensive as I saw it had some immediate dimensions which were--which were political. Like positioning ourselves properly in terms of geopolitical reality of being African people living in America. I am aware as many who have traveled are aware that African-descended people all over the world really look to those of us who have been privileged enough to be educated and to live in the United States and conscious enough, hopefully, of our Pan-African identity. They look to us for some leadership. And so we talked about immediate implications for elected official and organizational leadership and scholar and students and others with respect to that leadership. Talked to people in the business community about how much support we can be giving each other in terms of 'Buy Black', 'Support Black institutions'. Talked to people in the artistic community and the master crafts and people in the Golden Age of Black Art (GABA), which is a wonderful collective of many of our best crafts people. Oh they loved it. they said, "Yes." And I have seen--I have seen a lot more of our art in terms of our homes, in terms of our personal apparel, in terms of decisions we make about where we would travel. So it--I had--those were immediate results that I started to see. More long-term had to do with curricula of inclusion and other kinds of educational reform efforts to get more books and more knowledge infused in what the children learn everyday right from the grades all the way through. More systematic work on leadership development that is explicitly cultural coming out of our organizations. Moving towards a day when we would do as much as we can to reconstruct for the twenty-first century this kind of village. Not physical perhaps, but mental, intellectual infrastructure that is cultural, that will help us as a group to understand what it is that [W.E.B] DuBois meant when he said, "The history of the world as a history not of individuals, but of groups." And to get ourselves in a position to uplift the masses of our people and not just a few, who have been able to make through the snares of life in the United States and around the world. Speaker 1: Do you think integration was bad Dr. Edelin? Speaker 2: You know, I have written and I have intimated in some public speeches that we have yet to do the analysis. The thorough going analysis that we need to do to determine what was gained and what was lost in integration. Certainly a great deal was lost. A great deal was also gained. We could not possibly continue to live in a segregated society with this Man's boot on our neck. Legal segregation had to go. But did we as vigorously and as systematically and as effectively pursue our cultural and group life and aims as we did getting the legal barriers removed? No we did not. Some tried. But the main focus in the overwhelming force that we were able to muster as a numerical minority and not all of that. I mean lets look at it. They tell me that it really was only about 10 percent of us who were in the streets and actively engaged in the civil rights struggle. But that was a critical mass. But it took everything of that critical mass including lives and livelihoods, dreams and hopes and aspirations of so many in order to make that happen. There was not a parallel movement, which was needed, we see now to retain so much of our culture. And sharpen and define it and make it appropriate for modern times. And I think it's up to us now to attend to that. And that's one of the things that I've been trying to attend to. So I would not say that de--that the effort to not be segregated was bad. Clearly that was necessary. I would not say that we have succeeded in reaching integration. Which is different for me from desegregation. Integration would be where you come as equals and sit at the tables as equals with the rest of the world's great races, and share and enjoy one another's cultural offerings. I want us to get to that point globally. We are not there because we are not equal at this point and time. And I think that there is some work that we can do, and that we must do. And that only we can do in regard to that. And I will dedicate the rest of my life to that pursuit. Story_ID: 6837 Speaker 1: So in that same vein what hope and-or concerns do you have for the black community in being able to reach that, you know--I mean we really the environment that you grew up in is the environment that was lost. Or it seems. I don't know if it was totally lost. But it, it was lost--that environ-, Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Certainly too few people have even that. But it wasn't perfect. It was not perfect. But it was, you know. What we have now is a far cry from it, but it was not perfect. It was a segregated environment. The question now is how can we renew, resurrect, reconstruct culture and cultural institutions and cultural relationships such that for the twenty-first century we have something that is appropriate to our group development. Because it still is a matter of group development. The questions that need to be answered cannot be answered one by one. It's still a matter of group development. And this is with some of the--some of the work that I'm writing and some of the work that institutionally I've been grappling with. Especially with the young adults, for the last few years. And I'm going to produce a book and some other ways of addressing these issues. But I'm working through at least the initial thinking. You know. Speaker 1: What do you--But let's talk about the youth a little bit and the disconnect. You know, that has happened. And your ideas about how to reach that group. Because they say--you know, and this may be, you know, generational. That one group doesn't feel that the other group hears them or understands. But you definitely hear that coming from this group. And this group in some respects when you look at the hip-hop group, has been able under the radar screen, you know, to really amass some wealth. But the sense of cultural identity might not truly sort of be there. It's there some. But--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Um-hmm. who some of them. Now those who started it, it was very strong. divide. Every generation has that divide. We certainly did. I believe that generations before did to, but I know we did. We may have been less like the old school than my mother [Leathia Annette Lewis] was from her mother [Leathia Lightner Lewis], I'm not sure. But it certain--we--I certainly knew it--know that feeling very well. (pauses) But what--I think what is different with the hip-hop generation is hip-hop developed at a period in time when we had permitted one out of every two African American children under the age of six to officially be born in to poverty. We have permitted the decay and decline of public schools. We had no response in the [President Ronald] Reagan and [President George H. W.] Bush years to their total disregard and contempt for African American leadership. So there was no visible movement. There was no tangible movement. There was nothing that they could see working to change those conditions that they were living in. and a lot of the kids even if they were not officially born into poverty themselves, nevertheless identify with what was going on with the masses of their cohorts. It was like a bond that existed among them. And even with some white kids. I mean, you know, 70 percent of the gangster rap when they looked at it, the demographic was the white suburban young people who were identifying with it. So there's a bond that kind of moves between them. An unseen bond that moves between them and their cohort functions in the way that age group similarities have functioned all throughout history, that we weren't always aware of. And I fault us in the African American leadership. Not just as parents, but as those who have to take responsibility for what happens to the whole group for permitting those conditions to exist. I don't fault the young people for them speaking about those conditions. And especially those in the very beginning. Who were like The Last Poets and Gil Scott-Heron and some of those in our [Civil Rights] Movement years. Just speaking the truth to power as they saw it. I think it's become corrupted in certain senses since then. Because you make money by violent and sexual images and descriptions, whether they're real or they're imagined it doesn't really matter. And so I think that commercialism has certainly corrupted some of the original message. And some of the original messengers are not even on the scene any more. But I think much of what they had to say was an eye opening, devastating fact. And it started with the closest in reality, police brutality. Which is the same thing that started most of the riots, if you recall. I mean you had this tinderbox of poverty and discontent and disinvestments. But it was an act of police violence in a community that was the match in that tinderbox that blew everything up when the riots started. And it was similar when they first started talking about, you know, the police and the way they were being treated in their community. So that was real and racial profiling and all of that is a more sophisticated way of putting it. But it started with them saying, "Hey! Nobody's paying any attention to what's going on here with us! How you gonna let them treat us like this? Aren't you supposed to protect us? Aren't you supposed to be in communication with us and know how we're feeling? And aren't you supposed to be educating us and preparing us to take our place in the world of work?" And the answer to that is, "Yes we are supposed to be doing that." Story_ID: 6838 Speaker 1: So what is different about this administration and the black community as--I mean we have another [President George W.] Bush in office. You know. And so what is different in your mind? Do you see anything happening? Or are you seeing this as all perspective about what needs to happen with the African American? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) I see it repeating itself. I'm frightened to death. Supply-side trickle-down economics that was what precipitated this disaster under [President Ronald] Reagan and [President George H. W.] Bush is being reinstituted. That little brief window we had with the [President Bill and U.S. Congresswoman Hillary] Clintons, everything, all of our numbers improved. Education, employment, nutrition, health, housing, economic development. And they're all right now in freefall once again. And if we're not very careful, we'll have another situation of the most desperate kind. Speaker 1: Do--you're talking about, you know, I think I understand you to be talking about that those that say the soul of black people. And I'm just trying to have you articulate what you think that is? Or what's percolating inside of you and your idea. That's what I--I mean you--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) I believe, and I can't articulate it as fully as I will be able to when I've had more time away from the terrible demands of twenty hour work days and all that I've been doing for the last thirty years, and really have a time to reflect more and think more. But I can say this. If you are not--if you're an African person on this planet and you're not engaged in a movement towards liberation and away from oppression, not just for yourself, but for all of your people, you have a death wish. The only way to be sane and productive in this world is to be actively engaged in changing it. I know that once we really understand who we are and that we have the capacity to change it, and that once we have leadership in place that will help structure and organize that so that people can see the blueprint, follow a plan, we will change it. And I'm gonna be a part of the group that develops that plan. Story_ID: 6839 Speaker 1: Do you have any views on HBCU's [Historically Black Colleges and Universities] and their legacy? One because of your family's relationship, your own experience with them and, and there--that they're--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) I do. I believe that historically black colleges and universities are a Godsend for the race. But I also believe that they are terribly deficient, in terms of being race conscious in their preparation of young people. They--because they have to depend for their funding and for their public approval and for their media relationships on being as much like white people and white institutions as they can, they miss the whole point. That white supremacy is what we have to undo in black education. And very, very few of them make any real headway in terms of developing a cultural infrastructure that is positive and affirmative for young black people, in laying out a course of study that will help us change the condi--they support the status quo more than they're prepared to change it. And I think that's just so sad. That in the twenty-first century that is still the case. But a lot of it has to do with where you get your resources from. And you know, very well that if you are very strong--and this is what [W. E. B.] DuBois meant by the duality of being African and American. If you pursue only your African interests, you'll be--you would be humiliated. You will be put down. You will be held back. You will be murdered. If you pursue only your American interests, you will be a betrayer and a traitor. And you will be outside of your own group and unable to maintain your bond with your family, the elders or the ancestors. We've got to figure out how to do both in a very positive and constructive and forward-looking way. We've got to. Story_ID: 6840 Speaker 1: Now with Stokely Carmichael can you talk about what you considered the essence of him and someone who knew him. Not just knew about him. Speaker 2: Stokely Carmichael who changed his name to Kwame Ture later in life and who also died of prostate cancer, above all was a militant Pan-African organizer. His mantra was "Organize, Organize, Organize." He was more effective at organizing at the grassroots with the help of [Benjamin] Ben Brown and [William] Willie Ricks [later called Mukasa] than anybody else in our leadership has ever been. Very, very effective. With the poorest of the poor, down in the [Mississippi] Delta, on the plantations, up in the hard ghettos in the cities. Anywhere he was he was still able to organize. And he helped us to understand politically the imperative for power. That was kind of a new concept. Love and justice and equality were not new concepts. But the concept of power, unequal power facing formidable power, and how we could change that in part through the way we think and organize ourselves was a new concept. One which I respected very deeply. Speaker 1: And what do you think--Is that what you learned from Stokely Carmichael yourself? Speaker 2: yeah I learned how to organize and the whole concept of power. And not just his book with [Charles] Chuck Hamilton called 'Black Power' but power relationships. And how we ourselves--well, really I learned from [W. E. B.] DuBois how we ourselves impact that. But Stokely helped put it in a pre--a political perspective. A political context. It was very helpful at the time that it occurred. Story_ID: 6841 Speaker 1: Now the other thing I wanna ask you is about single parenting. And, you know, because you are the result of a single parent and then you've had the role of a divorced sort of single parent, and I'm wondering your comments about that in the context of family and children. And raising--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Well I believe that we African people have throughout time really relied on an extended family network. We have never though that only one man and one woman were supposed to raise a child. And it's a good thing. Because since so many of us have found ourselves as single parents in the '70s [1970s] and going forward. And unfortunately so many of the young girls who are single don't know about the extended family network and don't have an extended family network. Which is when they really get in trouble. But those of us who are older and who do benefit just enormously from that understanding and from being able to make good use of all of the potential that lies within your family and your friends to help you form that village and reform that network around your children and yourself. It's not easy. It's not easy financially. It's not easy in terms of all the burdens and responsibilities of parenthood. Especially in the twenty-first century. But with the help that creator ancestors and the extended family, many, many, many single mothers are preparing their young people and keeping themselves together and moving forward. Speaker 1: So what you're saying essentially is it's not so bad that there are single parents--there's been that focus on that. But that--and that we as African Americans can teach a lot, society a lot about that. Because that's sort of the--that is what has changed between the '50s [1950s] and now. But your saying it's the lack of, you know, the extended family infrastructure. That may be hurtful if I understand you right. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Right. I think there's a difference in our culture and in European culture. We have never simply looked at the so-called nuclear family as the way to live or the way to raise children. So that when we're compared to 'Ozzie and Harriet' [1950s television program], and when we are measured only by their yardstick, that is a disservice. It's an antihistorical disservice. It's a depiction of us which has no reality, period. So that I reject that for us. It may be true for them. But I reject that for us. Nevertheless how successful have we been in keeping these extended family networks in place? Not just of your kin, but if you're away from your kin in your community. And I believe that these young people who are trying to raise young people, both of whom have been let down by the older generation, we have to understand that as a culture, we have to stand in for these young parents. When for whatever reason they're not able to fulfill all of their obligations. And that in any event it wasn't just their responsibility in the first place. It is all of our responsibility. So we've gotta organize ourselves around ways to be more supportive of one another. Story_ID: 6842 Speaker 1: What makes African Americans a special people? Let me put it that way. I mean--. Speaker 2: Well that's one of the things that we have not fully flushed out for the twenty-first century. But we certainly do have accounts from cultural anthropology, from history, from African American studies that a few people have done on about the nature of the family. The extended family that I was just describing being key in the central one. As you know, culture is a total way of life of a people. And the institutions that make up that life are the family, the church, the school, the media and the context of communications and commerce. So that as we do the studies that we're doing now, we look at each of those areas and try to see what is the best that should be brought forward. And then you also look at polls and surveys and consumer habits and spiritual, you know, profiles and the facts of the matter as to how we behave. And you try to match them up. And that's some of the work that is being done right now. Story_ID: 6843 Speaker 1: I wanna ask you about your work and your path to date. And I wanna ask what you see as your legacy? You know, the legacy of Dr. Ramona Edelin. Speaker 2: Well it's not finished. It's not complete by any means. But certainly one area--one arena in which we have already had an impact is in defining the cultural nature of our existence. And the mandate to really renew the culture and develop a blueprint for group action, which heavily relies upon education and has to involve the young people. As just not an add on or a second thought not something that you're doing for them, but something that you're doing with them. Because they are the ones who live in the future. And we've got to delve in right from the start what they see and what they experience, as well as what we have experienced and what we can still see. So a dynamic process of cultural development African descended people can undergo. Rooted in education but also in civic and partici--and political participation I would say is the path that I've been on. Speaker 1: And what do you--what would people say about Dr. Edelin? How would they describe her? Speaker 2: Some people describe me as the one who always has young people around. People who know me really well have often referred to me as the quintessential maternal figure. Almost everybody even people who are not friends but who are only associates or acquaintances refer to my integrity. These are attributes that I hope I'll only continue to grow and blossom. These are seeds, positive seeds that I planted long ago that I hope to continue to nurture. Speaker 1: You've talked good about--a deal about leadership. You know, and your work up-to-date has been about leadership and work in the future. What do you--when you look at African American leadership, besides W. E. B. DuBois, is there anyone else that you would point to has been a--important with our progress in this country, and why? Speaker 2: Well I mentioned Mr. [Moses Carl] Holman. And the reason why is that the leadership itself needs glue and needs focus and needs someone who is willing to hold it together at all costs. One would look at Harriet Tubman and Mrs. [Mary McLeod] Bethune and Mrs. [Mary Church] Terrell in terms of women who put it all on the line in order to affect change. And were fearless and relentless and uncompromising in their approach to anti-lynching, to emancipation, to education--getting education for young people. Dr. Benjamin E. Mays was one of my grandfather's [William Charles Lewis, II] friends back home in South Carolina before he ever came to Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia]. He and Miss Sadie [wife of Benjamin E. Mays] left an indelible impression on all of us as leaders who were also educators and who held the highest standards and had the highest expectations for us. And made institutions--created institutions which would yield results for generation upon generation to come. Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] of course. Malcolm X, Stokely Carmichael. I have robust respect for most of our leadership. I see they have different roles. But I have seen their effectiveness in many of these roles. Dr. [Dorothy] Height, many, many, many of our leaders have my undying love and respect. Story_ID: 6844 Speaker 1: And is there anything else you would like to say, Dr. Edelin? Speaker 2: (Pauses) I've talked about the young adults. I haven't said a lot about the really young children. And it's interesting to me. And we've been seeing this for almost twenty years now. I call them these new age babies. These babies are different. These children are different. They have levels of proficiency and expertise; they may not be the same. But they have levels of proficiency that are higher than any coming before them. And they have less regard for the old authority and the old ways of doing things. And they need to be connected to us in ways that are gonna require us to change. We cannot approach it with the same hierarchical, "Do as I say and not as I do." Approach. They don't have any tolerance for hypocrisy. If you're not doing it, you might as well not even raise it with them. Because that's the only way they wanna learn. I think they present an enormous challenge, but also tremendous opportunity. And I hope that we wil--part of our work is gonna be to figure out how to connect sooner and more effectively with them. So that they won't be even more alienated than their cohort right above them. Speaker 1: Are you still active as a Delta [Sigma Theta sorority]? Speaker 2: Oh yes. Speaker 1: Can you talk about that organization and what you see as it's important--you know, your mother [Leathia Annette Lewis] was a Delta. You were a Delta. Speaker 2: Well my grandmother [Leathia Lightner Lewis] was a Delta, and my daughter [Kimberley Sabel Edelin-Freeman] is a Delta. In fact when we made her, she was the fourth generation at, at Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia]. The soror--I co-chair with one of our past national presidents Hortense Golden Canady, who also went to Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee]. Sorority's National Social Action Commission--this is the political arm. This is where you get to teach advocacy and talk policy and talk issues and really get Delta women who distinctively among women and sororities already have a public service orientation. We are a public service sorority. And we have instituted some changes. We've got a certification program, which we never had before, to teach sorors--how to become social activists in their communities and lead their chapter's social action profile. We have Delta Days in the nation's capital every year, where 600-plus women in their red and white descend on Capitol Hill [neighborhood in Washington, D.C.]. No other African American group has that kind of presence on Capitol Hill. Once a year we have seminars teaching on the issues and connecting and networking. And then we actually go from the different states. They go to their members--the senators and their members of [U.S.] Congress's offices and talk about the policy priorities of the sorority. And at our national conventions we have a dynamic array of speakers, activists, scholars, politicians and others in the whole arena of social action. We have--we're the only sorority or fraternity that has full-time policy analysts on staff. And I think that that is one of the defining characteristics about Delta Sigma Theta besides, of course, our love and sisterhood with one another. In fact, the first act of the twenty-two young women at Howard University [Washington, D.C.] who founded the sorority was to break all the rules and join the Women Suffragette [sic, Suffrage] March [1913] down Pennsylvania Avenue in Washington [D.C.] against the wishes of the university or their mothers. And we have that wonderful photograph all in white with the banner of Delta Sigma Theta right there in that march. And we're carrying on that--in that tradition...