 Story_ID: 643950 Speaker 1: --Matthew Hickey is the videographer. And I want you to start out by stating your name and spelling it for us including your middle name; and give us your date and place of birth. Speaker 2: All right, my name is Audrey Marie Edwards [HistoryMaker Audrey Edwards], A-U-D-R-E-Y, Marie, M-A-R-I-E, Edwards, E-D-W-A-R-D-S. I was born April 21st, 1947, in Tacoma, Washington. Washington State. Speaker 1: Okay, and our, our location today--our interview location? Speaker 2: Is--you want the address? Speaker 1: Whatever you-- Speaker 2: Oh, Brooklyn, New York (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, Brooklyn. And then can we also have your occupation? Speaker 2: I am a journalist and a real estate broker (laughter). Speaker 1: That's--I think (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Go figure (laughter). Speaker 1: --that's the only company- combination we have like that in our collection. Story_ID: 643951 Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: And then I'm gonna ask five People magazine-ish questions, short answers. What's your favorite food? Speaker 1: Rice (laughter). Speaker 2: Fav- favorite color? Speaker 1: Red. Speaker 2: Favorite time of year? Speaker 1: Fall. Speaker 2: Favorite place to vacation? Speaker 1: Paris [France]. Speaker 2: Favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 1: It is what it is. It's been so overdone, but (laughter). Story_ID: 643952 Speaker 1: So I wanna start out by asking you about your family background. And if we could start with your mother, if you could give her name and her date or year of birth, and what you know about her growing up. Speaker 2: Okay, my mother was--her name is Bertie Marie Edwards [Bertie Edwards]; that is her maiden name. She married an Edwards [Cyril Edwards]. She grew up--was born in Danville, Virginia, went into the military as a WAC [Women's Army Corps] during World War II [WWII]. She was attending Hampton [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia], and I believe had enough money to do one year. And after a year, came to New York [New York] to work and make money to go back to school. And during the time she was working in New York, she really enlisted in the WACs I think as a way to earn additional money. And part of what she had to do in becoming a WAC was take an IQ test. And evidently she scored so well on the IQ test she was steered into Officer Candidate School. So she went into the [U.S.] military or came out of the military training as a lieutenant and worked her way up to captain in the military, went to Europe during World War II, which is where she met my father who was a master sergeant with the name Edwards like hers. And he had heard that there was this captain with his name in the WACs, and he said I gotta meet this woman, which is how they met. So they met in Birmingham, England in 1944, 1945, somewhere in there, and got married in 1946. My father was married, so he divorced his wife [Victoria McClean Edwards]. He was from the [U.S.] Virgin Islands. He's, he's a native of the Virgin Islands, St. Croix, but he and his brothers all migrated to New York when they were young. And he was the youngest of six brothers. Divorced his wife who was in New York, married my mother in Vancouver, Canada. He had been stationed in Fort Lewis, Washington [Joint Base Lewis-McChord, Washington], which is how they ended up in Washington State. And in those days if a woman, a WAC, got married, she had to leave the military. That's not true now, but my mother came out of the military after marrying my father. Story_ID: 643953 Speaker 1: What is--tell--how much do you know about your mother's background? Did she talk about her growing up? Speaker 2: My mother [Bertie Edwards] came from a family of twelve. There were nine girls and three boys. Danville, Virginia, is a small mill town. My grandfather was an entrepreneur. I believe he had a trucking business or a carting business, but he was the sole provider. My grandmother did not work; she had twelve children, and it seemed like at some point every two years. Or every eighteen months to two years she was having another child, so she stayed at home and raised the children. Story_ID: 643954 Speaker 1: Did she talk about the milling town and what it was like or what the family was like in Danv- family life was like (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, we spent--my brother [Dwight Edwards] and I spent a year in Danville when my father [Cyril Edwards]--we lived in Japan for two years when my father was in the [U.S. military] service. And when we came back from Japan, while he was waiting orders for his next assignment, we were in Danville. And I can tell you as a--I think I was seven or eight during that time. I remember segregation just being wretched, coming from Japan in the early '50s [1950s] where Americans really lived like royalty because it wasn't that long after World War II [WWII]. So to go from living like royalty in Japan, coming to Danville, Virginia, where everything was segregated--school system, everything--and for me it was just awful. Now my mother [Bertie Edwards] and her sisters and brothers grew up in that. But I think what segregation did for a lot of that generation was just strengthen their resolve to get an education, to get good jobs, and to really make the best of what was I felt a terrible situation. Story_ID: 643955 Speaker 1: Now how would you describe your mother [Bertie Edwards]? How would you describe her personality, or-- Speaker 2: You know my mother (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) person. Speaker 2: --was very smart, as evidenced by the fact that it was an IQ test that got her into officer's training school [Officer Candidate School]--very smart, very good at math--I was terrible in math--very charming, a southern woman that was very different from my father [Cyril Edwards] who was a West Indian man who came from a completely different culture. He came from a culture in which blacks were in charge. My mother came from a culture in which whites were in charge. But they were compatible, you know, in the ways that mattered. My father was a tough macho West Indian. My mother was a charming--on the surface kind of soft, charming, acquiescent, but really underneath very tough. She was a captain in the [U.S.] military. So she could be a captain when she needed to be, but she could also be this dutiful, obedient wife when she felt she needed to be. Very well organized, very disciplined, a woman of the church. Her faith was very important to her. She was a natural teacher I think. She didn't become a teacher. I had an aunt who did. The youngest sister in the family became a teacher, but my mother was a natural teacher, very patient, very articulate. And both of my parents were--and, and it was a blessing in that day and time--both of my parents were educated. My father had gone to City College [City College of New York] here in New York [New York] at a time when it was free. He didn't finish; my mother didn't finish; but they both valued education. They--my mother had many careers, but she was all--married to a very macho man who didn't want her to work, which to me was always odd because you met this woman who was a captain in the military, and that's what attracted you. But she was a licensed nurse, an LPN [licensed practical nurse]. She worked in her later years for a senior citi- she actually started a city senior citizen center that became incorporated into the city. So she was very creative, very smart, very much a leader, very funny, great, great sense of humor, very loving, which you don't find a lot in--when I say loving, demonstrative in terms of showing affection, you know, hugging, kissing. My father was not that, but she was. And that was very beneficial for my brother [Dwight Edwards] and I to come up with, with that kind of maternal energy that showed love, that showed affection. And I really came to appreciate that as an adult, you know, encountering other black people who didn't have that. So that was valuable, that was valuable. Story_ID: 643956 Speaker 1: So you're saying that she was born in Danville [Virginia], then sh- education must have been focused--she went to, to Hampton [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia]-- Speaker 2: To Hampton. Speaker 1: --for a year. And then what brought her to New York [New York]? I know she came to New York, but-- Speaker 2: She needed money to go back to school, and she had an aunt living--my great aunt living in New York. So she came and stayed with her-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --thinking that she would work for, you know, a year, maybe, save enough money to go back to school. Speaker 1: And then that's when she went into the service. Speaker 2: She went into the service. Speaker 1: Okay, you know what's interesting is that they both are from--you know I mean, well, they were in New York, not from New York. But they met-- Speaker 2: In England. Speaker 1: In England. So I-- Speaker 2: Right, right (laughter). Speaker 1: --so Birmingham [England], so-- Speaker 2: But my father [Cyril Edwards] now is ten years older than my mother [Bertie Edwards], so when he was in New York and she was in New York, he was married [to Victoria McClean Edwards] with a family. And I'm not sure when he went into the service, but for both of them the service represented better opportunities. You know, service, the service was not--you know something? It was still segregated because my mother was in an all-black unit--WAC [Women's Army Corps] unit. And my father must have been in an all-black regiment also. Speaker 1: Did your mother talk about the WAC unit-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) when they recruit--can you share some of those? Speaker 2: My favorite story--and I remember this story. I don't know when she started telling it. And it was one of those stories--tell it again; tell it again. As a captain, she was stationed in Fort Benning, Georgia. Now the thing about the [U.S.] military, it was segregated, but it respected rank. So here's this black female captain coming to Fort Benning; she is an officer. They built her--when I say built, they took an old barracks, and they converted it into her own commissary and PX [post exchange], because she was an officer so she couldn't really mingle with the non-commissioned folk. And she said every Saturday a sedan would be sent to pick her up. She would go into town or into--she--not town. She would go to the local black hairdresser to get her hair done, and then she would go to the commissary and the PX, which was in one barrack, to shop. And she'd be the only one because she was the only black officer (laughter) in Fort Benning--the only black female. Speaker 1: So did she talk about the process that she went through to become an officer, 'cause that--how long of a time did that take? Speaker 2: You know, I think it had to do with the war [World War II, WWII]. It had to do with needing people in the service, needing officers. Again, your--you have segregated troops, so you have this regiment. And I forgot--I, I know it's somewhere in my papers. I forgot what the--what--whatever you called her WAC unit. But they were assigned to handle mail for Patton's [George S. Patton] troops in North Africa, as I recall. That's what they were assigned to do. But what I--what always struck me about that particular story was the expense that the government went to, to preserve this segregated life. And, and the contradiction or the, the kind of the absurdity of it is you have a hierarchy that is respected and acknowledged, so even if the person is black and they're an officer, you have to respect the office, which you know was--and that's, that's the military. And I think that's what my father, coming from St. Croix [U.S. Virgin Islands], liked about it, that this was an organization where it didn't matter where you came from; it didn't matter which color is or was. If you were an offi- rank is what took precedence. Rank took precedence over-- Speaker 1: A lot of it. And then you know--I, I know my father was in the service and you (background noise)--(laughter) sounds like the service down there. Speaker 2: This is New York (laughter). Speaker 1: But, you know, you--it would--it represented, as you said, opportunity. Story_ID: 643957 Speaker 1: Let's talk about your father. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So his name? Speaker 2: Cyril--very British. Speaker 1: C-- Speaker 2: C-Y-R-I-L, Cyril Alfred Edwards [Cyril Edwards]. Speaker 1: And his date of birth or year of birth (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was--okay, my mother [Bertie Edwards] was born in 1917, so he was born in 1907. It's hard to believe--1907. Speaker 1: So really at the turn--I mean this---right after the turn of the century. Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 1: And so what was--can you describe--I mean, you've described some of him, but what, what did he talk about in terms of growing up? You know-- Speaker 2: You know, my father was like a lot of West Indian men, very proud, very boisterous, kind of a braggart. The story that struck me most about his growing up in St. Croix [U.S. Virgin Islands] is that he was a kid when the United States purchased the Virgin Islands [Danish West Indies; U.S. Virgin Islands] from Denmark. That happened in 1917, so he was about ten. And he said the American soldiers came in and ran amuck. He said they were getting drunk, and raping women, and just carrying on. And he said he remembers a group of men meeting in his father's kitchen to talk about these American soldiers and what were they gonna do. And he doesn't remember what was said. He remembers the meeting and remembers the purpose of the meeting, which was to address these, you know, guys who were running amuck. He said well, the next day, an American soldier was found with his throat cut. And the day after that another was found. And he said this went on for two weeks. And he said that stopped. He said soldiers running amuck stopped. So my father to me--and again, this is through the eyes of a kid was the complete opposite of my mother. My mother came out of a segregated culture in society where you acquiesced, where you made nice, where you got off the sidewalk, you deferred. My father was the complete opposite, the complete opposite. Speaker 1: So did he--what about his family structure? Do you know much about the culture that he was raised in? You know-- Speaker 2: He came--there were six boys. He had (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, so six boys? Speaker 2: Yeah, there were five brothers. I think there was a girl who died at birth, but six boys were raised by my grandmother [Georgiana Henry Edwards] on my father's side. Speaker 1: And where did he fit on the birth order? Speaker 2: He was the youngest. He was the youngest. So he came to New York [New York] last. I think he was sixteen when he came to New York, and he lived with one of his brothers [Ignatius Edwards]. And my uncles were like a lot of West Indian men. They were womanizers, they were drinkers, they were gamblers, they worked hard, they took care of their families, but they were out here. And I have an uncle that I didn't meet, but I understand when he died, and he died early--I think he was hit by a car, and there was a big funeral in Harlem [New York, New York]. And people said there were more women crying over his (laughter)--so they were like that (laughter). Not all of them. And my father tells the story of being in Harlem. And I guess one of his brothers was running a game--you know, gambling game, and they were raided. They were raided and everybody was rounded up, including my father who was sixteen. And he said he was the youngest and the smallest. And this is when they had paddy wagons, and they were all thrown in the paddy wagons. But the paddy wagon was so full my father had to stand on the running board. And he said the cop has his arms around him as this paddy wagon is going down the street and my father's on the running board. He said, "It was so embarrassing." He said, "Everybody saw me on this paddy wagon with this cop" (laughter). So his brothers were kind of wild. Story_ID: 643958 Speaker 1: And what kind of West Indian culture came into your home then? You know, basically-- Speaker 2: The music (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) he, he had--he had some of it, but he was also--well, he was sixteen when he came [to New York, New York], right? Speaker 2: He was sixteen, and then we were living in Tacoma, Washington where there were no other West Indians to my knowledge. And for me, I didn't even know what a West Indian meant. It meant, oh, I'm--I got Indian in me, you know, which was then to me Native American. I didn't what--and you know at that time, you wanted to be anything but black. So, you know, when I was in school, and I was in a predominantly white school, and you would have the, you know, geography--where do your people come from? Or who are you? You know, and I would always say I'm West Indian, which sounded exotic. I don't even know if the teacher knew what that meant (laughter), but it was, you know, better than being this dyed in the wool American Negro. But that was pretty much it, and the music, you know, calypso. I can remember calypso being part of the music. My father [Cyril Edwards] loved to dance. But he really was assimilationist to the extent of wanting to be part of the dominant culture, but really having a sensibility that was West Indian. Story_ID: 643959 Speaker 1: So I wanna understand. So your parents met in Birmingham, England, right, you said? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And then, then they moved where? And then--? Speaker 2: My father [Cyril Edwards] was stationed, and my mother [Bertie Edwards] may have been too, in Fort Lewis, Washington [Joint Base Lewis-McChord, Washington], which is now the biggest [U.S.] Army base. Speaker 1: And that's right--Tacoma's right near it? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay, I see, so-- Speaker 2: Right, Tacoma's about fifteen minutes away. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so you're really born three years after their, their union. Is that it? Because-- Speaker 2: No, they were married in 1946. I was born-- Speaker 1: Born the next year (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) in 1947. Speaker 1: Okay, okay-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And so with that, so are they--how long do they stay--does your father stay in the service I guess that's what I'm-- Speaker 2: He came out when I was twelve, because we moved back to Tacoma. We went to Japan when I was maybe five or six. I did the first grade in Japan. Speaker 1: And then you went to Danville [Virginia] for a year. Speaker 2: Danville. We went to Missouri; we went to New Jersey--a lot of little short stints. And by the age of twelve I was in the sixth grade--we came back to Tacoma. Speaker 1: Okay, you came back from where to Tacoma? Speaker 2: Missouri. Speaker 1: Missouri. Speaker 2: Missouri. Speaker 1: Okay, so Missouri was your last-- Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. So do you remember--so you're growing up on bases. Speaker 2: Right, I was a military brat. Speaker 1: You're mil- military. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay, so that--so what is your earliest memory of growing up--the earliest? Speaker 2: The earliest is, is starting out in Tacoma as a--I don't wanna say a toddler, but going to nursery school; that was in Tacoma. My vivid memory growing up is having a nursery school teacher, young--you know, young teacher--young white teacher. My brother [Dwight Edwards] and I were in the same nursery school class. And I think a guest was coming, and the teacher was very clear that we all had to be on our best behavior because this guest was coming. And my brother spilled some milk, and the teacher hauled off and slapped him across the face. And I went home and told my mother, and my mother was up at the school the next day. Now I don't know what happened to that teacher. I don't recall seeing her in our class again. But that was so--and I didn't--you know, at four or five, I didn't ascribe racism to it. I just--you know, it's like, this teacher haul--this teacher slapped my brother. And my mother was like (makes sound). Speaker 1: Now, what is your--how old is your bro- you're-- Speaker 2: I'm older. Speaker 1: You're older. Yet, your--you two were in the same class? Speaker 2: This was nursery school. Speaker 1: Oh, it was nursery school (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was nursery school. That's what made that slap-- Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: I was about five. My brother had to be four. Speaker 1: Now you would take your kid--okay, you--okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And she--and I remember she was young, you know, maybe in her twenties. And it was just--it was this--he spilled the milk, and she was like, (makes sound) (gesture). And then of course he's shrieking and crying, and I was outraged, you know and probably embarrassed. But I just remember, what? You know, 'cause it was so quick, and it was violent, and it wasn't until many, many years later that I realized it also had, I'm sure, racial overtones. You know, this little silly--and again, we were in a predominantly white setting. Tacoma, Washington, even now is maybe 15 percent black, maybe. Speaker 1: And about how, how large is Tacoma? It's about--? Speaker 2: Now it's about two hundred thousand. Then it was maybe 150. It's the third largest city in the State of Washington. Story_ID: 643960 Speaker 1: Can you describe what family life was like? You know-- Speaker 2: You know, I think we had a pretty--in looking back at it (laughter), was kind of a Donna Reed ['The Donna Reed Show'] and Harriet and Ozzie ['The Adventures of Ozzie and Harriet'] kind of family. My father [Cyril Edwards] went to work every day. My mother [Bertie Edwards] kissed him. You know, we saw my mother kiss my father as he went off to work. We had dinner every night together. We used to have what we'd call family council meetings. I don't know how often those took place, but we would have a family council where we discussed--usually my brother and I were discussing something. I also remember--and my brother is a great guy. I tell people I adore my brother. My joke as I got older would be to say to my mother, "I know you like Dwight [Dwight Edwards] better than me." And she would go, "Oh no, no, no, that's not true." And I would say, "It's okay. I like Dwight better than me," because I really thought he was just--when you're growing up you don't think he's great. But I remember when he turned thirteen, my father, being this macho West Indian, declared that he no longer had to do the dishes because he was now a man. And dishes was the one thing we both hated, and we managed to negotiate for many years how we would do it. We would either take turns and do dishes one week and alternate, or we would do dishes together; I would wash and he would dry, or he would wash and I would dry, but we had worked it out. The one chore we detested we worked out. Okay, now he doesn't have to do dishes. I'm like outraged. And I remember one night--it was probably right after this decree, (laughter) I'm in the kitchen doing the dishes. And my brother comes in and he goes, "Audrey [HistoryMaker Audrey Edwards], I'm gonna help you. You want me to dry?" Because he knew this is like unfair (laughter). And I don't think he even remembers that, and that's such a vivid memory because he was like--he was, he was almost as outraged as I was. Speaker 1: So you had a close relationship as brother and sister then? Speaker 2: We--it's funny because I just saw my brother for Thanksgiving. And we can go six months without talking to each other. Now growing up we fought like cats and dogs. Speaker 1: Like kids do. Speaker 2: Like kids do. I was a neat Nick. He was a slob. I, I was so anal. You know, if he was I my room and (moves object off camera)--that was there, "You've been in my room." (Laughter) But he was a good guy. He was easygoing. He was a crier. He was one of these soft boys who cried. When we saw each other at Thanksgiving, his wife is--was--his, his second wife is white. His first wife was black. His second wife is white. So she's fascinated. Every time we're together she wants to hear about our growing up just as you're asking. So she wanted to know basically what was the narrative that our mother had about us. And this came up because my brother said, "You know, Mom used to say, 'Well, Audrey's sickly.'" Because his memory was: "I would do all this work, and you didn't have to do anything; and I'd say, you know, 'How come Audrey's not doing this?'" He says, "And mom said, 'Well, you know Audrey is sickly.'" And I said, "Really?" And I used to get, you know, measles a couple of times. So his wife wanted to know what did my mother say about him. And I said, "Well, she said, 'You know your brother is slow.'" So he said, "What?" I said, "Yeah and one day she even said to me, she said, 'Now you know your brother is slightly retarded'" (laughter). Well, I was outraged; I was outraged. I said, "My brother is not retarded. What are you talking about?" Now I could call him retarded, but I was like, "What?" So he was stunned to hear this. And I told his wife--I said, "But you know what? I'm gonna tell you something. He was trying to become a Cub Scout, and he couldn't learn the oath." And I can remember my mother being in the kitchen drilling the oath, and he just couldn't memorize it. And I remember one day coming in--and I was always smart. And in school if you had siblings close together, the smart one--if the smart one is of the grade that the kid is--that the less smart one is coming into, the teachers expect the sibling to be as smart as the one who's in their class. So I was the one, "Are you like your sister?" "No." He's trying--he's trying to become a Cub Scout, can't learn the oath. One day I just barged into the kitchen, and I stand there and I go, "On my honor as a Cub Scout, I will do my duty to God and my country." My mother had drilled it into him so much I had memorized it (laughter), and he still hadn't, (laughter) so he was outraged. And he's telling his wife, he said, "And you know that's why I never became a Cub Scout." And I said, "That's not true," (laughter). Story_ID: 643961 Speaker 1: You are--what about schools? Can we talk about schools? 'Cause you're going to school on the [U.S. military] base, right? Speaker 2: We were going to school on the base only in Japan, only in Japan. When we came back to the states, we were going to regular schools. When we went to Missouri--and I remember this vividly--after the horrendous segregated experience in Virginia [Danville, Virginia], my mother [Bertie Edwards] was not going to have us in a segregated school in Missouri. So we went to Catholic school for a year, which had the complete opposite effect on me. I wanted to become a Catholic. And my father [Cyril Edwards] grew up Catholic, but he was not a practicing Catholic. But in Catholic school I became so enamored of the rituals. And if you are not Catholic in a Catholic school you're another outsider. So we were one of few blacks in this Catholic school and we weren't Catholic. So I wanted to be like my friends. It's like, well, they get to go to catechism. I didn't know what catechism was, but I wanted to go because that's what my friends were doing. They took communion, you know, they genuflected. I did none of that because I wasn't Catholic. So I remember that being a big to do in the family 'cause my mother was like, you know, dyed in the wool Baptist and was like, "No, you're not becoming Catholic." But I got ov- now what happened--1954, Brown versus the Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954]. Story_ID: 643962 Speaker 1: So, you were talking about Brown versus Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954]. You said it was 1954 (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That summer Missouri built a new elementary school that was integrated. So that's where I went during the fourth grade, to their brand new integrated grade school. Speaker 1: This is Missouri? Speaker 2: This is Missouri-- Speaker 1: It was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) after Catholic school. Speaker 1: --that was--oh, so after Catholic school-- Speaker 2: After Catho-- Speaker 1: --you went to public school? Speaker 2: Um-hm, because they had built a new integrated public school. Speaker 1: Talk about what you remember about the experience in Japan. Do you--do you have memories of that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah. Japan--and again, my brother [Dwight Edwards] was maybe five. I was six. Everybody had housemaids because the yen was worth nothing. So the American dollar was very, very strong, which meant--and we lived on the [U.S. military] base, but every single household had one or two servants. You either had a houseboy, you had a maid. I remember my brother (laughter) my brother got to the point where he would sit at the dinner table; and my mother [Bertie Edwards] had a little bell; and he would ring the bell. And he would say--and he was like five. And he says to this young little Japanese maid, "When I--when I shake the bell once, it means I want you to bring me milk." And I can remember him lying across his bed as a kid while she's putting on his shoes and tying the laces. He knew how to put on his shoes and tie the laces, but he had become this (laughter) Little Lord Fauntleroy, you know. Very used to having servants. And I remember--and we traveled a lot in Japan. We traveled a lot. My most vivid memories is going into little Japanese villages that had never seen black people. They probably hadn't seen whites, but they definitely had not seen blacks. My brother even at that age was much more accommodating than I was. We'd go into a village--I remember going into a village, getting out of the car. All the kids in the village ran over to my brother, started rubbing his head, rubbing his--doing like this, and he stood there grinning. I, meanwhile, am like, "Get away from me" (laughter), but he was very, you know, compliant and very sweet. I remember in one village I had fallen asleep in the car, in the backseat. My parents got out with my brother, went into a little shop. I wake up. The car is surrounded by Japanese looking at me. I freaked out; I jumped up; ran into the shop where my parents were. The shop had--you know how you have basement windows on the ground, very little windows going around, well the people in the village were actually on their hands and knees looking through the window at this black family. Now, because I was a kid--and it's interesting what--because my brother was also--we're the same age--he didn't really care. I'm freaked out because they're acting like not so much that we'd landed from Mars, but we may as well have in terms of how they were acting. Story_ID: 643963 Speaker 1: Again, looking back, there was never any hostility. There was--just curious. Who are these folk? We've never seen people with color like this. And it--and thinking about cultures, the Japanese culture is very fascinating. Because when Japan started to become a world power--people are now talking about the Japanese, and looking at their culture, and talking about the Westernization of Japan. What I remembered about the Japanese is how--gentle is not the right word, but respectful. Not--see, I think there are other places where you could go and if folk don't know who you are they're--it's like how the West was won--they're gonna pull a gun. That was never part of their mindset. They did not go to hostility. They went to open curiosity. The kids were the ones running up to us. The adults were not. The housemaid--the, the maids that we had and the houseboys that we had, those maids were lov- they were--they were kids. I mean, they might have been eighteen, nineteen years old; they were patient. I remember one was very creative, and she taught us crafts, or she taught me crafts. Very--I, I love Japanese culture, and I think the people in many ways are really amazing. And what they did after the war [World War II, WWII]--and in college [University of Washington, Seattle, Washington] I took a lot of--I did some Eastern Asian studies, and the Japanese in particular, they were known for: we lose, we now learn what made the winners victorious, and that's what we will now do. And not only will we do it, we are going to perfect it because we will never lose again for that reason. And that was pretty much how--looking again with, with the perspective of an adult looking at the childhood, that's pretty much how they acted. And because my mother [Bertie Edwards] was so charming and ingratiating, she had a ton of Japanese friends. My mother was (laughter) one of these women, who she's--to her dying day, if she met a foreigner, she would talk in the accent of the foreigner. So the Japanese--(adopts accent), "Hello, how are you?" And I'd go, "Ma," even as a kid I'd go, "Ma, that's not--," but I think she felt if I talk like they do, they'll know that I'm com- trying to communicate. So (adopts accent), "Hello, so, how are you?" (Laughter) That's how she would talk. So I remember going to a Japanese wedding or being in a village where a wedding was going on, which was absolutely fascinating because the bride was crying. She was beautifully dressed. She was crying and she was walking through the village saying goodbye to the villagers, because now she's going into the household of her husband, and you're never gonna see her again. So it was this happy occasion and this sad occasion. And I remember saying, "Why is she crying?" And my mother would explain, and she'd all--you know, already met somebody who spoke halting English, and they would explain what was going on. So we really got a whole different sense of the culture because we traveled throughout the country. Speaker 2: So this, this was really nice too because you're--you know, you're a relatively young family still, and you're living in a--I mean, you know, black people would love to have--they have servants and things like that (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, exactly. Speaker 2: It's not--so you have all that sort of going on. Speaker 1: Right. Story_ID: 643964 Speaker 1: And then your father [Cyril Edwards] gets transferred, right? Speaker 2: Um-hm (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And you--then that's when you go to Danville [Virginia]. When you go to Danville, is your mother [Bertie Edwards] with you? I mean-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, so she's-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --with you? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And you're living with family down there-- Speaker 2: Living with my [maternal] grandmother. Speaker 1: So what explains the dif- how--I mean, you're in a whole different environment. Who-- Speaker 2: Oh, we're in a--my mother--my grandmother's house had an outhouse. The school that we went to had no doors on the lavatory. The classroom--I sat at a desk for one--you know those desks have the chairs attached? Okay, that's where one kid is supposed to sit. Well, in our classroom two kids are sitting at that desk. I happened to be sitting next to the psychopath in the third grade. 'Cause I remember her taking a pencil and either putting it through her hand or somebody else's hand. Now who knows what was going on in her house. But she's my desk mate. So I remember just doing everything I could to keep this child from going off on me (laughter) because she was going off on everybody else (laughter). So I was always constipated because I hated going to school. So that was the one thing that kept me home. And I had loved school up until then. I had loved school. I was a good student. Speaker 1: So did you think your mother knew what was going on with you? Speaker 2: No--yes, yes, yes, I do. You know why? That's why we went to Catholic school when we went to Missouri. I think--yeah. I'm pretty--now I don't know what I was communicating to her, but I was traumatized. I hated it. I don't recall my brother [Dwight Edwards] hating it to the extent that I did. And again, he was more easygoing than I was, and because he was slow, as my mother said (laughter). But I think he was just--he just had a more easygoing temperament. You know, things didn't bother him the way they bothered me. Story_ID: 643965 Speaker 1: So, you get to Missouri. Now are you living--you're living off base? Speaker 2: We're living off base. We were in Jefferson City [Missouri]. For a while we lived in a trailer park. I don't know how we got there, but we were in a trailer park. And then I guess we had an apartment. And I had an aunt, my mother's [Bertie Edwards] younger sister, who came to live with us. She was breaking up with her husband and had a young child, and she was going to--what's the black school [HBCU] in Missouri? Speaker 1: Lincoln [Lincoln University]. Speaker 2: Lincoln. She was going to Lincoln. Speaker 1: I know there's a Lincoln. I don't know if--yeah, Lincoln is in both places. Speaker 2: There's two, yeah-- Speaker 1: Yeah-- Speaker 2: --Lincoln in Jefferson City, Missouri and one in Pennsylvania [Lincoln University, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania]. So she came to live with us while she tended- attended school, and she brought her child. She actually had her child while, while living with us. And that's a cousin I'm close to because I literally changed his diapers. But my--but where we lived in Missouri is kind of fuzzy because we moved--we lived in more than one place. Speaker 1: So you would--maybe you were getting settled into the city or--you know, in temporary housing that was best-- Speaker 2: Yeah--and I don't think we were in--where did I do the fifth grade? Yeah, by the time we got back to Tacoma [Washington] I was in the sixth grade, so I had to do the fourth and the fifth grade-- Speaker 1: Oh, so you--in, in Missouri (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) in the Missouri. Right. Story_ID: 643966 Speaker 1: So how would you describe yourself? You've done some description, but around this age how would you describe yourself? Speaker 2: Oh, at that age? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: I, I was smart. I was a good student because I, I was a good--what's the word? I wanted to do well to please my parents. I was very much into pleasing. I was a pleaser. I was popular. I had friends. My mother [Bertie Edwards] always told me I was stubborn. She would say when she was really mad, "You're evil," but I think it meant I was obstinate, and strong willed, and stubborn. And again, contrasting with my brother, who was you know, easy. I thought he was a crybaby. He was soft. And as we got older--I remember my father [Cyril Edwards] (laughter) saying--he was probably right. He said, "You know, Audrey [HistoryMaker Audrey Edwards] should have been the boy and Dwight [Dwight Edwards] should have been the girl," because our temperaments--I had more of a masculine temperament, if you wanna call it that, and he had a more of a feminine just in terms of our persona. Story_ID: 643967 Speaker 1: So you move to Tacoma [Washington]. Now where are you living in Tacoma? Speaker 2: When we came back, we came back to the house. Speaker 1: But when you say when you came back, 'cause you started there. Speaker 2: We started in Tacoma. Speaker 1: Right, right, but you don't remember so much when you--when you started. Speaker 2: Yeah, because that's when we were in nursery school. Speaker 1: Oh, nursery school. That's right. Okay, so you come back and then what-- Speaker 2: We had a house on a hill. It overlooked the city next to a park. And I remember the house 'cause I loved the house. It had a big picture window. We came back to that house which my parents [Bertie Edwards and Cyril Edwards] kept and rented out. And it was overrun with rats, and you know, whoever the people were, and my father was disgusted, but he fixed it up and we lived there. And then the city--during that time, I guess the early '60s [1960s], the big highway expansion was going on. So our house was bought by the city to accommodate part of I-5 [Interstate 5], and my father then built a house on the Eastside of Tacoma, which is where we were living in the old house. Speaker 1: Now when you said built a house, he actually built it or he had it built? Speaker 2: He had it built. Speaker 1: He had it built, okay. Speaker 2: He had it built, but he was a carpenter by trade in St. Croix [U.S. Virgin Islands]. All of the boys and--well, all of the kids in the Caribbean during his time had to learn a trade, so he learned carpentry. Story_ID: 643968 Speaker 1: So tell me what sights, smells, and sounds remind you of growing up in Tacoma [Washington] at that time? Speaker 2: Well, we lived on the hill facing the smelter factory, so depending on how the wind was blowing it felt like the toilet. I mean it smelled like the toilet. It was just an awful odor that would permeate, you know, the area. When it--with an incredible view--an incredible view of the city, an incredible view of Puget Sound, of the bridge. We had a backyard filled with fruit trees. In many ways that was probably my favorite house because--and it was next to a park. McKinley Park [Tacoma, Washington] was like across the street. All of that is now gone. All of that is highway [Interstate 5], so. And when I--still when I go to Tacoma I will look at the highway and remember, you know, 2709 East K Street. Speaker 1: What about sounds? Speaker 2: Not--sounds were not predominant like the sounds of New York [New York]. The smells were predominant. It rained all the time, so the, the atmosphere--I tell people--I remember dreaming in black and white because the days were usually gray. And that was the one thing I knew when I grew up I would not be able to tolerate. So I knew from an early age I would be leaving Tacoma. Story_ID: 643969 Speaker 1: So life--so you are at this point in, you said sixth grade? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So is sixth grade in elementary school and then seventh grade you-- Speaker 2: Is junior high (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) go through junior high school. So when you--so you really--for the rest of the time you're in Tacoma [Washington] because he's retired? Is that-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He came out. My father [Cyril Edwards] developed asthma and he came out early. Speaker 1: I see, okay. Speaker 2: Came out early. Speaker 1: Do you know what his total amount of service was? Speaker 2: It was twenty years. Speaker 1: It was--oh-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --so he--okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm pretty-- Speaker 1: Because he was o-- Speaker 2: Oh, well, wait a minute. Was it twenty? You know what, Julieanna [Julieanna Richardson]? The--it might not--and he was older in the [U.S.] military. It might have been sixteen or seventeen. He may not have done the full twenty. Speaker 1: Now did he have children with his first marriage? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, so was there any discussion about this marriage versus your marriage (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Nope. Speaker 1: No connection at all? Speaker 2: My mother [Bertie Edwards]--I told--I tell my mother I never knew I had two sisters. I knew I had a brother because my brother came to Tacoma. He, too, was in the military with his wife. And I remembered that because he was grown and he had on a uniform. But my father also had two daughters. My older brother was the oldest, and he had two daughters. I had no, no knowledge of their existence until I moved to New York [New York]. Speaker 1: So there actually were six of you. I mean, so-- Speaker 2: Five. Speaker 1: Five. Five. Speaker 2: Two--I thought he--okay. Speaker 1: Three with his first--with my father with Aunt Victoria [Victoria McClean Edwards], his first wife, and two with my mother. Speaker 2: Okay, okay, okay. Oh, I see, I see, I got you. Okay, okay. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: Oh, you just learned of them at separate times. Speaker 1: I learned of the two sisters (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sisters at a separate time. Speaker 1: --in 1969. Speaker 2: I see, okay. Speaker 1: When I'm now grown. Speaker 2: Okay, I see, I see. Speaker 1: And you know, in those days-- Speaker 2: People didn't talk. Speaker 1: --they didn't. There was shame attached to divorcing. I found out--Aunt Victoria, which was the name I called my father's first wife--my sister, Norma [ph.], said, "I can remember going with my mother to the priest after my father basically served her with divorce papers to see if she was gonna be excommunicated," because the church didn't recognize divorce, and his first wife was a devout Catholic. So the idea of her husband divorcing her--and you know, family--every family has secrets, and I think the big secret--and, and families can use it against each other. The big--it's not so much a secret, but you know, my father fell in love with a woman and he was already married. And I don't think my mother knew that he was married when they were seeing each other, so that was like (makes sound). 'Cause my mother was also, you know, not religious then but certainly would not have been going around with a married man. You know, that's not--now she had some sisters who would do that, but she was not doing that. Speaker 2: So, so you--your--back in the--they just didn't talk and there were a lot of things. Speaker 1: Right (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was kind--well, I guess it's really maybe all families do. Story_ID: 643970 Speaker 1: So what is life like in Tacoma [Washington], you know, when you've sort of settled down? And who are you--like, who are you in the seventh grade? Speaker 2: The seventh grade was difficult because Rogers Elementary School [John R. Rogers Elementary School, Tacoma, Washington] was in a part of town that had more whites than blacks. Now I'm in junior high, whites still predominate, but there are more blacks and they could all dance. And what I remember was I got to junior high school and I couldn't dance. So I felt like an odd duck out. And I quickly learned to dance, and I loved dancing. I love dancing. So it took me all of seventh grade to feel comfortable with this black crowd. Be-- Speaker 1: Becau- because you hadn't been around a black crowd. So (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No. No. Speaker 1: --you were going to the black school then (unclear). Speaker 2: No, it was still predominantly white. There were just more black kids. Speaker 1: Blacks at-- Speaker 2: And, and, and there were enough of us to form black cliques. So in junior high and high school [Lincoln High School, Tacoma, Washington], you came together around race. Speaker 1: So what is the name of the junior high school? Speaker 2: Lincoln, Lincoln High School [sic. Gault Junior High School, Tacoma, Washington] (simultaneous). Story_ID: 643971 Speaker 1: And my favorite story in Roger (laughter) Rogers Elementary School [John R. Rogers Elementary School, Tacoma, Washington]--you know, the minority population wasn't that big. And people said, "Did you fight?" And I said, "I had one fight." I was supposed to have a fight with Teresa Wong [ph.]. Teresa was a little Chinese girl, and when--she was little and I was tall, and we were gonna fight. And I don't remember what we were fighting about, but we had an appointed time after school. We were meeting behind the school in the yard. And I had my posse, which were all the black kids, and she had her posse, which were a few little Asian kids. And people would say to me, "You know those Chinese girls got nails, and they scratch your face" (gesture). And I'm thinking well, I'm bigger and I can beat her, but I'm saying, oh my god, Teresa Wong can (gesture) scratch my face. So, so we--you know, after school we're marching, and we get to the schoolyard, and we're facing off. And all of a sudden there's a screeching of tires. And I hear this voice going, "Audrey [HistoryMaker Audrey Edwards], what are you doing?" It's my mother [Bertie Edwards]. So I look at her and I go, "I'm getting ready to fight Teresa Wong." And she goes, "Get in this car." So now all the kids are going, "Oh man." So I get in the car, and I slump against the window. I go, thank god. Flash forward forty-five years later, forty years later at our high school reunion, (laughter) sitting at the table with a friend of mine from Seattle [Washington], a guy I grew up with; he's my date. And somebody mentions Teresa Wong. And I go, "Teresa Wong is here?" So they showed me the table where she's sitting. I run over. Here's Teresa Wong looking like a Chinese dowager. You know, she's got on her silk. You know, she looks like this--you know, somebody from 'The Joy Luck Club.' So I go, "Teresa?" She goes, "Audrey?" So I tell the story. I said, "Teresa, remember when we were gonna fight?" So I tell the story to the people sitting at the table, who hadn't heard it. I said, "Teresa, do you remember that?" She goes, "Yeah, because when your mother came and got you, I went, 'Thank god'" (laughter). Speaker 2: So neither of you wanted fight? Speaker 1: Neither one of us. Speaker 2: It was all bravado. Speaker 1: Right, right, and we couldn't remember why we were fighting (laughter), but we were so grateful it didn't happen (laughter). Story_ID: 643972 Speaker 1: What classes did you gravitate to? Speaker 2: In terms of-- Speaker 1: In school (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) academics? Speaker 1: Academics-- Speaker 2: English, English. Speaker 1: 'Cause you said you were always--you were a good student. Speaker 2: Yeah, I liked English, I liked foreign language, I liked social studies. I was an editor of the school newspaper. Now my father [Cyril Edwards] in his--he went to work for Boeing [The Boeing Company], but my father was a writer. He ended his career at Boeing as a technical writer, so that was something in the family. Speaker 1: So were you writing or do you remember your first instance of writing? Speaker 2: I remember writing for the school newspaper. I was a features editor. I think there were two features editors. I was one of them. We go around and you know do stories on whatever was happening. I can't remember the stories. I do know when I graduated high school, I got a job at the Tacoma News Tribune [The News Tribune] for a supplement called the Teenage Tribune [ph.], and I was the editor of that and wrote all the articles for that. It came out once a week on Sunday. And my mother [Bertie Edwards] is the one--'cause my mother was a real pistol--I went down and sort of applied, and they looked at me like, get away. And then my mother went back with me and pretty much made them hire me, and pointed out, you know, "You don't have any black people working here, and my daughter was an editor at the school paper." So the lead feature every week would be me interviewing the incoming student body president at all the high schools. So every week there would be an interview with, you know, Lincoln's [Lincoln High School, Tacoma, Washington] incoming president, what's he gonna do? And it was like a two page supplement, so that was my first real media job. Speaker 1: Was there anyone at school that--you know, any teacher or other adult or--you know, outside of school that was of--was an impact on you, 'cause you had relatively a small nuclear family, right? Speaker 2: Um-hm. There were very--there were memorable teachers. Yeah, there was a teacher named Mr. Shaw [ph.]. My brother [Dwight Edwards] and I were just talking about him. He had lost a daughter. He had lost a daughter at the age of two or three to something weird like a brain tumor that just took her right away. He was also a Korean War vet, and he was a tough Marine [U.S. Marine Corps]. He was a tough Marine, and he taught drama--very good, very vivid, the first teacher that my parents had to dinner, you know, 'cause they were impressed with him; had a very good English teacher, a woman named Lillie Smith [ph.] who was kind of this hot to trot--you know, wore spike heels and tons of makeup, and you know, jet black dyed hair and very (gesture)--but a good, good teacher. So the teachers who had an impact on me were kind of characters, you know, in terms of personality, but good at teaching what they were teaching. Speaker 1: And so you, you know, English being your best subject, I would like to also just to have you maybe describe were there any things--any clubs and things that you were involved with? Speaker 2: Yes, I was in the honor society, I was on the debate team--what was it--pen and scroll or scroll--a journalism group, a journalism society. Speaker 1: And you're saying seventh grade was--was it-- Speaker 2: Junior high. Speaker 1: Junior high. And then what is high school? Speaker 2: Tenth grade. Speaker 1: Ten--but the-- Speaker 2: Junior high was seventh, eighth, and ninth. Speaker 1: Right, but what is the--what is the name of the school for high school? Speaker 2: Lincoln High School and Gault Junior High [Gault Junior High School, Tacoma, Washington]. Speaker 1: Oh, so you--it was always the same school, you just moved to a different building. Speaker 2: No, no, no, different school altogether, different location-- Speaker 1: But they both were called Lincoln? Speaker 2: No, junior high was Gault. Speaker 1: Gault. Speaker 2: G-- Speaker 1: Okay, so Gault (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) G-A-U-L-T. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, I see. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Rogers Elementary [John R. Rogers Elementary School, Tacoma, Washington], Gault Junior--Junior High, and Lincoln High School. Speaker 1: I see, okay, okay. Speaker 2: But it was the same kids. Like, Teresa Wong [ph.] in elementary school was with me (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It's-- Speaker 2: --in high school. Speaker 1: I see, okay, okay. Story_ID: 643973 Speaker 1: So now you, you--this is the early-- Speaker 2: Early '60s [1960s] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) When is it? Sixties [1960s]. Speaker 2: Early '60s [1960s]. Speaker 1: Okay, so are you aware of the agita- I mean, are you hearing about your parents talk about the Civil Rights Movement-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and what's happening in other places, and-- Speaker 2: I wanted to go to the March on Washington. My parents were not hearing of it. It's interesting because, I think like a lot of mid- and my parents were working to middle class people. The Civil Rights Movement--and maybe because we were so far away geographically--was not resonating with them when it first started. I think my father [Cyril Edwards]--I remember when Muhammad Ali defeated Sonny Liston, and my father was really more of a fan of Sonny Liston's. When Ali announced that he was changing his name from Cassius Clay to Muhammad Ali, my father was like, "What are you (makes sound)." So and when I wanted to go to the March on Washington in 1963, I was sixteen, it was like we can't afford that. And I don't think they really bought into it. And then all hell broke loose when I was in college and gone to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] for a year and came back to Seattle [Washington] and announced that I wanted to join the Seattle chapter of the Black Panthers [Black Panther Party]. And they basically said, "Yeah, well, if you do that don't even try to come through this door again. Don't even use the name Edwards." Speaker 1: You know, because that, that was a time we don't--you know sometimes in the--in the rush to say people were all for it, there was a lot of--a lot of people were not. Speaker 2: Not at all. Speaker 1: Not for it, they were more conservative-- Speaker 2: Yeah-- Speaker 1: --and you-- Speaker 2: --exactly. Speaker 1: --your father you had said was more of an integrationist anyway. Speaker 2: My mother [Bertie Edwards] was more of the integrationist. My father I think wanted to do well in America, but he was not an integrationist. And I guess maybe for him the Civil Rights Movement represented that. I remember my father--I remember when I was maybe, maybe a junior in high school [Lincoln High School, Tacoma, Washington]. I'd wash my hair, and it was natural, and I'm sitting--you know, I hadn't pressed it yet, and I've got this hair sticking out. You know, it's in its natural state. And I remember my father saying, "Why don't you wear year hair like that?" And I'm like, "What?" He says, "Like that." He said, "It looks nice." And it's like, are you kidding? And this was before naturals. But he was--he said, "Why are you spending--?" You know, it was like, "Why are you spending all this time with a hot comb pressing your hair when that looks fine?" And I was like, what are you crazy? Speaker 1: So I thought earlier you had said he was assimilate- maybe he wanted to assimilate into America (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I said an assimilationist, and I--and I--that's the wrong word. He wanted to do well in America. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: He was smart. He knew that he didn't have some opportunities because he was black. I can remember we were watching Nixon [sic. President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] and Jody Pow- Jody Powell was the press secretary for somebody. And my father had been--had to be in his fifties or sixties. And I remember him saying--Jody Powell was running a press conference with the White House press corps. And my father said, "You know, I'd like to do that." He said, "That's a job I'd like to do." So he would sometimes say things that told me he had these longings for if I--if all things were equal, this is what I would aspire to. Speaker 1: So he--so you literally are growing up when--you talk about it. There's a lot of hope and anticipation for things really to come-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --within your family. Story_ID: 643974 Speaker 1: But this is a little different in that you know the Caribbean influence is--you know that, that's a whole different dynamic. Speaker 2: Yes, which I didn't--and you know I gotta tell you something, Julie [Julieanna Richardson]. One of the things (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You didn't understand it because you didn't understand it-- Speaker 2: Wasn't until I came to New York [New York]. Speaker 1: 'Cause there's a lot of it here. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And even--see, what I'm--I just wanna ask one thing because a lot of times, you know, the interviews that I've done--there was a lot--but see, you have a mixed--I wanna ask if, if this happened. You know, a lot of the--a lot of times the Caribbean influence--if there were two Caribbean parents in people of Caribbean ancestry, they often said--you know, they would talk about black Americans in a different way within-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --the household, you know, don't be like them, you know, striving, you know, to, to do things. Was--there was none--there was none of that going on? Speaker 2: No, no, because my father [Cyril Edwards] did not embrace his Caribbean roots in Tacoma [Washington]. Now, I had friends who would say things like, "Your father talks funny." I never heard an accent. The only thing I can remember him saying would be tree for the word three, but everything else he just sounded--you know, because if you grow up hearing it, you don't perceive it as different. Story_ID: 643975 Speaker 1: So the conversation around the dinner table--what is the conversation occurring around the dinner table? So these activities are happening, but basically, you know, your parents [Bertie Edwards and Cyril Edwards] are like, well it's okay. But, what is the--he wants to, he wants to assimilate into society, so it--are they active in the community? Is it-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Oh yeah, they were club--they were club members. That generation, just like you had the Elks [Improved Benevolent and Protective Order of the Elks of the World] and the Masons and the Eastern Stars [Order of the Eastern Star], they didn't have that, but the City Association of Colored Women's Clubs [Tacoma City Association of Colored Women's Clubs, Inc.], which I think was a branch of--what's the big one that [HistoryMaker] Dorothy Height ran? Speaker 1: Oh, the Ne- National-- Speaker 2: Council of Negro (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) that's-- Speaker 2: --Women. Speaker 1: --Women [National Council of Negro Women], right. Speaker 2: Yeah, the City Association of Colored Women's Club I think was part of that. My father belonged to something called the Caballero Club [sic. Caballeros Club]. These groups gave dances and dinners, scholarships, separate and apart from what the church was doing. These were social clubs. Story_ID: 643976 Speaker 1: And then you mentioned the church, and I'd been meaning to ask that. What, what is your affiliation? Speaker 2: Baptist. Speaker 1: Baptist. Speaker 2: (Cough). Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: Excuse me. Speaker 1: --even though your mother [Bertie Edwards] was--I mean your father [Cyril Edwards] was Catholic-- Speaker 2: A lapsed Catholic. Speaker 1: A lapsed Ca- okay. So, so you're growing up in the Baptist church and all of that. Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay, are you active? Do you go every Sunday? Speaker 2: I went every Sunday because my mother was active. And I guess I was active, but I was na- when I was younger I was more active. As I got older, I was got less interested because then I'm seeing what I consider contradictions and the behavior of people that I think is inappropriate if you're supposed to be in church--blah, blah, blah--which I would sometimes discuss with my mother, you know, because she was still very much of the church. She would go to--she would leave one church and maybe go to another one, but she was very much in the church. And Sunday school was a big part of our growing up, going to Sunday school. Speaker 1: So you had--what was the local black church called--the Baptist church? Speaker 2: There were several, but we, we belonged to Bethlehem Baptist Church [Tacoma, Washington]. Speaker 1: There were several black churches? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, at least five or six. There was Methodist, there was Baptist, but there were a couple of Baptist, and probably a few Methodists. There were at least five churches. Speaker 1: So which song reminds you of, of church service on Sunday? Or do you have any songs what you hear them that remind you? Speaker 2: No, even though I liked the singing. That is what I did like about church. 'Nearer, My God, to Thee,' that was one of the big solos. But for the most part, church was kind of a dim memory because it was, you know, kind of (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It wasn't holding your attention. Speaker 2: Yeah right. Speaker 1: You started seeing the contradictions. Speaker 2: Right. Story_ID: 643977 Speaker 1: So you're forming--you're starting to form your own thoughts-- Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: --you know, about what life should be and things like that. So what are those thoughts, and what are you thinking that you wanna do? Speaker 2: I remember being fourteen; we had family in Los Angeles [California], and I love Los Angeles. And we had cousin--we had an aunt and uncle and cousins, and we would take turns going to see them and they would come to see us. And we had gone to--this time we had made the trip to Los Angeles, and we're with my aunt; my aunt is in our car and we're going somewhere. And I'm fourteen, sitting in the back, and we're at a stop sign. And I turn and there is this young black woman, maybe in her mid twenties. She had on glasses, something like yours; she had on leather riding gloves. I think her hair was pulled back. She had on a little suit jacket, and she was in a--I think it was a sports car, and she was sitting at the light. And I don't know what--I was--I looked out the window, and I'm just looking at her. And my aunt said to me, "You know, we have a lot of professional independent girls like her down here." And I wanted to move to L.A., because I wanted to be that girl sitting in that car, looking confident, and attractive, and happy, and driving, driving her car. So, I didn't have the words for what that was, but looking at her, that's what I wanted to be. And my aunt saw it; that's what I remember about her. My aunt was very political; she was different from my mother [Bertie Edwards], her sister. She worked for [HistoryMaker] Maxine Waters for many years, but you know, very, very politically astute, very much an activist, and I guess--and she had two daughters, but she saw in me this--you know. And she just said, "We have a lot of girls like that here." Story_ID: 643978 Speaker 1: So you were--so this is--did your mother [Bertie Edwards] and au- did you always get along or did she find you too willful? I know you said that-- Speaker 2: No, we were very close up until I left and went to school [University of Washington, Seattle, Washington]. Speaker 1: Oh, you were? Okay, okay. Speaker 2: We were very, very close. And so my mother had a hard time letting go. Speaker 1: I see. So-- Speaker 2: She really had a hard time letting go. Speaker 1: So you were like--you know how they have relationships where they're like sort of sisters or there--you know, there's a symbiotic relationship. Speaker 2: Well, you know, I'll tell you something. I was one of these kids because my--I thought my father [Cyril Edwards] was really kind of a bully. This macho West Indian man, I thought, was kind of a bully. And he had a loud voice and he would yell, and I didn't like his yelling, and I thought he kind of bullied my mother. So I got to a point, when I was like twelve, and it's like, you know what? She needs to leave him, so that's what I told her. I said, "Why don't you just leave him?" And I also realized--I was smart enough to realize--I said, "And Ma, if you leave him, in two weeks he's gonna beg for you to come back." And I knew it would just--the whole dynamic would change, that this man who's stomping around and yelling and bully- (makes sound). If you leave him for two weeks, he's gonna change his behavior because he can't live without you. So I knew this at like twelve, and I would tell my mother this. Now, she told me years later--and this is the difference between me and my brother. My brother is now sixteen. She's still--father's still kind of difficult. She's driving my mother to--she's driving my brother to a basketball game. And she said she's driving and she says to my brother, "You know, I'm thinking of leaving your father." She said Dwight [Dwight Edwards] broke down and sobbed, and she said, "I never mentioned that again, never mentioned it again." So that's the contrast between my brother and me. Speaker 1: So were there a lot of arguments your parents had? Speaker 2: You know, they had arguments, and I think--I don't--see, you know what? It's taken me a long time to realize that there are some people--my father had a heavy voice, and he had a brusque voice. And I think--I don't know if they were arguments so much, but he would talk loud, and I would think they were arguing, as opposed to this is how he was talking. But they did have arguments, yeah-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --yeah, yeah, absolutely. And most of the arguments had to do over my mother working. My mother wanted to work. Speaker 1: And he did not want her to work? Speaker 2: He did not want her to work, so she worked in the house. She was a--she'd sold corsets for a number of years. She did things that were home based because she was smart and you know, it's like she had energy. And when you have a situation like that, raising your kids becomes your life, and that's not really healthy. Speaker 1: That's right. Well, back then, too, it was common for women to be--you know, if you could afford it. Speaker 2: Right, and see my father was a proud West Indian, and he wanted people to think-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --that he-- Speaker 1: He could afford it then--this, this was always aspiring to be-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --part of the-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --the middle class-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and all of that. Speaker 2: Right. Story_ID: 643979 Speaker 1: When you're thinking about school, what are you thinking about? Like-- Speaker 2: You mean-- Speaker 1: --was this (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You mean higher education? Speaker 1: Higher education. Speaker 2: I wanted to go to school in Los Angeles [California]. I really wanted to be that girl I saw in the car. Could not afford the out of state tuition; did not get a scholarship to go--I mean, I got some money to go to school, but I didn't get enough to go to school in California. And then California was really like number one in terms of education. It had top, top colleges in particular. The California university system [University of California] was, was good, and if you lived in California, like living in New York [New York], you could go for free; but if you didn't, it was unaffordable--for my parents [Bertie Edwards and Cyril Edwards]. Speaker 1: And this is--you graduated in 19-- Speaker 2: Sixty-five [1965]. Speaker 1: --sixty-five [1965], okay. Speaker 2: Watts had just happened [in Los Angeles, California]. That was--you know, the Civil Rights Movement was starting to really kind of take on--civil disobedience was coming--was, was getting ready to, to take, take over. Speaker 1: So you decide to apply to and get in at the University of Washington [Seattle, Washington]? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Are you going to University of Washington Seattle? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Or is it--okay, okay. Speaker 2: Yes and that was the only campus then. Now they have two more, but at the time that was the only one. Speaker 1: So how are--Tacoma [Washington] and Seattle [Washington] are-- Speaker 2: About thirty miles away, maybe an hour drive. Speaker 1: So were you living at home? Speaker 2: No, no, I lived on campus--lived on campus. Now that was a whole other experience, because now I'm in a setting where there are thirty thousand students, and maybe a hundred blacks, most of them athletes. So now it's a large, impersonal, white (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Environment. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: White environment. Speaker 2: Yeah. Beautiful campus, beautiful, beautiful setting. But you know, again, it was fine. I made friends; in fact, one of my dear friends, who was just here from Paris [France], was my roommate. We switched because my roommate was from Louisiana. She told me her father was a grand wizard in the Ku Klux Klan [KKK] (laughter). Jo's [Josephine Lowrey] roommate--she discovered this. I went into the room one Saturday morning and her roommate is in one of these little narrow beds, naked with her lover, Nan [ph.], who's also naked. And Jo is like this (crosses arms) like, "Get them out of here." So we switched; we switched roommates. Speaker 1: Oh, you mean the grand wizard (laughter) (unclear). They both--to switched? Speaker 2: No, Jo and I--it's like (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You, you became roommates, and then the two others became roommates. Speaker 2: Because I'm not living with the grand wizard's daughter, and Jo was not living with Nan and Karen [ph.] sleeping in the same bed naked, you know, from here to there. Now her bed was there (laughter). Speaker 1: So was--so ha- what did college mean for you as an overall experience because you're there four years? Now do you go in? What is your major? Speaker 2: Well, that took a while 'cause I didn't know what I wanted to major in. And socially--now I went to--I tell people I went to Howard University [Washington, D.C.] my junior year, and I tell people I went to Howard University so I could have a date, because socially the University of Washington, in the first two years-- Speaker 1: Was a, a disaster. Speaker 2: Oh yeah, it was just a desert. Speaker 1: But how did that differ from high school [Lincoln High School, Tacoma, Washington] for you? Speaker 2: High school--now I didn't have boyfriends in high school, but I was popular in high school. And there was enough of a black community that you felt, you know, that you had a community. University of Washington was just so big and so few black people, which you didn't have. You know, you didn't have black sororities. You didn't have black fraternities. You had--I think in the dorm my freshman year there were maybe three other black girls. The athletes were dating--you know, the few black girls. You know, you had to be beautiful or white. So it was just a different environment, and Seattle was a big city compared to Tacoma. Now I loved it because I'm a big city person, but socially, socially it was--it was difficult. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: It was really difficult. Speaker 1: How about--so what were you--what changes did you go through, in terms of what your major was gonna be? You said you had trouble-- Speaker 2: I wanted to do psychology. Their--University of Washington's psychology department was very heavily into the het- into the hard sciences, which I was terrible at--chemistry, biology, zoology--heavily, heavily scientific. Couldn't cut it. Then I thought of sociology. And I ended up with history because of a really wonderful teacher, a wonderful teacher who turned me onto history, and that's what I ended up getting a degree in. Speaker 1: And so when you--what are you doing during the summers? You know-- Speaker 2: Going back to Tacoma and working at the, at the--what do they call it--the city administration building. I had a work study job at the university, and I think it carried over into the summer. I think my summer job in Tacoma was a work study, so making money to go to school. Story_ID: 643980 Speaker 1: And how do you decide that you wanna go to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]? Where, where does that come from? And who-- Speaker 2: That's a good question. I think my parents [Bertie Edwards and Cyril Edwards] realized that socially-- Speaker 1: It was probably not (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, and I think they wanted me to have a black college [HBCU] experience. Speaker 1: So, instead of just--you spent your junior year, instead of abroad, you spent it at Howard? Speaker 2: You right, in 1968, the year that King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was killed and everything blew up, beginning in Washington [D.C.], so most of that year I was not in class because the university was closed down. Speaker 1: The university was closed down during that? Because you know, a lot of times the--though--the university--'cause the president then was--the president (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Snowden [sic. James M. Nabrit, Jr.] I think. Speaker 1: Okay, but they tended to be often sometimes conservative, though you had-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: Right. Was Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture]--was he--did you-- Speaker 2: He was one of the people after King was killed who came running through telling everybody to pick up the gun. The National Guard was sent in. That year there was an overflow with the dorms so I was in Meridian Hotel [Meridian Hill Hotel]. That's--they had--the university had taken over part of the hotel. And I remember my best friend and I looking out the window after the riots. And here's this little soldier down under our window, walking around with a bayonet--you know, with a rifle and a bayonet in it. And we had made sandwiches and we said, "Are you hungry?" And he said, "Yeah," so we made him a sandwich and threw it down (laughter). And he threw down his rifle and sat down to eat (laughter). I was in the riots, you know, when, when--I mean, I'm running and jumping into Lerner's [Lerner Stores; New York and Company] window. And I'm-- Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: --so anal. You know, this is a--people are just grabbing stuff. Well, I run into Lerner's and go in the basement where all the merchandise is stocked and hanging. And I literally go and find size twelve, and then I'm picking out the outfits that I want (laughter), 'cause nobody else was around (laughter). Speaker 1: You know, what is interesting is that--so you go there. Now do you talk about--why don't you talk about your first experience on the campus. Do you go there sight unseen or do you go and interview there? Speaker 2: No, sight unseen. Speaker 1: So who-- Speaker 2: Had never been to Washington. Speaker 1: So, so what is-- Speaker 2: Never had--and never taken a plane ride. Speaker 1: So what is your experience then--I mean there, because it's like totally different. I mean, first Howard is ten times--I mean, it's way smaller. Speaker 2: The first thing I noticed about Howard is that I thought its campus was wretched. It's like, where are the rolling hills? The University of Washington [Seattle, Washington] probably has one of the most beautiful campuses (laughter) in the country. So I go to this campus in the middle of D.C. and it was like, where is the campus? It was like, this is it (laughter). And because we weren't in a dorm on campus, you know, we're in Meridian, which is a few blocks away, so I'm not even, you know, spending most of time in a campus setting. And then when I am there it's like, what is this? This is like the poor person's version of a college campus (laughter). But I did like being around all the black people. That I liked. It was also the year that the whole black is beautiful was changing. So it was the first year that they had a dark skinned homecoming queen, and my look was more en vogue, you know. So that was happening; all of that was happening. The poor people's march [Poor People's Campaign] was going on. There was just so much politically going on, socially going on, the riots, the, the death of King, and then the death of Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy] in June. And was I still around in June? I think I was. So there was just upheaval. Story_ID: 643981 Speaker 1: So did you have grades from that year if school was closed a lot? It did (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was closed a lot, but you know happened and the reason I went back to the university, (clears throat) because I'm in this campus that I think is ugly. Well, Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] took most of my credits. Because they were on a semester system, and the University of Washington [Seattle, Washington] was on a quarter system, so I would have to had done an extra year to graduate Howard, and there was no way I was doing an extra year. I could barely make it through the four because I was tired of school by then. I was just tired of school, and I almost didn't finish my senior year back at the university for that reason. Speaker 1: So, but you were a history major at Howard? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So who, who was--who was in the history department? Do you remember some who was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I remember a professor named Chason [ph.], a white male, who probably was gay. He took a liking to me--I don't know why--because he stood up in class, looking at a map, and told us that Egypt was not in Africa. And I'm like, "What are you talking about?" And he went on to say that the Semitic people are this and that and (makes sound). And even though, yes, geographically we're looking at it on the map of Africa, it's not really African. So that's who they had in--one of the teachers they had in the history department. The other one they had was John--was Chancellor [Chancellor Williams]--oh, what's his first name--very famous historian. Was it Chancellor? But he was--by then he was blind. So it was a difficult course because he was very distracting, as a blind professor. It was very hard, for me anyway, to focus on what he was saying. Story_ID: 643982 Speaker 1: How do you think that experience [at Howard University, Washington, D.C.] changed you? Was it--I mean, there's a lot of activity going on. You're, you're more at the heart of what's going on. Otherwise, you're halfway across the country. Speaker 2: Right. It politicized me in a way that I don't think-- Speaker 1: It politicized you (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) I would have been had I stayed. And then I went back to the university [University of Washington, Seattle, Washington] and became a teaching assistant, which I had no qualifications for, in--they had introduced a black history course. Because in that year there were many more blacks on campus back in Seattle [Washington] because now the floodgates have opened. They're recruiting, they're going after students, so I think the black population doubled in a year. And now I'm part of the black teaching assistant crowd. Half the kids in my class as a teaching assistant were in the Seattle Black Panthers [Black Panther Party]. That's why I wanted to become a Panther. So now I've got--kids who were my age, but now I'm meeting folk who are politically involved in what's going on in the city. Story_ID: 643983 Speaker 1: And by then I'm a senior, and, and enjoying being in Seattle [Washington], enjoying meeting all these new black folk, and had an opportunity--got a fellowship, which I didn't want, because Seattle magazine had offered me a job, and NBC was interested in talking to me in Seattle. Speaker 2: But this--even though you're a history major, these are the opportunities that came to you? Speaker 1: Right, because I'm a black--this was when everybody was trying to recruit black folks in college. Speaker 2: Right, 'cause there, there--there's pressure, the cities are burning up-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --so there're, there're opportunities-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --coming all over the place. Speaker 1: Left and right, including the fellowship that got me east. Speaker 2: And what fellowship was that? Speaker 1: This was given by the American Association of University Women. And it was given to ten black women around the country. And initially I said oh, well, they're giving to ten black women, I'm not gonna be one of them. But I had a history professor--a white history professor--who encouraged me--in fact, I think he submitted my name. I think he submitted my name. And I had done a paper on the Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois] and Booker T. Washington, contrasting their styles, and he was very impressed with it. He kept it, and I said he probably used it himself for something. But he was so impressed with the paper that he wanted me to, to apply for this fellowship. Speaker 2: And the name of the fellowship? Can you--? Speaker 1: It was given by the American--the American Society-- Speaker 2: Of-- Speaker 1: --of Magazine Editors [American Society of Magazine Editors]. Speaker 2: American--oh, of magazine editors. Speaker 1: I'm sorry. I'm sorry. Speaker 2: 'Cause here you said (unclear)-- Speaker 1: University Women. Speaker 2: Okay, that's what-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: ASME is another organization. Speaker 2: Okay, okay, so American Society of College Women [sic.]. Speaker 1: Oh, American Association of (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Association of College Women. Speaker 1: --University Women. Speaker 2: Okay, of University Women. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And so what was the fellowship? Speaker 1: The fellowship was a four--was a two year fellowship to any school I wanted to go to in the country. Now this is how much I didn't want it. My best friend went to school in Rhode Island. And she said, "Well, you knew--you know, Audrey [HistoryMaker Audrey Edwards] why don't you just go to BU [Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts]. Go to BU, which is near Providence [Rhode Island] and we can hang out and party," and that's what I did. So BU took me. I was gonna major in--I was gonna get a master's in Afro American studies because that seemed easy and related to history. It had to be something related to history. And it would get me out of Tacoma [Washington] and you know, near Stephanie [ph.], so that's what I did, got to Boston [Massachusetts]. Boston is--was almost as expensive as New York [New York]; took me forever to find a place to live. I was in a little room. The woman running the Afro American studies department was a dynamite woman. But I looked at that syllabus on the first day of class and it's like, you know what? I am done with school. So two weeks later I quit. I know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So what-- Speaker 1: I know she thought I was pregnant. Speaker 2: This is 1969, right? Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 643984 Speaker 1: And my mother [Bertie Edwards] had always said to me whenever I wanted to do something independent, like not take this fellowship, she had always said, "Your father [Cyril Edwards] has worked so hard for you. You have the rest of your life to do whatever you wanna do. Just do this." So, so it was always just do this. You have the rest of your life to do what you wanna do. So when I quit, I went into a phone booth and I called my mother. This is Boston [Massachusetts]. I called my mother in Tacoma [Washington] and I told her I had dropped out of BU [Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts]; that I would be going to New York [New York]. She said--I could hear her like gasping on the other end. And I said, "You know, Mom, you always told me I have the rest of my life to do whatever I wanna do." I said, "The rest of my life has just started." And that was it. Then I called a cousin in New York that I'd never met and told her, "You've never met me" (laughter). But she had reached out to my father. My cousin, Theresa [Theresa Edwards], had reached out to my father because she knew there was this uncle, you know, the, the, the uncle on the other side of the country, so she started writing to him. So I knew that's--and that's the cousin I called. That's the cousin I called, and then came here and met my two sisters, and met all these aunts and uncles and cousins. Speaker 2: So now how did you meet the two sisters? See, that--were you-- Speaker 1: My cousin had them come over. They all lived in Co-op City [Bronx, New York]. They all lived in the Bronx [New York]; I'm sorry. They all lived in the Bronx. And I remember my cousin say--she said, "I called your sisters today." And I go, "What sisters?" She said, "Your sisters." I said, "I didn't know I had sisters." So she's the one who told me. Speaker 2: So that created some disruption in the family. Speaker 1: Yeah, on my mother's part--on my mother's part. She was very upset (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) 'Cause that, that--that's right. But did she know about them herself? She did, but she-- Speaker 1: Absolutely. Speaker 2: --didn't, you know-- Speaker 1: Didn't tell. Speaker 2: So your sisters were how much older than you? Speaker 1: One--the one above me was six and the other was twelve. Speaker 2: Okay, okay, so they were (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) They were grown. Speaker 2: They were. Speaker 1: They were grown. Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: Okay, so what about--did, did you meet their mother, your stepmother [sic.] or-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --oh yeah, you met on, on-- Speaker 1: Yes, yes, Aunt Victoria [Victoria McClean Edwards]. Speaker 2: Okay, okay. Speaker 1: She to me in many ways was the easiest relationship. I thought she'd be the most difficult. She was the easiest. And the thing about families--you know, my brother [Dwight Edwards] and I--as much as I would say to my mother you should leave my father, my brother and I benefitted by having two parents. And to me it was evidenced by the fact we both went to school, we finished school, we did well professionally. My sisters did okay. I think they might have done better, and I know they were affected by the divorce. And then you have guilt. I mean, I had guilt as the one who grew up with the father. I had--I had a lot of issues around them, and you know, feeling that I had to bend over backwards, to be nice, or to be whatever. And they were--they were always nice to me, but they were clearly closer to each other than they would have ever been to me because they grew up together. So there was a lot of you know, undercurrent--nothing really overt, nothing hostile, but, but unspoken. Story_ID: 643985 Speaker 1: So you come here. Are you working or are you--? Speaker 2: No, I come--I come--came here floundering, not knowing what I wanted to do. It took me a good year to, you know, get hired at a magazine; you know, to figure out okay I wanna work in media. But you know, I was a secretary. I started out at Hearst Magazine as a secretary in the--not Hearst--Hearst company [Hearst Corporation; Hearst Communications]. I think it was Good Housekeeping. On my first day of work, you know, one of the people that I met, one of the secretaries, we'd go out for lunch. We're coming back. It was payday. Two guys accost us; you know, they're lost; they're poor country bumpkins lost. They flash a wad of money. She tells me to go back and tell her boss she's gonna be late. And they rob her. So this is like some scam. So she comes in crying. She'd been robbed the minute I left. My parents [Bertie Edwards and Cyril Edwards] were visiting. They were sure that she was part of it. And you're living in New York [New York] with all these scammers, and you need to get out of here, and we have a nice teaching job lined up for you in St. Croix [U.S. Virgin Islands]. They wanted me to move to St. Croix, and it's like--so there was a lot of, you know, tension and anger, and we don't want you in New York. Meanwhile, both of them had lived here, but they didn't want me living here. Story_ID: 643986 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So I have you--I just wanna get this. So you then--okay you graduate from Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York], then you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Then I went to Community News Service-- Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: --which is a black and Puerto Rican press service. Speaker 1: Okay, and then after that? When do you (unclear) Fairchild [Fairchild Publications, Inc.; Fairchild Fashion Media] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) After was Fairchild-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --after that. Speaker 1: Now what does Fairchild publish then? It's-- Speaker 2: Their big publication at the time was Women's Wear Daily. Speaker 1: Oh yeah, sure. Speaker 2: They're a trade press. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: And I worked for a publication called Supermarket News. Speaker 1: Oh sure, sure, sure. Speaker 2: And I was there two years. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then went from there to Black Enterprise. Speaker 1: Right, okay, good. I got--I got the--okay, the dates right. I didn't have the-- Story_ID: 643987 Speaker 1: So in this four year--so your parents are like, no way. Speaker 2: Yeah, my, my mother's [Bertie Edwards] having fits. Speaker 1: She is like, you've gone there; you met the, the sisters, the family-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --you know, this--you got--this is not right. Speaker 2: Right, because she could have gone for the rest of her--as far as she was concerned, we could have gone for the rest of our lives not acknowledging the folk here at all, and it was a big family; it was a huge family, so I was delighted. And for me it started putting the pieces together, in terms of who I came from, because all of my cousins were Caribbean on both sides. See, my father [Cyril Edwards] was the only one who married a non-Caribbean woman. All of his brothers married Caribbean women. So all of my cousins were, you know, second generation Caribbean. Speaker 1: So in many ways you were being introduced to yourself. Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: In a lot of a sense so-- Speaker 2: And coming into a city where ethnincis- ethninsicity--whatever that word is-- Speaker 1: Ethnicity. Speaker 2: Yeah, is important. You know, because people--I, I had a job where I, I remembered I was working with white girls. I remember one of them saying, "Yeah, well, you can tell she's Irish." I was like, "How can you tell?" Because in Tacoma [Washington] you didn't make those kind of distinctions; you were either black, white, Asian, Native American. Here, within the black group, not only could you be Caribbean, you're Jamaican, or Trinidadian; and people could tell by--and I can do that now too. I mean, I can hear a Trinidadian accent and know it's a Trinidadian. But then it's like you're just West Indian. And I--but I liked those distinctions. I really did. Speaker 1: So you--so you say no, or do you actually go to the--'cause you--you know you said your mother had something lined up for you. Speaker 2: Oh, I wasn't thinking about going down-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --to St. Croix [U.S. Virgin Islands] to be a teacher. And see they had taken a vacation to my father's home, and had met a niece of his, one of my cousins. And my mother said--she had this nice little--I, I--she said, "And you have your own room. Gene [ph.] has a room for you." And I, I envisioned this room with a little narrow bed like in a prison, with a little nightstand table, and a teaching job. And I had never been to St. Croix, but I knew I didn't wanna live on an island unless it was Manhattan [New York]. I wasn't going to the Virgin Islands. So--but it was like this was what they came up with to get me out of New York [New York]. Story_ID: 643988 Speaker 1: So before you go to Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York], what is this four year--'cause you start--when do you start working at Columbia? Speaker 2: After Redbook. Speaker 1: Okay, so talk (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) After Redbook. Speaker 1: --about your experience at Redbook. Speaker 2: Redbook was great because I had--Redbook had an editor-in-chief, a man named Sey Chassler, who believed in diversity before it became the popular catch phrase, and he was very methodical in promoting black women into editorial positions. So I started out as a secretary in the fiction department, and in six months I was promoted to an assistant editor. And that is the decision he made that put me on the path in media. And I think everybody has a point in their career where something happens that puts you on the path, and that's what happened in my case. Speaker 1: So where there at that time--you think it was just because there were opportunities. Had you been a good student? Speaker 2: I'd been a good student, and I, I think everybody has to do something that distinguishes themselves. In the fiction department, there were four editors, and we got all these manuscripts in. And as a secretary, I--my job was to go through the manuscripts, give them a first read, and then distribute them if I thought they were good. Agents were also sending in manuscripts, so they were constantly reading manuscripts, evaluating, and purchasing. I had gotten sick, and I was laid up for a week. And I took--I said I had nothing to do so send me some manuscripts, and I'll do the first read, and I will start the comment sheet. And in doing that, they saw that I could write, that I could read and evaluate, and it was like, oh, okay, this is somebody who's editor material. But if I hadn't done that, if I had just laid up for a week--but I was really bored, and I really did want work to do. That's what, in their mind, you know, set me apart, and it's like, oh. So it was easy for Sey to then say we're gonna make you an assistant editor. Speaker 1: So where there other blacks at Redbook at that time? Speaker 2: There were. There were. There were a few. Speaker 1: Who were they? Speaker 2: A woman named Sandy Satterwhite [Sandra Satterwhite], who became a best friend. She's here in Brooklyn [New York]; another named Audreen Ballard. No, actually, they were the only two. And then when I was made an assistant editor, there were three. Speaker 1: Were they assistant editors also? Speaker 2: They were associates, which was a little higher. Speaker 1: Okay--oh, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They were higher and they were in the articles department. Speaker 1: And you worked there for two years? Speaker 2: Two years. Speaker 1: Two years. And so what did you learn there that has stayed with you still today? Speaker 2: What I learned at Redbook in the fiction department really is what constitutes good writing. I also learned--and I was just taking to my editor today at Essence--one of--the first novel I cut--because then magazines ran condensed novels. So I was given Alice Walker's 'The Third Life of Grange Copeland' to cut, and I'd never cut anything and I'm cutting, cutting, cutting. And the fiction editor came to me and said, "Audrey [HistoryMaker Audrey Edwards], you never--if you can avoid it--cut a writer's lead, their opening line." And I had just cut the first couple of paragraphs, so I learned you don't do that. So I was talking to my editor about the Steve Harvey story ['A Love Worth the Wait,' Audrey Edwards]. And I had started the story by saying, "It's true. There's nothing like love--there's nothing like the love of a good woman to turn a man around." Well, they took out it's true. And I said, "Cori [Cori Murray], is there any reason that it's true was taken out?" He said, "I don't know who took that out. I didn't take it out." I said, "It's my opening line. It--if it's not grammatically incorrect, if it's not libelous, could you put it back because it's how I wanna start the piece?" And I learned that from Redbook. I learned that from Redbook over forty years ago. Speaker 1: So was it a good program there? And was it what you consider--you've been in a lot of media organizations. Was it well run? Speaker 2: Redbook? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Um-hm. The fiction department was extremely well run, extremely well run. And my experiences at--what, what I've learned with many mainstream publications is the level of efficiency in getting the work done. Now that doesn't mean they don't have their craziness in terms of personalities, but there is a level of efficiency in getting the work done. Speaker 1: Is the efficiency based on structure and resources or is the efficiency in terms of system? Well, I guess it's (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's just the same, yeah. Speaker 1: It's the same. Speaker 2: It's the same. Yeah, it's efficiency based on systems. Speaker 1: Okay on systems. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 643989 Speaker 1: And did you during--now so why did you not stay then? Speaker 2: You know what happens with me Julieanna [Julieanna Richardson], which is why I ended up being an entrepreneur? Got bored. Once I learn the job and master it, I'm ready to learn something else, you know. I think there's also a political aspect. Because my career has been spent equally between women's media and black media, and I felt--you know, I said, do I really wanna edit fiction for white women for the rest of my life? No, and the audience was fine. I mean, whenever I edited fiction, I envisioned Edith Bunker sitting at the table in her kitchen reading, you know, a Redbook short story. And I said I like Edith Bunker, but I don't wanna edit for her for the rest of my life. So I would always at some point go to black media. Speaker 1: So who were your two--who were the two other women? Did they stay in publishing at all? Do--the one who-- Speaker 2: No, Sandy [Sandra Satterwhite] ended up as a teacher in the New York City school system [New York City Department of Education]. Audreen [Audreen Ballard] moved to New Mexico. She did have other publishing jobs. She went to Essence. So did Sandy. Sandy went to Essence for a minute. And then Audreen went to Lear's magazine. Speaker 1: But do you think--okay, in the area of diversity--how long was Sey [Sey Chassler] there? Was he there a long (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was there a long time. Speaker 1: A long time. Speaker 2: He was there over twenty years, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, and he, he really did advance people, and it caused some problems with the--with the young white girls. I mean, I remember some of my friends saying, "Well, you know, I really don't like the fact that, you know, you're getting promoted and you're not any smarter than me," and I didn't disagree with that. I said, "You know, it's a benefit that's accruing to me." I said, "There are benefits that come to people for all kind of reasons." Speaker 1: I see. So (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know. Speaker 1: --there was--there were claims about affirmative action and, and some conflict around that. Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And resentment. Speaker 1: And resentment. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 643990 Speaker 1: So you got bored and then you went to work at Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York]? Speaker 2: After Columbia, yes, I went to the Urban Center [New York, New York], which was one of these, again, program started--funded by the Ford Foundation [New York, New York]. After one of the riots, Ford Foundation gave Columbia $10 million to set up this Urban Center. And I was the editor of the newsletter, and put together programs. And it was kind of a--I don't wanna say a think tank, but it was, you know, a center that became a place where black public--black professors got published. There were outreach programs to bring aspects of black culture to the larger community, the larger Columbia community. Speaker 1: Now were you--was this center running--was it out of the history department, or was it (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No. Speaker 1: --just like a-- Speaker 2: It was--it was separate. Speaker 1: It was just the center-- Speaker 2: It was in the building that housed the general studies department [Columbia University School of General Studies, New York, New York]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, if you wanna give it an academic classification-- Speaker 1: So, so there were lectures and symposiums-- Speaker 2: Yes-- Speaker 1: --(unclear). Speaker 2: --we had [HistoryMaker] Andrew Young come, Coretta Scott King came and spoke; we did a panel with, you know, a young Toni Morrison and, and some other people, a writing panel. And it was just--because when I came, it was pretty much the last year. The funding was running out, and they were gonna close it down. They did close it down. That's how I ended up getting my master's [degree]. Speaker 1: So you just--then you got your master's from what department? Speaker 2: Teachers College [Teachers College, Columbia University, New York, New York]. Speaker 1: From Teachers-- Speaker 2: Teachers College. Speaker 1: Oh, you went to Teachers College because your mother [Bertie Edwards] wanted you to be a teacher? Speaker 2: No, because I didn't have--(laughter) this is gonna sound terrible. I didn't have to do a thesis to get a master's. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I was gonna go to the journalism school [Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism, New York, New York], which was where my friend Sandy [Sandra Satterwhite] had gone. And that was the other thing. I was following Sandy, who had been at Redbook, and then she went to the Urban Center, and I took her job at the Urban Center. And you know, she had a difficult time in the journalism school and it just--and I'm kind of sorry I didn't do journalism, but I did Teachers College. And I did it because, as the editor of the Urban Center, I could get enough credits free because I was an employee. So the first semester was completely free. And I said well, it doesn't make sense not to take advantage of free tuition, you know, at an Ivy League school, so that's, that's what I did. Story_ID: 643991 Speaker 1: Now you graduate and you--wait, you got married you said also, right? Speaker 2: I got married much later. I got much--I got married--I met my husband at Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York]. Speaker 1: At Columbia. Speaker 2: But I didn't marry him-- Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: --for fifteen years. Speaker 1: Oh, for--oh, okay. Speaker 2: For fifteen years. Speaker 1: Okay, I see. Okay, 'cause I know you--okay, okay. So you go--but you're in your early thirties here, right? Are you in it-- Speaker 2: Where? At Columbia? Speaker 1: At--oh no, Columbia and then you go to Redbook. I'm sorry. It's-- Speaker 2: No, no, no, no, I go to-- Speaker 1: Red-- Speaker 2: --Columbia after Redbook. Speaker 1: Redbook. Okay, see, that's what's--okay, so you go to Columbia after Redbook. Speaker 2: I think I was twenty-six when I graduated at-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --Columbia. Speaker 1: See, the--they have it--okay, let's--okay, so when you--so you work at, at Fairchild [Fairchild Publications, Inc.; Fairchild Fashion Media] for two years. Then you start-- Speaker 2: Then I went to Black Enterprise. Speaker 1: Black Enterprise. So let's talk about Black Enterprise at that time. Now Black Enterprise, at the time that you come there, it's been in existence for, for how many years? Speaker 2: I went to Black Enterprise in 1977--seven years. Speaker 1: So it started (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It started in 1970, yeah. Speaker 1: So it's still-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --a young company? Speaker 2: Yes, yes, very much so. Speaker 1: 'Cause I--you know, I've--I just was reading something about the early days, you know, that--it's like any new thing, they don't have enough money. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: You know, they're--and this is really-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --sort of breaking new ground. You don't think of it now, but there was--and I al- the whole thing about it being five black men too, 'cause they keep--I keep just thinking of Ed Lewis [HistoryMaker Edward Lewis] and Clarence Smith. Speaker 2: Oh, that's with Essence now. Speaker 1: Essence. I'm sorry. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, Black Enterprise-- Speaker 1: No, Black Enterpri- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That was started by Earl Graves [HistoryMaker Earl G. Graves, Sr.]. Speaker 1: Oh my god. I'm reading-- Speaker 2: Earl Graves. Speaker 1: --this right here, and I'm like, at Essence. I just (makes sound)-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) You had Essence on the brain. Speaker 1: (Laughter) I had Essence on the brain. So no--so this is--okay, but don't they both begin almost the same-- Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy [1970]. Speaker 1: But they begin the same year. Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy [1970]. Speaker 1: Okay, sorry, okay. I-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I'm looking at Black Enterprise and I'm in Essence. So talk about that because that's the same, same sort of thing, except this is--talk--the, you stayed there-- Speaker 2: A year. Speaker 1: A year, okay. Speaker 2: And then I would go back later. Story_ID: 643992 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But let me back up, at Redbook. I remember vividly when Essence started in 1970, because I was working at Redbook. And Sey Chassler came into the fiction department. I'm still a secretary--and I think this is why he promoted me--I'm still a secretary, and he said, "Has anybody called you about this new magazine called Essence?" And I said, "No." And he was worried that Essence was going to be raiding his people, his black people. So when he said, "Has anybody called," I said, "No." So when he left, I said to myself vividly--I said they don't even know who I am, but one day they will (laughter). That was such a vivid, (laughter) and they did. Speaker 2: So you knew the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Took a while. Speaker 2: So talk about the Black Enterprise that you went into. Speaker 1: Black--now coming from Fairchild [Fairchild Publications, Inc.; Fairchild Fashion Media], which was business press, the idea of now being able to write about black business was very appealing, very appealing. It was--Community New Service had-- Speaker 2: Wait a minute. Wait, wait, wait, Supermarket News--wait, I thought you said you also did-- Speaker 1: That was at Fairchild. Speaker 2: Fair- wait, let's go--I'm sorry. Speaker 1: That's okay. Speaker 2: Let's do that--oh my god. Okay, so you went from Redbook to Fairchild? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: No, Fairchild-- Speaker 1: I went from Redbook to the Urban Center at Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York]. Speaker 2: Columbia and then you come-- Speaker 1: Now, there was a brief stint. I worked two places that folded, the Urban Center-- Speaker 2: Folded. Speaker 1: Meaning, when the money ran out--these were set up-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Ford Foundation [New York, New York] gave $10 million. I went there in the last stages of the money. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: That was folding so I went to Columbia, came out of Columbia, went to a small press service called Community News Service, which was like the AP [Associated Press] or the UPS [sic. United Press International] or UPS, but it was a black and Puerto Rican news service. And we did stories that were fed to major media. Speaker 2: Oh, you--oh, they were fed to major media by-- Speaker 1: Like-- Speaker 2: --minority media? Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Okay, now who was head of that? Speaker 1: A woman named Annette Samuels. Now different people had been head of it, but I worked for Annette. And it was a small staff, and what the staff did was report on local black stories. And we had subscribers like NBC, ABC, the Daily News [New York Daily News]. In lieu of them having a big black staff, they would get their stories from us, another funded organization. Again, when the money ran out, it closed. That's when I went to Fairchild's. Story_ID: 643993 Speaker 1: And at Fairchild [Fairchild Publications, Inc.; Fairchild Fashion Media], you're working-- Speaker 2: For Supermarket News (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) with Super- Supermarket News. Okay. Speaker 2: Which was a trade press dealing with the supermarket industry. Speaker 1: Right, so how does this--so how is the structure there, and what--how are you hired on, and what are you doing? What is your job? Speaker 2: Okay, I'm hired as a reporter. My editor there, Steve Weinstein--I, I love Steve. Uh-oh, I think my mic disappeared. Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION) Speaker 2: Okay, now I've got that chronology, okay. It's not difficult (unclear) (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) I worked--I worked in a lot of places. As you see, I'd get bored and move on. Supermarket News was fascinating. At first I was hired as a reporter to cover the supermarket industry. And it's like okay, what is the supermar- supermarket industry? Well, the first thing I covered was this big meat racketeering trial that was going on in Long Island [New York] between different supermarkets that were accused of price fixing the meat. So and it was like a mafia trial. So I said oh, there's more to supermarkets than just meat and potatoes. So, what I learned at Fairchild was really how to write about the business of an enterprise, you know, how to read an annual report, going to the annual shareholders' meetings, you know, how to talk about sales and profit, what made a successful supermarket. It was the beginning of the big stores. Walmart [Wal-Mart Stores, Inc.] was not around yet, but Pathmark [Pathmark Stores, Inc.] was like the big leader, and it was the revolutionary superstore retailer, came in with the twenty thousand square foot stores selling everything. So it turned out to be--even though supermar- it's, it's like I don't even shop in supermarkets, but it was a very interesting job. And I learned a lot in terms of writing about business, which I brought to Black Enterprise. Speaker 2: And you worked there how many years? Speaker 1: Two. Speaker 2: Two years. Speaker 1: Um-hm (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. Story_ID: 643994 Speaker 1: You brought that to Black--now why did you leave [Fairchild Publications, Inc.; Fairchild Fashion Media] though? Was it that you craved to be in more--I mean why did you leave? Was Black Enterprise paying more, or were you excited about Black Enter-? Speaker 2: I was more excited about Black Enterprise. Speaker 1: The opportunity to work in a-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I was familiar with the magazine and the opportunity to work with black press. Speaker 1: Right, and at this point, it's--'cause it started as a newsletter. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: But it, you know, had evolved, but it's not like Mr. Graves [HistoryMaker Earl G. Graves, Sr.] had a publishing background. Speaker 2: No, he didn't. Speaker 1: He had a--he was a real es- yeah, but-- Speaker 2: Right, he was a salesman. Speaker 1: Salesman, right. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, he did insurance, he did real estate, and he was a great salesman. But I liked the idea of working for a black business. Community News Service was black so I knew that covering black, black stories was important, that nobody was going to cover them the way black press covers. So I, I instinctively, I guess, really developed a love for the black press. And even in high school [Lincoln High School, Tacoma, Washington] I understood the power of journalism and the power of media, and I used to--I remember writing about it in high school. And I knew for us, as a people, no one is going to really tell our stories consistently and as accurately as possible but us. And I just felt a responsibility as someone working in media to be in that aspect of media that dealt with our stories. Speaker 1: So when you join what is the structure? Mr. Graves is editor in, in-- Speaker 2: He's editor and publisher. Speaker 1: Pub- publisher. And who, who--what is--who are the other-- Speaker 2: Phil Petrie was the managing editor, which in the editorial side was the top editor. And then there were--I was an associate editor, there was a copy editor, I think maybe two associate editors, production person. Small staff, not a big staff. It's much bigger now, but then it was maybe six people. So we worked hard, wrote a lot of the stories as well as edited them. But in an--in an operation like that you have an opportunity to do more and to really be in charge. I started something called In the News, which was a news section in the magazine. And I came up with the writers and assigned the writers, and came up with the story ideas. Speaker 1: Is that section still there? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: It isn't. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: No, it's--you know, all of these sections, you know, morph-- Speaker 1: Evolve (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) into something else. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Right, right, right. So they have something like it, but it's not called In the News. And it was enjoyable. And then I got an opportunity to work at Family Circle for a lot more money. And Earl, bless his heart, you know, he, he pounded the desk and said, "I trusted you, and how could you do this," and I-- Speaker 1: He was upset? Speaker 2: Yeah, he was upset, but I'm looking at him thinking to myself, not saying anything to him well, why don't you offer me what Family Circle is offering me, and we won't have a problem? But that seemed to never occur to him (laughter), which I thought most businessmen would do. If you want somebody to stay, you say, "What are they gonna pay you? What are they paying you? I'll match it. I'll--you know, I'll up it." He didn't do that. Speaker 1: But most--but he--for him--he still--it's still a young publication at that point, and he's probably thinking-- Speaker 2: I can't--I can't match. Speaker 1: Right, I can't match it, or you're in the family--you know, look what I've-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --done and we're growing-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and-- Speaker 2: Right, right, right, right. And that's a limitation in a lot of black businesses. It becomes personal, you know. To say I trusted you when basically I'm making a better move financially. So it's not a betrayal of you, but that's how it was taken. So since he didn't-- Speaker 1: Now do you know who replaced you there? Speaker 2: Yes, yes, a man named Emile Milne, who's very good, very sharp. He came in with a higher title and more money (laughter). He was made a senior editor. Speaker 1: Well how did you find that out? Were you still watching this--? Speaker 2: No, Emile and I were good friends. As a matter of fact, I told him--I recommended him as my replacement. I forgot what he was doing--where he was at the time. Story_ID: 643995 Speaker 1: And so you then move on to Family Circle. Now are you--what, what level are you? Speaker 2: I'm now senior editor. Speaker 1: You're senior editor, okay. Speaker 2: I'm a senior editor. Speaker 1: And what does that mean in the, the food chain? What did that mean at Family Circle? Speaker 2: It--there were two senior editors. It meant that you were just considered to have more experience; you're more of a seasoned editor. Even though I was young, I was thirty--I was there at '77 [1977]--maybe I was thirty-one to thirty-two. I was in my early thirties. But a senior editor just means you're, you're more experienced, and you're viewed as someone who can take on more responsibility, probably can write--you know, can probably write some stories as well as edit. And I've always written; I've always been a writer. Speaker 1: You all--you stay here two years too I think. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay, and--but is this common within the, the media industry that people sort of-- Speaker 2: I think it's more common now. You know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It wasn't common then was it? Speaker 2: You know, in magazines, they really say if you wanna move up, you need to move out. That was kind of the axiom, you know, you wanna move up, move out. Because you can stay anywhere, but chances are if you really want to advance moneywise and title wise, you need to go somewhere else. Speaker 1: Okay, and I wanna understand for each place that you've been, what, what, what the structure was and you know, how that sort of adds to things, because this is a different--this is not--the only thing I could say is that, you know, the fact that you have worked at Supermarket News--you know women shop at supermarkets. Maybe there are some things that you can sort of bring in there. But this is sort of like it's all wholesome, but there's a--it's a great brand, right? Speaker 2: You mean Supermarket News? Speaker 1: No, Family Circle. Speaker 2: Oh, Family Circle. Oh yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, it's an established brand-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah, it was--it was the number one woman's magazine when I was there in terms of circulation. It had the highest circulation, which might have been--I forgot how many millions, but it was number one--not a magazine I'd read. When I met with the editor-in-chief, I actually went out and bought some shoes and read the magazine. But it gave good service information. For what it did, it did very well, and I respected it, and I enjoyed working for it. But, again, it was not a place where I saw being for twenty, thirty years. Story_ID: 643996 Speaker 1: Oddly enough, when the Essence opportunity came along, I initially turned it down because--now I'm thinking as a history maker--Family Circle is about to make me articles editor, which is now almost part of management, which would have been a coup for a black woman to make articles editor. And I wanted to do something historic, and that was become articles editor. And I--and Ed Lewis [HistoryMaker Edward Lewis] called me when [HistoryMaker] Susan Taylor was made editor-in-chief. She was putting together a staff. He called me first, took me to lunch, and I told him no, wasn't interested. And you know what turned it around? My friend [Emile Milne] who had taken my place at Black Enterprise. The person they made a senior editor, he told me, "If you don't want that job at Essence, I do." And I'm like they're not gonna give this--it was--it was the executive editor; that was the title, executive editor. I'm like they're not giving this to you. And then the managing editor at Family Circle, who was a white man, said to me, "Are you crazy? You have an opportunity to go work for a real magazine." And I'm like, "But Family Circle is number one." He did not view--he just said, "You have an opportunity to work for a magazine that is fairly new, reflects who you are; it's geared to black women." So it took two men to turn me around (laughter). And I called Susan over the weekend, and I said, "Look," and I had met with her also, and I said, "I'd like the weekend to think about the offer." And I called her on Monday and said I'd take it, but I initially said no. Story_ID: 643997 Speaker 1: So when you come in--so you go and meet with, with Susan. And so can you talk about that meeting and what you, you talked about? Speaker 2: Yeah, the first person who called me was Ed [HistoryMaker Edward Lewis]. He had hired [HistoryMaker] Susan Taylor. The editor before her had been let go. He had hired Susan. There was conflama all over. The day that I heard she was being named editor [of Essence], I went to lunch, came back, and there were twenty-five--remember the days when you had pink message sheets--message pads? Well, there were twenty-five phone calls between the time I went to lunch and came back. Speaker 1: With her--lunch with her and when you came back-- Speaker 2: No, no, this is--this is the day that it's announced Ed has named her editor-in-chief. Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: So I'm getting calls from everybody I know in the business. "Did you hear? Susan Taylor has made editor-in-chief. What do you think?" (Makes sound). At the very bottom of the pile was a message from Ed Lewis, which meant his call came in first. And I said, "Oh my goodness, Ed Lewis," so I called him back first. He wanted to take me to lunch and say that, "I'd hired Susan Taylor. She's going to need a strong staff. You know, people are--you know, eyebrows are being raised. She's coming out of fashion and beauty. She needs a strong number two. She needs a strong executive editor." To which I said, "Well, I'm about to be made articles editor at Family Circle and that's historic, and I wanna be historic." So that was the end of that. Then Susan called me and invited me to lunch, and talked about, you know, what she wanted to do and--you know, I don't really remember the details of the lunch, but I remember, you know, she was very stylish, and very attractive, and had a very gentle manner and a gentle spirit; and I told her the same thing. I said, "I'm about to make--to be made articles editor." And she had a phrase: it's in divine order--it's in divine order. So after that lunch is when I talked to the two guys, one of whom said, "I want the job." We actually had drinks. After I had been offered the job, he [Emile Milne] said, "I wanted the job." Okay, we leave; I come home; I walk in the door; and my phone was ringing. It's him, reiterating, "Audrey [HistoryMaker Audrey Edwards], I'm serious. If you don't want that job, I do." And I said now I know how men think. If he wants this job, maybe I should take a second look (laughter). And I think the managing editor at Family Circle had already said to me, "What are you crazy?" So it was President's Day weekend. I called Susan, and I said, "Susan, may I please have until Tuesday to think about this," even though I had told her no. And she said, "It's in divine order, of course." So on Tuesday I called her and told her I would take the job. Speaker 1: So talk about-- Speaker 2: Best move I ever made, by the way--best move. Story_ID: 643998 Speaker 1: So talk about the community and the business that you came into. Speaker 2: At Essence? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: You know, first of all, I came into an environment where I was working with a woman that I consider to be the best person ever to work for and work with. Susan [HistoryMaker Susan Taylor] was smart. She knew the importance of surrounding herself with good people. She was also extremely affirming, which is something a lot of bosses are not. She would tell you when something was good. She would tell you you're good. And she did this with everybody, so it was a positive motivator. If somebody is telling you your work is good, then you are motivated to continue doing good work. She was fair, extremely creative, brimming with ideas, passionate about the magazine, passionate about her work as editor-in-chief, which I found to be infectious, and a very--we had very different styles, very different styles--you know, good cop, bad cop; that was me and Susan. Bad cop meaning Audrey [HistoryMaker Audrey Edwards] is the one who's gonna be the straight shooter. You know, Susan will say, "We're a family." I'm gonna say, "You know what? We need to get this done," but, but in a good way, in a good way. And because I'm a straight shooter, I was very often the one that people would come to and say, "Could you talk to Susan?" Because they were either too timid, too afraid, didn't know what to say. So I became that person that could, you know, plead their case if they felt they had a case that needed to be pleaded. Story_ID: 643999 Speaker 1: Are you saying that--well, what I want you to talk about is what the vision for the magazine is at this time. It's still new--how topics maybe were chosen; what the whole editorial process was; and the process for putting together the publication; who the team was, you know, at that time. I'd like you to just-- Speaker 2: Okay. Essence at that time had a formula mix for stories. We always wanted a strong relationship story, a celebrity story, political story, very important, and a service story. The stories I was proud of, [HistoryMaker] Bebe Moore Campbell, who turned out to be a great novelist, did a wonderful piece called 'Abortion: The New Facts of Life' [ph.]. Because at this point, there was noise about repealing Roe v. Wade [Roe v. Wade, 1973], so an a- an abortion story we felt was important. A writer in Atlanta [Georgia] named Roger Witherspoon--and this was Susan's [HistoryMaker Susan Taylor] brilliance--he had done a piece for The Atlanta Journal and Constitution [Atlanta Journal-Constitution] about witnessing his wife's miscarriage ['At Grady, A Baby Girl Makes a Valiant Fight for her Life']. He was the science and health editor for the paper. Riveting first person account on being present in the delivery room when his wife had a miscarriage. So what started out as what they thought was going to be a happy moment turned into this nightmare--written beautifully, very moving, and had a scientific underpinning so you came away understanding this is what happens during a miscarriage. And then there was a sidebar on other information about miscarriage. Beautiful story, because the writing was so good; the point of view was provocative; and the information was solid. Susan--I don't know how that came to her attention, but her taste was always dead on, and it's like we need to have this story in the book. So at the point I came in, I was very good at packaging. I read the story. It was running in the June issue. I said, "We're calling it 'Father's Day,'" and that was our big feature for her launch issue. It was my launch issue. That same issue, I think, was the story on Zimbabwe. Alexis De Veaux had gone to Zimbabwe to cover the, the inauguration of Robert Mugabe, so that was a political piece. I don't remember what the other pieces were, but it was this really great mix. And it just--that was the beginning. I've got to sneeze (sneeze) sorry. And what, (cough) excuse me, what I loved about Susan was that she just encouraged all kinds of input and would take a risk on doing stories that were a little daring, little off the chart in terms of what you expect from traditional women's magazines. I think in that same issue we did a fashion little story on fitting bras for the full-figured woman. Essence was the first magazine to really talk about full figured women, and we had full figured models who were beautiful, shapely, not a size two; they might have been a sixteen or an eighteen. And the story on fitting bras for full breasted women was very important because black women as a group have fuller breast than other women. So you recognize that. You understand that. Susan brought that from her fashion and beauty background. We did a very provocative story a few years later, maybe a couple of years later, on skin color. And it was done--it was three essays written by women of three different colors. Alice Walker is the one who came to us with the idea. I think she wanted to write a piece, and we ended up having pieces. Again, very provocative, very engaging in terms of reader response. I mean, readers just, you know, went crazy. So those were the kind of daring pieces that just made the magazine zoom. Speaker 1: So was it her coming up with the ideas or you coming, or was that a joint effort. I'm trying to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Ideas were joint, but Susan had a lot of wonderful ideas. She really did. I think my value then, as her number two person, was understanding how to package the ideas. I remember when the color story came up, Alice Walker wanted to do a story on being dark skinned. I said, "Alice Walker cannot do a story on being dark skinned because she's not dark skinned." And I remember Susan and I, we had big discussions. I said, "We need a dark skinned writer." And she said, "No, no, no, Alice is writing for dark skinned women." I said, "Do you know what you're saying? You're saying we, dark skinned women, can't write about our own experience. We can't do that." So that kind of give and take--and she was never the kind of editor-in-chief who would say, "No, this is what we're doing because I'm the boss and we're gonna do it this way." She listened; she ended up agreeing. We got a great story from Alexis De Veaux, who's a dark skinned writer; we got another great story from another woman, who was light; and Alice Walker wrote the story of being in between, which is what she was in terms of, you know, her color. So it was a terrific, you know, it was a terrific presentation. Story_ID: 644000 Speaker 1: How long did it take you to understand the, the Essence culture? Because at this point, when you're coming on, you know, they've gone through, and I'm not saying where they--I don't--you could tell where they were financially, but they're passed the--you know, they have now advertisers, you know. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: They, they have some sense of their, their--you know, their audience, you know. This is--Essence meant a lot to the black female, mainly because-- Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely. Speaker 1: --it had never had anything like that. Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: So what are you finding--you know, what is the age bracket--what, what are you told, or what do you experience within, you know, the community if--how large is the staff? Let's start with how large the staff was. Speaker 2: The staff was maybe fifteen, twenty people in editorial, which is separate from fashion and beauty, separate from the art department, separate from (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So it's a-- Speaker 2: --the production department. Speaker 1: So it was a large staff then? I mean, large for-- Speaker 2: I'm trying to think. Speaker 1: Because remember you said Black Enterprise was six. Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: And here-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --you know, you're talking that there're, there're fifteen and just in editorial. Speaker 2: Yeah and I'm counting now the assistants. Was it that many? Maybe not that many. Maybe ten, but it was a bigger staff than Black Enterprise. Speaker 1: Now was [HistoryMaker] Terrie Williams--was she on in public relations? Speaker 2: She was not there yet. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. Speaker 2: When I came she was not there yet. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so what is the culture, though, that you've come into? I mean, you talk about Susan [HistoryMaker Susan Taylor]. You're her number two. How long does it take for you to sort of find your space with each other, or is that immediate? Speaker 2: It wasn't immediate because there was--and I didn't realize this until I was in it. There were some people who wanted to test me. Susan was a very strong leader. And she went away--I don't--she went away to do something. I don't know if it was a conference, but she was gonna be gone for a couple of days so I was in charge. And one of the first things I had to was mediate what looked like a fist fight. And (laughter) someone came to my office and said, "So and So had So and So up against the wall." And I remember thinking, oh dear. So I went down and knocked on this editor's door, and she cracked it and tried to close it. And I just pushed it and came in. And the person--she literally did have this young woman up against the wall, and they had been arguing. And I said, "What's going on?" So the person who had her up against the all said, "Well, I'm doing (makes sound)." And I said to the person--I said, you know, "Go back to your desk." And I said to the person who had her up against the wall, "I don't know what you're doing, but this is unacceptable," and blah, blah. So that person I know was testing me, and I didn't realize it until it happened. And before that I had sent out a memo that I had to resend. And I don't remember what the memo said, but it was like, "Okay, whatever it said forget it. This is what's happening." And I heard her say, "Okay, oh, this is gonna be interesting." And I'm the kind of person I'm quiet, I'm easygoing, but you know, you're not gonna close the door in my face. And I don't, again, remember what was said, but it got handled, it got straightened out, and I think this person realized okay, when Susan's not here, Audrey [HistoryMaker Audrey Edwards] can, you know, handle things. So that was--that was the only one of those, as they say, come to Jesus moments. And the culture--you know, one of the things I always said about Essence, it was perfect for me because what better place as a black female journalist to be than Essence magazine, which is for and about and by black women. Speaker 1: Your career would have been much different, you know, 'cause you would have--and espe- well, yeah, and then the time that you were there it's--you know-- Speaker 2: And I was there five years, which for me was a lifetime. That's the longest I've been anywhere. And once I left Essence, I went into entrepreneurship. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: I did not go to work for anybody. Speaker 1: So talk about also what are the things--during that time were--was it any focus on events and things like that? Was Essence doing and what was the interplay between, you know, the different departments with--because at some point then Essence becomes very involved in-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --events (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And this is in the book ['The Man from Essence: Creating a Magazine for Black Women,' Edward Lewis with Audrey Edwards]. What happened--a young woman named Karen Thomas was hired in the sales promotion department, and she come up with a number of events that became an auxiliary way to make money in a different--in a--in addition to selling advertising. And that's very important in any publication, that you have other avenue streams for making money through promoting your magazine. So she came up with the Essence Awards [Essence Achievement Awards]. She came up with not the music festival [Essence Music Festival], but what some of the elements in the music festival, like the symposiums that happened during the day. So events, though, were not a major part of the magazine when I started working there. It was really driven by advertising and circulation. Story_ID: 644001 Speaker 1: Now were there--there were other attempts to have similar magazines to Essence I think around that time. Do you--did that happen while you were there? Do you remember any--you know-- Speaker 2: There as a magazine called Elan that was started by Jonathan Blount who had been one of the partners with Essence that did not last, came out maybe two or three times. The problem with starting a number of new publications, and this is where Ed Lewis [HistoryMaker Edward Lewis] I thought was very brilliant, you really do have to have fiscal prudence. And I think the tendency for a lot of new publications is to kind of wanna be splashy, and give the big party, and spend a lot of money. That's not how you're going to grow. First of all, it's not how you're going to establish a new publication and grow it, you know. Magazines are very expensive undertakings, very expensive. You have a lot of elements: you have the editorial; you have the art; you have production; you have printing; you know, you have distribution. All of that is together costly. Story_ID: 644002 Speaker 1: So, what were some of the key--you would say key elements that occurred in that first year at Essence? Speaker 2: See, I was not at the magazine the first year. Speaker 1: No, no, first year you were there. Speaker 2: Oh, the first year I was there. Speaker 1: No, no, no, I'm talk- I'm talking about the five years you were there. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So I'm just trying--so I understand that, you know, this was--you liked her leadership. That sort of fit. You know, you were tested, but I'm just trying to understand the first year. The publication was coming out monthly, right? Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes. The first year was really Susan [HistoryMaker Susan Taylor] establishing her voice with her In the Spirit columns. The other key thing that happened that first year, we did the first men's issue in November. November for most women's magazines is typically a slow selling month. The holidays are coming. People are focused on that. They're not necessarily buying magazines. They're buying gifts. They're thinking about Christmas. Susan brilliantly came up with the idea of doing a magazine devoted to men, the thinking being women will always read about men. In the case of Essence, we wanted to hear from the men themselves. So we put together a package of articles written by men in the first person--very emotional, very revealing, very poignant. The magazine flew off the stands. Speaker 1: So who was featured? Who were some of the people featured? Speaker 2: There was a writer, Phil Petrie, who I'd worked for at Black Enterprise, who had three sons. And he wrote a--he wrote a piece called 'What Do I Tell My Sons Who are Black?' And he looked at the challenges of being a black father in America trying to raise boys. Had another piece by a writer who talked about the meaning of friendships among black men. And he talked about his best friend and what that friend meant, and why a male friend is different from having a woman and very important. If you're gonna be a healthy man, you have to have a man that you can trust, you can talk to who helps you be a man. Had a piece written by another editor. It was an open letter to his father, and this was someone who'd had a very tough relationship with his father. So he talked about what he needed from him and didn't get. An interview with Judge Bruce Wright [Bruce M. Wright], who was a controversial civil court judge, who had a habit of letting black men go who'd come before him on the bench on their own recognizance. So that was a way of looking at the criminal justice system and its impact on black men. The fashion that issue looked at I believe five black designers, and the women were modeling clothes these designers had made. I think those were the key features. I'm trying to think--yeah, those are the key features. Story_ID: 644003 Speaker 1: In the development of the, the Spirit column, was that all Susan [HistoryMaker Susan Taylor], or did (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. Speaker 1: --was that a group shaping? Speaker 2: No, that was all Susan. Speaker 1: And when she explained it to you, what, what was your sense about that? Because what's where she really became identified-- Speaker 2: Absolutely (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Everything flowed from that. Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely. You know, Susan popularized, and so did Oprah Winfrey, what people call the personal confession. What she was masterful in doing was taking her personal experience, communicating it the reader, and saying I am like you because I have been through this too. So she would talk about what it was like to be a young single mother, you know, to have no money, to feel, you know, that she was having a heart attack and it was really a stress attack because she was so worried about, you know, how am I gonna take care of my daughter; my car is broken down; how am I gonna pay the rent? Women identified with that. She was very open, she was very honest, and it really changed the way editors in writing their pages talked to their readers. And it, it just, again, sold the magazine [Essence]. Speaker 1: It did. So you're saying--so how--she just--this is after you come there. Is she saying--or was this idea hatched before you come? Was this part of her (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't think so. I think--I think it evolved as she, you know-- Speaker 1: Evolved. Speaker 2: Yeah, absolutely. Speaker 1: Okay, so did--was there any discussion with you or she would--she came and said, "I'm gonna do this In the Spirit column and I'm talk to our, our, our, our subscribers." Speaker 2: No, I do know--you know, one of the things I did when I was at Family Circle, I used to write the editor's page. The editor-in-chief was a white man named Art Hettich [Arthur M. Hettich], and I wrote his page, but it was a different kind of page. And I remember saying to Susan, "Susan, you know most editors don't write their page. Now if you'd like, I'll write your page for you because you have a million other things to do." So she let me write the page one month. I don't think it even ran as I wrote it, because it wasn't her voice, it wasn't her sensibility, and we needed a page--we needed that In the Spirit column to be Susan, not me. So she reclaimed it, took it back, did it, and it really became the most successful feature in the magazine. You know, people would buy the magazine and go to that page first. Speaker 1: Right, and it also became her person. It really (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 1: --identified her. I mean, why-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --everything came out of that. Everything came out of that. Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm, um-hm, um-hm. Story_ID: 644004 Speaker 1: So in the first year, so you started--are you starting in January of that year, February of that--? Speaker 2: February, 1981 (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) February that year, okay. And then what happens--what are the developments year two, year three, year four, year five? Speaker 2: As we went on, I think by year--when did the Essence television show start? Speaker 1: Because that's in the-- Speaker 2: That was--I don't--that might have been '83 [1983]. I'm not sure. Speaker 1: You start at Essence in '80 [1980], 1980 I have. Speaker 2: That might be--no, no, no, a--I'm pretty sure it was '81 [1981]. I was thirty-three and turning thirty-four, so that would have been--I'm so bad at math--'81 [1981]. I was there from '81 [1981] to '86 [1986]. Speaker 1: Eighty-one [1981] to '86 [1986], okay. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And so, so you--okay, so '81 [1981] to '86 [1986]. Were there any--I'm gonna get back to the--you know, what happened each year, but were there any business issues that you were aware of? Because this is Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan]--you know, there's a-- Speaker 2: Cart-- Speaker 1: --Reagan is-- Speaker 2: Yeah, Reagan is in the White House. Is Reagan in the White House? Speaker 1: Um-hm, Reagan's in the White House-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --in the '80s [1980s]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Because the interest rates are high. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: There's the, the-- Speaker 2: Remember that. What were the political issues driving the magazine in the '80s [1980s]? Speaker 1: Well, there is a lot of coalition around--you know, because blacks are co- you know, the, the Congressional Black Caucus is active. People are sort of fighting. You have--during your time there, you know, Reverend Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] runs for office-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --the first time-- Speaker 2: That was '84 [1984]. Speaker 1: --his wife [Jacqueline Brown Jackson] stay--stands next to him. Speaker 2: Yeah that was '84 [1984]. Speaker 1: Eighty-four [1984]. Speaker 2: Vanessa Williams became Miss America in '83 [1983], and then we had all the controversy with the photos in Penthouse. That was a big thing in Essence. Speaker 1: And can you talk about that, 'cause she even--or the publication--I think it may have been Susan [HistoryMaker Susan Taylor] or the publication came out in support, you know, of Vanessa Williams. Speaker 2: Well, what happened--we were planning--the magazine was planning to have her on the cover and it did, but she'd been on the cover shortly after she won in the following year February or January. January was also traditionally a slow issue--slow month for selling magazines. She did very well in January. Speaker 1: Because that was a big to do. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: It was a big to do. Speaker 2: Right, now normally you don't put the same--at least then--same person in the cover twice in one year. But that cover did so well we said let's put her on in September, at the end of her reign, that's our fashion issue. We'll have her modeling clothes and talk about her reign. Well, just at the point we're on press, Bob Guccione, owner of Penthouse, announces he's got all these scandalous photos that are gonna run in Penthouse in September, same month that Essence is running it's story. It's too late to do anything 'cause we were on press. So I remember Clarence Smith, the advertising director, saying, "Well, this is gonna be great for sales 'cause, you know, we're gone be showing her with her clothes on." Susan is saying this is gonna be disastrous. Now, he was right. It was great for sales. Susan was right. It was horrible for subscriptions. People canceled. How de- you know, because they don't understand; they did not know the lead time in publishing a magazine. So I think they thought we were trying to capitalize on these photos--just the opposite, just the opposite. So that was one of the big cultural events going on that had an impact on the magazine (simultaneous). Story_ID: 644005 Speaker 1: --This discussion that's occurring inside, you know, about this because--do you, you have editorial meetings? Is this-- Speaker 2: Um-hm, oh Susan [HistoryMaker Susan Taylor] called me this--I was married at this point, and Susan called me at home like you know, I don't know, seven o'clock in the morning woke me up saying, "Oh my god, Audrey [HistoryMaker Audrey Edwards], what are we gonna do?" And I said, "Well, there's really nothing we can do except, you know, go for it." Be--and I was kind of with Clarence [Clarence Smith]. I thought well, this is gonna be great for sales, and it was, it was. But in a case like that there really is nothing you can do. It's too late. Speaker 1: Wait, didn't she--so she didn't rewrite In the Spirit or any--she--'cause it was--you're saying the whole thing was--there was nothing you could change? Speaker 2: Vanessa Williams came out on the cover modeling career clothes. She looked great. And people bought--I'm sure people who had never bought the magazine, bought the magazine that month (laughter). Now (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) People were-- Speaker 2: --that's not what you-- Speaker 1: --they were buying Penthouse too. Speaker 2: But that's not how you wanna drive sales. Speaker 1: Right, it's just-- Speaker 2: Just like whenever I get a cold I say you know I lost ten pounds. That's not how you wanna lose ten pounds, but in this case it sold magazines. Bad for circulation or bad for subscribe- you know for subscriptions because people did cancel. Speaker 1: Do you remember who canceled or what, what groups of people (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, and I don't know if you could, you know, categorize it like that. I don't know if it was, you know, people in the South, people in the North. Just people who were outraged. Speaker 1: Was there any follow up to that afterwards, like in her In the Spirit column 'cause-- Speaker 2: No, but Vanessa Williams was on the cover I think two more times. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because she went on to have a great career. Speaker 1: She did. No, she went on to have a great career. Speaker 2: And she resigned. We went to her press conference where she resigned, but she did have a great career. And you know, one of the things that's being said in Ed's book ['The Man from Essence: Creating a Magazine for Black Women,' Edward Lewis with Audrey Edwards], there are things you do even if you know it may not be great for sales. You do things that are historically important. That was one. Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] was on the cover in July of 1984. That was the worst selling cover up to that time in the history of the magazine--the worst. It wasn't a good cover visually; it was dark, it was somber, but people--Essence is not a political magazine. So people saw Jesse on the cover, and they're thinking oh, well, this month we're getting politics. Bombed. Bombed. Speaker 1: So why hadn't it have been decided that you do his wife [Jacqueline Brown Jackson]? 'Cause she didn't have the-- Speaker 2: 'Cause she wasn't running for president. Speaker 1: She wasn't running for president. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: But, but people--maybe that was in '88 [1988] they came asking her. And she's like you don't--you know, I think that was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, okay. Speaker 1: --'cause she was more visible-- Speaker 2: Okay, okay. Speaker 1: --and-- Speaker 2: And they may have done them both on the cover. I don't-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --know if they would have done her herself (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, okay, okay. That's right; that's right. Speaker 2: Yeah, they probably would have done them as a couple. Speaker 1: That makes sense Speaker 2: But even had we (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you run another man on the cover? You did the men's-- Speaker 2: Men had been on the cover frequently. Oh yeah, men had been on the cover frequently--always a men's issue. The O- now, but contrast, you know, forty years later, when Barack Obama is running for president [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama], it's a completely different time. He sold very well. His, his family sold extremely well. Speaker 1: Right, that's right. Speaker 2: But that was forty years later. But even with the knowledge--if we'd known ahead of time that the issue was gonna bomb, I think the decision would have still been made to put him on the cover because it was important historically. And one of the things I feel black media has to do is document those historic moments. Story_ID: 644006 Speaker 1: What I'd like you to also address--and I don't know maybe how to ask the question, but this really--you're setting new ground for a black, a, a, a magazine targeted to black women. 'Cause it had not been necessarily done before. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And there--and so I'm trying to understand the, the--maybe the structure and the issues. You know, the structure meaning what was the structure of putting together the, the publication? Was it a difficult structure? Did you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: --have the same, same setup as any other magazine? Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay, but no one who started at the magazine, that I know of, had a publishing background. Is that-- Speaker 2: No, when Essence started it had a lot of help and advice from the larger publishing community, and that made a big difference. On the editorial side, there was a woman named Barbara Kerr, a white woman who was the executive editor of the magazine. She had been in magazine publishing for thirty years, so she knew how to come up with story ideas, how to edit, how to assign pieces to writers. The first editor--the real first editor, Ruth Ross, came from Newsweek. She knew writers. Toni Morrison was her best friend. So you know that you have to have a collection of editorial. You have to have pieces that are written by writers, and she knew where some of the bodies were. Barbara Kerr knew how to edit, how to get people to meet deadlines, same thing in advertising. Clarence Smith was very smart, knew how to sell, knew how to go after a sales staff. So even if you don't have experience in publishing per se, you can get the information from people who do, and you hire people who can do the work. And the other thing the magazine didn't have in the beginning was a large talent pool to choose from, because how many editors were working for women's magazines? How many salespeople were working for women's magazines? Speaker 1: So you're doing a lot of on the job training, and that's why your hire is--was important in this (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 1: --way. Speaker 2: Right, because I had come from women's magazines-- Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: --black magazines, yeah. Speaker 1: And you were black. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: I mean, 'cause (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, and a black female. Speaker 1: --right black female and the others weren't. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So that's--that's why I'm trying to understand more this five year period and what it meant to the publication (unclear). Speaker 2: Well, see, the five year period--now the magazine started in 1970. So by the time Susan came-- Speaker 1: Oh-- Speaker 2: --it was ten years old. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: It was ten years old. Speaker 1: That's right (unclear). Speaker 2: So there had been a tradition-- Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: --you know, the groundwork had been laid. Marcia Gillespie [HistoryMaker Marcia Ann Gillespie] really laid the groundwork. Speaker 1: That's true. That is true. That's true. Speaker 2: So it was much--the structure was really in place. Speaker 1: The structure was in place, but they still were doing untradit- nontraditional hiring when they hired Susan. Do you see what I'm saying? Speaker 2: Yes, but that-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --but the hiring before that was pretty traditional. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Susan was the only one who didn't come from a journalism background, but you don't necessarily need to have a journalism background to have a great editor-in-chief, you know. That was the thinking, but that's not necessarily the case (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did they say--ever say what they saw in her? You know, what, what made them-- Speaker 2: Ed [HistoryMaker Edward Lewis] did because he's the one who hired her. First of all, Susan had been with the magazine for ten years, so she knew the publication. She may have been in fashion and beauty, but she understood the culture; she knew something about sales, because in that capacity as fashion and beauty editor, she would go out with salespeople on pitches occasionally; and understood the audience. That's key, that you know who your audience is; you have a--and this is what Ed recognized--Ed Lewis recognized in [HistoryMaker] Susan Taylor. She was very empathetic. She was the reader. You know, her issues around money, around childcare, finding a mate, all of that resonated with the, the readers because they were going through it. Speaker 1: But there would be--there was no one else in mind who she sort of pushed out of the way when she become ed- became editor-in-chief? Speaker 2: No, because Ed had let the predecessor go. Because what had happened under that editor is that circulation started to decline. It was a real prob- the magazine was not doing well editorially. People were not buying magazine. Speaker 1: And is that between Marcia Gillespie and-- Speaker 2: And Susan. Speaker 1: And Susan. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay, but there was--it would be later that there would be--oh yeah, that's much later-- Speaker 2: Yeah-- Speaker 1: --'cause they got (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) 'cause Susan was nineteen years in the job as editor-in-chief. Speaker 1: That's right; that's right, right. So it's the--okay. So what is significant then-- Story_ID: 644007 Speaker 1: --I'm gonna do two. And I was never a corporate person. Meaning (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, you had--that's--you had worked (unclear) in corporations, I mean at that-- Speaker 1: Up until the age of thirty-nine. Speaker 2: Up until--right, okay. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: I know, but you said I was never a corporate-- Speaker 1: No. Meaning, I didn't stay anywhere that long. I was never going-- Speaker 2: Yeah, that's true (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) to be someone who would be-- Speaker 2: --that you didn't stay-- Speaker 1: --you know, Susan [HistoryMaker Susan Taylor] ran the magazine [Essence] for nineteen years. I can't--the only thing I've run that long has been my own business [Plaza Properties]. Speaker 2: That's--okay, that's true. That's where you've been. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: But what's interesting to me is that you ran your business, but you kept your--you kept your-- Speaker 1: My hand. Speaker 2: --your hands in the-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --as, as a freelancer more. Speaker 1: Right, right, right. Speaker 2: So that was-- Speaker 1: And occasionally I would go back to editing two or three times a ye- . I was a senior editor at More magazine three days a week. So I did the real estate and did More. Because real estate--any commission based business--the--it's, it's sporadic. So what coming back and editing allowed me to do was have a steady income. Speaker 2: But you know what I've--and also-- Story_ID: 644008 Speaker 1: I just wanna ask the--so the thing that would be important to cover are the, the show where you--did you have any involvement-- Speaker 2: I did. Speaker 1: --with the show? Speaker 2: I did. Speaker 1: So the show--the festival [Essence Music Festival] you--did you have any involvement with that? Speaker 2: Not the festival. The awards I had involvement with (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) At Essence? Speaker 2: Yeah, I wrote about the winners for many years. I was-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --the writer who would write about the winners. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So I did the copy for that. Speaker 1: But what about the selection of winners and you know, was that done? Wouldn't that be part of editorial? Speaker 2: Who selected the winners? Now, I think at that point I was probably gone from the day to day. Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: When was that first Essence Award [Essence Achievement Awards]? The first Essence Award I believe was in 1987. I was gone by then. Speaker 1: Oh, you were gone? Okay, I see. Speaker 2: So I was not selecting the winners, but I was writing about the winners. Speaker 1: Okay, so you weren't there--the only TV part of it would have been her [HistoryMaker Susan Taylor] show. Speaker 2: Right (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You didn't do other TV-- Speaker 2: The Essence television show. Speaker 1: --you didn't do other TV. Speaker 2: No, no, no. Speaker 1: But that's--okay. Story_ID: 644009 Speaker 1: And then the other question I have is--I mean--okay, well, we, we can do this on camera. But why would Ed [HistoryMaker Edward Lewis] choose you then to write the book ['The Man from Essence: Creating a Magazine for Black Women,' Edward Lewis with Audrey Edwards]? Speaker 2: You know something, Julieanna [Julieanna Richardson]? Speaker 1: I (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Are, are we on tape? Speaker 1: No, we're not. Pause. Speaker 2: Okay. It took-- Speaker 1: No--oh, we're--take it off. Okay, I just want-- Speaker 2: (TAPE INTERRUPTION) Speaker 1: Black Enterprise did a business story on Essence and I wrote that in 1980 for its tenth anniversary. So in many ways, and I don't say this about a lot of things, I was the idea person because I'd worked there, I'd written for the magazine, I understood business because I'd been in black and white business press, and I'm part of the audience. And the other thing that was really important, I told you about the editor-in-chief [Sey Chassler] at Redbook asking in 1970 if anybody had called me. I'd been following Essence from the day it started. I had friends who were working there; I knew a lot of the inside stories; I'd heard the gossip; I knew who the players were; I knew what the points of tension had been; the--some of the warring between the partners, because I had people associated with the magazine who would tell me. So I had a whole history still in my brain, which meant I knew the kind of questions to ask Ed; I knew what bodies to look for to interview, to give amplification as to what had happened; but I really knew and understood the importance of the magazine itself on black women and on American culture. So, you know, if (laughter)--Ed would say, "Audrey [HistoryMaker Audrey Edwards] probably thinks it, it was like what took you so long, Ed, to call me," (laughter). Speaker 2: So you enjoyed the, the whole process of writing with him then. Speaker 1: I did. I did, because Ed is a very good subject. He is totally transparent. There was no question I asked that he did not answer, and he answered honestly. He is a man that people have underestimated because he's so quiet and almost reticent, but he's very strong, he's very focused, he's a visionary in his own way, and I think we are guilty of stereotyping each other as well as other people, and as well as people stereotyping us. You know, I would say to him, "Ed, you're not--you know, you're not the guy sitting at the bar beating his chest saying look what I did," which is what you expect from a lot of people who have achieved the level of success he has. He's very humble; you know, he's very soft spoken, but very effective, and I was intrigued. I was intrigued by Ed Lewis. Why did he prevail? You know, why did he turn out to be the last man standing at the magazine? Story_ID: 644010 Speaker 1: And how did that--so talk about the, the founders of the publication 'cause there five of them, right? Speaker 2: There were five in the very beginning. But before it really got going, one of those founders dropped out. Speaker 1: Okay, so who were the--who were the five? Do you-- Speaker 2: Clarence Smith, who was head of sales; Jonathan Blount, who had the original idea; and Cecil Hollingsworth, who was an entrepreneur before the partnership formed, and the guys initially met in his office. That's where the first Essence offices were, his office on 30th Street [New York, New York]. And all four brought (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)In Cec- in Cecil's? Speaker 2: In Cecil's office. Speaker 1: Office, okay. Speaker 2: Right, right, he had a small office on 30th Street; that's where they started the magazine [Essence]. Then it grew and they took over additional space in that location, and then moved to, you know, bigger, bigger-- Speaker 1: You know, it's so fascinating to me that there is not a woman in the mix. Speaker 2: I know. Speaker 1: And I know-- Speaker 2: But you know what? This is 1970, before the women's movement really got going, and this is how guys thought. That initial meeting where all these young men were invited to talk about starting a business. There was no women in that. The person who extended the invitation didn't invite any women. Speaker 1: So what were they saying they wanted to do, and address, and--you know, were they talking about the love of their mothers or their girlfriends, and why is-- Speaker 2: I think it was both. In terms of who the audience was, it was both; it was both. And they weren't clear. They knew they wanted to be in business. The idea of a magazine for black women was a very sexy one. It--you know, it, it captured the imagination of the entire publishing community because a lot of people like Clay Felker, who was editor at New York Magazine, which was new then, Osborn Elliott, who was editor at Newsweek, Sey Chassler at Redbook, John Mack Carter at Ladies' Home Journal--these were all men now. That's the other thing, men then ran women's magazines. Speaker 1: So this was not unusual. This was-- Speaker 2: No, nobody thought, you know, where's the woman. But the partners did know for editor-in-chief they had to have a woman. And then they made [HistoryMaker] Gordon Parks editorial director, and he had more say than the editor-in-chief so that caused problems. Speaker 1: At the beginning. Speaker 2: At the beginning. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: At the beginning. You know, because again, they were guys thinking the way guys do in 1970. Speaker 1: And the other thing, in terms of advertising, it's often told the story about, about approaching John Johnson [HistoryMaker John H. Johnson] and how he was like not having it. Not wanting-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --to invest in it, not wanting to have it-- Speaker 2: Well, he tried to take it over actually. You know, he tried a hostile takeover. But Ed [HistoryMaker Edward Lewis] wanted him--he wanted the two companies to join forces in things like buying paper, because it would have been more cost effective; sharing mailing lists, that would have been more cost effective. But John Johnson started as a lone ranger. You know, he, he laid the groundwork; he sort of cleared the path; and he really didn't see himself aligning with anyone else. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: If anything, he was going to take over someone else's operation. Speaker 1: That's right; that's right; that's right. And then--but then there was another Johnson from Chicago [Illinois] that had, had impact on the advertising and that's-- Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] George Johnson-- Speaker 1: George Johnson. Speaker 2: --the hair products person. Well, what Ed said in the book ['The Man from Essence: Creating a Magazine for Black Women,' Edward Lewis with Audrey Edwards] is that the black hair care companies were critical to that first year of operation because they advertised. And he said without them, without the black hair care advertisers, he said, "I don't know if we would have made it." So they were very important from the business standpoint of putting their advertising dollars into the magazine. Story_ID: 644011 Speaker 1: So Marcia Gillespie [HistoryMaker Marcia Ann Gillespie] was there. And then who followed Marcia Gillespie? Speaker 2: A woman named Daryl Alexander [Daryl Royster Alexander]-- Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: --who had been at Mademoiselle. She had worked at the magazine as an editor, left and went to Atlanta [Georgia] with her husband, who took a job, and then they came back. And she came back to the magazine and was the number two person. So when Marcia left, it seemed natural that it would go (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) To go-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: But then what was--what was--what didn't she--what decisions--editorial decisions was she making that were not particularly good decisions? Speaker 2: You know, I don't know if it was--see the--one of the things I think you have to understand, at least at that time, Essence became successful because of the connection the editor-in-chief was able to make with the reader. That began with Marcia. Daryl was less effective at that. She was shy; she could be remote. Her first few editorials didn't even have her picture, so you didn't even know who this person was who was speaking to you because you couldn't see her. So I think that, as much as any editorial content, had a lot to do with readers just not being excited and not connecting. But Marcia was brilliant at connecting. Susan [HistoryMaker Susan Taylor] was brilliant at connecting. Speaker 1: And then now why did Marcia leave at the time? Speaker 2: Marcia was tired. She'd been doing it ten years. She had really took it to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And, and those were hard years too, right-- Speaker 2: Yeah, the beginning years-- Speaker 1: Those are the hardest. Speaker 2: --the beginning years. Speaker 1: Those are the hardest years. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah. And she did a great job, but she was burned out. Susan was burned out. It's a--if you do that job correctly--and this is said in the book ['The Man from Essence: Creating a Magazine for Black Women,' Edward Lewis with Audrey Edwards]--if you do that job correctly, and you're successful at it, you burn out because it's huge, it's huge. You're the only--it's the only job as editor-in-chief of a woman's magazine where you have to be a leader, not just an editor. You have to be a race woman, not just a business manager. You have to connect to our readers, not just to keep circulation up. You know, you have to be so many more things to this reader, and it wears you out. Speaker 1: So was, was the expectation--'cause I don't know if with other female publications that you have to, you know, be out in the community. Susan was extremely-- Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: --very--I mean, I'm not talking about that she was just speaking, in the spirit, but she was out touching the community-- Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: --and speaking, and making appearances, and doing that TV show. So that's-- Speaker 2: And she took that to a whole other level. Marcia did some of that, but Susan took that to a whole other, other level. That's part of Susan's personality, and that's what made her great, that's really what made her great. You cannot expect that from your typical editor-in-chief. That's just not--people don't have that energy; they don't have that passion; they don't have that drive. Speaker 1: But if she's doing that, wouldn't that require more work on your part if she's--that--that's what I'm just--was there more work? Did you find that there was more work on your plate-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --the more that she's becoming a public figure? Speaker 2: No, because Susan at the time--and we were all younger--Susan had incredible energy. She still read every manuscript; she still wrote every In the Spirit; she traveled nonstop; she wrote her books; she still came up with story ideas. She just had incredible energy. That's the other thing that's not typical. And she had a child. Speaker 1: And she had a child. Speaker 2: Yeah, she was raising a child during all of this time. So she's--you know, she's one of the superwomen. Superwomen are super because that's not typical. You know, that's not traditional; it's not normal; it's, it's, you know, above and beyond, and that's how she worked. Story_ID: 644012 Speaker 1: How did the idea of the TV show come into being? Speaker 2: That came to the magazine from WPIX [WPIX-TV, New York, New York], from PIX. There was a young black producer named Kathy Shepherd, who is since deceased, who wanted PIX to have a greater penetration in the black market, and really thought it would be a good idea to team up with Essence and do a television show. So that's how it initially came to the magazine. And then once it became established, it moved from PIX into national syndication. Speaker 1: And who was in charge of the national syndication? Did, did Essence do that internally or did they hire someone? Speaker 2: They hired someone named Gene Davis, who's also deceased. He came from CBS and he was a syndicator and really, you know, worked on packaging the shows and then selling them to other stations. Speaker 1: So what was envisioned as--what did it become--that show become? Because really it catapulted her, not just through the column, but she became, you know-- Speaker 2: Because, well, she was the host of the show-- Speaker 1: She was the host of the show. Speaker 2: And the show was really designed to bring the magazine to a television format. So feature stores that were done would be done on television. One of the--one of the edgy stories that the magazine did--it was the magazine to talk about why do men cheat, and that particular story was put on television with three or four men--one of them was a cousin of mine--talking about what's the thinking of men when they decide to stray from their marriage. So it was provocative. You had real men talking about this in a--in a television format, which is different from a print format. And that's what was done with the show. You took the print information and packaged it for broadcasting. Speaker 1: So what was the--what was the timing between the show and the print to make that, that work? So the show was--how many series were you producing in any given time? Were you doing them in thirteen series? Speaker 2: No, no, because initially it was a local show with PIX, so it was almost like public service. And you didn't have--there was no correlation between when the magazine was out and a story appearing with the magazine. So we could have done a story on why men cheat a year ago. Speaker 1: So the stories would--you would just use that as, as, as--you would use the TV show to sort of cherry pick stories that would be in the magazine. Speaker 2: Right--well, no, the, the other way around. Speaker 1: The magazine would--you would cherry pick from the magazine-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --for things that would be in the-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --the show. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: Right, right, right. Susan's [HistoryMaker Susan Taylor] In the Spirit column was always a part of it. We had--I can't remember Adrienne's [ph.] last name, but we had a young newscaster from Connecticut who always ended the show with an upfront topic that depend--and usually she would interview someone. So say the up--the upfront topic is voting rights. And she might pull in someone to talk about why it's important to vote or what it means if the Voting Rights Act [Voting Rights Act of 1965] is coming up and about to be repealed. So that--and there was a feature called Upfront [ph.], which dealt with a particular issue. Abortion would have been another example; interracial adopting, you know. Those kind of stories would be Upfront topics. With interracial adopting, you would get a family that--maybe a white family that adopted a black child. Speaker 1: And then there--I think you also did issues of, you know, interracial dating, you know, those, those-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --cycled through and-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --are taking on (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right, right, right. What were some of the standard--dealing with a younger man. We had a young writer. This came in over the transom of Laura Randolph, who turned out to be a terrific writer. But she sent in a piece called 'Dealing with a Cheap Man' [ph.]. And it was a funny, humorous piece, but it had solid information. You know, what do you do with a guy who doesn't wanna spend any money on you? And that's the kind of story, again, that could translate to television. Story_ID: 644013 Speaker 1: Are you making the decisions about what appears and what doesn't, or is it ha- what is the editorial process? Can you explain that? Speaker 2: The editorial process at Essence when I was there, we, we had weekly meetings very often to talk about story ideas. You would agree upon an idea, then you would select a writer. You had an editor who would be--it--usually if the editor came up with the idea and it was accepted, that's the editor that's gonna run with the story. They're going to assign it to the writer; they're going to bring it in; they're going to edit it; they're going to work with the art department to get it treated visually; they're going to do the elements of the title, the deck, or the blurb that accompanies the story, captions that run with the art. And every editor (background noise) is doing that, whether it's a big feature story or a smaller department story. (Background noise) But that's what comes--that makes up the editorial package. Speaker 1: And so who's head of the art department when you were there (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) When I was there, it was a man named Ron Albrecht [ph.] and then a woman named Deborah Wilson [ph.], so there were two art directors when I was there. Speaker 1: Okay, and the art, art department often--I mean the--right, the art department often will help facilitate the look of the--you know, the, the publication. Was there a difference or was there a style that Essence had really that it set up? Speaker 2: You know, the style would be the logo was always the same. Speaker 1: Yeah, but even how things are shot sometimes. Speaker 2: Yeah, and that would depend on the art director and the photographer he's assigning a piece to. But the art director does have to have a visual vision. You know, he has to have a concept by which he sees the magazine. And that was also worked out editorially. Very often Susan [HistoryMaker Susan Taylor] would, would work with the art director in terms of how do we want this to look, especially the covers. Speaker 1: Okay, but see, you even--you spoke about the, the cover with Jesse [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson]--you know, Reverend Jackson and how it was dark. So was there any--'cause--do you know-- Speaker 2: I think that--you know what? I think, Julieanna [Julieanna Richardson], I think that was a photo. I don't think he was shot for that. Speaker 1: Oh, I see. Speaker 2: Yeah, which (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Because sometimes you, you know, you might not shoot-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --you know, shoot it 'cause it could be expensive or maybe his schedule. Speaker 2: I, I have to--I--'cause it, it was not a typical Essence cover at all. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: At all. And I think that's what happened-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --in that instance. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. What were sort of low points? Did you have any low points in your time there? You know, where you were--it was either too much work or there was a disagreement with another, you know, department 'cause it--whether it be, you know, advertising or you know--or the art department? Speaker 2: That's a good question. You know, I initially had disagreements with the art director before Fo [Fo Wilson]. He was-- Story_ID: 644014 Speaker 1: It's the interaction with the people that you very often have to work with. So there were some low points around people that I worked with. And I was gonna say, not through any fault of their own, but I think it's very important in a magazine like Essence or any media that's geared to a particular niche, that you understand the culture of that niche; and if you don't, then there can be some conflicts. You know, I think you have to respect the market. There is a reason if you have a magazine for black women the tendency would be to hire black women. It doesn't mean that other people don't understand that audience, but I think you're more likely to get agreement and meeting of the minds with people who are like your audience. So my low points had to do with dealing with people who were not necessarily of the culture, and in my mind didn't respect the audience, and didn't respect very often the staff which was the audience, I mean you're talking black women, whether it's black women working for the company or your readers. Speaker 2: So where did--where did those areas--you mentioned that the art department may have been one, you know at one point one of them. Were there other areas of the-- Speaker 1: I always had believed in--when you're talking your freelance community, and in magazines it is a freelance community, and it's like jobs anywhere else--if you're running a black business your, I believe, first responsibility--not first, but you have a responsibility to hire your people, to provide opportunities for your people that other organizations may not be providing. So if you're looking for writers, look for the black writers. If you're looking for photographers, look for black photographers. There were people who felt: one, that's not necessarily what we have to do; two, we can't find (gesture) qualified people to do that, which would always drive me crazy--always drive me crazy because that's what we're told by other folk who aren't hiring us. So to be in a position to have the resources to hire your own, and be told, well, we can't find any who are qualified, that to me was always a problem. Speaker 2: You know, that's interesting too. I'm thinking of you becoming not a black radical, but very, you know, pro-black, when your background had not been necessarily--you had come from a totally different--a more multicultural, a more-- Speaker 1: It's true, but you know, I think--I mean, I am also a child of the Civil Rights Movement, and children of the Civil Rights Movement understand what discrimination was about, what lack of opportunities were about. You know, I had a father [Cyril Edwards] who was denied opportunities because of the color of his skin, a mother [Bertie Edwards] too for that matter, but he reacted differently. And I just think every other group empowers its own. Speaker 2: That's true, but you know, you came in I--you know, literally, you were coming in and getting opportunities pretty easily. You know, when you look-- Speaker 1: At a time (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) at your career-- Speaker 1: Yeah, absolutely. Speaker 2: --I mean, it looks-- Speaker 1: Absolutely. Speaker 2: You were moving pretty quickly. There were opportunities available. It wasn't like you were having to--you know-- Speaker 1: But that was a result of the Civil Rights Movement. It really was. I was-- Speaker 2: But you understood that. See, that you understood that-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --is what I'm saying. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Because there are others that haven't necessarily understood that. Speaker 1: Yeah, and I think that's very unfortunate. I think that is very unfortunate that, that we definitely--people of my generation definitely were standing on the shoulders of people who got us to that next point. Story_ID: 644015 Speaker 1: Yeah, because you know what? Now that I'm thinking of it, the guy I used as a director last, last--for [HistoryMaker] Ursula Burns' show ['An Evening With Ursula Burns'] was the director--he was one of the directors used for the, the Essence TV show 'cause he brought-- Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: --he brought to--brought a picture of, you know, Susan [HistoryMaker Susan Taylor] and everyone. For all I know, you might be in the picture. But it was--I don't know who--but it was a picture of-- Speaker 2: I don't know who the director is. Speaker 1: --you know, one of the tapings or after one of the tapings. So, you know, 'cause those, those are--those are, you know, those are issues no matter where you find it sometimes. You know, we've, we've struggled too with the--you know-- Speaker 2: You mean the issues-- Speaker 1: --issues. Speaker 2: --of hiring. Speaker 1: Of hiring, um-hm, we've struggled-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --with those issues. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah. And see I'm surprised in this day and age. Here we are, you know, forty-four years later after Essence launched. Speaker 1: Right, but see the, the--there was nev- there's never been a sustained period of time. Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: And it also depends on where you are operating. New York [New York] might be different, but I found the same issues last year trying to hire in New York. Speaker 2: Well, I think you hit it on the head when you said there has not been a sustained or prolonged period where-- Speaker 1: I found this-- Speaker 2: --you have generations now acquiring the skills, you know. And that's disturbing; that's disturbing. Speaker 1: Because really that, that show was one of the first--'cause I think--was that show now--was Ebony/Jet show--were the--the 'Ebony/Jet Showcase,' was it on--I think it was on the air around the same time. Speaker 2: I think--well, no, it came after. Speaker 1: It came after, okay, okay. Speaker 2: Essence was the first black magazine to go on television. Speaker 1: Right, so that--that's why I'm saying those--these--you're breaking new ground and so you have to try to find the talent where you can sort of find it. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: In some cases you're making a talent. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: In some cases you're not. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And initially the editors were producers on the television show. I didn't know anything about television, didn't even especially like it as a medium because it's so instant. Story_ID: 644016 Speaker 1: So, but can you talk, talk about your role on the show? Speaker 2: It was really coming up with ideas, pretty much what I did at the magazine; identifying talent. I mentioned a cousin who did the segment on, you know, cheating--why do men cheat, and he was colorful and provocative. So as a--I think my title was consulting producer, but kind of pulling the elements together. But I didn't understand the workings of broadcast because that wasn't my background. But in terms of coming up with ideas and packaging, it was pretty much a similar approach. Speaker 1: So did you find the show did what it was intended to do and that it brought, you know, expanded your audience. And from a marketing perspective-- Speaker 2: You know what I think the show really did was give Essence another kind of recognition, because television is broad; it's broadcasting. So if you turn on Channel 11, which is what PIX [WPIX-TV, New York, New York] was, it doesn't matter who you are, if you turn it on you can see it. It's not like going out and consciously making a decision to pick up the magazine. You know, it's in your living room if you turn to a particular channel. So it really expanded the Essence brand in terms of recognition, and it made Susan [HistoryMaker Susan Taylor] a star. You know, and that's also the power of television: it's a very, you know, up close, hot medium. Story_ID: 644017 Speaker 1: Now can you go over who the team is when you're there? I know it's Susan [HistoryMaker Susan Taylor] and you, but--and I know there's the art department, but who, who are running the other areas? Speaker 2: The fashion and beauty department was Mikki Garth Taylor [Mikki Taylor], and Ionia Dunn Lee; they were the fashion and beauty editors. The contemporary living department--and that's why I said fifteen people, because I'm including these departments now in editorial. Contemporary living did food, parenting, travel, home decor; that was Stephanie Stokes Oliver, [HistoryMaker] Harriette Cole. So there are about--yeah, Harriette started at Essence. So there are maybe four or five people in contemporary living; four or five people in the art department--I'm, I'm sorry--in the fashion and beauty department; four or five in editorial as editors; and in the editorial department you had the editor-in-chief, you had the executive editor, you had a couple of senior editors, associates (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And who were they? Do you remember who-- Speaker 2: At the time Rosemary Bray [Rosemary L. Bray] was an--was a senior editor. After Rosemary--well, there was a woman named Alice Jones Miller, Cheryl Everett [ph.], Elaine Ray. These are all people who came during the time I was there. [HistoryMaker] Valerie Wilson Wesley came later, Benilde Little came later. We had an entertainment editor. So it was, you know, a collaborative effort. A magazine is first and foremost a collaborative effort. Story_ID: 644018 Speaker 1: You said you had a political editor at one time or you did--or that was rolled then under the main, main--? Speaker 2: Yeah, we didn't have a political editor per se, but there was an editor. Cheryl Everett [ph.] was one of the editors who really kind of came up with the political stories and brought those in, edited them, very often originated them. After America invaded Grenada, she had a friend or knew a woman who actually--I don't know if she'd lived Grenada, but went to Grenada and reported on that. And that ran in the magazine. We had a story on Nicaragua that June Jordan did. And these were the kind of really, to me, breakthrough pieces that women's magazines certainly were not doing. Speaker 1: No, because they were doing cookies, and-- Speaker 2: Right (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) sewing, and tapestry-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and all of that. Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly, you know, what to hand- how to handle your two year old. And we did that too, but we also did the things that were affecting us globally and sometimes domestically. But real issues, real political issues of the day. You know, every year there was a big travel story to some black destination. We did Jamaica, we did Bahia [Brazil], we did Trinidad and Tobago. And it was a way to talk about not just travel as a destination, but what's the politics of this country? What's the culture? Who are these people who look like you? So, and that was travel also being given a bigger dimension. Speaker 1: And can you talk about then how that manifested or what the results of those things were becau- because I just think (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Those kind of stories? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Well, I think the travel pieces introduced us to the countries as much as the reader got introduced to the countries. That was important. And in that sense, Essence began to have a global kind of reach. Going to South Africa in 1997, very important, very important. The magazine was known in South Africa, but to actually be there physically covering the politics at that time, very important. And, again, it set Essence apart from other women's magazines. It made it distinct. You knew that you were getting meat with your potatoes. You know, we did the typical--we did fashion, we did beauty, we did parenting, we did relationship stories. Story_ID: 644019 Speaker 1: The other thing the magazine did under, under Susan [HistoryMaker Susan Taylor] that I think was absolutely groundbreaking was create a dialogue between black women and black men. Because what was going on--the big thing going on culturally in the '80s [1980s] was this schism all of a sudden. Well, I don't know if it was all of a sudden, but there was a real schism between black men and black women. You know, there was--there was a lot of fallout from Alice Walker's book, 'The Color Purple,' Gloria Naylor's book, 'Women of Brewster Place,' ['The Women of Brewster Place'] and Ntozake [HistoryMaker Ntozake Shange] play, 'For Colored Girls' ['For Colored Girls Who Have Considered Suicide / When the Rainbow is Enuf']. You know, that had men up in arms, sometimes women up in arms. And the magazine became a forum for men and women to talk to each other. And at its height, 25 percent of Essence's readers were men, which was very significant for a women's magazine because it meant that men wanted to know what women were thinking. And men wrote for the magazine, so women could find out what they were thinking--very important. And, again, not what typical women's magazines were doing. And then a lot of magazines started copying. You know, all of a sudden women's magazines were doing special issue on men, and that was started by Essence. Story_ID: 644020 Speaker 1: So do you think Ed's [HistoryMaker Edward Lewis] book he will touch upon all the groundbreaking things 'cause I'm--you know, as you're talking, I'm (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This is all in the book ['The Man from Essence: Creating a Magazine for Black Women,' Edward Lewis with Audrey Edwards] (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Yeah, because I'm thinking about all the other things. I mean, you know, when you were talking about travel, so many black people got really more through, through, through Essence than I would say Black Enterprise. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You know, got introduced-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --to different cu- it's the cultural tourism, what is now-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --cultural tourism. They got introduced to new places. And, and then women felt like they were acknowledged, you know-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --as people. Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: And, and just, you know, you have 'The Cosby Show' on. You've got--you know, you've got the, the spin- the one with the girl--the girl on--college one ['A Different World']. Speaker 2: Oh--I know what you're talking about--god. Speaker 1: But it's a ca- all this is happening (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Lisa Bonet, yeah. Speaker 1: --at the same time. Speaker 2: Yeah, right, right, right. Speaker 1: And people are feeling--you know, black people are feeling like--you know, 'cause Essence resonated--I mean it's all the black middle class. It's in a different way, but you see the images. And not that we didn't have Johnson Publishing [Johnson Publishing Company, Chicago, Illinois], but this is newer; you know, it's reaching kids on college campus-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --it's the-- Speaker 2: And it's a different way of looking. I think Essence was a lot more analytical in its coverage. Even the arts and entertainment, very important. We did some very, I thought, groundbreaking entertainment stories. Looking at--what did 'The Jeffersons' mean as a family portrait? Why was George Jefferson important? And we did that story when it had been on the air or was going off the air maybe after twenty years. You know, why did it run so long? What was--what were the touchstones? Why did it resonate with black viewers? Because that was still the majority of the viewers. So we would do stories that didn't just profile George Jefferson, but let's look at what this meant culturally. What's the--what, what's icon? Speaker 1: How did that come to be though? Because you're right about Essence--you know Ebony and Jet was really about profiles. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: You know, and that was important in its day-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --because people didn't even have that. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So can, can you talk about the internal process that led to that? Speaker 2: That was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) 'Cause we're sort of back-- Speaker 2: --driving-- Speaker 1: --to profiling-- Speaker 2: --that was I think very much writer driven. There was a wonderful writer named Bonnie Allen, who just brought insight to her entertainment coverage. And when you have a magazine that's open, like it was under Susan [HistoryMaker Susan Taylor], you have writers who are thinkers. If they're good they're your thinkers, and if you give them an opportunity to expound on an issue from an analytical standpoint and do it in a way that's compelling, you have another kind of profile, you have another kind of portrait. And I thought Essence was very good at that and a lot of the entertainment coverage. Speaker 1: Okay. Were there any other, the, the features or things, that just did not sit right with the, with the--with your audience? You don't remember that? Nothing? Speaker 2: What were the things that didn't work? And there had to be some 'cause there always is. Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause you mentioned Reverend Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson]. I mean-- Speaker 2: You had to--you had to be careful how you delivered politics and how you delivered sports. I mean, every four years we would do Olympics coverage. Sometimes that worked; sometimes it didn't. I think you had to be careful how you did historical coverage. And, again, it was writer driven. See, I'm, I'm an editor who believes if it's well written you can write about a paper bag. If it's well written you can write about your beautiful necklace. So if you have the right writer, they can take a subject and make it compelling, and interesting, and educational, and illuminating; and that's what I think writing should do, especially in magazines. Story_ID: 644021 Speaker 1: So, Audrey [HistoryMaker Audrey Edwards], why did you say, you know, earlier that I wish that I had maybe gotten a degr- you know gone to Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York] or gotten a degree in journalism (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Because at the--you know, I, I don't know that any of this matters in the long run for anything. But the Columbia journalism school [Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism, New York, New York], in media, has a certain cache. Now if I was in the educational community, my master's [degree] at Teachers College [Teachers College, Columbia University, New York, New York] would have a certain cache. Speaker 1: Now I understand that part. I'm just wondering how it manifested that you would have regrets, because to hear your story, you know, your-- Speaker 2: You know what the regret is, Julieanna [Julieanna Richardson], my--is Sey Chassler at Redbook pooh-poohed J school. He also pooh-poohed Evelyn--Evelyn Wood Reading Dynamics. And sometimes you can listen to not wrong information, but you can make a decision based on what someone else is saying, which may not be what's right for you. But you think it is because he's the boss. He's running this he must know. But sometimes I think it's important to follow your own instincts. And I think I didn't go to the J school: one, because my best friend had gone and I didn't wanna keep following her, but he didn't seem to think much J schools, and it's like, okay, but it could have been a value to me networking wise, political wise. You know, it's just--but--and I shouldn't say regret because that sounds too strong. But if I were doing it again, I would have gone to the J school as opposed to Teachers College. Speaker 1: And I understand that. It's just that when you talk about your--you know, when you're talking about your career, I don't see anything that was a loss. You know-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --as you were talking about (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's true. Speaker 1: --good writing. You know-- Speaker 2: That's true. Speaker 1: --I mean all these things-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and really when you're telling your story--I mean, the story is sort of like oh, I was sort of just floating around. It took me awhile (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, it's--but it's-- Speaker 1: --to get a major. Speaker 2: It's true. That's how--that's how I've seen my career. I have not seen it-- Speaker 1: And then I'm like (laughter)-- Speaker 2: I haven't seen it as planned. And you know, I had this five year plan by which I was gonna do so and so. Speaker 1: No, no, no, I understand that, but I mean, you're sort of like--you're, you're making it seem, well, I was okay, you know, whatever. And then you said but he did recognize--you're saying Sey--you know, "I was a good--," you know, "He saw that I was a good writer," you know, a good editor. But then--I mean, but that's only sort of recognition, and then you're over here being recruited, and-- Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: --and the--and you're at the magazine [Family Circle] where there's a lot of growth and you're--you know, so that's what I'm trying to sort of put together in your story. And I don't have the advantage with my questions-- Speaker 2: Wait--when you say put--okay. Speaker 1: Together. I'm trying to put the telling of your story together because clearly they went after you because you were experienced, and they felt look at where she's been. They had obviously heard. There are not that many people in positions-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --in mag- you know, magazine publishing. They're looking to say who are the people out there that we can recruit over here-- Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: --to shore Susan [HistoryMaker Susan Taylor] up. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, and that, I will say, was the reality of my experience. I--the joke was: people would say, "Audrey's always getting called by somebody who wants to hire her." And I think that has as much to do with having a certain kind of flexibility, not being rigid in what I wanted to do to begin with, kind of being open. But I used to regret not having a five year plan, not knowing, you know, what I wanted. But I think that's worked to my advantage. Speaker 1: Do you think you regret at all--well, okay. Do you regret at all--at all leaving when you did? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: You don't? Speaker 2: No, not at all. You're talking about leaving Essence? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Now why? Speaker 2: Because if you look at what happened, all the people I left there are no longer there. They're no longer there. Speaker 1: Right, but I mean, they were there for a while. Speaker 2: Yeah, they're not there now. I--you know what? What I realized about me--I say I'm not a corporate person--I have done much better in my life, separate and apart from career, going out on my own. Story_ID: 644022 Speaker 1: So, let's talk about your decision. This decision, did it take--'cause first of all, neither Susan [HistoryMaker Susan Taylor] nor Ed [HistoryMaker Edward Lewis] want you to leave. And they try to say, you know-- Speaker 2: Well, Susan had a much bigger reaction. Speaker 1: Well, of course she would. You had a good working relationship. Speaker 2: Yeah, absolutely. Speaker 1: Who wouldn't (laughter)? Speaker 2: Abso- absolutely (laughter). Speaker 1: I don't hear head--Ed's name mentioned here. I mean, you're working with her-- Speaker 2: Right (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) on a daily basis-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and you are--you're the beginning of-- Speaker 2: I am the number two person. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And I'm her first number two person. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Right, right, right. Speaker 1: I mean, who would not? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: I mean, you get-- Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: --five years, it's like, you know, why mess with this marriage? Speaker 2: Right, right, right. But you know what? And the thing--one of the reasons Susan and I had a good working relationship is that I never wanted her job. Now, I never wanted her job, but it also meant, I'm sure in the back of my mind, I'm not gonna be number two for the next twenty years. If I'm working at some point, it's gonna be about working for me in a very direct way, meaning not a paycheck necessarily. The other thing that happened during this five years that I'd bought my first piece of property in the Village, and I sold my first piece of property. Speaker 1: When did you buy your first piece of property? Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy-nine [1979]. Speaker 1: That's before you went. That's before-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --you went-- Speaker 2: --oh, wait a minute--wait, wait-- Speaker 1: No, and then--I have it in the timeline that it's before you went to Essence. Speaker 2: It is. Speaker 1: It is. Speaker 2: Wait a minute. Speaker 1: No, I have--I-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: No, I know you. That's why I'm wondering why that's significant. Because--and no, I have it in the timeline that it's before you went to Essence. Speaker 2: Then I sold it. Speaker 1: You brought your first up--you bought your first--I--for some reason, I have it between 1979 and 1981. When you're at Family Circle-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --you bought--you know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Unclear)-- Speaker 1: --and I didn't know what--'cause I had a question about where, where did you buy it. Speaker 2: It was a one bedroom co-op in the Village--in Greenwich Village [New York, New York]. So I must have sold it because the selling of it was the epiphany. I sold it for four times what I'd paid for it in four years. And when I got the check, I remember thinking very vividly: I could be at Essence for the next thirty years, and I will never get a check with this amount of money on it with my name. And I realized then, if you're going to really make money, it's got to be under your own enterprise, not working for Ed, not working for Clarence [Clarence Smith]. I didn't consider working for Susan because Susan didn't own the magazine either. So I'm working to make Ed and Clarence richer, and you know, if I'm gonna do that, why don't I work to make me rich? Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: So that's when I had the epiphany, when I saw what selling this piece of property meant. Story_ID: 644023 Speaker 1: Now you got married in what year also? Speaker 2: Eighty-three [1983]. Speaker 1: Eighty-three [1983], so-- Speaker 2: Eighty-three [1983]. Speaker 1: Okay, so the show-- Speaker 2: Was it '83 [1983]? No. Speaker 1: 'Cause you said (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I could never-- Speaker 1: --the TV show started in '84 [1984]--'83 [1983], '84 [1984]. Are those-- Speaker 2: It might have been even later. I got married in '85 [1985]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I was thirty-eight. Speaker 1: So a year before you left? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And your husband's name? Speaker 2: Ben, Ben Williams [ph.]. But I didn't stay--I didn't stay (laughter) married to him. I didn't really wanna get married. I--and I say that because he proposed to me fifteen years before we got married. He proposed to me when we were still at Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York], and took me fifteen years to get married. And I figured it was something I hadn't done. And you know, I was the editor to the magazine [Essence], and it would probably be appropriate to do that, but-- Speaker 1: How long were you married? Speaker 2: A couple of years. Speaker 1: Okay, so it didn't last long. Speaker 2: Yeah, right. Speaker 1: But out of that came children, right? Speaker 2: Well, my son [Ugo Anekwe] is actually someone I call my stepson, but I was not married to his father. We just had a long term living together relationship. Speaker 1: Relationship, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, but he's the--he's the one I still have in my life as my son (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, okay, okay. Speaker 2: But the, the man I was married to, we did not have children. Speaker 1: Children, okay. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 644024 Speaker 1: So you leave. You tell--you leave? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: You sure you wanna leave the Essence story--you leave. And then what are your thoughts about what you wanna do? Speaker 2: Well, now Susan [HistoryMaker Susan Taylor] was very good to me because she still wanted me there. I was starting a business, and I didn't have--I had a little bit of money, but not really a lot, so I became--I believed in the title was editor-at-large. So I still came in I think three times a week. But I had no benefits to speak of, but I had a steady paycheck. Speaker 1: Okay, so they took you off salary, but you were like on a contract. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: But who do--who do they recruit? Who takes your place? Speaker 2: Oh, oh, oh, Stephanie Stokes Oliver, who had been the editor of the contemporary living department. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Stephanie's also from Seattle [Washington], so she's a home girl. I didn't know her in Seattle, but she came and was there for another sixteen years. Speaker 1: Wow--oh, so she was there almost for the whole time that Susan was there, the remaining time. Speaker 2: Almost, yeah. Speaker 1: Almost. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Or maybe even--okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, you're right. Speaker 1: Okay, maybe even longer then or something--wait, that doesn't make sense. If she was there for sixteen-- Speaker 2: No, sixteen years in total. I'm sorry. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I believe-- Speaker 1: Oh, in total. Speaker 2: --she was sixteen years at the magazine. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So what--how does that sort of work with it? And was--was this typical with Essence that people would get promoted? Was there a lot of promotion from within? Speaker 2: I don't know if there was a lot. That number two position and that number one position very, very--not difficult, but the number--people are not by and large promoted from within from the top spots. When Susan left as editor-in-chief and brought in [HistoryMaker] Monique Greenwood, she came from Fairchild [Fairchild Publications, Inc.; Fairchild Fashion Media] also. She lasted a year because she-- Speaker 1: She didn't last very long, and then they brought in a white--a white gentlemen, right, after that? Speaker 2: No, after Monique was Diane Weathers. Speaker 1: Oh, okay, but didn't they--there was a short period of time I've heard it reported. Or it was either your position-- Speaker 2: No, they didn't have a white man in it, no. Speaker 1: They had a white man (unclear). I'm telling you. I've read about it. It may be the new Essence. Maybe this is after. There has been. He la-- Speaker 2: Oh, there was the managing editor, who-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --who was--yeah, but there--Essence had a white managing editor when I was there too. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, okay. Speaker 2: But the-- Speaker 1: I wonder why that was controversial? This one was controversial. Speaker 2: Because he had put something on Facebook saying-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --that he was really running things. You know, it was something very-- Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: --not smart to do. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But, yeah, and I had problems with the managing editor when I was there too (laughter). But Diane Weathers came in after--was it Diane? (Pause) You know what? I'm not sure who came in after Stephanie (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay we've got to change. Story_ID: 644025 Speaker 1: You're-- Speaker 2: I was editor-at-large. Speaker 1: --editor-at-large. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: And I was coming in three times a week. Still I guess editing and occasionally writing, but keeping my hand in the magazine [Essence], and I think, you know, just making Susan [HistoryMaker Susan Taylor] feel a little better. But there was, excuse me, there was a number two person and that was Stephanie [Stephanie Stokes Oliver]. Speaker 1: Okay, and did--how long did it take that transition to work? How long were you at--you know, at-large at (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know, I--one of the things that happened in '91 [1991] or '90 [1990] I went back to Black Enterprise as executive editor. Now the--that, that was a corrected bio when I-- Speaker 1: Okay, see I (laughter)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I went back-- Speaker 1: Oh, no, I have--wait, no, I have 1990--at Black Enterprise was as appointed vice president of editorial operations in 1990. Okay, so wait, so you're--you--for let's say if it's nineteen eighty-- Speaker 2: Eighty-six [1986] when I left. Speaker 1: --six [1986] you left, so you stayed in that--did you stay in that position for-- Speaker 2: Maybe a year. Speaker 1: Oh, just for a year as editor-at-large? Speaker 2: Yeah, because I was trying to get my--what do you call it--real estate business going. Speaker 1: And you're--had you had your real estate license at this point? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, when I left I had my real estate license. Speaker 1: Now there's a lot--this is a good time for real estate, though, 'cause-- Speaker 2: It is now, but when I left it wasn't. Speaker 1: It wasn't, not even-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay, interest rates (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not in '86 [1986]. Interest rates were still high. The market was-- Speaker 1: I thought things were, though, increasing in value. Speaker 2: Not in '86 [1986]. Speaker 1: No, it wasn't? Okay. Speaker 2: It wasn't until the mid-'90s [1990s] it had started, you know, sort of being on the--yeah, in '86 [1986] you couldn't see anything. Speaker 1: So that--those were difficult years then. Speaker 2: Those were difficult years, which is why I needed, you know, a job while I was trying to get the real estate (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you went to Black Enterprise then. Speaker 2: I went to Black Enterprise. A deal had died. I watched a twenty thousand dollar commission go out the window. And at the point that I'm looking at my checkbook, Barbara Graves calls, Earl Graves' [HistoryMaker Earl G. Graves, Sr.] wife. And she said, "What are you doing?" And I said, "You mean right this minute? I'm looking at my checking account" (laughter). So I was primed to, to take (laughter) a job, but it only lasted five months. I also had a book contract to do 'Children of the Dream,' ['Children of the Dream: The Psychology of Black Success'] which we had started, Craig Polite [Craig K. Polite] and I had started. But I felt that I needed--you know, I wasn't gonna turn down this job offer because I'd lost a twenty thousand dollar commission. I needed money, but I could not go back to that kind of full-time, around the clock, executive level working. With Earl you had to be in at eight o'clock. He wanted you to work 'round the clock. He was the kind of guy who would tear up the magazine after you've put it together and you've got all the articles planned. "I don't like this, (makes sound)." And I just--I said, "I need to finish my book, Earl. I will never finish this book working for you." And it was just--it was just too consuming for too little money, too much aggravation, and I wanted to do my own thing, so I left after five and a half months. Speaker 1: So who, who were you in between then? I mean, was, was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) At Black Enterprise? Speaker 1: Right. Was Alfred Edmonds [sic. HistoryMaker Alfred Edmond, Jr.]--was he-- Speaker 2: Alfred and Derek [HistoryMaker Derek Dingle] were both there. Speaker 1: They were both there, okay. Speaker 2: They were both there. And I think after I left Sheryl Tucker [HistoryMaker Sheryl Hilliard Tucker] took over. Then Derek at some point--maybe Alfred became editor, but the two of them switched off. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: And they're still there. Speaker 1: They're still--now that's right (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, they were there when, when I was there, and they're still there. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Story_ID: 644026 Speaker 1: Talk about the book and how that came about. Speaker 2: 'Children of the Dream' ['Children of the Dream: The Psychology of Black Success']? Speaker 1: 'Children of the Dream.' Speaker 2: You know, 'Children of the Dream' was an idea I had. I wanted to look at what I call the integration generation for the very things we're talking about, the opportunities that you mentioned I had. I felt that many people in my generation had those opportunities, and it was a result of the quest to assimilate, to be integrated. There was a time in American history when everybody thought that was a way to go. And there were these unprecedented opportunities. So I wanted to look at success among black people. What does it take to be a successful black person in America? And I wanted to look at the generation that had had the most opportunities to achieve success. And Craig [Craig K. Polite], who's a psychologist, I don't know how he and I just started talking about this, and we decided to do this book together. Speaker 1: And so how--what struck me about the book is how much was left on the cutting floor. Speaker 2: Oh (laughter). Speaker 1: 'Cause you did a lot--I mean, and I--I-- Speaker 2: A lot of research--a lot of interviews. Speaker 1: A lot of interviews. And I mean, I was even thinking my god, you know, even politically cutting some out. And then you acknowledge everyone, but it was a lot on the cutting floor. And not to say that that matters or anything, but how did you make the decision about what you cut? Was it the nature of the story? Speaker 2: Yeah, very much so, very much so the nature of the story. Because I kind of knew what I wanted to look at. And so in knowing what I wanted to look at, I then identified those people who fit talking about a particular aspect. I wanted to talk about things like beauty for black women. I wanted to talk about skin color for black people. I wanted to talk about the impact of faith, in terms of people who, who operate from a God standpoint, because God is very important in our community--wanted to talk about a generational timeline. There's a father and a daughter in Denver [Colorado]. The other important thing was to get a geographical representation (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Diversity. Speaker 2: So I wanted people in unexpected places. So Arnold [Arnold Roane] and his daughter [Arlene Roane] were in Denver working for the Mari- he was working for Marietta [Martin Marietta Corporation]. I forgot who she was working for. So, geograph- geography was important. The other key thing is that these were people who had to be in occupations that would not have been open to them before the Civil Rights Movement. So an engineer at Marietta, you know, an investment banker in Houston [Texas]. Speaker 1: Yeah, you did--I think Neeland--I think maybe it was Kneeland Youngblood [HistoryMaker Dr. Kneeland Youngblood] or you la- maybe you cut Kneeland Youngblood 'cause you--John Rogers [HistoryMaker John Rogers, Jr.]--I don't think he was--he made it. Speaker 2: No. He, he was not in. Who was in Chicago [Illinois]? We had somebody in Chicago. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: There was a guy at West Point [United States Military Academy, West Point, New York], who was a brigadier general who are ran, you know, the cadets. Craig interviewed him. There was a car designer in Detroit [Michigan], you know, a young brother who actually designed--I think he worked for general--did he work for General Motors [General Motors Corporation; General Motors Company]? But it was different occupations. We did not want athletes. We didn't want entertainers. Speaker 1: How long were the interviews that you did? Speaker 2: Oh boy, depending on who it was, maybe a couple of hours, a couple of days. And truthfully, you know, after a certain point, the interviews--we narrowed it down to forty that actually made the book. And I think we interviewed eighty people. We didn't need eighty people in the book to make the points we wanted to make. And then the book also had long--if you read the book you know--had long narratives that talked about issues that didn't involve-- Speaker 1: People's stories. Speaker 2: Yeah. Oh, I know who we had in Chicago. We had [HistoryMaker] Haki Madhubuti. Speaker 1: That's right, you did. That's right. Speaker 2: Yeah, very important because he-- Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: --was a businessman but he was-- Speaker 1: An activist. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, and, and kind of Africanist centered. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: And that was important. So that's--that was the thinking. Story_ID: 644027 Speaker 1: So it took you how long? Speaker 2: Five years. That's because Craig [Craig K. Polite] and I would meet every week, and for the first year all we talked about was real estate. You know, we would talk--'cause he owned--he was buying income property in Connecticut, and I had some income property here, and we would talk about our property (laughter). I guess that was our warm up period (laughter). And then what happens--now Ed's book ['The Man from Essence: Creating a Magazine for Black Women,' Edward Lewis with Audrey Edwards] was much easier. When you do an undertaking like this, at some point you say I've got to finish, and that's when I left Black Enterprise. It's like you know what, Audrey [HistoryMaker Audrey Edwards]? You can't keep putzing around. You're either gonna finish this book ['Children of the Dream: The Psychology of Black Success,' Audrey Edwards and Craig K. Polite] or you're not. Speaker 1: So you fini- you left Black Enterprise and how much longer did it take you after that? Speaker 2: Another year. Speaker 1: Oh just--oh, so-- Speaker 2: 'Cause I left Black Enterprise in '91 [1991] or maybe '90 [1990], but it took--'cause the book came out in '92 [1992]. Speaker 1: Right. That's right, okay. Speaker 2: And I had been working on it. Oh, and the other big thing that happened. I was with my son's father. We were not married but, honey, I got pregnant, and we were going to get married. And I knew if I had a child--I had a miscarriage--I knew there was no way I was gonna finish that book. There was just--I was forty-two or forty-one, and I said--and I remember--I remember Craig saying, "Well, we can finish the book." And I said, "No we can't." I just--I am not Susan [HistoryMaker Susan Taylor]; I'm not one of these, you know, high energy, multitasking, I'm gonna have a baby and finish this book. No. So I had a miscarriage, and I finished the book. I don't think I could have done both. So that was--that was an interesting time because it's like oh my goodness. I didn't wanna get married; I didn't really wanna have a child, but it's like okay, well, this is how the cards have been dealt. But that would have kept me from finishing. Speaker 1: So once you got how--so how did it work with co-writing? I mean, I guess it's like the editorial process (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know how it worked? I wrote--there were twelve chapters. I wrote eleven of them. Craig wrote twelve. Our editor said, "Well, this book is great except for chapter twelve," so I rewrote chapter twelve (laughter). And the only thing Craig and I argued about the entire five years is whose name was going first. And I didn't real- on the book--I didn't realize that when you have a Ph.D.--'cause most Ph.D. people don't write anything, but because they have the Ph.D. their name goes first. And our editor said, "Audrey's name is going first" (laughter). Speaker 1: Exactly. Speaker 2: 'Cause my argument was, Craig, I wrote the book. Speaker 1: But what did he do? What was his contribution to-- Speaker 2: He did interviews. Speaker 1: He did--did he do (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He did do interviews. Speaker 1: --did he do some interviews or most of the interviews? Speaker 2: He did some; he didn't do most. I can't even say he did half. Most of the interviews in the chapter twelve are his. Speaker 1: Well, did most--did he do the psycho- well, did his psychology-- Speaker 2: His psychology came into--yes. But you know what? I'll tell you, Julieanna [Julieanna Richardson]. In a book like that, because he had the Ph.D., I needed him for the things I was saying, 'cause you know I have a lot of opinions as a writer. So most of the psychological stuff is mine, but he at least signed off on it. He signed off on it, but most of the, the discussion about, you know, the nature of oppression and the psychological oppression, and (makes sound) all that's me. But nobody is going to buy me as this editor of a black woman's magazine [Essence], so I needed the, the academic heft. Speaker 1: Did your--did, did your publisher feel that too? I mean beca-- Speaker 2: No, my--our publisher and our editor was wonderful, because they sent us on a sixteen city tour. Now I did ten of the cities; he did six. And Craig was very good. He had a radio show. That was the other thing. He had a radio show on WBLS [WBLS Radio, New York, New York], so he had access-- Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: --in terms of marketing, which was very important. Speaker 1: No, that is very important. Speaker 2: Yeah, it's (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) With a book, people-- Speaker 2: --that was very important. Speaker 1: --people don't realize that books are hard. Speaker 2: Yeah, yep, yep, yep, yep. And he was good at that, and that was--you know. And I, I loved working with Craig too. He was great. And that was our only--our only point of contention. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But I can remember going to one book party, where all these men, you know, these kind of older men who were like black professors at black colleges [HBCUs]. And one of 'em said, "Dr. Craig I loved your book. I loved your book." He said, "Thank you, thank you." I'm like (laughter)-- Speaker 1: You were like that's not your book. That's my book (laughter) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's okay; it's okay. Speaker 1: But wait, were, were the two of you--you did some of the book, book-- Speaker 2: We did local book parties together here, but the tour we split up. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 644028 Speaker 1: So what did you find--what was--what, what was--what were your readers telling you? What was the, the result of-- Speaker 2: The feedback from readers (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The feedback from the book. Speaker 2: People--one, people like reading real stories. They liked--some of them knew some of the people, but I think they like the stories, and they liked seeing how people had prevailed. And I remember my mother [Bertie Edwards], bless her heart, I did Bebe Moore Campbell's husband. I interviewed Bebe [HistoryMaker Bebe Moore Campbell], but I ended up going with Ellis [Ellis Gordon, Jr.] because of his particular story. He, he had a lot of inferiority, coming out of Houston [Texas] going to L.A. [Los Angeles, California], going to Chicago [Illinois] first. And he said he would walk around with this big fro. Well, my mother used his story in her Sunday school class. And it became kind of a parable of the angry black man. And he was in the chapter on anger. That was the other thing we looked at. You know, 'cause anger undergirds so much of what happened-- Speaker 1: You know, really when I--my office got me the book ['Children of the Dream: The Psychology of Black Success,' Audrey Edwards and Craig K. Polite], and I--you know, I was sort of struck actually at the similarity to our project, though we're not-- Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) thematic and-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --I was struck-- Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes. Speaker 1: --by that. Speaker 2: Yes Speaker 1: And I was also struck by--but I don't think you did this part, but I would like to--I think you should do a number two--a two version. Speaker 2: (Makes face). Speaker 1: And that's--no, no, the legacy of that generation it didn't touch upon because I do not think-- Speaker 2: You're talking about the people who came after? You're talking about--when you say the legacy, you're talking about-- Speaker 1: Of the children of the dream. No, not (unclear)-- Speaker 2: The children of the children. Speaker 1: Well, the children--but I even say this, this generation. Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: You know, because that--this generation, the ja- children of the dream. You know it could go further, but the children of the dream, what is their legacy? Now that's a question we, we will ask you during this. But I found--anyway, I don't--I'm talking. Okay. Speaker 2: That's fine (laughter). Speaker 1: I know it's fine, but that's not the purpose (laughter). That's not the purpose. But what was your feedback on that, because you looked at that to look different subjects. Speaker 2: We looked at it to look at the dynamics of what it takes to be successful. And our premise was if you succeed in America as a black person, you have brought a particular skill set to what you're doing. Some people are stronger in one area than others, but we identified key things that we feel all successful people have to have. And the last chapter identifies that you have to have a pioneering spirit, you have to be able to manage anger, you have to pick your battles, you have to have a faith subset. You don't necessarily have to be religious, but you have to have something that's guiding you. You have to know how to make whites comfortable. That's very important. Craig [Craig K. Polite] interviewed a brother in Connecticut who was six foot six. He said when he sat at a conference table and just leaned over or did this, his entire body went across the table. You have to be able to make people comfortable when you come on like that physically. I think we had ten or maybe twelve key things. You have to be able to manage whites. You have to be able to manage how they react to you, as well as how you're responding to them. So it's very--it's, it's so--people who do that, they do it--some of it's learned, but some of it is instinctive, it's intuitive, but it's complicated. And those people are really in their own way great. They really are super- I don't want to say superior, but in many ways they are. Speaker 1: So some, some of the critique of the book was that you were too--were too close. You were suc-- Speaker 2: We were what? Speaker 1: You were too close. Some of the critique I read of the book-- Speaker 2: Oh, was too close to the subject. Speaker 1: That you were too close to the subjects. But do-- Speaker 2: I think Craig and I identified with--we felt we were one of the children of the dream, that we were people who managed to do this, so we were close. Yeah, that's cor- I don't know that that's a criti- I mean, I wouldn't say that that's something you should criticize. I think it helps you tell the story. You know, 'cause you understand--you know [HistoryMaker] Maxine Waters--and she was a good interview, and she was in the--what did--there was something she said that was pretty profound and I can't remember now. But, yeah, I think being close was an--was an asset actually. I think it was a strength. Story_ID: 644029 Speaker 1: After that project, then you get serious about your real estate because the real estate is--I mean is-- Speaker 2: How, how is that operating in between? Speaker 1: Um-hm, because you had a lot going on there. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You lot--lost a child; you're-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --back at Black Enterprise for a year. That's-- Speaker 2: Right (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) hectic; you-- Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: --you got a partner who's not writing ['Children of the Dream: The Psychology of Black Success,' Audrey Edwards and Craig K. Polite] (laughter). Speaker 2: Right, right, right (laughter). In a way, that was okay (laughter). Speaker 1: You're like get o- well, you didn't have to argue too much. Speaker 2: Right, right, right, right, right. And he was perfectly fine with me. But see, that meant you're not gonna be fine with taking the credit, you know (laughter), which is why my name ended up going on first. Yeah but you know what? But I'll tell you something, Julieanna [Julieanna Richardson], I realize there's always been a lot going on. Just now that--you know, just now in my life I'm now sixty-six. I keep talking about retiring. It seems like every time I look up there's something else I'm doing. And at some point you realize well, this is what it is. Speaker 1: That's insightful. Speaker 2: You know, people talk about multitasking and having it all and doing it all. At some point it's like well, this is just my life, you know. I feel that I'm not burdened with a husband and children, you know. I know for a lot of women that's a goal, but for me, I think I've been able to do more because I don't have that as a--as something else to do. You know, 'cause that's a lot of work too. Speaker 1: So when, when do you start taking the real estate seriously? Is it then, 'cause you said the '90s [1990s] were a better time period. Speaker 2: Right, right. When did I go into my office? I went into my office-- Speaker 1: See, I had you-- Speaker 2: --in '92 [1992]? No. Speaker 1: I have-- Speaker 2: No, it wasn't '92 [1992]--2002. Speaker 1: You're talking about Plaza Properties? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: See, I have it (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I started it in '86 [1986]. Speaker 1: --as ninety--'88 [1988]. Oh, I have '8 [1988]. Speaker 2: Start--that's okay (laughter). I know I was reading some of that. My favorite is when it got to the books that I've written, and there was one book. It's like, who is this? Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Who--I wrote--co-wrote with who? But that's, that's why, you know, in magazines you have fact checking 'cause you have all kinds of--you know, and I've, I've made errors too. Speaker 1: Is that the coffee table--did you do the coffee table book at Essence? Speaker 2: Yes, don't even mention that book please. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, you talk about a low point. I was not at the magazine then, but I did--this is a case where they had gone through a couple of writers, couldn't find one, they come to me, I turn the book around. When you go to the jacket flap where it says about the author, there is the editor's name and Susan's [HistoryMaker Susan Taylor] name. I had a fit. I had such a fit. They left--they didn't put my name down. There was like--I was so angry I was crying. I was so--I was furious. Furious (laughter). Speaker 1: So what did Susan do there? Speaker 2: Well, she said, "Oh, when we have a second edition--." They didn't have a second edition. But you know what the problem was, I was no longer at the magazine. I'm doing-- Speaker 1: So you weren't (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) all of this as-- Speaker 1: --you weren't the deta- the details-- Speaker 2: I wasn't on the ground. Speaker 1: You weren't on the ground. Speaker 2: And I--you know, so I didn't see what they were doing. I didn't see what they were doing. And the editor, like Craig [Craig K. Polite], was well, I'm gonna take credit for this. She was the one who was scrambling around looking for a writer, and now you're gonna take credit. So, but you know that happens if you're not around to safeguard-- Speaker 1: Your--what your (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) to keep it from happening. Speaker 1: That's right. That's absolutely right. That's right. Story_ID: 644030 Speaker 1: So that's what I had to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So '90s [1990s] start off with--so, what are--what are you wanting to do in real estate then? Speaker 1: I was a broker-- Speaker 2: I mean, 'cause everyone has to have their own--their goals. Some people do. Speaker 1: (Nods head) I was brokering (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They float-- Speaker 1: --and I was also investing, because I love investing more than brokering. I like, like doing deals, but I love buying and selling, and you know, renovating, and renting out. So that was what appealed to me. And then at the point I got my office [Plaza Properties], which was in 2002-- Speaker 2: Is that in Brooklyn [New York]? Speaker 1: Um-hm, down the street. I pretty much was doing it full time. Now by 2002-- Speaker 2: There's a lot going on (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) There's a lot going on. We have not hit 2007, 2008, when everything is gonna bust out. Speaker 2: Right, I know 2002, it's like-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --there's money is flowing-- Speaker 1: Yep, yep. Speaker 2: --by the bucketfuls. Speaker 1: Yep, yep, yep, yep, yep. So all of my little buddies, my little independent broker friends, black ones, you know we wouldn't, wouldn't hear from each other for like weeks. I said we're just busy making money, and then that busted out. But what happened, in 2007 I lost my--let's take it in order. I lost an ex-boyfriend who had sickle cell anemia. And when I was dating him, he would talk about marriage. And it's like, you know what? I'm not marrying him 'cause I'm gone be a young widow. So at fifty-seven he passed. Then my mother [Bertie Edwards]--he died in September; this 2006. He died in September; my mother died in October; and [HistoryMaker] Bebe Moore Campbell, who was a very good friend of died in November--three back to back. So the next year I closed up my office and moved to Paris [France], because I was going to retire in Paris. And the roommate [Josephine Lowrey] that switched back in 1965-- Speaker 2: She came? Did she-- Speaker 1: She was--she married a Frenchman, and she'd been living in Paris over twenty years. Speaker 2: So that's when you said she just came. That's when-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --she came to the-- Speaker 1: She was just visiting because her son moved here and she wanted to see him. So I closed up my office. I was about to turn sixty, and I was ready to retire and move to Paris. Oh, I'm sorry. And you know, start it--start a new life, but (laughter) I was smart enough not to sell this. I just closed up my office. I gave it a try--loved Paris, could not afford it. So in three months I was back. The euro in 2007 was through the roof. Speaker 2: It went through the roof. I think-- Speaker 1: It was awful (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah England was like that. I mean-- Speaker 1: Oh yeah, England was worse. Speaker 2: It was worse, 'cause I was-- Speaker 1: I think it's two dollars-- Speaker 2: --gonna go-- Speaker 1: --to the pound in England. In France it was 1.6--I would go to the ATM machine [automated teller machine] and take out two hundred dollar--two hundred euros, and I would go on line and my account had been debited $360. I said, well, I can't do this for during my old age (laughter)--can't do this. So I came back in three months and joined Brown Harris Stevens, which is a boutique high end firm. They have an office few blocks away, and that's been great-- Speaker 2: But (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) you know. Story_ID: 644031 Speaker 1: The property that you first, you know, sold you said it was in the Village [Greenwich Village, New York, New York]. Where have you concentrated your efforts in terms of real estate? And you said you like to-- Speaker 2: Buy and sell and invest. Speaker 1: --invest and buy and sell, right? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So tell me some of the projects you've taken on during this time. Speaker 2: I have owned in my life fifteen properties. Right now I own four. At the height I owned six, a couple in Manhattan [New York], mostly Brooklyn [New York], Georgia and upstate are the two that are out of New York City [New York, New York]. Speaker 1: So what kind of properties are these? Speaker 2: Apartments for the most part. Upstate is a townhouse. Georgia is a single family house. Georgia was a short sale, going for fifty-eight thousand dollars. Upstate--what happened, I bought upstate because, as I was doing this in New York, it just got to a point where I couldn't afford it. And I had sold a property and I wanted to reinvest, and I couldn't find anything in Brooklyn that made sense because everything costs so much. So that's why I started to looking outside of the city. Speaker 1: And are you renting all of these, so-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Oh, so you fixed (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) These were income properties. Speaker 1: So you fixed them. Oh, that's a lot. Speaker 2: And I didn't fix--no, most of them I didn't fix. The ones I fixed, for the most part, are the ones I lived in. Speaker 1: Okay, so did you manage--you were man- you're getting rental-- Speaker 2: I'm getting-- Speaker 1: --from all of them. Speaker 2: --rental. Speaker 1: So you've (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And you know I have a girlfriend who is an economist. And I remember saying to her years ago, as I was flitting around from job to job, I said, "You know what? I don't have a pension anywhere." And she said, "Your real estate is your pension." And I had never thought of that. I just liked doing it. So then I approached it much more systematically, you know, in terms of what can I hold onto, what can I get in terms of maximum rent. And she was absolutely right. I mean, now that I'm collecting social security--honey, if I had depended on social security and whatever pension I might have gotten from Essence--that's why I don't regret, I don't regret leaving Essence. Because when the deal went down, people made some money if you had stock, but if you didn't, when Time Warner [Time Warner, Inc.] took over, whatever you had you got, but that's it. Speaker 1: But you would have had--don't you think you would have had stock at that point? No. Speaker 2: You know what Julieanna [Julieanna Richardson]? I did not have stock. I came-- Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: --too late. Speaker 1: Oh, I understand. Speaker 2: They had already done that. Speaker 1: Okay, I understand. Speaker 2: You know, the people who were there and got stock did very well, but--you know. Speaker 1: So, so you, you basically have bought--you buy low. Is that what-- Speaker 2: That's the idea, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, so you buy low, you fix them up, and then you rent them. Is that how-- Speaker 2: Yeah, but most of what I bought has been rentable when I got it. Now I will fix it up in the course of time, but that really didn't--I didn't have much down time when I bought. I was able to get somebody in. Speaker 1: So how are you managing that then, 'cause you have to have someone to do repairs and you know, at least. Speaker 2: In Georgia I have a good group of people that I've met over time who I can call on. Here I have apartments so you have a super. You know, you have people in the building who can take care of that. Speaker 1: So every building--so how many--how many units do you have-- Speaker 2: Right now I have four, but it's--when I say four, including here, and then I have three rental properties right now. Speaker 1: Wait, you're saying you have single units or you have four unit buildings? Speaker 2: No, no, no, no, no, I have single units-- Speaker 1: In, in-- Speaker 2: --like an apartment. Speaker 1: I see, okay. Speaker 2: So I'm renting out an apartment. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So I have three properties that I'm renting. And what I do is send all of them deposit slips. They deposit it in Chase [JPMorgan Chase and Co.]. I bank online. I can go online to see, okay they put it in. If they didn't put it in I call 'em. And, and I--you know, how I--when I did that, when I went to Paris [France]. That's what I did in Paris. It's like, well, how am I gonna manage properties in Paris, and that's how I did it. Speaker 1: So have you ever had to evict someone? And what is that-- Speaker 2: I just had a case and it wasn't--I rented to some students in New Paltz [New York]. They brought in a third roommate. He didn't pay them. When their lease was up, they left and he was still there. He changed the locks. My broker said, "Well, you don't have any rights as a tenant. We have to go to court." And I said, "Honey, get a locksmith; take that lock off because he's now broken the law." I called the junk removal place. His father came. They took out some stuff, and the junk removal people took out the rest. That's the worst I've had, and that just happened. That's the worst. Speaker 1: You didn't have to go to court then. Speaker 2: I wasn't going to court. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know, I said, "I don't even know this guy. What do you mean I have to go to court?" Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So that's how that-- Speaker 1: That's good. Speaker 2: --ended. Story_ID: 644032 Speaker 1: --And no matter, writing has never stopped. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Editing? Do you ever edit? Speaker 2: No, I don't like editing. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No, editing was what I was hired to do in the beginning of my career. I've really never liked editing. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know, and even now when people call about editing jobs, I don't take them. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It's the one thing I could have done in Paris [France] if I--had I spoken French, but I didn't even wanna do that. Yeah, I'm really a writer. I'm really a writer. And I edit, yeah, that and real estate, but writing is the one thing I've been doing (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, so, so, so, how often have you--were you writing, I mean in the whole mix of things? Was it weekly? Was it monthly? Speaker 2: No, no, Essence--I didn't write anything. This year I did Oprah [Oprah Winfrey] and Tyler Perry. I had not done anything for them since 2008. I wrote a couple of pieces for More, which is a magazine I used to work for. Speaker 1: Wa- wa- well, let's talk about that. When did More come into the mix though? Speaker 2: More-- Speaker 1: 'Cause we ment- you, you mentioned it earlier, but I don't know where it fits in that time. Speaker 2: I went to work for More in 1999, the year it started. And I--that was three days a week. I was doing my real estate-- Speaker 1: I thought you brought--where does that fit with--oh, that's nine years after Black Enterprise. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Right, and the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And talk about what More is. What kind of publication. Speaker 2: More is a magazine for women over forty. Myrna Blyth was the first editor-in-chief. Myrna had been my editor at Family Circle. My joke with Myrna is that after twenty years I'm still the only black editor she knows. So she wanted to have a black editor at More and she called me, or she had one of her editors call me. And at that point, I was in between--you know, part time editing and needed a job. So I was hired by them, and I was there two and a half years, which were very good years. It was great being at a startup. It was great having that niche market, which was the ov- over forty market. I wrote for them as well as edited for them, and they let me come in three times a week. And what that did--I was in that early group of part time staff at magazines. It's now very common, 'cause it's so much more, you know, cost effective. And the truth of the matter is you can do most of these jobs in three days. You know, if you really just do the work you can do in three days what people do in five. Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: So and from their standpoint, they didn't--they did have to pay social security, but they didn't have to pay health insurance or any other benefits. Speaker 1: So they--so--but they've had to do that yourself. You've (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that's been fine. That's been fine. I mean, I thought I would much rather direct my career, meaning I'd much rather pay for the health insurance, create the bus- the pension plan, which I've done, and make the money. Story_ID: 644033 Speaker 1: But you're writing--the publications you were primarily writing for have been what? I mean that's-- Speaker 2: Tho- that's (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) besides More. Speaker 2: --been across the board. That's been-- Speaker 1: So what--so talk about the across the board. Every-- Speaker 2: Many of the women's magazines, Ladies' Home Journal, Glamour, Seventeen, Essence of course, Black Enterprise, Vibe, The New York Times. Speaker 1: Where, where does--because we--you know, where does--not Honey, but--I said Honey, but I didn't mean Honey. Spot- I wanna say body and soul--no. Speaker 2: Heart and Soul. Speaker 1: Heart and Soul. Where did Heart and Soul come in in the timeline? Speaker 2: Nineteen ninety-eight [1998]. Speaker 1: So it's a year before More? We have to-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And it was short. A couple of things happened at Heart and Soul. Rodale [Rodale Press Inc.] started it. It was the brainchild of a brother named Reggie Ware [Reginald Ware], very smart guy. He was the publisher. He put together a proposal, took it to Rodale, they bought it. And this is a case of them not understanding the difficulty of selling black media to the advertising community. They la- they learned a lot of lessons. But Reggie was one of these brothers who couldn't keep it zipped. So at some point along the way, and it wasn't that far into it, he was being threatened with a sexual harassment suit. And I guess the woman was paid off and Rodale hurried up and got rid of Heart and Soul, sold it to Bob Johnson [Robert L. Johnson] and BET [Black Entertainment Television], at which point Reggie was out. Speaker 1: It got sold to Bob Johnson at BET and that--but that probably was part of a mer- well, then how did [HistoryMaker] Roy Johnson get it then? 'Cause--you know, because (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Becau- now what hap- how did Roy-- Speaker 1: You know, because the only thing I can think of is that Emerge was around that same time, and maybe that came in with the same deal, because the person I just--you know, who just passed away, he was an investor in Emerge. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I'm--and I'm just--'cause that doesn't make any sense to me how-- Speaker 2: Was it Bob--it was--yeah-- Speaker 1: It couldn't have been. Speaker 2: --I'm pretty sure. Speaker 1: Are you sure? I don't know if it that's the-- Speaker 2: I know it wasn't--Roy didn't buy it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It had to be somebody with the bucks [dollars]. Speaker 1: But--well, but Kleith--[HistoryMaker] Keith Clinkscales. Speaker 2: I don't think--see, Keith had Emer- he had Savoy. That's what Roy-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --was starting, Savoy, Honey-- Speaker 1: Honey. Speaker 2: He bought Honey. Speaker 1: That's Vanguarde. Speaker 2: That's Vanguarde Media. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I don't think--I have to look, 'cause he's mentioned in the book ['The Man from Essence: Creating a Magazine for Black Women,' Edward Lewis with Audrey Edwards], and I know Keith. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I don't-- Speaker 1: Okay, so Heart and Soul went to, went to Bob Johnson. And do you know how long it, it last? Speaker 2: Not long with Bob. He got rid of all of his publications. Because he had BET Weekend, he had Emerge, he had Heart and Soul, but he didn't want mag- magazines weren't making any money. Speaker 1: So what was the position--what, what was Heart and Soul's target? Speaker 2: Heart and Soul was a health oriented magazine for African Americans, and I thought a very good publication and a very important publication. You know, because I really believe after the economic front, the health front is critical for us, critical. So it was a health magazine. And it was good. Stephanie Stokes Oliver was the editor. She was the founding editor, so she brought me in. Because at that point, I'm s- back to doing real estate full time and kind of, you know, could, could use a steady gig again, so she brought me in. Story_ID: 644034 Speaker 1: And did you--in, in your publications are people asking you or are you pitching stories to them? How has it worked (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They're asking me. Occasionally, I will pitch a story, but for the most part they're asking me. And if I feel a story and pitch it, then I usually can do it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Now 'Bring Me Home a Black Girl' [Audrey Edwards] that was me; that was my pitch, and I don't remember-- Speaker 1: That, that appeared in Essence, right? Speaker 2: And girl that (makes sound)-- Speaker 1: Now is-- Speaker 2: --I heard from folk, but it was very popular. I actually sold my previous apartment to a woman. It was a black woman married to a white man, and she came to look at the apartment. And she brought--no, she came by herself with the broker. And she said, "[HistoryMaker] Audrey Edwards. Did you write that story 'Bring Me Home a Black Girl'?" I think that's what sold her, I think. I mean, she liked the apartment (laughter), but I think that, that, that it was me. And then she came back with two girlfriends to look at it, and then she wanted them to meet me. She said, "Yeah, this is the one who wrote" (laughter)-- Speaker 1: But talk (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) and she was a lawyer. Speaker 1: But talk about the article. Speaker 2: I'm trying to remember what motivated it, but I had always said to my son--and he's been in my life since he was seven. His father got custody of him 'cause his mother's crazy--got custody, and we were at a diner right down the street. He's thirty now so it's twenty-three years ago. And the boy--you know, his mother sent him--he was homeschooled; the boy couldn't read, so seven years old you can't read. So we're sitting at the table and this pretty little black girl, looked like a little dark skinned pretty girl, goes to the jukebox. She looked to be seven too. We look up honey, Ugo [Ugo Anekwe]--beelined for the jukebox. And he's standing there pretending to pick a record, and I was saying this boy can't read nothing. But he's pretending to be looking with her to pick a record. So something--I just said, "That's right. When it's time to get married, I want you to bring me home a girl just like that." And her parents kind of looked at me, and then they grinned, then they just started grinning. So after that, I would just say to him, "Bring me home a black girl." And I might see a cute little girl--whenever I would see a cute little black girl, I didn't care what shade she was I'd say, "Bring me home a girl just like that." So I guess it got a--and see, Barbara Graves--when we did 'Children of the Dream,' ['Children of the Dream: The Psychology of Black Success,' Audrey Edwards and Craig K. Polite] we interviewed--I interviewed Butch Graves [HistoryMaker Earl "Butch" Graves, Jr.], and he was the oldest of Earl's [HistoryMaker Earl G. Graves, Sr.] three sons. And he said, "My mother made it clear to us when we were growing up, we'd better not bring home any white girls to marry." She said, "'Cause your father has spent too much time accumulating the wealth that he has accumulated for it to pass out of our hands." And I was so struck. And I--you know what it said to me? What you have to do is tell your kids what you expect. We're the people who don't do that. Now we tell them, "You gonna go to college, don't do drugs, you know, use protection if you're gonna have sex," but we don't tell the mo- one of the most important things is picking a mate, picking a mate. Story_ID: 644035 Speaker 1: And we don't even--you know, "Well, no--," and I had--I had to fight with the editors at Essence first. I had to fight with the editors. Diane Weathers who had a little black--she had a daughter, and she said, "You know what? I'm gonna do a story that--," says, "I tell Sadie [ph.] bring home anybody you want." I said, "No, no, no, you can't do that with my piece ['Bring Me Home a Black Girl,' Audrey Edwards]. You can't have a double standard. You can't do that." So Susan [HistoryMaker Susan Taylor] was the one that said, "No, no, no, you can't do that." And then I--one of the editors called up and said, "Well, couldn't you end the piece saying if Ugo [Ugo Anekwe] finds a nice girl, and she's white it'll be okay." I said, "No, that's not what this story is about." Then she said, "Well, you know [HistoryMaker] Richard Parsons--," now he's the head of Time Warner [Time Warner, Inc.] at the time. "You know Richard Parsons has a white wife [Laura Bush Parsons]." I said, "Yeah, I know. He knows that too. What is your point?" "Well." "What," I said, "what? You think he's gonna read this piece?" I said, "First of all, he's not reading Essence. And even if he is, so what? So what?" But and then the--oh, honey, the mail. I was called a bigot, a Nazi. I don't know if people said they were canceling their subscription. When I went on the radio with [HistoryMaker] Randall Kennedy, who had done a story--he had done a book called-- Speaker 2: Nic- oh the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, his--this book--they were--had him on was 'Interracial Intimacies' ['Interracial Intimacies: Sex, Marriage, Identity and Adoption']. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So I'm on with--who's the boy at PBS [Public Broadcasting Service]? Was he the one in the wheelchair--John Hockenberry? I don't know who I was on, but it was PBS. I'm on the radio by phone with Randall Kennedy, who's talking about 'Interracial Intimacies.' And I said, "First of all, if you're doing an historical look at so called (gesture) interracial intimacies, you're talking about rape. You're talking about the master raping the slave. Okay, so let's not try to clean it up." So he was saying, "Well, you know--." What, what was his comment? He, he said something about what white families do. And I said, "They do this all the time routinely. It's inferred in everything they do. They don't have to come out and overtly say it; it's inferred in the neighborhoods that they live in, in the schools that they go to, where they send their kids to school. The expectation is there. We have to have the same expectations." I said, "And everybody doesn't have to do this." But then I had mothers who said, "You know, girl, I am--," she said, "I have a five year old." I'm--I said, "If I've reached one mother, I've done my job" (laughter). But the reaction was unbelievable. Speaker 2: So what does Susan say? Were they pleased with it? 'Cause they-- Speaker 1: Susan is great. See, this is what I love about Susan. Speaker 2: Because-- Speaker 1: Susan was-- Speaker 2: Because that's good, though, to have things that people react to. Speaker 1: Yes. And I-- Speaker 2: As a piece (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) had to say to the editors--I said, "Now think about what people are reacting to. All I am saying is that I want my child to marry a black woman. Why is that so blasphemous? What is that saying about how you see yourself as black women? Why is that so outrageous? You know, I want my son to marry a black girl. What's wrong with that?" And then I had a, a, a rabbi--in fact, he--a group came to, to videotape--I don't think anything came of it. Oh yeah, it was the daughter of a friend of mine, pretty black girl, and she had hooked up with this rabbi who was, you know, kind of outraged over what, you know, I had said. I said, "Well, what does he want his son to marry?" She said, "Well, of course, he wants him to marry a Jewish girl." I said, "So why is it okay for him, but not me? How is that okay?" So underneath all of this was how dare you reject us? That's really what that was about. And then on the editor's side was oh my god, you're telling him to marry a black girl. Well, (laughter) anything wrong with that? And you think about how we think, and you know, it's like this is crazy. But that got more mail from people. Speaker 2: And you, you had left then. At that point, you had left. Speaker 1: I was still writing. And I don't remember what triggered it. Something triggered it and I don't remember. Speaker 2: Do, do you think it was the con- conversation with Barbara Graves? But you had been saying it all along. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: You think that, that it was just (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But no, I don't remember why I wanted to write about it at that time. Speaker 2: Right, at that time. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: It may have been just some discussions and everything, 'cause things--but I thought--I mean, it's, it's a-- Speaker 1: Oh, I know what it was, the endless discussion about all these brothers who are dating white women (makes sound). Speaker 2: Right, that's right. Speaker 1: That's what it was. That's-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --what it was. Speaker 2: That's right (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In a cycle, you know, the one way to-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --turn it around is to tell these boys what you expect. Speaker 2: That's right; that's right. Speaker 1: That's, that's what it was. That's what it was. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Another one of those conversations (simultaneous). Story_ID: 644036 Speaker 1: So now--wait, is 'Emil Holzhauer' ['Emil Holzhauer: Portrait of an Artist'] that's--is that a book you did? Speaker 2: No, unh-uh (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No. See, that's the other one. Speaker 2: That's the one I didn't (laughter) I didn't know what-- Speaker 1: There, there are two of them. Speaker 2: (Unclear) (laughter) 'Children of the Dream' ['Children of the Dream: The Psychology of Black Success,' Audrey Edwards and Craig K. Polite] was it. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay. I've got 'Children of the Dream.' So let me ask you, you have been involved with three, three black publications, two of them--you know, you're writing--you're writing the--one of the founders' stories['The Man from Essence: Creating a Magazine for Black Women,' Edward Lewis with Audrey Edwards] and the other one [Black Enterprise], you know, was, was significant in the black business community. And so I'm not putting-- Speaker 2: Black business-- Speaker 1: --and Heart and Soul, but--so can you talk about the importance of these two publications to the black community because--right. One, one got sold. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: One is still in family hands, but you know-- Speaker 2: Kind of--kind of-- Speaker 1: (Unclear) right (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) shaky, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: And then the other [Essence] is--you know, was bought by-- Speaker 2: Time Warner [Time Warner, Inc.]. Speaker 1: --Time Warner, which technically it is no longer-- Speaker 2: Black owned (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) black owned. So can-- Speaker 2: Yeah, not technically. Unfortunately, really it's no longer black owned. I think an independent black press is critical to informing the black community about our reality. I think the only people--no, that's not true. The people who are living the story should also be the people reporting the story. They do not have to be the only people reporting the story, but it's important that they be a part of the telling, which to me is what black press represents. And I don't expect--you know, people have all kinds of issues with white media, and I do too, but I don't expect white media to be fair. I don't expect white media to be honest when it comes to portraying us. Given our history that's not a realistic expectation. I mean, they can sometimes do a good job, but for the most part, I'm not looking to them to define my reality. I'm looking to people who live my reality and have shared my history to tell me or to inform me as to what's going on day to day. And as a journalist I wanted to be a part of that group. Story_ID: 644037 Speaker 1: So do you wanna talk about--I want--about Black Enterprise, and what you think is its, its importance. Obviously, you were friends with Barbara Graves as well, you know. Speaker 2: Yeah, we weren't friends, but we had a nice working relationship because she worked at the magazine. You know Black Enterprise looks at black business, but in the larger context black economic development. And that to me is important in the same way a magazine looking at black health is important. It's just another--you know, you have a health magazine; you have a wealth magazine. And the economic front is another front that we are still battling. You know, it's, it's the whole economic job labor issue is one that's been a part of our history from the beginning. You know, our history has defined what our relationship is to economics and to labor. So I thought Earl [HistoryMaker Earl G. Graves, Sr.] is--you know, what he's trying to do is important. It was difficult dealing with, you know, this individual temperament, but I always shared the vision. And I always felt that the work he was trying to do was important. And, again, we didn't have anything looking on a regular basis at our work lives, at how--how do you build wealth. You know, how should we view money? How should we view working? You know, who are the people who are important, in terms of role models? What are the success stories that bare telling? So it's all part--when you talk black media, it's all part of educating, celebrating, affirming, informing, and whatever the niche is, doesn't really matter as long as you're doing that for your people. And I guess I view black press in, in very much a missionary context, as a mission. You know, it's about more than just telling the news. You know, you really have to, to guide people, direct people, help them, celebrate all of that. And that's what black press has historically done, and that--and black press has gotten us through a whole lot of stuff in this land. Story_ID: 644038 Speaker 1: So what do you think the difference has been with Essence since--do you see editorially, or can you describe the difference that-- Speaker 2: I think Essence now is packaged to be like all of the other Time Warner publications [Time Warner, Inc.], which means to me it's lost some of its edge in doing the things that I just talked about, which is looking at what's of particular importance to black Americans, African Americans. And some of the issues--you know, when you talk about, you know, Trayvon Martin. That's an easy subject. When I say easy, looking at our relationship to the police, or the criminal justice system, or how we get treated by the law, that's something that's, you know, pretty obvious and in a way kind of a safe subject. And there are other issues. I'm concerned about the image of black women in media. You know, how we get portrayed. You know, there are things that I don't think are being talked about because the magazine is part of this stable of other magazines that's just kind of regurgitating what every other magazine is doing. So that's what's been lost, that edge, that global dimension, the international dimension. And, and that's not surprising. I mean, that's what I felt a lil- and I told Ed [HistoryMaker Edward Lewis] this. I said, "I was really--," you know, "I didn't like the idea that you were selling the magazine." Now, from his business standpoint, I understand, because he wanted the magazine to survive. And he felt the best way to do that was to have it with an institution that's big enough and powerful enough that its survival would be ensured. I don't know if that's the case, because now Time Warner is spinning off its magazine division. They're gonna have to be on their own, and they may not keep Essence. You know who knows? Speaker 1: You know I hadn't heard that, okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm. That's happening (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I hadn't heard that, okay. Speaker 2: By the end of this year-- Speaker 1: 'Cause I had heard someone who said they might be interested in buying it or something. Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 644039 Speaker 1: So you're fresh off of writing this book ['The Man from Essence: Creating a Magazine for Black Women,' Edward Lewis with Audrey Edwards]. Are there--what do you think about the whole story that, that you know emerged? Like, was it the process of writing the book, you were revisiting things you knew? Speaker 2: Well, I was interviewing Ed [HistoryMaker Edward Lewis]. You know, just as we're in--as we're doing an interview, I was doing interviews with Ed for about two years. So--and that included stories of his early life, his growing up. People don't know he flunked out of law school. That was a very traumatic experience, extremely traumatic. But it got him back to New York [New York]; it got him working of Citibank [First National City Bank; Citibank N.A.]. And then he got a call to meet with a group of other young professional black men to talk about entrepreneurship, so that's what--that's when the idea of a magazine for Negro women first came up. And he joined with these four other men to start a magazine [Essence]. So that was his personal--flunking out of law school was the, the tragedy, if you would--if you will. It was very interesting because he was in denial. He came back to New York. I thought this was (laughter)--it's funny, but it's also very poignant. He told his mother [Jewell Spencer Lewis] that he was transferring from Georgetown Law [Georgetown University Law Center, Washington, D.C.] to Columbia Law [Columbia Law School, New York, New York]. So he would actually go up to Columbia two or three times a week and hang out around the campus, and go to the law library, and carry his books from Georgetown, and sit on the steps of law library, and hang out at the West End [West End Bar, New York, New York] and pretend to be a law student because he couldn't--you know, it took him a while to accept the fact that he was not gonna be a lawyer. So and it--so his, his early stories have a lot of these moments where he had to confront a reality that was not in keeping with his view of himself. Speaker 1: So when, when--how does he end up being the last person standing (unclear)? Speaker 2: He's a tenacious one. People underestimate Ed because he's quiet, he's reticent, he's reserved, he's not a (makes sound) (gesture). Ego is in check. So people, you know, either thought he was slow or stupid or not, you know, in touch with what was going on, but very smart, very shrewd. I think a big key to understanding his personality he was a football player, you know, played in high school [DeWitt Clinton High School, Bronx, New York], got a scholarship to the University of New Mexico [Albuquerque, New Mexico] on football. And football--if you play football, you understand the art and the game of war. And he was the only one of the partners who had finished school, finished college, had an advanced degree, and was an athlete. Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: And the sport was football. Speaker 1: So when did Clarence [Clarence Smith] leave? Speaker 2: Clarence left in 2002, and it was very acrimonious. He hasn't talked to Ed since, couldn't even get him to pick up the phone to talk about being interviewed. He just--none of the partners were interviewed, none of the partners. They're all alive. Nobody was interviewed. Speaker 1: They all refused to be interviewed. Speaker 2: Cecil [Cecil Hollingsworth] at least talked to Ed. I called Jonathan [Jonathan Blount], got him on the phone; he told me to call him back and didn't pick up the phone--didn't. And I knew Jonathan. You know, when they--when he and [HistoryMaker] Marie Brown were doing Elan magazine, they wanted me to be editor-in-chief. I'm so glad--we were supposed--we were supposed to meet at the Palace Hotel [Lotte New York Palace Hotel, New York, New York]. They were in one restaurant. I was in another, and I said okay, that was divine intervention too 'cause I didn't need to leave Family Circle to go work for him. Speaker 1: So do think that they're upset with his success? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, oh yeah. He sold the mag- what did he sell the magazine for--over $400 million? So everybody who owned stock did well. And they're--yeah, they're upset that he sold the magazine for a lot of money and that he is still on the masthead as a co-founder, the only one. Speaker 1: So what would they have wanted? Speaker 2: Money. Speaker 1: Oh, money. Speaker 2: Everybody wanted money, more money. Susan [HistoryMaker Susan Taylor], bless her heart, she wanted--in the end she wanted more money. It was not enough; nothing was enough. Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: So that, that was interesting to see. You know, that was very interesting that in the end folk just wanted money. And it's the idea that the person you least expect is the winner. Speaker 1: He stayed. Speaker 2: Right, he stayed the course. He was tenacious. You know, I say in the introduction--he said, "Like those slaves on the Middle Passage, that horrific transatlantic crossing, I was the one who refused to die." And that is what you can say about the people who survived that. They refused to die. Whatever that spirit is, whatever that headset is, whatever that emotional constitution is, in the end these are people who refused to die; and that's what he did. Story_ID: 644040 Speaker 1: Had Susan [HistoryMaker Susan Taylor] left at that point? Speaker 2: No, she and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, she was there [at Essence]. Speaker 2: She was there. They--she and Ed [HistoryMaker Edward Lewis] both had three year contracts. I think Susan, her disappointment more than money, I think she really thought she would be there in some capacity, so I don't know what happened that resulted in her not being there. Speaker 1: So being there for, for--'cause she could have help keep the, the spirit there, right? The-- Speaker 2: Yeah, but I--you know, Susan had moved away. She was tired. She had moved (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) She was tired. Speaker 2: --away from the day to day. Speaker 1: It was a lot of--right-- Speaker 2: Yeah, she-- Speaker 1: --it was a lot of work. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, she wasn't gonna continue to be the kind of editor-in-chief she had been. She couldn't. She's in her sixties. We're both-- Speaker 1: That's right (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) in our sixties now, you know. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: And when she--she kept wanting me to come back when I was about to turn sixty. And I said, "Susan, look, it's time to pass the baton," you know. Story_ID: 644041 Speaker 1: And what I don't think we do as a people is prepare a successor. We don't do that. We either think we're gonna be in these positions forever, or they're going to end when we go, when you've really got to prepare for that person to come after you. You know, and understand that that is part of--that's part of it. That's part of it. You can't hold on. I mean, you can't--John Johnson [HistoryMaker John H. Johnson], you know, can die at his desk. And if you--you know, that's what you wanna do, fine. But for the most part, that's not what life is about. It's like having a child. (Background noise) You know, your child grows up, your child leaves, your child has a child, and on and on and on. But I think it's hard for us 'cause we're new to this. Story_ID: 644042 Speaker 1: I wanna ask you what you believe--well, what do you see as the next frontier, 'cause you've been involved in two of--well, two of our major publications. And one [Essence] you've had a long term relationship with. And these really had tremendous impact on the black community. What do you see as the next really horizon? What do you see-- Speaker 2: You mean in terms of magazines? Speaker 1: Of magazines or--yeah, magazines. Magazines, newspaper--magazines. Let's do magazines. Because what do you see that has--it--that you're excited about now? Speaker 2: You know, I'll tell you something. I'm more disturbed by what I see, because technology is really changing the face of print media as we knew it. And I think the challenge will be for print to remain relevant or to be replaced by something that will be as relevant as print has been. I think that for black media to remain relevant, it has got to address the issues affecting us as a people. We cannot be like every other magazine and stay in business, because you can read every other magazine. If you're coming to a black publication, to me it's got to be because you're getting information that you're not getting anywhere pertaining to your life, whatever that is, whether it's, you know, what kind of makeup do I wear? What kind of business do I think about going into? What are the health tests I should be taking, you know? It's got to be direct--it's, it's got to be something you can get only in this medium or this media. Speaker 1: So do you see anything on the horizon that you see or present day that you see is true to what you're saying things have to be? Speaker 2: Not really. I think we're in flux. I think technology is changing so rapidly that we still don't know what it's all gonna look like when it shakes out. I, I think it's still shaking out. It's harder to do media from a cost standpoint. It's harder to do print. The digital revolution is probably going to take hold, but I don't know what that's going to look like as far as black information goes, the delivery of black information, or what I call information directed to black people. I, I don't know. Story_ID: 644043 Speaker 1: So do you--what are your hopes and concerns when you look at the black community now, because this is a community that you've spent really your, your life with? Speaker 2: I think we've lost some ground that was gained during the Civil Rights Movement. I find that disturbing. I think we still have issues that have not abated in terms of how we see each other. The whole notion of black is beautiful is really gone by the wayside, and, and I think there is more than ever a look outside the group for affirmation, a look outside the group to, to what we consider desirable or what we want to emulate, having nothing to do with who we are and our strengths. I find that disturbing. You know, Kanye West and Kim Kardashian I think kind of epitomize this silly reality driven--you know, let's look at whatever it is they're supposed to represent. And I think he, poor thing, I mean, I think it fell apart from him--for him when he lost his mother [Donda West]. And it's interesting because mother figures are so important. I always said that John F. Kennedy, Jr. would still be alive if his mother [Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis] was alive because she wouldn't have let him get in that plane, when he didn't really have, you know, the hours in to fly in that kind of weather. And I think the same thing with Kanye West's mother. If she was alive he wouldn't be running around with silly Kim Kardashian. So, I'm disturbed by the loss of, you know, still our--I don't want to say family values, but a lot of the things that anchored and moored us as a community, whether it be the church, whether it be the family, you know, whether it be a sense of our history. In terms of legacy of 'Children of the Dream,' ['Children of the Dream: The Psychology of Black Success,' Audrey Edwards and Craig K. Polite] I'm not sure that we imparted to our children the history that we needed to in terms of what we've been through, what we accomplished, and who we are. You know, 'cause you have all these folk running around trying to be somebody else, and trying to be people who don't have any more respect for them really than they had fifty years ago, and not understanding that--really not understanding that. And that means you don't know who you are. And that's, I think for us, a very dangerous place to be because that means you can be disposed of, (background noise) you know, without any consequences. Story_ID: 644044 Speaker 1: What do you wanna be- have as your legacy? Speaker 2: You know, as my legacy I hope that as a writer, I've imparted information that's made a difference in somebody's life. It may not have to be the multitude. But I do believe each one teach one. You know, reach back and bring one. So I hope I leave a body of work that has an impact on how people think, on how they view the world. Because media ultimately is an influencer of thought and opinion, and I understood that in high school [Lincoln High School, Tacoma, Washington]. And I remember writing a little essay saying that what media does is ultimately shape how you think, and that's very powerful. That's very powerful. It's a huge responsibility. You know, when it's misused it's a terrible travesty, you know, and it's misused I think sometimes almost more often than it's used wisely. So I would hope that I have influenced people to think in a way that's critical, and healthy, and affirming. You know, I think so much of what we need to do as a people is affirm each other. Just simply say you're great, you're wonderful, you're beautiful, you're smart, you're talented, you know, you are in the plus category as opposed to being in the minus category. We need to do more of that. And I think for me Essence--that was the other thing that was so important. You know, you looked at that magazine and you saw all kinds of women who were beautiful. And I remember--I remember Ugo [Ugo Anekwe] being seven years old, coming to the office with me. And he was sitting next to me, and I'm doing my work, and he's drawing and he's drawing some kids on a school bus. And he turned to me and he said, "I love it here. I just love it here." And I said, "Really, what do you love?" He said, "I don't know." I said, "Is it all the pretty women you see?" He goes, "No, I don't think it's that." And I think he just liked being in an environment of productive, professional looking, attractive looking black people who were working toward a pur- he didn't know what they were working towards, but the way he said it, it was just, "I love it here." And that's where I'd like us to be as a people about our people. You know, I love it here. I love being with my people. I love being black. I love, you know, black women, black men. That's--you know, that's a pretty big legacy. I don't know if I'll achieve that, but I think in terms of how you inform people and how you get to think about--how you get them to think about the world and think about themselves is very important. And I'd like that to be positive, and healthy, and affirming. Story_ID: 644045 Speaker 1: This is my parents, Bertie [Bertie Edwards] and Cyril Edwards. My mother is seated. My father is also seated. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: That's my parents on their honeymoon in Victoria, Canada, in 1946. My fa- my mother was a captain it the WACs [Women's Army Corps] and my father was a master sergeant. Speaker 2: June 1946. Speaker 1: Yeah, June 1946. Speaker 2: That's my father. In the shot above on the left is his brother, Alphonse [Alphonse Edwards], and my father is standing next to him. That's our house in Tacoma, Washington. And the lower shot is my father as a young serviceman. And that's my mother. Speaker 1: That is my mother when she was in the WACS. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): With the scarf, or--? Speaker 1: With the scarf. She's on a ski trip, and she's with people, her friends in Birmingham, England. Speaker 2: And what's this? Speaker 1: The WACs are marching in Birmingham, England. And that's about 1944, at a parade. And they were displaying the black WACs. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: It's my parents at the USO [United Service Organizations] club, probably in the 1940s. Speaker 2: My mother also in the WACs. That's Fort Benning [Georgia]. Speaker 1: Oh this is cute (laughter). Speaker 2: Yes, my brother and I are with some Japanese playmates in Yokohama, when we were living there in the early '50s [1950s]. Speaker 1: That was on the military base in Yokohama, Japan. And my brother and I are with one of my mother's housekeepers. Speaker 2: And this one too. Speaker 1: And we are traveling throughout Japan, and we have stopped at a Japanese restaurant. Speaker 2: That is in Canada, I think. I'm about thirteen and fourteen, my brother and I. Speaker 1: That's my brother and I at Christmas. Looks like it's in 1949, '50 [1950]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: That's my father and I and my-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Yeah that was my father's nickname for me; and he called my brother bum. This shot I love. This is me doing the dishes. I think this is when my brother is probably thirteen by then and he had come in to help after my father decreed (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Unclear) told the story. Speaker 1: --decreed he didn't have to. Yes, we were posing early '50s [1950s] when-- Speaker 2: And your brother's name you should give it. Speaker 1: Oh, it's Dwight, Dwight Edwards. That's the backyard. Speaker 2: That's amazing that they have the same name. Speaker 1: Yeah isn't that something? Speaker 2: And it even-- Speaker 1: That's my Aunt Hattie [ph.]. No, that's my mother; that's my Aunt Hattie there. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: And you can kind of in this picture see the view of the city. Speaker 2: That's your mother there? Speaker 1: That's my mother. Speaker 2: And that's the window you spoke of. Speaker 1: Right, big picture window to look at a good portion of downtown Tacoma. Speaker 2: The graduation shots are taken in front of the house that my father had built when we had to-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: Oh, the cavemen club. This is the men's club. My mother's in the middle. My father's standing behind it. Speaker 1: That's your father at eighty-three? Speaker 2: Um-hm. I don't know if he was eighty-three then, but probably--I'm not sure how old he was then (laughter). Speaker 1: It says, what it says in the picture. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's the--and my mother was not eighty-nine then, which is how old she was when she died. But that was one of the (unclear). Speaker 1: Yeah, that's me with my son up here. Speaker 2: And your son's name? Speaker 1: Ugo [Ugo Anekwe], U-G-O. Speaker 2: That is an unusual name. I wo- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It's Nigerian. His mother is Nigerian. His father is black American; his mother is Nigerian. Speaker 2: Okay, and this is, this--? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Is that you playing (unclear)? Speaker 2: Yes, that is me. Speaker 1: What, what is that picture here? Speaker 2: Here? Speaker 1: What's it--what--yeah, (unclear). Speaker 2: I don't know. I don't even recall seeing that. I don't know. Speaker 1: Okay, this is Yugo- Ugo? Speaker 2: Yes, his graduation and his prom, yeah. Speaker 1: Ugo, and his last name? Speaker 2: Anekwe, A-N (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How do spell it? Speaker 2: A-N-E-K-W-E. That's actually the cousin I called to say I'm coming to New York [New York]. Speaker 1: Okay, what's her name? Speaker 2: Theresa, Theresa Edwards, T-H-E-R-E-S-A. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: Bebe [HistoryMaker Bebe Moore Campbell]. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: My brother came when he was, you know, living on the West Coast. He took a picture of the building (laughter). Yeah. Speaker 1: What? Speaker 2: He took a picture of the apartment building. Oh, yeah, that's [HistoryMaker] Susan Taylor, my son Ugo, me and my brother Dwight. Speaker 1: Okay, spell Ugo's last name. Speaker 2: U--oh, A-N-E-K-W-E, Anekwe. And Ugo is U-G-O. Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: That's I don't know. My brother threw that in. That's a book signing he had. I'm not sure where this is...