 Story_ID: 466345 Speaker 1: Our subject today for The HistoryMakers is Mr. Antwone Fisher [HistoryMaker Antwone Fisher]. Welcome Mr. Fisher. Speaker 2: Thanks. Speaker 1: I'm going to begin by asking you to give us your full name and to spell it for me? Speaker 2: Okay, it's Antwone Fisher, Antwone Quenton Fisher. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: A-N-T-W-O-N-E, Q-U-E-N-T-O-N. Speaker 1: T-O-N-, all right. Speaker 2: F-I-S-H-E-R. Speaker 1: Good enough, and I'm going to ask you, where are we today. You do not have to give the address but the general area. Speaker 2: We're in Ladera Heights, it's a suburb of Los Angeles in California. Speaker 1: Okay, in your home. Speaker 2: In my home yes. Speaker 1: Okay, and the hardest part, many people miss this one, and that is what is today's date? Speaker 2: Oh wow, I don't know, I think it is April 18th? Speaker 1: You might wanna go one more. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: April 19th. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Okay, what year? Speaker 2: April 18th, 19. Speaker 1: Nope, I hope I'm right on it. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Yes, the 19th. Speaker 1: Right, okay, go ahead (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, April 19, 2007. Story_ID: 466346 Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask you a few People magazine like questions-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --easy, easy answers and they tell us to ask this because it will relax you, and it will relax me. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I'll start by asking you what is your favorite color? Speaker 2: Blue, my-- Speaker 1: Okay, your favorite food? Speaker 2: I like lima beans. Speaker 1: Okay and your favorite season or time of year? Speaker 2: Fall. Speaker 1: Okay, favorite vacation spot? Speaker 2: Bermuda. Speaker 1: And finally your favorite phrase or favorite saying? Speaker 2: "To thine own self be true," ['Hamlet,' William Shakespeare]. Speaker 1: That's a wonderful one. Story_ID: 466347 Speaker 1: From here we will go on to ask you, first of all your place of birth? Speaker 2: Delaware, Ohio, I was born in Delaware, Ohio. Speaker 1: All right and may I just ask you your date of, date of birth? Speaker 2: August 3, 1959. Speaker 1: Okay, and now I'm going to ask you about your, your parents. Let's start with your mother, her, her full name? Speaker 2: Eva Mae Fisher [Eva Fisher]. Speaker 1: Okay and your father's full name? Speaker 2: Edward Densby Elkins [Edward Elkins]. Speaker 1: Okay, and even though you may not be able to do this I wanted to ask about your mother's place of birth and date of birth? Speaker 2: My mother I believe was born in Cleveland, Ohio and her birthday is April 8th, I don't know the year. Speaker 1: Okay. Approximate year, though if you had to take a guess? Speaker 2: Approximate year, maybe 1940. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: And her birthday is April 9th, actually (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) April 9th, okay. Good enough. All right, and now with your father, his place of birth and date of birth? Speaker 2: Forrest City, Arkansas. Speaker 1: Forrest City? Speaker 2: Yes, Forrest City, Arkansas. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I forget the day of his birth but he was born in 1936. Speaker 1: Nineteen thirty-six [1936] okay all right. Now we want--here's where we want to try to see how far back you can trace your ancestry on your mother's side. Can you go back beyond your mother's mother or anything? Speaker 2: No, just as far as my mother. Speaker 1: Okay, and how about on your father's side? Speaker 2: Well yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Start with your father's father. Speaker 2: My father's father his name was Horace Elkins [Horace Elkins, Sr.]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He was married to Emma Elkins. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Who was a--actually she was a Choctaw, Indian [Native American] woman. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: And he was part Choctaw himself. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: His mother. Speaker 1: Horace Elkins' mother, go ahead. Speaker 2: Just slipped outta my head. Real proud of that knowing that, it's a weird name. Story_ID: 466348 Speaker 1: What is Horace Elkins' [Horace Elkins, Sr.] mother's name? Ida? Speaker 2: Ida Jolif [ph.]. Speaker 1: Okay, and spell Jolif for us? Speaker 2: J-O-F, Jolif. Speaker 1: J-O. Speaker 2: Yeah, Jolif, I-F, J-O-L-I-F. Speaker 1: L-I-F, okay, that's fine, that's close enough. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, and his--I wanna get this whole thing up, Horace Elkins' father's name? Speaker 2: He--I don't know. Speaker 1: Okay, that's fine, and you said there was a story about? Speaker 2: Oh, Ida Jolif, in the family we call 'em, we call them the Ida Jolif papers. Speaker 1: Okay (laughter). Speaker 2: Horace spent his whole life--well Ida Jolif worked on the Mississippi River on a paddle boat and it was a gambling boat or there were prostitutions or whatever was going on. She became friends with an oil man from Oklahoma I believe it was or Texas named Turnbow [ph.]. Speaker 1: Turn- Turnbow? Speaker 2: Yes and he--wherever how it happened he, he gave her a share of his company. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And he died and--well Ida was never able to recover anything from--because blacks weren't allowed to-- Speaker 1: Inherit? Speaker 2: --inherit that, but over the time something happened, it's a long story but anyway Horace spent his whole life trying to be paid or get money, and, and the story--you know he wrote President Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy]. He got a response from the White House and he traveled to Texas and Oklahoma and apparently it's, it was acknowledged that this certificate--in fact I have a copy of it was, was true and there was some validity to it and there was some--I won't name names, but there's a big oil company, an American oil company who apparently was communicating with the Elkins family about this. I mean this had, went into Horace's children's lifetime. Speaker 1: Um-hm, did, did he, did Horace ever manage to collect any money from that claim? Speaker 2: No, I was told that he was offered $10 million and he refused it. He said that they were owed more and so I guess he called it--they said he called it stone walling. Speaker 1: Okay, one of the things I did not get and so I'll get it right now, Horace Elkins' place of birth, and if you know it and, and date of birth? Speaker 2: I'm not sure. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: But he ultimately became a podiatrist. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: And they were really proud of that, you know. Speaker 1: Okay where, where was his city of residence? Speaker 2: Cleveland, Ohio. Speaker 1: In Cleveland, okay, and he was a podiatrist there? Speaker 2: He went to a school there, he became one while he was there and he never actually had a, an office. I think he would treat people in the neighborhood. It was a different time. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And I think it was a part of what he wanted for his life, some education. They were big on that from what I learned. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Most of the younger of his children were like artists. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: People like that and a lot of oil paintings in the family. If you go to Chicago [Illinois] or you go to San Diego [California] or Cleveland there's these oil paintings that the children did throughout their life, they're really an interesting family. Speaker 1: Let, let me--of which your dad [Edward Elkins] was, was one of them right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Let's discuss Horace Elkins'--I know you don't know his date of birth, but the city where he spent most of his time as an adult was Cleveland? Speaker 2: Cleveland. Speaker 1: Okay, and approximately what, what years are we talking about perhaps--? Speaker 2: I think we're talking about the '40s [1940s]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Through the '70s [1970s]. Speaker 1: Okay, good enough. Okay. Speaker 2: Or the '50s [1950s]. Story_ID: 466349 Speaker 1: Let's get into some of your dad's siblings. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: If--as, as many as you can, can name, these would be Horace Elkins' [Horace Elkins, Sr.] children. Was your dad the oldest or? Speaker 2: No, I think my, my dad was the second youngest. Speaker 1: Okay, can you name the oldest child of Horace Elkins? Speaker 2: Yes, I think I can, well--I need my wife right here 'cause this is pressure. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: LaNette [LaNette Canister Fisher]. Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION) Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): You have speed. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's Eda. Speaker 1: And how do you spell Eda? Speaker 2: E-D-A. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I heard that her name--she was named Ida but she thought the name was old-fashioned so she changed her name and no one ever called her Ida. Speaker 1: Okay, Eda Elkins? Speaker 2: Yes, and then there was Anna Elkins. Speaker 1: And two Ns? A-N-N-A? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Then there was Horace, Jr. [Horace Elkins, Jr.], then there was Spinoza Joseph Elkins [sic.]. Speaker 1: And you're gonna have to spell Spinoza? S-P- (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't know how to spell it but my--Horace like Shakespeare [William Shakespeare] and that was a character in one of his plays. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Joseph Spinoza Elkins [Joseph Elkins]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Then there was my father. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Edward Densby Elkins [Edward Elkins]. Speaker 1: Okay, what, what his middle name? Speaker 2: Densby. Speaker 1: Densby. Speaker 2: He was named after a priest, they were Catholic. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And the priest at their parish in Forrest City [Arkansas], Forrest City who actually saw them off when they left Forrest City to move to Cleveland [Ohio]. Speaker 1: Okay, so these siblings were all, including your dad. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then there's twins Janette [Janette Elkins] and Annette Elkins. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then there's Raymond Elkins. Speaker 1: Now do you know the spelling of Janette's name, I know some people G. Speaker 2: J-A-N-E-T-T-E. Speaker 1: Okay and Janette and the other one? Speaker 2: Annette. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then Raymond Elkins. Speaker 1: And Raymond was the baby. Speaker 2: Yes, they had another child that died when she was an infant, her name was Theresa [Theresa Elkins (ph.)]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I know a lot for a guy who didn't started off with anything. Speaker 1: And I noticed that you had done, you have not done an extensive history on your family tree, so you do know a lot. Speaker 2: Wow, yeah come to think of it I guess. Speaker 1: Can we go beyond Horace Elkins, do you have any history on that? Speaker 2: Well, Horace, Horace he was adopted by Mr. Elkins. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I think his, his birth name was Barnett [ph.]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And Ida [Ida Jolif (ph.)] had met a man, Elkins. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Who adopted him. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And apparently I was told that they--their family hailed from the Elkins' plantation in Virginia. Speaker 1: Okay, and what part of Virginia? Speaker 2: Elkins, Virginia [sic.]. Speaker 1: Okay, Elkins, okay. Speaker 2: Apparently Mr. Elkins was a pretty powerful man (laughter). Speaker 1: Yes he was (laughter), obviously. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Any more information we have? Speaker 2: Yeah, well just stories and things like that yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Story_ID: 466350 Speaker 1: We'll come back to that. The--we'll now go to your, your birth. You, you--your mother [Eva Fisher] gave birth to you in a very unusual place. Give us the details on that? Speaker 2: My mother was a foster child and she was a, a--her father was deemed unreliable. He was an alcoholic, her mother had died when she was thirteen, and so the county felt like he was irresponsible and so they placed her in foster care and her other siblings were you know on their way to being adults and have their own lives. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, so she I guess she was getting in trouble and running away and ultimately she became pregnant by my father Edward [Edward Elkins], and at the time she was sent to a women's institution. Speaker 1: Let me stop you there and ask you about your mother's siblings? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Do we have names for them, can you? Speaker 2: Jesse Fisher [Jess Fisher]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Who--and I get along famously. Speaker 1: Okay, she's still alive? Speaker 2: He? Speaker 1: Oh, oh he--I'm sorry. Speaker 2: He--Jesse; yeah could be a girl's name as well, yeah. Speaker 1: Right, right, I'd written it as a girl, okay. Speaker 2: They call--yeah and--I know nicknames, Mug, they call him, that's his brother they call him Mug. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But I don't know very (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I'll put that down. Speaker 2: --much about that family. Speaker 1: All right, okay so your mother was getting into trouble at the time. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And was put into a women's prison. Speaker 2: Yes, and I was born in Delaware, Ohio, the prison was there and I was born in a place I think--well, I was born there. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, and right after you were born? Speaker 2: I was taken to Cleveland [Ohio] where my mother was from and placed in, in foster care and the women who I lived with her name was Nellie Strange, and of course I--when I read my, my records, my childhood records that social service kept they described her as a woman who really loved me and she would always have me close and that they had to admonish her for holding me as though I was little baby once, because I stayed with her for two years and I was a rather large child for my age and she would carry me around and she wasn't as big as a woman that would be carrying somebody around, so they made a big deal on my records about that, and they thought that she was growing too close to me so. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So they separated us. Speaker 1: Okay, by growing too close to you what, what do we mean by that? Speaker 2: They felt like she was falling in love with me. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Or had fell in love with me and, and you know and they felt like that would make it difficult for her and they felt like I had fell in love with her, you know, and so it would make it difficult for me to separate because they were hoping that my mother would come to claim me when she was discharged from prison. Speaker 1: Right, released. Okay, the, the--Mrs. Strange, Nellie Strange, was her husband there or was it? Speaker 2: She was a single woman. Speaker 1: She was a single woman? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, and there was something in my records that indicated that she had a boyfriend who the social services wasn't real happy about and they felt like if she was to marry him then she could continue being a foster mother. She, she wanted to adopt children as well and she eventually did adopt a boy named Butch [ph.], and I learned later that Butch committed suicide or he was murdered, and they found him in Lake Erie, and he wrote a letter to Nellie Strange and it was really an odd letter. When I was making the movie ['Antwone Fisher'] people could come to me, I learned so much and this letter he had wrote and asking why did she treat him the way she did, you know and I don't know the full story but it was a really a cathartic for me, but-- Speaker 1: So you could possibly--had not some of the decisions had been made by child services, you could possibly have been that child (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's possible, it looks good you know the way they describe in my records, her treatment of me and my affection for her, but you know life is long and when people start traveling on the road of life, you know they change. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Based on things that happened to them or their philosophies developed and they may not be that sweet person, or they may not be that angry person that they were initially, so maybe her path took her down a road and maybe I was fortunate that they took me away you know it's always different ways to look at these things (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right. Story_ID: 466351 Speaker 1: Now when they took you away you were two years old? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, do you as a--remember those circumstances or do you remember that happening to you even though you were two? Speaker 2: You know, I have a very good memory I've been told and I feel like I do. I see all of those things in shadows. I don't know if it's because someone told me the stories or if I actually remember, but I do think that--I, I feel like I remember the first day I came to the Pack house, which I didn't call them the Packs when I was in the book ['Finding Fish,' Antwone Quenton Fisher] or the movie ['Antwone Fisher'], but I remember that thing. I think it, it was a--as I remember it, it was a like a very like emotional day because a lot of things happened that day. Like they took me from Ms. Strange [Nellie Strange] and they dropped me in a strange place and you know I--you know it, it really--I really felt like this was the hollowness where the hollowness began, the feeling of emptiness like began that day and it's almost like a shadow, but the feeling I can feel but the memory is like a shadow. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So the--you, you can sort of remember being delivered to the Packs? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: And obviously I'm sure you were confused, bewildered because you had this attachment to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 1: --Mrs. Strange? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Any other emotions you can remember that day? Speaker 2: I, I think I was a--I think the fear had to be one and this feeling of--people would call it abandonment, but I wouldn't quite--at that time I don't think I would call it abandonment. It was more--I think the word abandonment is too specific and it gives you an idea of what the person is saying as I said I felt abandoned, but it was more than that. It was like really--I would have to try to invent another word to describe it. I think that--maybe it was a premonition that went along with it and a mixture of, of things, uncertainty and, "Where is Ms. Strange," and I had social workers, you know. Back then it was the '60s [1960s] and the, and the most people I saw they were black and I only saw white people when I went on television, I mean when saw the television if--you know when I ever saw or went downtown. Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: Later, and no one ever explained the difference or the issues or anything. Even as a little boy I think one of my gifts was that I could read people. I had my own way of evaluating things. I was a quiet kid and even at three years old I was more intuitive than people knew and I, I felt like as long as they thought that I did not know, then it was my advantage and not to let on how, how smart or how I could read what was going around me, and I got better at it as the years went on because I felt like it was a defense mechanism. It was a way to--without weapons and without a, a vocabulary or without a--without anything. It was the thing I had, my ability to think and I started doing that really early. I think the day I arrived at the Pack house was the day I started thinking. Speaker 1: Okay, that was a very good description. Story_ID: 466352 Speaker 1: On the last tape we were just about ready to discuss what it was like living there at the Packs' household. Speaker 2: Okay, living at the Pack household--she had nine kids of her own and when I came there, three of them were living at the house, her own children. They were teenagers. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And there were two other foster children there. My foster siblings, Valencia [Valencia Dixon] and Wayne [Wayne Bell], they were brother and sister. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Meaning they had the same mother. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And the Packs were religious people, religious in that everything was about God and everything was about going to church and praying, that whole thing and they didn't really allow secular music in the house, even though their teenage daughters would do it anyway, and Mr. Pack was--they both were from rural Mississippi, Laurel, Mississippi. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And the story goes Mr. Pack you know he was kind of a holistic doctor. You know he probably learned to--this way of curing ailments like from his parents you know and old way. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And he actually--I had eczema terribly and he made some kind of what he called salve which burned like I don't know what, but after going to the doctor so much and them having different creams to put on me and saying you can't eat tomatoes or eggs, he slapped some of that stuff on me and one afternoon, a week later it was all gone (laughter). Speaker 1: So there was something to it. Let's, let's get the Packs, the--first let's go with the name Mr. Pack? Speaker 2: His name was Cronie Pack. Speaker 1: C-R? Speaker 2: Crony, C-R--just like a crony, like a friend. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I think. Speaker 1: Crony Pack, okay and Mrs. Pack? Speaker 2: Ms. Pack, her name was Queen Esther Pack [Queen McDonald Pack]. Speaker 1: Um-hm, okay. Speaker 2: You know and of course Queen Esther was from the Bible and they had big ideas I suppose--well. Speaker 1: Right, okay, we, we--okay now you, you were there with the two other foster children, Valencia and Wayne and three of the Pack children. If you can remember, what were their names? Speaker 2: Three of the Pack children who were living there, one was Ann. Speaker 1: A-N-N or A-N-N-E? Speaker 2: Her name was Ruth Ann Pack [ph.]. Speaker 1: Oh, Ruth Ann, okay and Ruth Ann, was that A-N-N-E or just? Speaker 2: I think A-N-N-E. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Or A-N-N. Speaker 1: Okay, okay A-N-N. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And the next one after Ruth Ann? Speaker 2: They were twins Ethel [Ethel Pack (ph.)] and Evelyn [Evelyn Pack Thompson]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Pack. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Mr. Pack had a nickname no one ever--we didn't call him Cronie or anything, we called him Dada, everybody called him that and Ms. Pack they called her Madea. Speaker 1: Okay, M-A-D-E-A? Speaker 2: Yes. Story_ID: 466353 Speaker 1: Let's talk about that. Mr. Pack [Cronie Pack] was into holistic medicine? Speaker 2: Early in life. Speaker 1: Early in life, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, in it but he got in trouble and he was treating a white woman in Mississippi and the woman died, and it wasn't because of what he had prescribed for her, whatever he was giving her but because he was practicing medicine without a license, this was Mississippi. Speaker 1: He went down to Mississippi? Speaker 2: No, he lived there, this is--was a part of why they left. Speaker 1: Oh, okay, okay. Speaker 2: This woman passed away, they arrested him and for practicing medicine without a license (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This was before you came to live with them? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah this was before I was born. Speaker 1: Okay, okay so the background on the Packs: Mr. Pack had been practicing holistic medicine on a white woman in Mississippi in those days (laughter). Speaker 2: Yeah, and she passed away. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And, and he, he did some foot doctoring too, maybe that was a big thing with black people. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And when they came to her house, the story goes is that they discovered that there was things that he had prescribed for her so they arrested him and I think when they released him I think the Ku Klux Klan [KKK] told him that they were gone get him. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: You know? Speaker 1: First of all for touching the white woman. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: I'm sure. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And then other things. Speaker 2: Yeah and so I think they wound, they--this is when they came to Cleveland [Ohio]. Speaker 1: Okay, the, the--do you know what part of Mississippi he was practicing in? Speaker 2: Probably his home town, Laurel. Speaker 1: Oh, oh Laurel, Mississippi. Speaker 2: You know they grew up around Hattiesburg [Mississippi] and Laurel, Mississippi. Speaker 1: Okay, okay good enough, okay, any other background on the Packs that you can remember? Speaker 2: Mrs. Pack [Queen McDonald Pack] was obviously married before and whoever she was married to either he was mulatto or he was very, very light because her children, Azalia [Azalia Edmonson Bransford], they called him little brother his name was Raymond [ph.], his real name was Raymond and Eddie Lee [Eddie Lee Edmonson] and Myrtis [Myrtis Edmonson Horgrow], they were all really light, all Mr. Pack's children were really dark. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: And I remember when I was a kid I asked Mrs. Pack what her name was before she was married 'cause I had heard it was McDonald, and then she asked me, "Why do you wanna know? It's not your business," and it was a touchy subject I think with the first. Story_ID: 466354 Speaker 1: Then you came there you were not yet three you came to their household? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And what are some of those earliest memories of being in that household? Speaker 2: My earlier memories, I remember--what I remember most about you know--outside of--I think I heard--I remember the smell of barbecue a lot (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I think in my mind. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Because they were big on like barbecuing, I think the 4th of July was as big as Christmas at their house because it was like in the whole neighborhood, I'd--when I'd wake up in the morning the whole neighborhood was smelling like lighter fluid (laughter), it seemed like in my memory you know, and it seemed like the sun shined differently back then. Maybe the air was clearer or something, but it was a different kind of sunlight and it matched with the smell and my innocence you know, how I saw the world and, and, and. Speaker 1: Now, did this smell come from just the Pack household or was it from the neighborhood? Speaker 2: Neighborhood too. Speaker 1: Neighborhood. Speaker 2: It was a time when people really celebrated in that way. Speaker 1: Okay, fire crackers and that kind of thing, even Christmas and all those holidays seemed different. They seemed like the snow was whiter or something. Speaker 2: Okay, the--was it barbecue during Christmas as opposed-- Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: --to turkey or something? Speaker 1: No, in those days they would like really put it on, I mean like Ms. Pack [Queen McDonald Pack] she was like from down south and they would have raccoons and possums and turkey all mixed with all different kind of things that would be traditional like in any household right down to the wild animals. Speaker 2: Right. Okay. Speaker 1: And then they would have a--she was a person who liked to can goods, like she would can peaches, and apples and she would make jelly and syrup. Story_ID: 466355 Speaker 1: It's fair to say that you ate well there in that household? Speaker 2: Well yeah, oh well, yes I did. That was--but there came a time later I decided I didn't like wild animals. I didn't like the gamey hint that I got in my head and, and seeing frozen animals in the sink you know it really like, as I got older it really like you know, and I remember the day I told 'em I wasn't eating anymore and they looked at me like that fool don't know good eating. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Right, right. Speaker 2: (Laughter) And Mr. Pack [Cronie Pack] said, "Well what you gonna eat?" I'm like, "I don't know," but that was one of--I made two stands in that household and that was one of 'em, that I wasn't gonna eat, and they would actually make me a baked potato or they would have like string beans or something and there would be no wild animals, and I don't know if they did it because they felt like I didn't want it so they weren't giving it to me, but that, that made it more for them if I didn't (laughter) want it. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: I was unsure about that, and the other one was that, the big announcement that rocked the whole family, that I wasn't going to church anymore, and I told them that on Sunday afternoon, and boy was that like--because I was so shy and quiet, by this point I was kind of beat down. I knew how things went but I told 'em that and they said, "Oh well if you don't wanna go we're not gonna make but you are not going to sit here in this house on Sunday afternoon." So they locked me out of the house every Sunday. Speaker 1: Now what led you to issue that ultimatum? Speaker 2: We were, me and my foster brother Wayne [Wayne Bell] which I--it seems odd to say foster brother because he was really my brother and so you know we were in church and I was just sitting there and we weren't clapping to the songs, I think it was 'Jesus on the Mainline' and she said sing and so we started singing and then she said, "Y'all niggers clap your hands." So we started clapping hands and we were looking so lackluster and so dull she said, "Y'all--N word, get out this church, walk home." So we walked maybe fifteen miles home, by the time we got home they were all at home eating and when we came through the door Ms. Pack [Queen McDonald Pack] said, "There they go," and I said, "I'm not going to church no more," and I said it really loud and then that's how it happened. Speaker 1: Okay, so you were really issuing a challenge to their, their rules or their traditions there (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, besides the way they taught from the Bible always scared me. I was always frightened every after Sunday. After Sunday it would take me a week to get over it but of course we had church all through the week, so it was never like an easy thing. They would always tell the stories of how you know Sampson slew the Philistines and how Jesus was crucified and there were never any stories, there were stories about even Lazarus which was a scary story and they never told it in a, you know a context that would make you understand or use it in an analogy of how it would help us in this time. So I was really already frightened of the whole thing, and the whole idea of God was frightening to me and so I was just done, I suppose. Story_ID: 466356 Speaker 1: Now church for the Pack family and the children was not just a Sunday morning thing, it was an all day Sunday affair? Speaker 2: All day. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And it was Wednesday, it was Friday, sometimes Saturday. You know you had to go all the time and what I liked about church the most was the singing actually. I like going to other churches that have a nice choir and a nice piano player, and Mr. Pack [Cronie Pack] you know he had a storefront church he, he had rented, I mean had bought this building and it was a storefront, two storefronts on either side and he turned one side into a church, built a pulpit and a choir loft and bought some pull out chairs and started soliciting for customers, and you know basically his church was too out of the way. It was on a street called Woodland [Avenue] where Stroh's Brewery [Stroh's Brewery Company] and kind of, kind of industrial field. You know there weren't a lot of people who probably would come to his church. So he had all the members who went to his church, he would pick them up on his way to church and it was only like about five of us including the family members, and so he didn't have very many paying customers actually. So it wasn't a very good business. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: If it was a business, and he would actually give us the money to put in the offering tray and then he would turn around and pay it to the piano player. So I think a lot of having a church was for his own feeling of worth and importance to make himself feel like he had something to offer that he was somebody who had a connection with, a special connection with God, something that everybody didn't have. So I think it was more for his own self. Speaker 1: And, and he was the principal speaker at these services? Speaker 2: Yes, and you know those Sundays when he said, "I'm gonna come to you in short today," and it was gone be a long one, (laughter) a long time in church. Speaker 1: And the total congregation would you estimate, what ten, fifteen people? Speaker 2: Oh, not even ten, there was Mother Crump [ph.] who was on the edge of being senile and there was me and Wayne [Wayne Bell] and Val [Valencia Dixon], Ms. Pack [Queen McDonald Pack], a woman named Ms. Walker [ph.] and him. Speaker 1: Okay so even their older children did not come back? Speaker 2: They never came and that was the sticking point for, for them. They were so upset about them, she would always say, "You, you all were raised in a church and I don't know why you guys are just out doing what you're doing, shacking and going on (laughter)." Well then she would have this speech she'd do and I would sit and listen to it and yeah--I don't know (simultaneous). Story_ID: 466357 Speaker 1: This is something you had to put up with through the years that you were there at the Packs'. Any other highlights of that we can think of (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know, they were abusive people, Mr. Pack [Cronie Pack] wasn't abusive, Mrs. Pack [Queen McDonald Pack] was and her children were towards us, the foster children and it was pretty bad and as we got older it got worse. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And. Speaker 1: Talk about some of the early abuses? Speaker 2: Sexual abuse. Speaker 1: From Mrs. Pack or from the Pack children? Speaker 2: Pack children. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And there were beatings, you know she would tie us up, take--make us take our clothes off and tie us up and whip us. You know, tie--there was a stanchion in the basement where we spent a lot of time being time being tied up down there in the basement and it was a--you know for a three or four year old you know, all the sounds of the basement. It's like the pipes and it's the water heater and it's just like the dryer, so everything. She would lock us outside and make us sleep you know--people--this is California, back east or the Midwest like Cleveland [Ohio] is different you know and it was ridicule and, and mental abuse and it would go on and on you know, and the children I guess they felt, some of them felt that you know it gave them permission to do the same. It was hard you know and--you know I know that there are people and children that go through worse than what we did. Me and my foster brother [Wayne Bell] talk about that sometime, but it's also--you know it's relative and I think that it's about how much you can take and, and that it's not supposed to be that way, and so we endured it all and so I think now looking back at them, I guess I'll always love them you know because in my mind you know they were the ones. I don't remember Ms. Strange [Nellie Strange], but I always remembered them and it--I, I--even though I understood them as best as a kid could understand the people who he lives with. I always tried to find a way to make them like me. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: I felt liking me would be enough you know, loving me I think it was asking too much, but if I worked, if I would get up early and do something and those moments would last for a while. The older that we got, the worse it got and I always look at it, it's almost like people who get pets you know they--you know when it's a puppy it's like really cute and it's like kind of floppy ears, and it's just moving around, and you think it's so cute and it's not taking up a lot of room, it's not eating very much. You have to take care of it you know but you know when it starts getting older, it's in the way, it's kind of big, it's eating too much you know. It starts barking a lot you know and it's like want a little independence you know and it's--the point is that you know I think my foster mother wanted us to remain puppies, she didn't want us to get older and I think sometimes when people look at children growing older right in front of them it reminds them that they must be getting older too, and I think she had a problem with that. I think she had a problem with the idea that I may wind up living in a better world than she grew up in and I feel like sometimes based on some things she said that she feels cheated, cheated out of fun. I, I wrote in my--I wrote a book called 'Finding Fish' [Antwone Quenton Fisher], and I remember she took in some Vietnam veterans after Vietnam [Vietnam War] was over, it was another way to make some money at the veterans' hospital with these guys. I would take in room--she took in roomers, but she would take their checks and the guy, his name was Benny [ph.] he wanted his money, and so he would go in her purse and take it. So the money was gone and she was out to find Benny. She found me in the neighborhood and said, "Come with me, we have to find Benny. He took my money," which was his money actually. So, we stopped at every bar in the neighborhood and by the last bar she was so drunk and this is a woman that didn't drink, she was a religious lady and I was thinking I wonder what she's doing in there? And then she got in the car--and that last bar and said, "I know there better be a God as much fun as I been missing out on." It's just I couldn't believe it. You know this is the lady that went to church all the time. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And somebody probably went in there and said, "Hey mama, how you doing," and she never had a compliment in some many years she probably sat down, had a tall, had a tall (laughter) drink or something, and. Speaker 1: But when she came back out to that car, she was drunk or some (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) To me she was, she was inebriated. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I believe I drove home, and you know I had (laughter) I was about fourteen and I did drive. Well she started driving and then she pulled to the side and she told me to drive and I drove her home and of course I think that was the first time I drove. Story_ID: 466358 Speaker 1: Let's go back a little bit because the--I'm sure the state or the City of Cleveland [Ohio] was sending caseworkers around? Speaker 2: Well I had, I had thirteen caseworkers during the time I was in foster care and I never met all of them, so, so they didn't really know me and I remember one time I--me and my foster brother told Ms. Pack [Queen McDonald Pack] that we were gonna tell about the treatment and what they were doing to us, and then she says to us--she's already laughing and she said that those people don't care, in fact that she was their boss, and so it took the wind out of us so every time a social worker would come by I never said anything, but I was waiting for someone to ask because if they would have asked me, I wouldn't have felt like I had told. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: But nobody ever asked, so I would just sit on the sofa and just wait and wait for them to ask, they never asked 'til it got to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What kind of questions would they ask? Speaker 2: "How are you doing Antwone [HistoryMaker Antwone Fisher]? How are you doing in school? I stopped by the school and the teacher says you're not doing well, you're daydreaming. What's going on with you, are you getting along well with your classmates?" And every question you could imagine besides, "How do you feel about your foster mother?" There was some social workers who really started to get it, and those were the ones that I, I was like always wanting to see and because I knew they was really close to asking me and then I started thinking maybe they do wanna ask but they don't wanna ask because if they ask they have to do something about it. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And so I stopped taking the meetings, meaning that on my way home from school if I saw the social worker's car or--I would turn around and stay away from the house 'til I know that she couldn't stay any longer. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, that's what happened, I felt like I had to do all this--whatever happened, I had to survive this all on my own and use my wits to do it, and, and so that was my plan. Speaker 1: Okay, okay you keep referring to Wayne [Wayne Bell] as your foster--now, there was not a blood relationship between you and Wayne (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No. Speaker 1: You were just foster children together right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: You seem to have been closer to Wayne than the other foster child? Speaker 2: You mean Val [Valencia Dixon]? Speaker 1: Val. Speaker 2: Well, probably because me and Wayne were boys and then we shared a room and we fought a lot. We fought because she put us against one another. In fact, sometimes she would hold him down so I could beat him, not that I wanted to beat him because I knew what he would do to me soon as he got a chance, it's just that I was afraid that if I didn't do what she was expecting me to do that I would really get it from her. Speaker 1: Right, right. How long did you stay with Mrs. Pack, until what age? Speaker 2: Until I was fourteen. Story_ID: 466359 Speaker 1: Give us what school was like, and then--well, let's start with, with school as you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Elementary school? Speaker 1: Elementary school. Speaker 2: Oh, I didn't--I was a really shy kid and you know I didn't have any self-esteem you know based on all the things that were happening to me there, which I haven't really described, even in the book ['Finding Fish,' Antwone Quenton Fisher] and the movie ['Antwone Fisher'] I didn't describe it well. I didn't want to, because I just wanted to get over that these things happened; that some things happened. Well, I didn't have a lot of confidence and I was so shy about everything. I didn't like for people to look at me in the face because they ridiculed my skin color, my hue. I was ashamed of being dark and I thought that I was ugly and that you know people looked at me what they must be thinking. So I didn't like it you know and I would really get--either give them--I would get angry and enough to want to fight or hit 'em or do something, or I would run away or be shy about it and so I would, this is the way I was and so I can remember kindergarten and cutting class even at that age. I only went half a day, but in those days a kid could walk home from school you know. I would go to a park, a park called the Tot Lot [Turtle Park, Cleveland Heights, Ohio] and I would hang out in there. Story_ID: 466360 Speaker 1: You described what it was like in school to us at that very early age. What was it like in the neighborhood [Glenville, Cleveland, Ohio]? Speaker 2: You know this, it was a time when, when you could go outside and people would say, "Well make sure you're back when the lights come on wherever you are in the neighborhood." Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: "Just don't go in anyone else's house." So that was the rule, and we were fine. There was an ice cream man I remember would come with the bells, and I mean the ice cream man actually wore white clothes and a combination cap. There was a milkman; I remember seeing him from my bedroom window, standing up driving down the street going from different houses, different houses. I remember this book called 'How Now Brown Cow' [Alice Schertle]; it was my first book I think that I learned to read. It was like the neighborhood was like that, and everybody knew the mailman. The mailman wasn't drunk (laughter). Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: You know he wore the full uniform you know. People took pride and you would see fathers around you know like they would take the bus, those who didn't have cars you would see them walking home. Some worked at Stroh's Brewery [Stroh's Brewery Company] or Fisher Body [Fisher Body Corporation], or Ford Motor [Ford Motor Company] or White Motor [White Motor Company], tool and dye companies. This was like an industrial city you know, and Cleveland [Ohio] was a mecca for black people you know. There was a lot of jobs and everybody who came there were people who were willing to work, they weren't hustlers and you know pimps and people like that. They were people who had families, and that's what the neighborhood was like. That's why on the 4th of July there was a barbecue, that's why when Christmas came there were lights all over the houses and people were actually wrapping gifts you know and you could just smell the pine from, from the front door when they'd open the door (simultaneous). Story_ID: 466361 Speaker 1: What was your Christmas for you and your foster siblings (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, you know I always feel like you know I would have liked to have the childhood that my children [Azure Fisher and Indigo Fisher] have, but that--I didn't have that so at this stage of my life looking back you know we didn't really, weren't really allowed to participate in the Christmas holiday. There were like no gifts for us or anything and so and, and when we did get a gift it came from like--Ethel [Ethel Pack (ph.)] gave me a gift one Christmas. It was a tomato red shirt and it had a mustard stripe down the side and, and I don't know whether I liked the shirt as I much as I liked the idea that she gave me a gift. Speaker 1: Okay, the, the--Ethel, of course was one of the Pack children. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Twins, and the--how did it happen that Ethel, just one member of the family could give a gift, and the rest of 'em did not? Speaker 2: 'Cause she was a sweet, she's a sweet girl, sweet lady. I remember when I was real little she would say, she would say, "If you clean the bath tub out when I'm done, I'll give you a dime," and a dime back then man you get Mary Janes, you get two for a penny, and you can get a candy bar for a nickel and you can have a soda and a bag of potato chips for like less than fifteen cents, and so that was a lot and you know a kid, I liked candy. She always made a way that she could give me something, and she was a sweet person and I think she liked me and she treated with more favor than the other two foster children [Valencia Dixon and Wayne Bell], but, but then, but then she was nice to them also. She's just a sweet person. Speaker 1: Now, there was no Christmas tree at Christmastime in there? Speaker 2: Oh, oh they put it on though. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Like I described earlier, there would be wild animals from down south. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: There would be pumpkin pie and they would have--I remember what is this--coconut cake and it was just like the dining room table was full of food, the buffet table was full of food and where people were gonna eat I don't even remember, I just remember food everywhere, and candy dishes with candy in 'em. Christmas had a smell, it smelled like candy and food and, and the Christmas tree. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: And it's almost like being in a cocoon of a celebration and not being able to move. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Or become a part of what that is, and so in my mind I'm sure my siblings, foster siblings, they probably found their own way to participate. They weren't--Mrs. Pack [Queen McDonald Pack] was always in a lighter mood around the holidays and so it was kind of a reprieve you know from, from her meanness. Story_ID: 466362 Speaker 1: Okay, and Mr. Pack [Cronie Pack]? Speaker 2: Mr. Pack-- Speaker 1: What was he like during the holidays? Speaker 2: Well I liked Mr. Pack, he, he was a quiet man and I don't know--he never hardly spoke to me at all, but I feel like we did have some sort of connection even though it was an unspoken thing, because he was nice to me. He was the kind of guy that when he would walk through the room if I was there and he would grab my head and just squeeze and slip his fingers off real fast and I felt like that meant he liked me. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Now he would grab, palm my head and shake it a little bit, and then walk away. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And if he ever had to punish me, my foster mother would get on him about not punishing us and then he would do it for whatever reason and he would feel bad about it. He would double back and give you a quarter or something like that, and I--out of all the people in their family I wish I had a chance to talk to him as an adult you know because I felt like with all his knowledge, you know he had a lot of knowledge with that whole holistic thing and, and his philosophy because I think that he was kind of like a player at some time in his life because I would hear him and Mrs. Pack [Queen McDonald Pack] arguing about how he would take these trips to Chicago [Illinois] and what went on in Chicago was probably be going on in New York [New York] and all these other places (laughter). Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: Yeah and so yeah, but I, I liked him, he went, he, he went, he worked for a company called the Yoder Company in Cleveland [Ohio] and so I don't what they did, but I think it was a like a--some kind of manufacturing company and when he retired he started a landscaping company. Sometimes he would take me and my foster brother [Wayne Bell] with him and he would cut lawns and I remember this one day this white woman came out of the house and it was kind of a breezy day and she had on a slip but she had on panties and a bra underneath and she had this tray with 7-Up, bottles of 7-Up on it and she walked up to him and said, "I thought maybe you and the boys would like to have something cold to drink," and I was looking at her panties through her thing, I remember they were red and I was thinking like wow, I can see her panties through her slip. I--and then Mr. Pack he would just look down the whole time, like he would not look at her and then I was--as I grew older I'll never forget that picture because I--as growing up I always saw him as the mightiest man on earth and I mean like he was the guy who told us all about God and I knew he was strong 'cause I'd see him do things that I felt like were like super human I thought as a boy but then when this lady came out and he dropped his head he was like skirting around the idea that he would actually wanna take the sodas. I was confused about that and so of course I didn't know a lot about blacks and white relationships, but I had had a picture but I didn't happen to have the full picture yet you know-- Story_ID: 466363 Speaker 1: They didn't talk about race relations in the house. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: They--what I learned about race relations I learned on television and because the neighborhood [Glenville, Cleveland, Ohio] I grew up in was all black. Speaker 2: On television or on the radio they did not tune in to the news a lot, because there (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, there were some. Speaker 2: --were a number of things going on at that time? Speaker 1: Yes, they did tune into the news. They didn't watch television but their--one of their daughters did and it was all Vietnam on the TV. I remember 'Huntley-Brinkley' ['The Huntley-Brinkley Report'] used to come on and, and what's the other guy, Walter Cronkite, and was it Chet Huntley? I remember that (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Chet Huntley. Speaker 1: Yeah and that's all they would talk about was the war [Vietnam War] and then there was the Civil Rights Movement which I thought that Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was a bad guy, because from what I was told that if the police was after you then you must be a bad guy. No one ever explained that he, what he was doing and the situation that we were in as black people in America. Of course I was a kid and little and I thought they had you know as I grew up, but really I thought that they had a responsibility to explain that to me and then when Martin Luther King was killed I was the one watching television. I was, I was laying the floor watching a program and the TV went black and then it says they had a special report, and Ms. Pack [Queen McDonald Pack] and her daughters was in the kitchen pressing their hair and you know they had the house smelled like Royal Crown (laughter). Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And they said, "Martin Luther King had been shot," and I was so excited to go tell Mrs. Pack that finally the troublemaker was gonna be gone, he got shot and I had this happy news and I went in there and told them that, and it's the whole house exploded, people running downstairs and all around the television and I couldn't even hear what the television was saying because of all the wailing and all the unhappiness, and I, I took it on as I was the fault of all this grief that was happening in our house because I was the one that carried the news and I didn't realize that people would respond that way and I didn't know that he would--that's when they started talking about the good things he had--what he, who he was and I didn't--I felt like I had been left out of what was--I mean as a kid I was smart enough to, to have been able to take that in and process it, but I guess they felt like children are in our world to be seen and not heard and we weren't important enough to understand the issues of the day, but we were intelligent enough to do that. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And when I really started to understand about the politics of blacks and whites, it was during the Black Power movement, it was right after that during the, the '70s [1970s], I think It '69 [1969], or '70 [1970] I started really thinking about it a lot because in our neighborhood the Black Panthers [Black Panther Party] and black nationalists had opened up offices. Speaker 2: Oh okay. Speaker 1: And so I would see them around and they would stop us on the street and then talk to us about white people, and blacks and white relationship and how we should treat one another as opposed to the way we had been in the past. Story_ID: 466364 Speaker 1: Were your siblings becoming much more aware also, or was there anything to signal to you that they may have been coming more aware? Speaker 2: I think, I think my siblings, my foster siblings had different concerns about the world. Wayne [Wayne Bell] was more of a--he, he was like an intellectual right? He read before most kids could read. I mean he knew about everything, I thought he did because he read all the time and he was, he would love to get you in a conversation even as little boy and try to stir the conversation in a way--so he knew how to debate. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was a natural thing but they shut him down and every time he showed how smart he was they would shut him down until he came to the point--I think he stopped pursuing that and so he became more of a person who was interested in style, he wanted a maxi coat, he wanted stacked shoes, he wanted a silk shirt, he wanted material things, when before it was about knowledge. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: So they turned him around and then they didn't have a problem with that because they weren't gonna give him that, that knowledge he was getting on his own they had a problem with him. Speaker 1: How much older was Wayne than, than you? Speaker 2: One year. Speaker 1: One, just one year? Okay. Speaker 2: Wayne just got out of prison; he's been in prison fifteen years, sixteen years, before that he was there a long stint, and he was a year older than me and he told he had a crime spree, and he told me, "You know in this world nobody's gonna give you nothing. What you want, what you need you're gonna have to take it, and Antwone [HistoryMaker Antwone Fisher] you are too soft, you're not gonna make it, because you're too soft. You are too soft, you're not gonna make it because you are too soft," and he was--started robbing people in the neighborhood [Glenville, Cleveland, Ohio], sticking up places, robbing jewelry stores, shooting people; but it wasn't who he was as a kid. They didn't let him. You know you, you know when you have a kid you have to like hold their hand sometime. Me, I could imagine myself, I would sit on the back porch and imagine myself holding my foster father's [Cronie Pack] hand you know. I used to love fall days when it was cold and the sun was warm, and I would sit on the back porch and day dream for hours, and I would have these different lives, but Wayne couldn't imagine any of that, he wanted--like he told me, "I need the real shit." Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: And he couldn't get love, they wouldn't give it to him, and he met his mother. His mother wanted to meet him and Val [Valencia Dixon]. Val refused. He met her and he came back and said, "Man my mama's beautiful." I said, "Wow, she is?" And all he wanted was to be with her, went to be with her and she left him in the apartment, moved away and he was living there alone. The school found out he was living alone, called social services and he wound up in Boystown [Cleveland, Ohio], and he wound up in Minnesota with his father. His father was married to a nineteen year old, he was in his forties. The nineteen year old of course liked him, Wayne. Kicked him out and before you know it he had developed this, this philosophy about life and this feeling about the world and people from the very beginning. And he started a crime spree and I remember when I told him I was gonna join the [U.S.] Navy. He said, "Man, I would never let the white man have that much control over my life," and then he wound up in prison for the majority of his life. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I was like, "Wow, man." You know I learned a lot in the [U.S.] military and I'm sure he learned (laughter)--you gotta hear him talk. He--you know, he's still smart, he's still so, so intelligent in, in a different--it's a waste. Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: But he still has value. Speaker 1: Wayne's last name? Wayne and Val were actual blood relatives? Speaker 2: Yes, Wayne's last name was Bell. Speaker 1: B-E-L-L. Speaker 2: Yes, and Val's last name was Dixon. Speaker 1: Dixon. Speaker 2: While, while (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) D-I-X-O-N or D-I-C-K-S-O-N? Speaker 2: D-I-X-O-N. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 466365 Speaker 1: When Wayne [Wayne Bell], Wayne was in prison, he, of course he was in prison and Val [Valencia Dixon] she had gotten I think a bachelor's degree, a master's degree in psychology and she was working in the field, still going to school, doing--and she had a massive heart attack and a stroke and all that. She's only forty-four or something. She was in the car with Wayne's kid, he had gotten out and had a kid and she was taking care of his kid and so the kid was stranded on the freeway with Val who had died basically there. Some guy came along and drove them to the hospital and so she was dead, brain dead and they had taken the top of her head off or something because her brain had swelled and then on her--the first of kin was Wayne, she wanted Wayne to be notified and I thought that it was curious because she always tried make the Packs, the Packs [Queen McDonald Pack and Cronie Pack] seem like it was the best childhood ever. That's how she dealt with it, she ignored everything. Wayne always didn't want to talk about it but then would start talking about it. I would always wanna talk about it. So the prison system let Wayne come and be at her side for a couple of hours. They took him out of prison, he hadn't been out in like I don't know ten years and he said he sat there with her and he said that he hadn't seen her in a long time, but she was just laying there, then they told him he had to go, you know the officers was gonna take him back and asked him what did he want the hospital to do. Story_ID: 466366 Speaker 1: Go ahead. Speaker 2: He told me that. Speaker 1: Wayne [Wayne Bell] told you? Speaker 2: Yeah, Wayne told me that he--you know Wayne, he's like full of bravado. You know Wayne's the tough one, Wayne's the one who could really fight, and when I was a kid if somebody ever bothered me I'd tell 'em Wayne was my brother and that would be the end of it. So he told me--of course I know he cried in his life, but he told me that he had never cried like that before. (Crying) I think, I think because I understand him, and she was the only thing he had, I was a little more distant at that time because I was in the [U.S.] Navy off whatever. I didn't know that, that had happened and she was taking care of his kid and he was--she was the only one he could depend on and I think because I remember--all that we had survived together, I remember (crying), I remember Val [Valencia Dixon]--there was a preacher who came to live with the Packs and he was (crying). Speaker 1: Stop. Speaker 2: (Crying) Yeah, okay he was, he was raping her. She got pregnant and nobody knew, and she told Mrs. Pack [Queen McDonald Pack] that, that the preacher had been raping her and she was, she thought she was pregnant and Ms. Pack didn't want social service to find out so she took her somewhere. At that time abortions were illegal, she got an illegal abortion. She could never have kids after that. Speaker 1: How old was Val at this time? Speaker 2: She was thirteen years old (crying). I always hate (unclear), I mean I don't--it's not hate. I just don't understand. Speaker 1: Strong resentment though. Speaker 2: Val, Valencia--I heard that she had a hairstyle she created for herself and she called it the Valencia. I thought it was so funny but it fit her well. So he told the hospital they should let her go and he was mad at me because I wasn't there, but I didn't know. Speaker 1: You were in the Navy at the time? Speaker 2: Well I wasn't in the Navy at the time I had got out but I had lost contact with them. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because of our ways that we, we were split up and, and I guess because of you know all the things that we survived together. Out of all the people that I've met besides my wife [LaNette Canister Fisher] and children [Azure Fisher and Indigo Fisher], Wayne and Val--I guess they're my family I would say more than anyone else of the people that I met. Story_ID: 466367 Speaker 1: Now when Val [Valencia Dixon] was there in the hospital they had tried to reduce the swelling and they asked Wayne [Wayne Bell] what should they do, he had to make the pronouncement and he wanted to let her go. They were taking Wayne back to prison? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: To your knowledge once he had done that then they allowed Val to pass on. Wayne went back to prison but there was this resentment what--did you start keeping, corresponding with Wayne then (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I lost contact with both of them. Well Wayne was in prison so you couldn't really call him, he had to call you. Val, I would call her and I thought she had got mad at me because you know she changed her phone number or her phone was out, but that what had happened was she died. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And I thought she was just mad at me 'cause she would--I would say something or she would say something and we would not talk for a month or two and I would call her and you know say, just like siblings. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And I just thought she was upset and I was on a book tour, I was in Cleveland [Ohio]. Speaker 1: You had written your book ['Finding Fish,' Antwone Quenton Fisher] by this time? Speaker 2: Yeah, well the book came out, I had written it after that apparently and the book came out and I thought surely she would contact me but she never did and I thought maybe I made her more upset. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And so. Speaker 1: 'Cause you did not know she had passed? Speaker 2: No, I was at a book signing and somebody that knew all of us told me while I was signing books. I couldn't believe it, it was a terrible place to find that out. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And then they were in contact with Wayne, and then Wayne called me and he was upset. He said, "Where were you?" I said I don't know, I don't know what happened, and you know there have been people who passed away in my life. I wrote about some of them, and I always had an odd feeling about people who were young and who passed away, and you know you get to be in your thirties and then you kind of get death and all that in some kind of perspective, but with Val it was different, it was like-- Speaker 1: It really hurt you finding out about it the way you did. Speaker 2: Yeah (crying) it was--I called my wife [LaNette Canister Fisher] and I told her and it was hard. It's like--because she and Wayne, they were a part of me, different than other people who were around when I was a kid. Story_ID: 466368 Speaker 1: Wayne [Wayne Bell] had gotten the book ['Finding Fish,' Antwone Quenton Fisher] in prison and he told me that-- Speaker 2: Did you send it to Wayne in prison (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No. Speaker 2: Someone else did? Speaker 1: No because I wasn't able to. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: They're not able to receive books and things like that. They have to get it through the prison system. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So he got it, they let him have and said that he was happy that I wrote the book. He was worried, he asked me not to put his name in the book, but after he read it he told me that he was happy that there was at least somebody in this world who knew him and how much promise he had before all this other stuff happened, and he felt like--he told me that he felt like whatever successes I had in life was his success and was Val's [Valencia Dixon] success. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So whatever I do and I remember I always remember my--really they're my siblings and so it was for them too and they are like a--I wish Val would have been able to be around but I'm sure that she would have approved and I remember. Speaker 2: Can, can we just stop here? (Unclear), okay. Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION) Speaker 2: Yeah finally right and he called he said, "Man I got out on the 11th (laughter)." I was scared to call him back (laughter), I said, oh so I called him I said, "How does it feel?" He said, "It feels good." I said, "Well what do think?" He said well television--he watched television all the time when he was in prison. He says he doesn't want to see another television. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Just sit out and watch the people go by. He said he doesn't want a car, he don't need the trouble, and young girls he don't need the trouble. He says that he got a job already at an auto parts store in Solon, Ohio and that he's going to try and make a go of it in the suburbs of Cleveland [Ohio] and he--I was so happy for him really and he's--you can still see the smartness, feel it. He has a prison way of talking and it's really funny because you can see how smart he is. It's not like some people who go to prison and they read a lot of books. He's a thinker because he had to come along the way I did so, he's actually done more work than just reading and God bless him and I wish him all the best and of course he's my brother so. Speaker 1: Right, right. Let's, let's two things, how, how many years total did Wayne spend in prison do you know, if you had to guess? Speaker 2: He was off and on at some, one point, but maybe total--maybe nineteen. Speaker 1: Nineteen years (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Eighteen years something like that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Long time. Story_ID: 466369 Speaker 1: We've skipped over a lot so I just wanna take us back to that, that period. You and Wayne [Wayne Bell] and Val [Valencia Dixon] and the three Pack children going through junior high, high school any highlights that we need to capture? Speaker 2: With us? I--I remember when Wayne first started liking girls, he was scared to let them know that he had a girlfriend because of the way the Packs [Queen McDonald Pack and Cronie Pack] would behave (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He was afraid to let the Packs know? Speaker 2: Yeah, so he would sneak around having a girlfriend, staying out late and they'd lock him outside and I'd let him back in and they'd threaten me we'd both be sitting outside in the dark (laughter), oh god we did have some fun though. Speaker 1: Okay, and Val, what--she supported you two? Speaker 2: Yeah, Val was a--she-, she was a--she had a boyfriend. Sometimes boys would like her, and I would be like, "Why is this older guy trying to be my friend?" I didn't get it right away and then I go oh, he likes Val (laughter), okay. It was--I just feel for Val you know not just 'cause she's gone you know, I feel for Wayne too. I feel more for them than I do myself, because I always felt something about myself--you know with this new book they talk about 'The Secret' [Rhonda Byrne]? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: I feel like I've always know whatever that was, that thing they're calling the secret. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: I already--I knew that as a kid, it was--I think some people born with that even through adversity hanging onto optimism and understanding that some things you can't say, you can think it but you can't say it. Believing even when other people don't. Keeps, you know I used to say, "Oh they're gonna make my movie." In nine years I kept saying it, and people would say aw, you know. It happened, everything happened, everything happens. Everything is not easy and then everything comes with pain and everything comes with joy, everything comes with laughter and tears. This is life you know so I, I think about Val you know. She was robbed, Wayne robbed, but I don't feel like I've been robbed. I feel like you know I've had a rich, full life. I have more life to live, I discovered time. I discovered that no matter what you have, fame or fortune, no matter how much money you have time is more valuable than anything, and if like Bill Gates if he had that money what he would give for some more time and some good health and that's the kind of thing you can't buy, so I think now I have my wife [LaNette Canister Fisher] and my children [Azure Fisher and Indigo Fisher] and I have whatever time I have left I'd like to spend all my moments with them as much as I can. Always and I feel fortunate that I've discovered this in my forties, this thing about time, so when my time is over I can think about my life and think that I spent my time well, not did I spend my money well, did I have a Ferrari or live on the best side of town, did I have good friends that regaled them with, with gifts and stories and things that don't matter? Did I spend time with the people I love that love me? That's it, that's all we can hope--that we'll hope for in this life. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And joy and happiness. Story_ID: 466370 Speaker 1: Let's look back at Val [Valencia Dixon] again, how the Packs reacted to her on a daily basis as she was growing up? Speaker 2: I hated it, I hated it because you know I didn't know about girls and menstruation, I--you know I didn't know about that. They never explained it to her when it started and she was ashamed so she would use other--instead of feminine napkins, she would use whatever she could find. There was so much shame in the house, it was a shame-based family, and some of that shame, you know of course we bared, and too and you know because that was the culture there and something as natural as a girl's menstruation became a shameful thing. When she developed breasts I remember Ms. Pack [Queen McDonald Pack] making comments you know when you become a teenager and you, you start to perspire more, I remember Ms. Pack making comments against her and when she discovered that she had a, was having her cycle, it was like a big thing and I, I was like I don't understand why, what it, what's going on and Wayne [Wayne Bell] explained it to me. He was only a year older than me but he was a little more-- Speaker 1: Some--an example of some of the comments that Ms. Pack might make? Speaker 2: She called her, she would refer to her as a heifer, heifer, and she told her that whatever--when it came to her cycle that I guess she was low down for having one I suppose and that it just-- Speaker 1: This is when Mrs. Pack found out? Speaker 2: Yeah she used to say that she smells like--she used to tell her she smells like (unclear) which later I heard was the smell of a wet sheep's hair, and she referred to her cycle and her time of the month. She would say, "It must be your time coming up 'cause you smell like (unclear)." Story_ID: 466371 Speaker 1: And this preacher who came to live there in the house. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: The one that was sexually abusing Val [Valencia Dixon]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Was there any sexual abuse by this minister with any of the Pack children or just Val? Speaker 2: No by the time he came along the Pack children were gone, it was just us three there (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: I remember him--I remember him--she made, had him sleep in the room with us. Speaker 1: So that made three of you in the same room? Speaker 2: Yeah, the preacher. Speaker 1: Were you in the same bed or? Speaker 2: No, me and Wayne [Wayne Bell] slept in the same bed. Too old to sleep in the same bed, his foot or his head this way, mine this way, and I remember as a little kid we used to like fight with our feet like kicking, god, boy we used to fight all the time and we use to make jokes about getting kind of big being in the bed together (unclear) and get on the floor and we'd take turns and sleep on the floor, but this guy he came to the house. They invited him there and since he was a preacher she was gonna have him change our souls. Speaker 1: How old was he approximately (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, everybody seemed to be old to me back then but he must've been in his late twenties or early thirties. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I remember this fool he smelled Brut all the time and he--we came home from school and he had taken over the room, whatever we had on the dresser top--he had Brut and shoe polish and all this kind of stuff, this men's stuff on there and which we never felt like it was our room, so we didn't have a lot of complaint about it. So we just watched him, we were good at watching adults and watching people. I never knew he was doing that to her, but the way--the impression people must've got that we weren't worth very much because we weren't with our parents and the people we were with didn't want us. She [Fisher's foster mother, Queen McDonald Pack] used to say we, you know that nobody wanted us and not to think that she wanted us because we lived at her house. She had some bills she needed to pay. She would tell us that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so that's basically the impression we got (unclear) her. Speaker 1: Okay, so the first time you knew that Val was being sexually abused was when Val became pregnant by this--? Speaker 2: Yeah and I didn't know about pregnancy, I knew about stuff, I thought I did but I didn't understand that, I was too old not to understand that. You see people have to talk to their kids, but you know they were a shame-faced family and I guess sex (laughter) was a shameful thing. Speaker 1: Right. The young minister's name, do you remember what that was? Speaker 2: No, I remember his name, they called him Elder Taylor [ph.]. Speaker 1: Elder Taylor? Speaker 2: Yeah, that's what they called him. Speaker 1: Okay, first name you don't remember? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: His first name was Elder. Speaker 1: Oh, oh okay. Speaker 2: You know, as far as I knew. Speaker 1: Right, right okay. Speaker 2: And he was like a slick kind of guy, thought he was slick you know and the kind of guy that wear slacks that were pressed very neatly, crisp shirt, always smelled like cologne, English Leather, Hai Karate, some crazy smell he'd have and he reminded me of a more refined pimp. Story_ID: 466372 Speaker 1: You know where I lived in the Glenville [Cleveland, Ohio] area there was a street called 105 [105th Street] that had pimps and prostitutes and they weren't like pimps and prostitutes that I guess people imagine when they think of pimps and prostitutes. These people lived in the neighborhood (laughter), but they were pimps and prostitutes, and they didn't have on the Huggy Bear clothes you know like the stacks with the goldfish in the heel and the, they were just like basically beautiful people you would see (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Dress well, smell well? Speaker 1: Yeah, you'd go to the shoeshine parlor and they were in there with the hustlers and they were all in there and the girls would have on these boots and they would sit up on this chair and they'd get their boots shined and pimps would get their shoes shined and all hustlers would be in there shooting pool and you, you could come to the door and say, "Hey, is--do you know where Rodney [ph.] is?" And they'd tell you, they wouldn't let you come in, they had respect for you, young kids it seemed. And I-- Speaker 2: And this was all in the neighborhood? Speaker 1: Yeah, I--and, and it was like, it was like a different time, but even people who were doing illicit things had rules. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: They had--they would never involve kids in what they were doing and you probably wouldn't even know what they were doing. They would never ask you to do anything; they'd tell you, "Hey, get outta here." Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: And you could come into the barbershop and they'd tell you, "Go wait outside awhile." Then somebody would come walking out and then he'd tell you, "Go in there and get your cut." Well you can get your hair cut for a dinner, like, they were like see people would come in with a pie and put it on the table and they'd sit in the chair and that was how they got their hair cut (laughter). Speaker 2: Right. The, the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That was funny. Story_ID: 466373 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) When Val [Valencia Dixon] had to go to Mrs. Pack [Queen McDonald Pack] and tell her that she was pregnant and who the father of the child was, how did Mrs. Pack react to Elder Taylor [ph.]? Speaker 2: Well, I don't know all the in-between stuff, but Elder Taylor moved out for a little while, but then he was always still around. Speaker 1: In the neighborhood [Glenville, Cleveland, Ohio]? Speaker 2: Around the family. Speaker 1: Around the house? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I think it's funny how people are like that when they're like that. They could have a child molester in their family and if that child molester molests your child, his brother's child and the brother says, "Hey my baby told me that you put your hands on her. I'm gonna do something about it." Rather than get in a fight with you or kill you or have you kill me, I'm gonna go to the police and I'm gonna tell them about it and then let them handle this. The whole family would shut off to the victim and the victim's father and embrace the child molester because you don't supposed to go outside the family and bring people into your business. So they would much rather have Christmas dinner with the molester than the victim. The victims become outsiders because of shame as if these things don't go on. Speaker 1: Right, right. In this particular case Mrs. Pack took Val to an abortion clinic or-- Speaker 2: No there was no abortion clinics. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: This was before that Roe v. Wade [Roe v. Wade, 1973] stuff. This was before all of that. Speaker 1: Took her to a--some maybe a midwife or some, some place. Speaker 2: Somewhere. Speaker 1: Where they could abort the pregnancy. Speaker 2: Yeah from what I understand that's what happened. Speaker 1: Okay, okay and then Val kept quiet just as if nothing had happened, and the rest of the family kept quiet? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And she never married, never have, could have children. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Always loved children, always was everybody's kids' auntie, always one of those kind of people who when they see a kid and love the kid and be sad when the kid have to go. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Just, a--she was loud I remember that, talking loud. I'm like, "Golly why you so loud?" You know I was really quiet, and I was like, "Why do you talk so loud?" Then she'd like, "Am I talking loud." I'm like, "Yeah, why don't you talk a little quieter?" But it was her, I think she was an alarmed, like she was always on edge. It was her way of fighting it, her feelings and, and it was like loud as hell. I'm like golly you know. Why don't you stop (laughter)? Story_ID: 466374 Speaker 1: During your school years, what was it like academically for you? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Let me tell you, I probably could have done better than I did. I remember at the beginning of every school year I would get A's and Bs, maybe a C in there. I would be so surprised because I'd be more focused after the summer you know, back to school you know and then I would bring--I remember bringing report cards home having A's and Bs and said, "Look Madea [Fisher's foster mother, Queen McDonald Pack], look," showing people--nobody cared. I remember nobody caring and so as the year went on ever semester it would get worse and worse until I wound up having to go to summer school the last semester, Fs and Ds, and so I feel looking back that I could have done better if I only had some support. If I had people who felt like, "Wow, Antwone [HistoryMaker Antwone Fisher] you know. That's great," they didn't have to give me anything but just say, acknowledge that I did a good job. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And so, so education at least going to school was more for social reasons, it's where I found a family in my neighborhood friends. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: I think that's how gangs start. We weren't gangs you know, there was no real gangs where I grew up in the time where when I was growing up, but there was some kids in the neighborhood [Glenville, Cleveland, Ohio], a group of boys that I was friends with, we would hang out together, walk around, go to the park, play basketball, but we would never do anything, and if an adult said hey to us or what are you guys doing? We'd be like oh, we aren't supposed to be doing this. It'd be like oh (laughter) and it was a different time and I guess and--but school, I was always good in art and I used to write poetry even I was a kid you know, and I wrote this poem 'Who Will Cry for the Little Boy,' it like got to be a famous poem you know? And then I have a book of poetry ['Who Will Cry for the Little Boy?' Antwone Fisher] out so and then that poem is the title of the book. I wrote this poem when I was sixteen, they put me in a reform school called George Junior Republic [Grove City, Pennsylvania] because after my foster mother was done being a foster mother she didn't want to be in the business anymore. They couldn't find anywhere for me, no one would take a teenage boy so they put me in reform school, which isn't unusual because I wasn't the only kid there who was there because they had nowhere else to go, and I wrote that poem and later when I was in the [U.S.] Navy, a Navy psychiatrist [Lieutenant Commander Williams] asked me to write something to express how I felt and I remembered that poem and I wrote it down and I gave it to him and he thought it was really good so I kept it. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: I always kept it, and I would always write poems. You know in the Navy I would write love poems for the, for the guys to send to their wives and girlfriends and making money that way. Story_ID: 466375 Speaker 1: Let's get to that point where you and your sibling, brothers and sisters were getting to an age where the Packs were no longer interested in, in taking care of foster children. Speaker 2: Well Val [Valencia Dixon] left first. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She was older and so she went to Job Corps and after Job Corps (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did she finish high school first? Speaker 2: High school, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: After Job Corps she joined the [U.S.] Air Force. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And something happened, I don't know. Either she left early or they let her go. I don't know exactly what happened. She, after she came back from the Air Force she wasn't like quite the same person, but then there was sometimes where I didn't see her grow, so maybe it's just something I missed. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: But Wayne [Wayne Bell], he--Wayne actually left before Val. He met his mother and wanted to go and be with her and I told you how that wound up. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And me, so I was the last one there. We had another brother named Kevin [ph.]. He--his mother was black and his father was white, and Ms. Pack [Queen McDonald Pack] used to say that-- Speaker 1: When, when did Kevin come? Speaker 2: He came--I must've been eight when he came and he seemed like he, he was--he must've been three or four. Speaker 1: Okay, so he didn't sleep in the room with you and Wayne (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, in fact they put us outta the bed and put him in the bed. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He, he--we slept on a cot and he slept in the twin bed and so he was a special kid because he was half white. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And she, my foster mother would talk about how beautiful he was and talk about you know the difference between us and I remember me and Kevin were like the best of friends you know. I wanted to be his friend because they liked him and I wanted to be him, you know. You know I couldn't be him though, stuck being myself. So, so Kevin's mother claimed that she--he was the product of a rape and so, so she says so she--I guess they had a hard time having him around, but it came a time when they wanted him to come around, and Kevin would never go anywhere without me, and so this was before I made my big announcement, and she would always wanna take him on the weekend. So it would get me outta church and so I would always encourage Kevin, we need to go to your mama's house (laughter). Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: And so Kevin, it's so terrible too you know, Kevin's mother wanted him to stay, and then Kevin would walk over back to the neighborhood [Glenville, Cleveland, Ohio], it wasn't that far, and he--apparently there was a radio disc jockey in Cleveland [Ohio] and he was friends with the mother and he was raping Kevin, and Kevin was--came--one day had walked over to our house and he got a phone call at our house. I guess he gave the phone number and told the guy he was coming over for the weekend or whatever he was gonna do, and Ms. Pack listened in on their phone call and surmised and came to the conclusion that the man had been molesting--and this was a person who was a disc jockey at one of the popular black radio stations in Cleveland and so that was the one time I really liked, was happy about Ms. Pack 'cause she, she took a stand about that or she made a fuss about that 'cause she, she did something, she, she told some--she did something and it was a positive thing, but I remember Wayne started teasing Kevin. Speaker 1: And she told the authorities (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She reported it I think or she called, she called his mother. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, and told her and she confronted Kevin, and I was there and Wayne started teasing Kevin about it and me and Wayne would fight about him teasing him and Kevin stopped coming over, and then we heard that Kevin burned the house down, his mama's house down, and I never heard from him again and or about him again until my movie ['Antwone Fisher'] came out because he was depicted in the movie too. The studio wanted to make--find out where he was and they found him in jail. Speaker 1: Okay well do we know what the charges were against him? Speaker 2: Burglary I think it was. Speaker 1: Burglary, okay. Speaker 2: He had burglary charges. Story_ID: 466376 Speaker 1: I could never beat him [Fisher's foster brother, Wayne Bell] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 1: I must've beat him a handful of times but then he'd always make me pay the next time. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So you know, when it came to, to fighting it was the only power we had was in the street. We didn't have no power in the house, that's how gangs get started. Speaker 2: That's it, that's very true. Speaker 1: If I can't have it just so you have children you gotta let them have power, decision making power. You gotta have, you gotta let 'em feel things you know. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Let 'em be angry and express it, you know what I mean? Speaker 2: I understand. Speaker 1: And so. Speaker 2: I understand. Speaker 1: And so if you don't do it there, let 'em have it there, they'll have it in the street and they'll be outta control. Speaker 2: You, you've done very, very well in explaining the motivation behind a lot of that and the meanness of the family and the, so forth. I think you know by understanding this some, some child--I can't help but think but some child will, will benefit from, from it in the future. I notice you have Dennis [ph.], the hang. Speaker 1: Oh yeah. Speaker 2: Over there. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): You have speed. Speaker 2: Okay we are up to speed all right one by one the children are leaving the Pack household. Mrs. Pack [Queen McDonald Pack] is losing interest in having foster children or perhaps a little better off because she doesn't have to have the money now. First Val [Valencia Dixon] leaves and then Wayne. Speaker 1: Yes, well Wayne leaves and then Val leaves. Speaker 2: Oh, Wayne leaves and then Val leaves and then Kevin [ph.]. Speaker 1: Wait a minute first Kevin leaves because his mother wants him. Speaker 2: Okay, right. Speaker 1: Then, then Wayne leaves, then Val leaves, then she decides to take mental patients, Vietnam [Vietnam War] veterans and put 'em in the room. She had this big Victorian house and I became the orderly. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: You know I'm dyslexic and I didn't know why, why I couldn't read like the other kids and it was like a torture for me, and so she put me in charge of dispensing medication and I couldn't even read the labels, and I told her that I didn't know which one was which. It was almost like, "It don't matter, as long as they get it during the day you know." I was thinking like as a kid that ain't right, but these guys god bless 'em wherever they are you know it was like terrible you know. There was one guy named Charles [ph.] I had to bathe this guy, that was so humiliating. Speaker 2: How old were you? Speaker 1: At the time I must've been eleven. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And I was so upset about having to bathe him but I did have some compassion for him because he was like a kid you know like worse than a kid. It wasn't like me I--he didn't have, I didn't understand that, and there was guy Howard [ph.] who she put in a room with me and he would grind his teeth and then there was this guy who did not like taking a bath. There was some kind of product called Psssst! [Psssst! Instant Dry Shampoo] that he would used to wash his hair with, you remember--well anyway it was a product, and I was thinking like this is crazy you know? And then there was Benny [ph.] who was the most sane of them all, big Robert [ph.] and little Robert [ph.]. It was crazy. Speaker 2: And you were in junior high school? Speaker 1: I was in junior high school and I would--you know I had like developed a reputation in the neighborhood [Glenville, Cleveland, Ohio] that not as a tough guy but a nice guy who-- Speaker 2: Soft spoken. Speaker 1: Yeah, it was kind of like and then but just don't get him mad, that was the thing you know and I had to explain to everybody, all my friends why all these mental patients or people who were like obviously nuts laying on the front lawn, sitting on the porch, and I was thinking like you know this is like destroying everything I've built up you know what I'm saying (laughter). So, so I was like this is what's doing nothing for my--. So then she decided that she was making more trips back down to Mississippi, her sister, she had a sister named Esther [sic. Estella Jenkins], and she was sick. They had a lot of land down in Mississippi and she decided that she wanted to go back down there and I think they were just retiring and then maybe that's what it was, because when they took me they were already in middle age. Story_ID: 466377 Speaker 1: Let me stop you here, now she was Queen Esther Pack [Queen McDonald Pack] but she also had a sister named-- Speaker 2: Esther [sic. Estella Jenkins]. Speaker 1: Just Esther? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: Maybe that was her mother's favorite bible character you know you never know. Speaker 1: Right okay, I just wanted to bring that part up. Speaker 2: No imagination (laughter), I guess you know. Now one thing I can say about my mother [Fisher's biological mother, Eva Fisher] she did have an imagination, she named me after Fats Domino. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Yeah and so, so I always real proud of that. I was the only Antwone [HistoryMaker Antwone Fisher] in the neighborhood [Glenville, Cleveland, Ohio] you know. Yeah so she-- Speaker 1: Sorry to interrupt, go ahead. Speaker 2: --she, she started trying to figure out how she could get rid of me I suppose, because the mental patients was easy. You just tell 'em, "Hey I can't do this," but me it was different because I had lived there for so long and as in the family and everybody that was associated with them, see they were shame-based people, she couldn't just say, "Antwone, when we took you we were already in middle age and we are gonna retire and we, we can't take you with us," and you know she could've said it like that, but instead she had this crazy friend, only reason I was friends with him because he was a good fighter and I didn't want him to beat me up so I'd be friends with him. Jesse [ph.], who in the movie ['Antwone Fisher']--we show him being murdered or killed and he--I told Jesse, "Don't come to the front door, when you come to get me never come to the front door," because we weren't allowed to come to the front door, only white people and the insurance man was allowed to come to the front door, so we had to come to the side door. Speaker 1: And Jesse was neither so (laughter) therefore. Speaker 2: Jesse comes to the front door and she called him, "That hoodlum nigger Jesse you love so much." She used to--that was his whole name (laughter), so she would see him--see Jesse stopped going to school and he would stand out in front of the record store and spin around you know dance like James Brown, and she would tell me, "I saw that hoodlum nigger Jesse you love so much up at the record store. You'd better stop hanging around that nigger or he gone get you in a world of trouble." That was her whole speech you know, so he comes to the front door and says, "Is Antwone here? We're going to the movies," knowing that the movies was off limits because it was the devil's going on. Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: And so she called me and says, "That hoodlum nigger Jesse came by her and said you guys were going to the movies, now nigger who told you, you could go to the movies?" She says, "I done told you once I done told you a thousand times that nigger gonna get you in a world of trouble." I said, "I don't know, I wasn't thinking I was just trying to appease him and be friendly." She said, "You know what I'm tired of you nigger, go pack your stuff and get outta my house." And I was like--she had threatened me with that so many times and I was like, "Well you know he's not so bad." I was trying to change the subject and she said, "Nigger I done told you gone up there and pack your stuff and get outta my house." So I went up I had been through this before. So I didn't do anything, I just sat in the room and then she came up and threw some paper bags in there and I said oh. She said, "Put your stuff in this," and I said oh. She said, "'Cause I don't want you taking none of my nice suitcases," like she had some Louis Vuitton bags or something like that in the house. So anyway I didn't see anything I wanted. Speaker 1: And I wanna emphasize, and you are eleven? Speaker 2: I was fourteen at the time. Speaker 1: Fourteen, okay? Speaker 2: So I figured she's just messing around like she always does, so I put a couple of things in the bag, the things I liked just in case she was serious, but and so I got back in the bed and then nighttime came and I said, "Just like I thought, she ain't serious like before." Half of me wants to go, but another half of me don't wanna go because this is all I know. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: So I get up and I wait, listen to the noises downstairs. I know she's down there, but she's not cooking any breakfast which is unusual but that's--you know whatever. So I go downstairs like I'm gonna go to school and as soon as she sees me she says, "You got your junk packed?" I said oh, my goodness, she's serious! So I said, "Yes ma'am." So I went back upstairs and looked around again and got the paper bag, when I came down they usually used to leave my lunch money fifty cent on the table, on the kitchen table, and it was there when I first saw it, the first time I came down I was relieved. I said oh, it's just my lunch money so I'm going to school, and she, when I came back down she pointed to the fifty cents and says, "There's bus fare go back where you came from." And I was like I don't know where I came from I was two years old when I got here. So the only place I could think of was the social service office. So I walked up the street. Speaker 1: With your paper bags? Speaker 2: With my bags yeah (simultaneous). Story_ID: 466378 Speaker 1: All my friends were at the bus stop. By this time I was in the tenth grade and I was going to John Hay High School in Cleveland [Ohio] and we would have to take a bus to there so I rode the bus with my friends and they were all laughing. You know we were all on the bus like kids you know and my mind, I just was thinking like--it was raining that day, I was thinking like oh, no I'm not gonna be going to school and I'm not gonna see my friends is what my whole thing was 'cause these were all my whole world, the kids in the neighborhood [Glenville, Cleveland, Ohio], and so when everybody got off at 105 [105th Street] and St. Claire [sic.], I had to go in the opposite direction. I got a transfer and when they got off the bus they could walk the two or three blocks to the high school, and I remember standing at the bus stop and my friend going, "Hey man where you going?" I said, "Oh I got something to do I'll be in school later in the day I got an appointment." And I went down there and the social worker came down and said, "What are you doing here?" She--I told her, "Ms. Pack [Queen McDonald Pack] sent me back." She said, "Send you back, send you back where?" I said, "She told me to get out." She said oh, and then Ms. Pack comes walking through the door and she says, "That nigger stole my money, I want my money." See she got ashamed, she knew sending me down there in the rain like that wasn't right and it was her pride. She could have just left me and just said hey, I don't want him no more. She didn't have to see their faces or anything, but her pride you know. She had had me since I was two and she would send me out in the rain like that. So I, I felt like this was the first time I had like real protection so I said, "You say that you're a Christian and you're lying and you know you're lying." She didn't say anything 'cause she wasn't accustomed to me talking that way. I said, "I don't have no money and you know I didn't take your money." I emptied out my pockets, I kicked off my shoes and my social worker was telling me to put my pockets back in and take my shoes and put 'em back on and I couldn't do it. I just wanted them to--see I took all my clothes off, just to show 'em that I didn't have nothing and she was lying, and she just stood there and she said, "Well I'm sending him back," and she said, "That's fine. Is there anything else you need?" And she said, "Nah," and she said, "Well you can go now," and Ms. Pack left, and then she took me into her cubicle, my social worker and she started reading from my file. She said, "Well your mother's name is Eva Mae Fisher [Eva Fisher]." I never heard that before. She said, "Your middle name is Quenton, your mother named you after Fats Domino." I said, "Wow, I have a middle name?" I didn't know I had a middle name. She said, "Your mother claims that your father's name was Edward, Edward Elkins." I said, "Wow, I have a father?" I didn't know, I thought you know I appeared in this world, the way it felt all you know, and then that I told her that wow you know all the things she had said that my mother had told her social worker that there was an article in the Cleveland paper, the black paper called Call and Post. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: That there was an article about my father's death and I always remembered that, June 13th or June 16th she told me and I said, "Wow, sounds like it must've been raining all the time back then." She said, "Ah you just feel that way 'cause it's raining now." Story_ID: 466379 Speaker 1: And they sent me to an orphanage, Metzenbaum Children Center [Metzenbaum Children's Center, Cleveland, Ohio]. I liked it there, I remember it was a bunch of kids there and this was the first time I really had like the real racism thing happen. Me and this kid, he's a white kid he--we had to take turns cleaning the boys bathroom and it was his turn to do it. Speaker 2: Approximately how many children did they have at the Metzenbaum? Speaker 1: There they had maybe a hundred or so but kids would come and go all the time and--well this kid, the lady, she's a white lady working with us that evening. She said, "Antwone [HistoryMaker Antwone Fisher] go clean the bathroom." I said, "No, it's not my day it's his day," and then he stood--he said, "Why don't we make Antwone do it anyway that's why we brought those niggers over here (laughter)." I said, "What," I got him good too, and I-- Speaker 2: You hit him? Speaker 1: I hit him good, he took off running, I couldn't hardly catch him and he was hollering and screaming but he's the kind of guy that was hollering and screaming and still hurling racial epithets at me (laughter), you know (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He didn't know any better. Speaker 1: I said, "What's going on (laughter) with this guy," so, so the next the day, the lady who ran the orphanage, her name was Ms. Day [ph.] called me in there, called the lady in there. Speaker 2: Was she black or white? Speaker 1: She's a white lady. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And we went in and she says, "We were really disappointed in you Antwone, we were really surprised at your behavior," and she says, "Well what, what is exactly--what happened, tell me in your own words," and I told her and she looked at the lady and said, "Is that true?" And the lady said, "No, that's not true. I told Antwone to clean the bathroom and he refused," and I was like, wow, what is that, she's lying, and then I started thinking why would she lie, she's an adult, she don't have to lie? And then after I started thinking about it I said wow, this is racism. Oh, this is how it feels because I was kind of insulated 'cause I lived in an all-black neighborhood [Glenville, Cleveland, Ohio]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And so that was my first one and I was like okay. Speaker 2: What did they do to--because now there was a situation (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) They-- Speaker 2: --between this white counselor and this supervisor as to what the incident was? Speaker 1: They said that, Antwone, I had a temper, and I went off on the kid because I didn't wanna do it and I blamed him and so. Speaker 2: So this is what Ms. Bell [ph.]? Speaker 1: This is what Ms. Day, this is the conclusion and that I needed counseling, of course I was getting counseling anyway (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So they did not believe you? Speaker 1: No, they didn't believe me 'cause she was an adult and they figured why would she lie, and I don't know why she would lie, but I figured that's what must be racism. Said okay, that don't feel good, okay so I can deal with it. Story_ID: 466380 Speaker 1: They were trying to find a place for me and they took me to Boystowns in Cleveland [Ohio], just for an interview and I'm sitting there and who walks in? Ms. Pack [Queen McDonald Pack]. Why is Ms. Pack there? Immediately I thought they're trying to get us back together, this is a set up, but what had happened was Wayne [Wayne Bell] had ran away from there and Ms. Pack, for some reason he--they called her or because of Val [Valencia Dixon] or whatever the connection was. His belongings was gonna go to Val since that was her--yeah. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And so she was there, so either--whether it was God or whatever, but that was the moment that I decided that I wanna leave Cleveland, I wanna leave Glenville [Cleveland, Ohio]. I don't want to run into her anymore, and then they said, "Well where do you wanna go," as if I knew where to go. I said, "I don't know, send me to the moon, I just don't wanna be here," and they found George Junior Republic [Grove City, Pennsylvania] which is a reform school which is a very nice place and when I went there, I did well there, I liked it and I liked it (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now give us that name again for the record. Speaker 1: George Junior Republic. Speaker 2: George? Speaker 1: Junior Republic, it's in Grove City, Pennsylvania. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: On the west coast of Pennsylvania, the west end in near Allentown [sic.] and I think Erie, Pennsylvania around there. Speaker 2: Okay so they sent you out of state? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And I stayed there 'til I graduated from high school, and then when I graduated from high school, of course, I didn't have a family so they put me in the men's shelter, I was emancipated by then mind you, they gave me like some money, like seventy bucks [dollars] and told me I was on my own and that's when it really got crazy 'cause this place was full of like homosexual men and, and-- Speaker 2: Let's not skip too, too far. Let's go to George Junior. Speaker 1: Republic? Speaker 2: Republic, there when you thought you were going back to Mrs. Pack, instead they sent you to the reform school? Speaker 1: No, I, I knew that I wasn't going back to Mrs. Pack's house. I was just confused as to why she showed up and I thought that maybe they were trying to. Speaker 2: Send you back? Speaker 1: Put the band back together so you know (laughter). Speaker 2: But Wayne had left for good even though he had run away. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: He was staying with his mother, and Valencia had left also. Speaker 1: Yeah she, she had left, but Valencia had graduated and she went to, to wherever she went, but she was in good standing with the Pack family. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: She always stayed near and around or she was, you know like she would call and that kind of thing even though she lived at, at I think it was some place. Speaker 2: Some place, okay. Story_ID: 466381 Speaker 1: So they put you into this reform school and you're about to tell us what that was like. Speaker 2: Oh, it was--what I remember the first day I got there they deloused me (laughter), you know they made me get in the shower, and they had this special soap and it really dried my skin out and then they put this powder on me. I was thinking like this is kind of much, but anyway they gave me some clothes or a change of clothes and I remember walking out of the, the place where you get. Speaker 1: Below? Speaker 2: Brought in yeah and it was like a big giant swimming pool and there was a bunch of cottages they called them and I remember this black kid, he yelled, he said, "Hey, is he coming to such and such a cottage?" And the guy Reddie [ph.] said, "Yeah," and they said, "Good, we need some more black people over there (laughter)." So I said cool, there's gone be some black people okay. So I went over there and it was like, it was nice you know. It was my first time to be around people who weren't just black 'cause there were basically blacks and whites, there were no really no Hispanics or Orientals [Asian Americans], just black and white, and Wayne [Wayne Bell] used to like rock and roll music. I don't know how that happened, but he did, he liked Led Zeppelin and Deep Purple, and he would play that music Ms. Pack [Queen McDonald Pack] called the devil's music. He would play that music so loud, I mean he would get a transistor radio and he had this electronic genius friend who would like made a speaker box and showed him how to hook it up. Oh it was crazy and so I was accustomed to listening to the James Gang and different rock and roll artists and I started liking rock music a little more because I was being exposed to and, but I always have loved soul music and soul music was the thing that carried me through the Packs, through George Junior [George Junior Republic, Grove City, Pennsylvania]. It was always music and, and music and this new music which became more broadened, more artists helped me too, but it was a cool place and I remember being allowed to make the fire in the fireplace in the wintertime. I really felt proud of that and everybody was enjoying it and. Speaker 1: Now, in these individual cottages you made the fire? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And was this, how many, how many kids were in each cottage? Speaker 2: Each cottage was a different size and so the cottage I lived there was--in the room I lived in was, there were four people to a room, and so along the back they might have four rooms and there were four people in each room along the sides. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But two people per room and then at the end of the hall was one person in the room. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then the cottage uncle, uncle-- Speaker 1: But it was integrated black and white? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. But a majority of black? Speaker 2: Majority white. Speaker 1: Majority--it was still majority white, okay fine. Story_ID: 466382 Speaker 1: There was Uncle Dave [ph.], we called him Uncle Dave, he's this cowboy, white guy and he used to love country music and I remember the song that was popular then was Glen Campbell's 'A Lineman for the County' [sic. 'Wichita Lineman']. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah and he would play that and--it was the first time, you would think (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now, now was he an inmate there or was he? Speaker 1: He was, no, he was more like an officer. Speaker 2: Counselor, okay. Speaker 1: And you know he was an officer and he ran that whole cottage. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And he knew everybody there, and so when I saw him I said, "Oh no, he's a hillbilly and a cowboy," and but you know that was the first lesson I learned about judging books by the cover, because he probably was the most fair adult that I ever--the first fair adult that I ever met. I remember I had this towel, this little skinny white kid was coming though, I whipped the towel up, I popped him real good and he screamed like, I said, oh, I'm in trouble now, (laughter) 'cause he didn't know who did it, but he went to Uncle Dave and Uncle Dave had this thing called the shine line, the floors were all like, what do you call that? Tile floor and so they would make us tie, tie pieces of blanket on our shoes and go down the hallway like we're skating, and they would put wax on the floor so we'd be shining the hallways (laughter). Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So they were gonna make the whole cottage do a shine line, if whoever did it, didn't show up and say, hey they popped the kid with a towel right. So I said ah man, this white guy is gonna get me but I gotta go 'cause I can't let all, let everybody do the shine line, so I went in there I said, "Uncle Dave I popped the kid," and he said, "Okay, don't do it again." I said, "Oh wow." He said, "The little, the kid is little. He has a hard enough time as it is, don't pop the kid, you ought to help him if anything," and then he let me go. I ain't never had nobody let me go from nothing that I did before and I was like wow. So okay, so, so I was kind of like the little boy's angel, guardian angel there for a minute (laugher), but I wanna skip. Later on after I, I wrote the book ['Finding Fish,' Antwone Quenton Fisher] I talked about Uncle Dave in the book and about that particular story and George Junior [George Junior Republic, Grove City, Pennsylvania] is really proud of me and the way I talk about George Junior Republic in the book, and Uncle Dave, I talk about him and a woman was trying to find me and she found me and said that she'd like for me to call Uncle Dave. I said, "Wow, I haven't seen him since I was like seventeen," and she said she saw him in the Walmart and she asked him, "Did you read the book," and he said, "What book?" She said, "One of your boys wrote a book and he put--you're in the book," and then he got the book and read it and I described him as being a cowboy when I saw him and he was white as a sheet, but he was the first person that was ever fair with me and the first lesson in not choosing, judging a book by the cover and they said that he stood in the public inside the Walmart crying about that, he had touched this boy's life. Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: Yeah, and so it made me feel good. I talked to him, he can hardly talk to me and they're all really proud of me. Speaker 2: Right, right (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah and so, so that, that time was a real good time for me. Story_ID: 466383 Speaker 1: Any other highlights there while in that reform school [George Junior Republic, Grove City, Pennsylvania]? Speaker 2: You know I had, I had won a scholarship to San Francisco Art Institute [San Francisco, California]. Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: I was really good, I'm still good at drawing and painting and all that, it's just something, probably I got from the Elkins, but they didn't have dorms or anything like that and I didn't have no family or nothing. So I didn't have an opportunity to take advantage of that. I remember the principal, his name was George Tutsi [ph.], and he was like this little guy, looked like Sergeant Carter [Gunnery Sergeant Vincent J. Carter] from that show 'Gomer Pyle' ['Gomer Pyle, U.S.M.C.']? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Ah man and he was something else you know, but he--I, I think those people even though they were hard on us, they had to have loved all of us in the way that they love their job and they, they're hopeful people. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And so they loved us in the idea--loved the idea that they may have an opportunity to do something. I think these people actually believed it. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: This small town group of people believed that they could do something for these kids and I think some people do things for a job and there were certainly people there who were there because they needed a job, but the administration, meaning the principal and some of the counselors, these people were sincere and when I think back on that time, I think about the patience that they had and I felt like it was the right place for me. Speaker 1: So you were what age when you got out of the reform school? Speaker 2: I was seventeen. Speaker 1: Okay, and-- Speaker 2: I graduated when I was seventeen, how smart? I accelerated because I had support and I did my work and I did well. Speaker 1: Okay, academically you did well? Speaker 2: Yes. Story_ID: 466384 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers, our videographer is Scott Stearns. We're interviewing [HistoryMaker] Antwone Fisher as follow-up on an interview we started some--well I think about what two years ago? Speaker 2: A year ago. Speaker 1: A year ago? Okay all right, and today's date is September 19, 2008. Correct? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And we are in your home in Los Angeles, California? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: All right. Story_ID: 466385 Speaker 1: So let's start. We left off with you at the George Junior Republic [Grove City, Pennsylvania] school so? Speaker 2: I'm wondering if I talked about when I arrived? Speaker 1: I think so 'cause we, we, I think from what I have down here you talked about Bill Ward and your relationship with him and so I think you've got us in there, we're, we're in the process. Speaker 2: In the school. Speaker 1: In school. Speaker 2: Okay so there I was at George Junior and I remember my feeling about being at George Junior, I was kind of--had a fatalistic attitude about everything back then and whether I was in a detention situation or whether I was living in a nice home man, I didn't think--nothing mattered to me then. I was kind of numb to people, I didn't like to talk very much and when people would focus on me I would get upset because I, I didn't want to feel special and I felt like if people were singling me out even for a--for some sort of praise or something that I did well, I felt like that it was bringing attention on me that I didn't deserve. I, I think being at George Junior was the beginning of my growing out of being or feeling like I wasn't worthy of like love or attention or a friendship. The kind of friendship where people would do things for you and it didn't make me feel weird that they were doing something nice for me. Not that I didn't feel like people shouldn't do things nice for me but when I was at George Junior there was like a culture they were trying to foster a culture that we should all take care of one another and some of us were in the same situation so since it was the culture and, and everybody was encouraged to do that, it didn't seem so odd. Where I had grown up as a foster kid, feeling special was a reward and those who weren't getting the reward felt bad so we didn't want our foster siblings to feel bad so we didn't want the reward because we had banded together in some kind of emotional alliance that we'd rather not feel good. We'd just rather feel bad because the good times never last long enough and bad times, if you can deal with that you can weather good times, the bad times were harder. So at George Junior I felt for the first time what it was like to have the kind of camaraderie that, that was--that extended beyond just a few people and then I felt like I had become a part of a group, and I had a social worker at the time when I was a foster kid. When they sent me to George Junior they, they transferred my case to the, the juvenile justice department so everybody felt like (unclear) because I was being presented as a person, a part of this department that I was a delinquent juvenile and the reason I was at George Junior was because I had issues as far as behavior or I had committed some crime, but I hadn't and--but that didn't bother me that people you know felt that way or thought of me that way. Story_ID: 466386 Speaker 1: Bill Ward always tried to impress upon me that I had to start planning for myself and for my future, and the idea of planning for myself you know seemed so daunting to me and because you know I had never had to consider anything, just like any child, never had to consider what I was going to do with my life or what was going to happen when I left George Junior [George Junior Republic, Grove City, Pennsylvania]. Every time they would mention, Bill Ward would mention that when I graduated that I would be on my own and what that meant never really sunk in. I guess the closer I got to June, I think it was June 7, 1977, graduation day for me at George Junior Republic, I felt almost like somebody had, you know like had cut out the--cut away the outer shell of me that I had created this shell around myself and that I used other people to reassure me that the shell existed, meaning that I would behave in a way that made people bump into the shell, not be able to get in and not to have anybody to do that against I felt like they had taken away my shell and then I was totally exposed to everything, and it was really scary for me that there was no, gonna be nobody to say so, what's gonna happen to me now, so what's gonna happen after I--I could always ask that. So what is the plan for me and when he was saying you have to plan for yourself, you know, the closer I got to graduation the more afraid I became, until the day I was graduating and it was such a happy day I remembered. I took this picture with the principal of the school, his name was George Tutsi [ph.] and he was like a guy who looked kind of look Sergeant Carter [Gunnery Sergeant Vincent J. Carter] in this television series called 'Gomer Pyle' ['Gomer Pyle, U.S.M.C.'] you know he had these pit marks in his face and he was really a good person and his assistant principal was Mr. Slincheck [ph.] yeah, both hard guys but you know you're dealing with a bunch of kids who are there for disciplinary problems, but I really--I came to appreciate them and I took that picture and I was so proud to be able to take a picture with them, and the very next day Bill Ward came to George Junior to pick me up and I had some things that I had acquired just from being there and I had this trunk and he put it in his car and took me to Cleveland [Ohio] and we stopped in front of this men's shelter, it was a YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] and he told me that I would have to watch out for myself and try to keep myself safe and you know I was an emancipated minor now and he gave me some money, I think it was about seventy bucks [dollars] and that was it and they took me up to this room, it was so musty and it smelled like a, someone who had not taken care of themselves very much like bathe had lived in the room and never left much and I felt like I needed to open the window so it could get some air in there and it was almost like a cell, the size of a cell and a bed, it was a cot actually with a mattress. I was happy that there was a door on it that would lock but I couldn't get the window open and realized it was painted shut and so I felt almost like entombed, and it wasn't like George Junior where there was people to talk to who were my age you know walking through the place. You could see that there were adults, people who were you know kind of scary you know and so I thought about you know what I would do, and how I would get in and out of the place 'cause I had a survival instinct that I had developed since I was a little boy. Story_ID: 466387 Speaker 1: Let me ask you this, let me go back a little bit and did they give you any counseling at George Junior [George Junior Republic, Grove City, Pennsylvania] about what--you know or guidance towards a vocation or anything like that? Speaker 2: Well in George Junior they had a vocational school and I took auto body and, and food service and I had these certificates. I had all these certificates when I left George Junior which I felt were gonna really help and work in my favor so, yeah when I got settled in that room [at the Young Men's Christian Association (YMCA)] I would--I mean the room was such that I didn't even wanna take--or unpack or anything. I kind of lived out that trunk and in just a few days I went out looking for a job, trying to find auto body places and everywhere I went they said, well you have these certificates and they all say you know--have the justice court, you know have writing on it that, that appeared that I had come from jail. Speaker 1: From a juvenile delinquent situation. Speaker 2: Yeah, nobody wanted, wanted me working for them because they didn't know whether they could trust me you know and then some of the was--some of the reasons for not hiring me was that because I had only been to school, they didn't have time to stand behind me to make sure I was doing things right, and that the other part of course was that it appeared that I had come from a juvenile detention thing. So I remember being afraid, the more I, the longer I lived there the more I realized that this was a place that was, was filled with like predators like what you call pedophiles and people like that. There were other young people like me, much in the same situation who were there. There was a few others. In, in those days there wasn't a lot of like you know when you leave foster care-- Story_ID: 466388 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You were talking about the trans- yeah a lot of predators in the place (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah there was a lot of predators. Speaker 1: And you were trying to find a job. Speaker 2: And the word predator didn't come to my mind, but I just felt like these were like unsavory people, a lot of 'em you know was unsavory. So there was a lot and some other kids who were like me who were emancipated and didn't have anywhere to go so they was living in this basically a men's shelter where there were sometimes women in there too, probably you know, of course they were prostitutes. And just this whole world that exists that most people don't see because they live in the day time. Speaker 1: So this is a Y [Young Men's Christian Association (YMCA)] or, or is it? Speaker 2: It's a Y, it was a Y but it was more of a rooming place. Speaker 1: Yeah, I know they're like residences and, and--it was a YMCA in downtown Cleveland [Ohio]? Speaker 2: Yes, in the historical district [Euclid Avenue Historic District, Cleveland, Ohio]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, and, and so I was there and-- Speaker 1: And this is, I'm sorry, this is 1977, I think that's right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And in 1977 you know people were--they're--you know I had never of course lived in the, the world that exists when everybody goes to sleep or the world that exists that when you're in your car driving around you never see these people, but they always see you. That's why some people are taken advantage of and they always find themselves a victim of people who live in this world that I found myself living in because I'd had no other place to go and I was there you know unsupervised of course and so I did recognize that I was in a dangerous situation, but anyway I remember one night I went to the bathroom. You had to go out of your room to go to the bathroom. I was down the hall and these--they two guys were in the bathroom and I went to the urinal and I was getting ready to walk away from the urinal and one of the guys said, "Hey baby, don't put it away." I said ah man, how the hell I'm gone get outta this bathroom? It was a total shock to me because I was like--you know I grew up listening to The Dramatics and you know and The Stylistics and songs about love and, and boy and girl relationships and in my mind you know I had just come to a world--in my mind when you fall in love or you are attracted to somebody it's generally of the opposite sex, this is me as a kid thinking like what the hell is--they're talking about, but whatever it is I'm smart enough to know that this ain't a good sign you know, and so I always think about we were gonna do this scene in the movie ['Antwone Fisher'] and Denzel [Denzel Washington]--this was the dialogue, the actual dialogue. I, I told you that Denzel wanted me to say right that it was a song called by Hot Chocolate, called 'I Believe in Miracles' ['You Sexy Thing (I Believe in Miracles)'] (laughter), Denzel's crazy (laughter), but anyway he was like so I was like standing there, I was thinking like how the hell I'm gone get the hell outta here? And so I felt, felt like I should not act afraid. So I should just turn around and walk to the door and I felt like I couldn't act tough. I have acted really tough and like I was a strong kid which I was to some extent you know when I was dealing with people of my own age and my own, but I felt like all I needed to do was get to the door, and but they were just standing there kind of between the door and me. So I started walking and I thought that I should not act afraid or look afraid but inside of me I could hear my blood like going past my eardrums you know, and my heart I felt like they could see my heart just pushing my pajama top forward and back you know like that and I was just walking and then when I walked past the first one he said, "Wait a minute baby." I said oh, man, I said, "I gotta go." I said something like that and then I walked past the other one and they started laughing. So I figured I didn't really impress them as a person who could not be taken advantage of. Story_ID: 466389 Speaker 1: So then I really became afraid and then I would started sneaking in and outta the place, and I tried to build an alliance with another kid who was staying there but he was a different kind of kid, and he was the kind of kid that probably had been taken advantage of and probably found himself a way to make it through that way and so I thought well I can't do that. So one night forgot all about these people live at night so they're up you know and I walked to the restroom and there they are again in there, and then I didn't even get to the urinal and the guy says, "You know I been watching you, you know baby you're fine." I said "Oh," in my mind I'm saying fine (laughter)? And so I'm thinking to myself I gotta get the hell outta here. So I turn and ran and he ran right after me. He grabbed me by my collar, one guy, and I, I like pulled my collar and I could hear it rip. I felt like it was my skin because he was holding it tight and I was like a wild, like if I was a cougar and he had grabbed him. I mean I felt like I would do anything just to get away and I got away, except for in this building. I ran down the stairs, they ran after me. It felt like they ran after me, maybe they didn't, but I ran down the, the stairs, the back way and I ran outta the place and that place at night they lock it, and once you push the panic bar and you're outside you can't get back in. So I was outside in the alley all night, and I was in the alley and thinking to myself what am I gonna do? Being in the alley didn't bother me as much as me feeling like what am I gonna do, I can't stay here? And that morning seemed like it took forever to come you know and it was damp you know in Ohio, Cleveland because Lake Erie is there, it gets really foggy and it was foggy that morning you know. I guess around ten o'clock or nine something the open the door and I had to go in through the front and there was all these people who probably never went to sleep that night in the hall, in the path--lobby and there was this guy. I had seen him before, his name was Butch and he--and I had these pajamas on you know, I had gotten since I was in George Junior [George Junior Republic, Grove City, Pennsylvania], you know like they had like cars and boats on 'em you know. This is not the kind of place, this is not the kind of place you wear PJs anyway, but you got boats and cars you just like say hey, here I am, I'm available, a kid who's in the world by himself, living in the men's shelter right? So I'm walking through there and the Butch says to me--can I use the words he used? Speaker 2: I guess so. Speaker 1: He says, "Hey little nigger, where you coming from, a motherfucking pajama party?" He says this to me (laughter) and it scares--it scares me just as much as the guys who had scared me the night before you know? I'm thinking like I'm not even gonna be able to get my stuff, I'm gonna have to just go back outside and get on the bus and walk up and down the street in these damn pajamas, PJs you know what I'm saying? And then he says, "Where you coming from," and I said--I explained the whole thing to him and he said, "Oh okay, I know who you talking about." He said, "I know who you talking about, okay, don't worry about it," you know he said, "so wait so what are you doing here?" I was explaining it you know and he says, "Well you're gonna need to fix your situation up, and I'm in a position to help you out you know, but you know you gone have to fix your situation up." So he gave me a job, and the job he gave me was collecting money from prostitutes and rolling joints. I had never rolled joints before, he taught me how or he had somebody teach me how, and so my job was--there was a street called Carnegie [Avenue] and there was a street called Quincy [Avenue] and he had prostitutes who worked on both those streets and he, he would drop me off, and all this stuff happens like let's say between like five in the afternoon, four I would have to go up there and just be hanging around not doing nothing, and then the girls would be there and these girls some of 'em would be from like Alabama you know and places, not from Cleveland. Speaker 2: Would just come up from Alabama (unclear)? Speaker 1: Yeah, he had went down there and got 'em, convinced them that they should come to Cleveland maybe and be prostitutes maybe, I don't know. I was really naive back then but I felt as long as I had him looking out for me, I'd just do what he tells me to do and so, so it was other pimps, hustlers they called themselves and just all kind of unsavory people around and, and it was you know I almost felt at some point I remembered feeling, feeling like that shell that I had, had coming back to me because some of them people--it mattered how I felt, but some of the prostitutes it mattered to them what I was doing so they were kind of like being my guardian or something. Story_ID: 466390 Speaker 1: My job was to get, get their money you know they give me and sometimes I'd be walking around in '77 [1977], $1,000, $2,000 may not seem like that much money now but for a kid walking around with you know $2,500 in my pockets and in my shoes (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's still a lot now (laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah, it's a lot of money and so I would give him the money and I remember he--the first time he gave me $100, I had never had $100 before. I'm like what the hell you do with $100 you know? I had so much change in my pocket, you know like could--because I you know--a fifty dollar bill I wanted to save it. So I started breaking these twenties and rather than keep using the change from the twenty until it was gone, I would break the other twenty and then I would wind up having a lot of dollars and a lot of coins in my pocket, and I just felt like so successful you know what I mean (laughter)? It was the strangest feeling and then there were people who were caring--who cared about me. I was, I was eating regularly, in fact I was--heard me one time I was eating these potato chips called Buckeye Potato Chips and they were really super hot you know I really liked them you know and Butch saw me and he said, "Come here man" and he came and he smacked pow, smacked the soda and the--outta my hand and the chips. He said, "Every time I see you you're eating chips and Twinkies and candy bars." He said, "Where the hell do you eat at?" I said, "Well, I just--I went to the store and got a candy bar." He said, "You can't eat like that." He said, "You have to go to this diner and if you don't go they're gonna tell me that you haven't been there, so I want you to go at least twice a day. So in the morning you have to get up and you have to go and get yourself something to eat." So I started eating like normal and he was concerned about how I looked. He was like you know, "You're wearing these pants and stuff, and we're all here this is a business. You can't be out here you know like this. You know did you put on deodorant? What the hell is that I smell," you know I was a teenager, you know you're just starting, your glands and you, you're starting to sweat you know, and he's like, "You know in order for you to become the kind of businessman that I feel like you can be, you're gonna have to start now and start caring a little more about the way you look," and he took me to this place called Boot 'n Shoe that was on Euclid Avenue [Cleveland, Ohio] and bought me a pair of shoes and I was like wow, these are some cool shoes. It wasn't really my style because I was kind of a you know square but, but they were new and I never had anything like that and after all he had been looking out for me and, and I did, didn't really think about what it was that he was having me doing, I was just happy to have some protection from predators. Speaker 2: What were they wearing in those days, what was it (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Stacks. Speaker 2: Stack shoes, those are high? Speaker 1: Stacks, yeah, stacks were just going out. These were a pair of wedged, wedged-heeled shoes and they were like really soft leather, really nice you know and the, the shirts they were made out of rayon, but they had like a lot of colorful shirts, colorful and then the pants were like gabardine, I guess that was a big material back then and I looked pretty cool you know I felt you know and but deep inside of me I felt like that I was getting rotten from the inside, you know I looked all right on the outside but on the inside there was stuff that bothered me about what he had me doing, but I was so afraid, not of him, but of what would happen if I wasn't under his stewardship. That's just how a lot of people become criminals. Every year as foster kids are released from foster care and a lot of 'em don't have any family and there are people who are just waiting for them on the street. Story_ID: 466391 Speaker 1: He also had these cards with addresses on 'em and he would have me sell those but he would send people to me to pick these cards up and they would give me the money for the cards and they had addresses on these cards and they were going like $200 or $300 whatever he told me to sell 'em for you know. Speaker 2: What were they, I mean what were these? Speaker 1: Well, what it turned out was that I had this regular customer who would come get a card what seemed like it may have been his payday, so this particular day I, I held a card back when Butch had sent this guy to--a few guys to get some cards from me and the guy never showed up, my regular customer to get the card and when I gave Butch the money I had collected that day and the card was with the money, he asked me you know, "What's up with the card," I mean he said, "Didn't I send somebody to get all this?" And I said, "Well I had a regular customer that didn't show up and I was holding it for him." I didn't even get a chance to say anything more I just saw this big flash of light because he had punched me in the head you know and I fell down and all the people who I felt like were my friends were standing around just looking and beat me, beat me really bad and probably should have gone to the hospital if there was an adult who wasn't afraid of Butch, they probably would have took me. He told me he was gonna make sure I'd become a good businessman and this was his money and his business and I had to treat it with a little bit more respect and I was like it was terrible you know and I couldn't understand why he would get so upset and I asked this girl named Rhonda [ph.], she was a prostitute and she says, "Well junkies would exchange their kids for heroin to him, and he would have them in houses and these deviants would go to these places to do whatever they felt like they wanted to do with these children," and you know after my young life growing up and all that I had known about that kind of predatory thing and what I was trying to escape there by hanging around him just came flooding to me like a siren was going off in my head, you know really loud and I was like I can't even you know go back there you know and--oh, that was really bad you know back then and I don't know man, so anyway-- Story_ID: 466392 Speaker 1: All right, go ahead, go ahead. Speaker 2: Okay so after I left the, well I figured I had to leave there so I went back to the shelter [of the Young Men's Christian Association (YMCA)] and I got some clothes that I felt like I, I could get and wear and the thing is, is that I didn't get a coat because it was summertime, so I left there and went back to--I thought that I would go back to the neighborhood [Glenville, Cleveland, Ohio] where I was a foster kid, maybe I would see a childhood friend of mine maybe that would help or something. So I walked back to the neighborhood. I remember in my first night sleeping on the street. It was a park near Carnegie Hall [Carnegie Hall Building, Cleveland, Ohio] that--where the Cleveland Orchestra plays, I lived--I slept in that park and I felt safe because there were some bushes there and I just kind of slept on the ground and that morning I got up really early of course it was really foggy and I started walking back toward the neighborhood and I arrived in the neighborhood and I felt like I was wow, back on earth or something you know and I before long I saw my friend Jesse [ph.] you know dancing and all like always. You know back in those days the mom and pop record store would have a speaker outside, and he would stand there drinking wine and dancing you know. He was a character you know, one of my good friends you know growing up and he told me--I explained--after I explained my situation and he said, "You never said goodbye," you know. I said, "Well you know I had to leave all of a sudden. I didn't know I was gonna be leaving," and he said "Oh, I get it," he said, "You can stay with us at my house." I said, "Your mother's not gonna let me stay there." He said, "Ah, it's so many of us man, she won't even know you're there." So I remember being in the living room one time and the mother came downstairs. She worked at night, and she came downstairs and she looked at me. I know she knew who I was, because I had always been over their house when I was younger you know, playing with Jesse and so she looked at me and then she walked on and then she turned back and looked at me again, and I was thinking to myself maybe she think I am one of her kids, or maybe she just remembered who I am, or maybe she doesn't know who I am, but she had a lot of kids and they had friends that would be over there. Story_ID: 466393 Speaker 1: That year, that summer Jesse [ph.] got killed, he got shot and, and so, and that was a very sad story and I-- Speaker 2: How did he get shot, I mean (unclear)? Speaker 1: He was confronting an older gentleman trying to rob him and the old man pulled out a gun and was saying that he was tired of hoodlums and people in the neighborhood taking advantage of older people, you know I wasn't right there but I was close enough to hear. I was in the playground playing basketball. He told me he would buy something. I told 'em I'd finish the game and come on. So I was walking down, up the street and I saw him you know and I saw him talking to the guy and I--it had totally took me by surprise and I didn't hear all of that, I just heard that they were arguing, he was always arguing with somebody and the guy shot him and I was thinking like you know what, afterwards that nobody you know not a lot of people get, you know get to see anything like that you know like a person who gets shot, and this was not like in the movies when you know the person coughs a little bit and then they you know start talking for a little while and trying to explain, and say goodbye and all that, you just drop like sack of potatoes and that's it. Nobody gets to say anything and nobody can do anything, and it was so, so disturbing to me and for days I walked the streets thinking like the world was coming to an end you know but the days just kept coming, you know. Story_ID: 466394 Speaker 1: And you know I was thinking that I started noticing that I was smelling because I hadn't had a bath like in days. Those days would turn into like months of me not having a chance or no place to wash up and I, I don't even remember when that stopped bothering me and something else started bothering me like not having anything to eat and whether it was acceptable for me, Antwone [HistoryMaker Antwone Fisher] to get food from the trash, or to beg or shoplift for a bag of potato chips or beg for money. I don't know, I passed all these thresholds without realizing that, that I had just done that and I saw myself in my mind as the kid that I always was. The kid that other people liked in the neighborhood [Glenville, Cleveland, Ohio], my childhood friends to one day seeing myself almost like in a movie when you walk by a store window and you see yourself and you can't believe that, that's you. So it was the rot that was happening, I felt I had finally reached to the outside of me you know, and so that was like you know in the fall you know, summer had turned to fall by then. It was cold and I didn't have a coat, and I stole one and I, I just remember being so happy to have that coat. It was like you know I never like even, now felt like you know taking something from someone else or something that belonged to me you know you never, you know when I had done it in my life growing up, it never really felt like the things, like is if I had earned it, so but that coat I felt like I had earned it, I felt like it was mine you know and I felt like I deserved it, and I felt like whatever I had endured, whoever--I stole it like from Cleveland State University [Cleveland, Ohio]. I started hanging around over there because there were young people there and I, of course I had learned to be afraid of older people, and it looked so hopeful young people walking around all going to college you know, and there was this big vent that blew warm air you know. I had discovered that I could use the restroom there to wash a little because they had a sink, you know it was a--for the students and later years would really like amazing that it was Cleveland State University that gave me an honorary doctorate degree, and I was walking through the same pathway I took as a homeless kid walking by this big vent that still was blowing that same hot air, but my family was with me, my two little girls [Azure Fisher and Indigo Fisher] and my wife [LaNette Canister Fisher] and I was walking behind them, the dean and the chancellor, you know the president of the school with the doctor's robe on and everything you know to get my degree and I thought my what a difference you know a few decades makes you know. This same person was walking this way feeling awkward and that someone was gonna notice that I was gonna go and try to steal a cookie or something and to now getting a doctorate degree. So, I would hang around there and some student was slipping, and I took their coat off the back of their chair you know and it was warm and I felt like it was mine and so it was mine then. Story_ID: 466395 Speaker 1: It started snowing and stuff and so I was thinking like I couldn't sleep in the storefronts like I had been because the adults who were homeless and didn't have themselves together enough to go to shelters started going inside. So I had to sleep outside in the snow so I discovered also that you could be warm sleeping in the snow, you just have to position yourself right. Almost like some people who, who climb mountains and they have to spend the night there and you know by accident I discovered that you can be warm in the snow, you know you just can't move around, you can't, you got to get yourself in a kind of a cubby in a way. I remember you know in Cleveland [Ohio] it started snowing to the point where when a car was coming down the street, you could hardly hear it, you know just the crush of the snow in the street, and there was no one walking around like in the summer and the fall and I remember how quickly night came which always was a terrifying thing for me because the days were shorter and the nights were longer, and I remember cars coming down the street and going into their driveways and people disappearing inside their houses and I would be thinking like oh, no don't go in, don't go in, and you know as long as people were driving around, moving around I felt like you know I wasn't alone but when night came it was terrible. It was a different kind of terrible than in the summer, but anyway I had a foster sister named Valencia [Valencia Dixon] and I saw her in front of the Cleveland Trust bank [Cleveland Trust Company Building, Cleveland, Ohio] and she called me and I, I walked over to her, I was so happy to see her and she said, "What, what are you doing you know what's wrong with you?" I said I said, I explained everything she said, "Maybe you can stay with one of our foster sisters." This was a daughter of my foster mother [Queen McDonald Pack], and we had always got along and she--I felt always liked me. Everybody knew she liked me, anyway she gave me her phone number and then I went over there and then she told me I could stay there and sleep on her couch. So I stayed there for a little while and then I felt like I was back where I started and in that foster home and I was, felt awkward about it and so--just show you how I, how I felt about it I went back out into the street, back into the snow, because I could not stay, I didn't wanna. Story_ID: 466396 Speaker 1: So I was walking down the street, I had been down this street so many times before and I saw this sign that said join the [U.S.] Navy and see the world. I was like wow, I'm joining the Navy. You know I just walked in. It was two days before Christmas, December 23, 1977 and the recruiters were getting ready to go home for the holidays. This was the Navy, I felt you know I'd join the Navy and they said, "Well come back after the holidays and we'll put you in," and I said, "I can't wait. I'll, I'll go and join the [U.S.] Army if you don't take me because they're still open," and so they said, "Ah well come on in." They gave me an aptitude test and, and I was explaining the whole thing from my whole story I was explaining from when I was born in prison, the whole thing you know, and they were looking at me like, we gotta help this kid (laughter). Hey, I think you know it was a kind of a tale for a kid my age to tell, it was kind of unbelievable, but I wasn't alone there were all these other kids with me so it wasn't like this was just happening to me, so they gave me that test and then I passed it which I was amazed and then I--they got me a room at a Holiday Inn and the Holiday Inn in downtown Cleveland [Ohio] and I, boy, I took the longest bath, I felt like I took a bath and then I felt like wow, I'm sitting in this filthy water. Speaker 2: (TAPE INTERRUPTION) Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Go back. Speaker 2: So I was sitting in this dirty water and I didn't realize how dirty it was 'til I got outta the tub and looked down as it was draining out and I thought oh, I had to take another bath 'cause I was sitting in that dirty water, and I cleaned the tub out, ran the water, got back in bathe again, got out and it was dirty again (laughter). I said well. Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION) Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Sorry--hold on I gotta--okay. Speaker 1: I got outta the tub for the second time and looked at the water going down and it was almost as dirty as the water was before so I thought maybe I should switch to the shower (laughter). So I took a shower and boy I never felt so good. I felt like all the time that summer, that fall, that winter I was spending on the street was getting washed right off of me you know and I felt so good about that and had this perfumery lotion that was--smelled so perfumed, that was perfuming, I was thinking I had put this stuff on and then I was smelling like a girl I felt. I had these weird ideas about things when I was a kid you know, and it probably wasn't bad as all that but then it bothered me that the Navy recruiters were gonna come and pick me up and take me out to the Navy and I felt if I was smelling like a girl they weren't gonna accept me in and so I washed it all off you know and you know this is winter so my skin was dry as a result of all these baths and stuff I was taking that night (laughter), and so, you know I started watching television which I hadn't seen in months and I felt like kind of new, you know in a facade-kind of newness going on and I felt like I could you know, I could do something you know and I, and the clothes were still not good, but the recruiter came and got me about five in the morning and took me to the Federal Building [Anthony J. Celebrezze Federal Building, Cleveland, Ohio]. I took a physical and all this other stuff and that evening I was on a plane, first plane ride I ever took to Chicago [Illinois] for boot camp. Story_ID: 466397 Speaker 1: Oh, so they sent you up to Great Lakes [Naval Station Great Lakes, Lake County, Illinois]? Speaker 2: Sent me to Great Lakes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so I was there and I was thinking like okay so now this is another hurdle, meaning that I felt like I wasn't smart enough because I had never really did well in school. I would always do well in school the first semester and then I remember one time I had gotten like, there wasn't even a C. I had A's and Bs, mostly Bs, but I had a few A's I was so excited you know. So excited you know, so excited brought it home and nobody cared. So the year kind of went down from there and then you know I always held onto the memory of that report card that I got that, that semester and, and thought to myself if it did it then, this is for me. So I had to put all my intellectual effort into doing everything they asked me to do as far as you know doing my class work in boot camp and it, when it came to the physical agility testing and all of that I was never really athletic but I felt I had to do it for myself and so this was my chant, I remember I was running, we had to run three miles in a drill hall and I felt like I was gonna die you know, and I'm sure all the other kids felt the same way, but I kept saying to myself this is for me, because in boot camp you can't fail a lot of these tests, you have to pass 'em every time or they set you back and you, if you fail more then they'll put you out. So I could not fail, and so I kept always saying that it's for me, I'm doing this for me and I would think about Jesse [ph.] and think about my childhood, think about being homeless and this is the reason why you have to succeed at this and you know so I found myself graduating at the end of boot camp, but all these other kids, we all had on the same uniform and I was thinking that nobody could, would be able to tell that I was any different from anyone else by looking at me and I felt really proud you know, I had on this uniform which represented something that was really huge, really big and I was a part of it, and they were telling us that we were a part of this huge thing and, and I had the uniform that I was allowed to wear and they expected me to wear it and I felt like this was good and I, I was thinking, I remember thinking I wish somebody could see me you know, Jesse or my foster mother [Queen McDonald Pack], people who said I would never amount to anything. If they could see me you know, then they would see then that I had accomplished something really big and I was only eighteen and so we--I graduated and the [U.S.] Navy sent me to San Diego [California] and I was on a ship called the U.S.S. Schenectady, it was a LST [LST-1185], we carried Marines [U.S. Marine Corps] and their equipment and so I-- Speaker 1: So, so had the--was it now 1978? Speaker 2: This was still '70 [1970], oh yes this was '78 [1978] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Early '78 [1978]? Speaker 2: Early '78 [1978], it was in the spring. Speaker 1: Spring, okay. Speaker 2: I think boot camp was like, thirteen weeks in those days. So after thirteen weeks you know they kind of really kind of remake you a little bit. Story_ID: 466398 Speaker 1: But I had some inner issues that they could not, they could not visit or no one would have expected somebody eighteen years old you know dressed the way I was in the United States naval uniform to have had the, the life experience that I had. I had lived by the time I was eighteen a lot more of the, of the unfortunate side of life than some people who were twice my age, and you could not see it just by simply looking at me, but I think if I was around and when I was around certain people or on a ship for a certain amount of time, there was just so long I could hold myself together, and so it started coming out the way I felt about certain things. You know there were kids from all over the country so we were all like teenagers, so fighting which I did some of that, not that I was very tough or a very good fighter, but I was willing to fight and I was the kind of person who like okay we'll fight until you get tired, and then when you're tired and I'm really gonna get you and so if it meant that we had to go for a second round then we would just go for the second round and you'd have to be ready because I had so much pent-up anger that I felt like this person is gonna prevent me from eating or they gonna prevent--try to prevent me from feeling like I deserve to be here, to feel or they're trying to take away what little bit of esteem I have so if the--if some members of the ship's crew thought I was a good kid or a good guy or they'd like to hang out with me, if I let this person do this to me, I'm gonna lose a friend or something, so I have to get this person. As it turned out my behavior was losing me friends and my whole rationale for keeping friends and making friends was all twisted. Speaker 2: So what, what would you fight about, you know in the movie ['Antwone Fisher'] (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Anything. Speaker 2: You know in the movie there was an incident where some guy says something that you didn't like (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, well that was a true incident, what he really said and you know Denzel [Denzel Washington] had the guy not say it because he said that well if he would've said that to me I would've fought him too, but I, I needed to show this fighting thing. Well what he said was when I was shaving and I was using astringent on my face and didn't shave very well so some of the cotton got caught on some of the hair on my face and so the kid came over and said, "Well what's that on your face?" And I said, "Oh, that's cotton," and he said, "What's, with, what's with you people and cotton," so I jumped on him. That was the thing that started the whole thing of me going to captain's mast all the time and so, well in the movie Denzel felt like if he would've said that to him, he would've jumped on him too, so I think that---and then it also makes me look like I was lying in the movie about what he said, but they didn't cut it right away, but they should've just let him say it you know, 'cause that, that matter is even if he said it I still wasn't supposed to be fighting. You're supposed to just report it and whatever. So that was what happened, and so I thought that my fighting was gonna win me respect and friends, because you know growing up in the neighborhood [Glenville, Cleveland, Ohio] and in the house where I lived, this is how you made friends and this is how you kept friends by making people afraid of you. They're not really friends, they're just afraid of you, or they'll be your friend because they know you can fight and so when they need somebody to help them with some other people they'll get you, or in the house we always had to fight each other because they put us against one another so I was socialized to be a kind of kid that was a fighter you know, not that I was that good at it, but I was willing and so, that lead to other things, you know me talking out of, out of turn and saying things to people like officers that I should not be saying things to get more in trouble and it just got worse and, and I would always get in trouble and then remember oh, before I joined the [U.S.] Navy I was homeless, I'd better slow down until I got to Hawaii and then they were gonna put me out. Story_ID: 466399 Speaker 1: I felt like, this was 1980, that I was coming to a place where you know, they were, there was somebody, a chief petty officer who was saying that I was--you know they said I was becoming a burden to the [U.S.] Navy, not really a burden to the Navy, but-- Speaker 2: Now what rank you then at that point? Speaker 1: At that time I was a seaman A3. Speaker 2: Okay, um-hm. Speaker 1: I was an A3. Speaker 2: So were you getting your promotions on time or was the fighting and the conflict keeping you down or? Speaker 1: Well no because I wasn't the only one fighting you know, we were all kids, you know the thing about the Navy and the [U.S.] military you know when people think about the military, they think and you see those war movies and John Wayne's walking around and all these guys are fifty and forty, well you go into the military base everybody's nineteen, twenty, eighteen years old. We were all kids, so the Navy you know they understand, they're not recruiting forty years olds, they're recruiting people fresh outta high school, unfinished human beings. Speaker 2: Juveniles. Speaker 1: Juveniles, so fighting is like okay you'll fight we have--we know how to take care of people who fight, but when you become like, just like you're doing it and you're not getting it or you feel like you're not getting it, and just doing your job is not enough after a while because you become a distraction to the command, you know, and so if, if one ship doesn't want you and they send you somewhere else and then you have the same problem then you know they don't have time for that you know, counseling people like that. So I wasn't as bad as all that I feel but you know it had come to that point where I felt like the only way I'm gonna get out of trouble this time is that I need to talk to somebody and I remembered when it was suggested when I was in the orphanage that I should talk to somebody and my social worker was worried that I would be in an unprotected environment and explode one day and then I would never be able to recover. Story_ID: 466400 Speaker 1: So I remember her saying that and I felt like if I just admit that I may need to talk to some professional about how I feel, you know that was--that they may feel like I'm trying, and so they sent me to this [U.S.] Navy psychiatrist and so I figured I'd tell him little bit of what I felt and then it would be over, but he wanted me to come back and then I didn't want to come back and so he, he sent to the ship some people to get me you know, and you know usually they don't do that kind of stuff. This guy was just the kind of person who was gonna make me talk to him and, and be frank and I thought he was just gonna say, "Oh, yeah, he's cool, just put him on restriction and send him to the brig, you know and he'll, he'll be fine," but he wanted to hear more of what I had to say you know and then I decided one day that I would tell him and I told him some stuff, I didn't tell him a lot, I just told him some things, and I felt like he would be shocked you know. You got this eighteen year old who you feel like probably just grew up and didn't--you know all the things I had just described to you had happened in my life, even more than that and then I was telling him some of the stuff, he was looking at me as if he wasn't impressed by anything I was saying and so I was thinking to myself oh, okay you're not impressed by that, let me tell you this, (laughter) you know, and as, as I kept talking I could see the look on his face was not that he wasn't impressed, that he was stunned by all I was saying to him and then when I realized he was stunned I couldn't sit in front of him, so I, I told him I--could I sit on the floor, and rather than sitting on the floor by the wall so he could see me, I would sit in front of his desk so he could not see me with my back against his desk and I would just talk. I would do that when I would come to his office, I couldn't do that talk to him like that, so he-- Speaker 2: Now is this a black psychiatrist like, a lot like in the movie ['Antwone Fisher']? Speaker 1: Yeah, he would never interrupt me, just a few times he interrupted me and then in the beginning of our talks he would just start talking and ask me had I ever thought about doing this and things that he would tell me that I thought were ridiculous, like how to breathe. He said, "You don't breathe when you talk, you need to breathe and sometimes you need to just take a deep breath, just whenever you feel like--you just need to take some air in you know, son (laughter)," he'd tell me that and, and so he said, "You know you start telling these stories to me--I mean you're just telling, you start telling these stories to me and you don't stop talking you just keep talking like a train." He said, "You need to stop and breathe." I didn't realize I wasn't breathing, so. Speaker 2: What was his name, what was (unclear)? Speaker 1: His name was Lieutenant Commander Williams. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah and so--you know it, it was--it struck me like--I always thought that psychiatrists you know make you lay down on a couch and then take some like some shrunken head and shake it over your head you know or something you know he was gone do to you, but what he--basically just listened to me and a part of I guess what was helping me was I was being, I was having the opportunity to say it to another human being and that person was listening, and I was actually saying it. So I felt like I was really getting benefit and you know it's just like when you share something like that, you know first time with somebody you, you want to continue having a relationship, a friendship with this person but you know he was an officer and I was an enlisted man, you know you can't be friends you know, they call it fraternizing, so he was simply my, my--and you know the Navy doesn't treat people so you only get a couple of times to go talk to somebody like that but I felt like he probably had did that and tried to help a lot of kids, I mean 'cause we were all kids. You'd come to his office, talk to him you know and so I remember he invited me to Thanksgiving dinner and it was like all these people you know. It wasn't like a whole lot of people 'cause he wasn't from Hawaii either but there were other sailors, like other officers, they were just people you know some civilians, and I felt like wow this is cool and they were treating me like an adult. I liked that, you know, I liked that they would say things to me and didn't expect me to be dumb. Story_ID: 466401 Speaker 1: So we left off at Thanksgiving and-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Now, now was the character that Denzel [Denzel Washington] played in the movie ['Antwone Fisher'] pretty, pretty much like Lieutenant Commander Williams (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, Lieutenant Commander Williams was a big, he was a tall guy, he was a--he had this doctor's smock, I, it was tight you know, he's had it since college and he wanted to wear it. He had ones that fit but he would hang this one he had in college, a smock, and he was just a regular guy. You probably if you just saw him you wouldn't be that impressed until he started talking, you know but you know I spent eleven years in the [U.S.] Navy and then traveled all over the world, you know, a good portion of the world. I felt I had accomplished a lot you--inside myself and having traveled and met people from other parts of the country. I felt like I had become kind of like a man of the world, and just to say eleven years in the Navy and, and having had an opportunity to get help through a psychiatrist with some emotional issues I had and from growing up. It's not--it's too quick--it's too, it's not--it's easy to say, but in a nutshell you know the Navy changed my life and my whole perspective about the world and how I fit in or how I could fit in and, and what people meant to me, the matter of race and all of that. It was a huge education for me, an accelerated way to have to learn, yeah I--and I think a part of it, lucky for me unlike my foster brother [Wayne Bell], I was the kind of kid and probably still am the kind of person who's like a sifter. The information that comes in, when I sift it, generally the bad stuff goes out and the good stuff stays in. Whether I use it or not it's still in there, I have a good memory and I have always been able to learn from other people's mistakes. I would learn from other people's mistakes better than I learn from my own mistakes. As I grew older I got better at learning from my own mistakes, and you become kind of a wise person being young in the Navy if you sift the information right because you're not alone and a lot of people are--they're not the kind of people who have went to Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey] or Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], but they have the kind of life experience that you can't learn any other place. These are real people, people who didn't have a silver spoon in their mouths growing up, or people who had to learn the hard way, many of them who had tougher lives than me. People who have struggled against racism and, and would explain to you how to get past this racial time or this racial incident and, and not just you know black, but white, Hispanic and you really realize that this world is bigger than the neighborhood I grew up in, you know what I mean. It's bigger than Cleveland, Ohio where going downtown is a big deal. You find yourself walking around Hong Kong and people knowing who you are. I spent eleven years in the Navy, you don't wanna go to the states when you have leave, you wanna go to Australia and when you get there people know who you are. You really become a man of the world and, and I had really felt like I have accomplished a lot and I felt like you know, there had always been somebody taking care of me and I owed it to myself, just like when I was in boot camp to try and raise myself from this point and after eleven years I decided that I would get out, and so I was stationed in Japan. Story_ID: 466402 Speaker 1: Did you consider at this point--I guess the movie ['Antwone Fisher'] tries to make a point that, that the psychiatrist [Lieutenant Commander Williams] really helped you put stuff in perspective, so I guess what I'm gone ask, what, what actually did those sessions do to make you put a--to help you put a balance on what was going on? Speaker 2: Well, I--you know I have to say that, that the African adage about it takes a village, he was just one village member. There were so many people in the service, one all black, one all white. There's this Polish guy who told me I should stop wearing dark colors. His name was Lekowsky [ph.], and I was thinking this white guy telling me to put some color in my life? He was telling me put some color in your life and I remember going out and buying some pants that weren't brown and this shirt, and we were stationed in Hawaii, and I actually did feel different. I felt like I did, so I started changing up a lot of different things and it was a chief who told me he never wanted to see me walking around the ship with my head down. That was a habit that I had acquired since I was a kid and he would be on me and then I got out of his division just so I could get away from him, and I became a ship serviceman and I remember feeling so free away from the chief, and I worked in the laundry at the time and he came down to the laundry. I was like--he said, "I came down here to see if you were down here with your head down." I was like, "Chief I don't work for you anymore." He said, "You're still in the [U.S.] Navy right?" I said, "Yes." He said, "Keep your head up," and he walked out. These are the people who raised me, so. Speaker 1: Okay, you know the way the movie industry usually works is that they try to boil a story down to put all the traits into one character who's emblematic of some good or bad or whatever it is, you know something involving the struggle (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, he was the perfect person to talk, to have in the movie. I could've had the chief you know or somebody but because I had to tell him my story so it was all about me sharing with him my whole story. So it was better to use him and tell the story against him being the sounding board than someone else. Speaker 1: Okay, but the point is a lot of people helped you, right? A lot of people helped you (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) A lot of people, yep from the very beginning of my life I can reach back to--I wrote a whole chapter about Ms. Profit [Brenda Profit], my fourth grade teacher. I had her for the fourth, fifth and sixth grade. She--I still know her, she's like the grandmother to my kids now. My kids [Azure Fisher and Indigo Fisher] know her, we go visit with them you know when they're here or go to Cleveland [Ohio] and talk to her on the phone, so you know this is what you know you make a family when you don't have one, you make out a family out of the good people you meet in life. Speaker 1: Okay and you know it's good that you can recognize 'em and hang on to 'em (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well it takes a while. Speaker 1: Like you said you can filter out the good ones and. Speaker 2: Yeah you know you get some junk in there sometimes, but you have to be smart enough to say to yourself, or to those people. See I love myself now and so I care about you too, so if you care about me like I care about you, you don't treat me in a way that I don't--you know that--you treat me the way you'd like to be treated. Otherwise, I have to separate you from my life, because I--my life is important too. You can't keep people in your life who are hurting you because they won't stop. Story_ID: 466403 Speaker 1: Now did you meet your wife [LaNette Canister Fisher] in the [U.S.] Navy? Speaker 2: No, I met my wife--I was, I was a writer by the time I met my wife. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Writing. Speaker 1: Okay, all right 'cause the Navy--I can't think of the Navy they suggested that--well you met her. Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: You did meet a woman? Speaker 2: But they didn't suggest it people just assumed that the girl in the movie ['Antwone Fisher']--that we got married. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Well, she was a real person, but she wasn't as special as she was in the movie you know. She's a composite of a few other girls, you know you can't have 'em all in the movie then I'd seem like a playboy if--you know in those two hours you know. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: So anyway (laughter), so anyway I got out the Navy and I felt like I was stationed in Japan and I felt like I needed to be in the city where I could look for a job 'cause I don't have a family, some people you know go to their uncle's house and stay while they look for a job, well I heard there was a base [Long Beach Naval Shipyard] in Long Beach, California so I was stationed in Japan so I got orders to go to Long Beach. Speaker 1: Now tell me this, now what was your occupation in the Navy, principally and how was that gone translate into civilian life? Speaker 2: Well, I was a ship serviceman and a ship serviceman what they do is they provide services to the crew. So what we do is we run the ship store and all the vending machines we operate them, all the money that comes through the retail outlets there, we run the laundry and the barbershop, special services like if a sailor wanted to rent a sail boat. If we're on shore duty we operate the enlisted men's club, we order the bands if a guy wanted to order a car from Germany we would be the ones he would come to and we would get it for him that kind of thing. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so, but we're in the Navy, that's just the job we do, but we all have battle stations so, so when it comes to--that's the principal job we did, so but when the ship goes to general quarters when it's on an alert or they're in a battle I had to go to a gun mount, it was like a big cannon and on this particular ship and it was a mount 38 [Mark 12 5"/38 caliber gun] so, so they would send the shells up and we would put 'em into the gun and then the gunner's mate would fire them and then they would just hand 'em and we'd just shove 'em in. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Which is a very dangerous job (laughter) yeah-- Story_ID: 466404 Speaker 1: Okay, so what kind of job were you trying to find? Now, you, you were sent to Long Beach [California] right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, well yeah, I was in Long Beach and so, I was on the ship and then I started looking for a job and the Federal Bureau of Prisons were hiring so I applied at the Federal Bureau of Prisons and I was accepted. I got outta the [U.S.] Navy and went to the Federal Law Enforcement academy [Federal Law Enforcement Training Centers] in Glynco, Georgia and then boot camp and then came back I was stationed at the prison at Terminal Island [Federal Correctional Institution, Terminal Island, San Pedro, California]. I did that for three years which was another education and you know after three years and all personalities I had met and one thing I learned from working in a prison, you never wanna do anything to wind up in prison. 'Cause one hour at work is worse than anything I had experienced at being sequestered you know like on a ship for ninety days, being out to sea. One hour at a prison, just working there knowing you're gonna leave in eight hours is worse than being at sea for ninety days, just looking at it, it's a sad, sad place and so after three years of that I decided that you know it didn't suit my personality to work there, and getting a job there you know is like me--I mean I was a military person, you know you could look at me and knew where I was for the past eleven years, I was in the Navy. My life had been documented. When the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] does the background, it's easy to find out where I've been the whole time, no empty spots. So, I left there and I heard that--I wanted to leave there and I heard that Sony Pictures [Sony Pictures Entertainment, Culver City, California] was hiring security guards. So I knew that I had to downsize my life a little. I wasn't married, didn't have any kids. So I went over to Sony Pictures and, and interviewed and they hired me and so I quit my job at the prison and I was there working and this was like the most wonderful place I've ever worked you know and you know you're walking down the street and there's Sidney Poitier, he's walking. I remember they asked me to open up, there was an actor who needed to get into their office in the TriStar Building [Culver City, California] and I was supposed to go over and unlock the door for 'em. When I got to the hallway and started walking down the hallway it was Sidney Poitier at the end of the hallway, and he said, "How are you doing young man?" I was like (laughter) wow, you know Danny DeVito and all these people, it's just like a really wonderful place to work. Story_ID: 466405 Speaker 1: This was the time I started looking for my family. This is how it actually happened unlike in the movie ['Antwone Fisher']. I started thinking about the [U.S.] Navy psychiatrist [Lieutenant Commander Williams] said, "Everybody comes from somewhere, and one day you should try and find out where it is you're from." So I got an Ohio Bell telephone book [Ohio Bell Telephone Company] and I was looking through it, you know I was on a security guard salary at this time and I knew I couldn't call all the number's but I knew my father's name was Elkins, and Cleveland [Ohio] was pretty segregated when I grew up, and you know unlike it is today, Cleveland was basically black or white, you know there were Eastern European nationalities, you know Italian and that but you know it was basically black and white, there wasn't a lot of Hispanics or Orientals [Asian Americans] in Cleveland. So I was thinking so all my people would be on the east side, so all the Elkins who are on the west side I didn't consider so I had this educated guess thing going. So I decided that I would circle a number, and I said I would call this number but I didn't call it 'til the spring, I mean a few months later and it turned out to be my father's sister [Annette Elkins]. So she says to me, "Well, if, if Eddie [Edward Elkins] was your father, you have a big family. In fact your cousin William Elkins [William Elkins, Jr.] is the deputy mayor of Los Angeles [California]," (laughter). Speaker 2: Is that, you know we were just given his name yesterday Bill Elkins-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --as the deputy mayor to Tom Bradley, we were just given his name by the Bradley family to contact to interview tomorrow (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Wow, tell him I said hello. Speaker 2: --and the office is trying to contact him as we speak, so I just wanted to throw that in how it's a serendipitous kind of a relationship popped up, but this is the year what, what year is this when you are working for Sony [Sony Pictures Entertainment, Culver City, California] (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This has to be like '92 [1992] or '91 [1991], something like that. Speaker 2: So what year was it when you came outta the Navy? Speaker 1: Eighty-nine [1989]. Speaker 2: Eighty-nine [1989] okay, so by '92 [1992] you're at Sony Pictures? Speaker 1: Eighty-nine [1989], '90 [1990], '91 [1991], '92 [1992], maybe about '92 [1992] I was there. Speaker 2: Okay and you find out that William Elkins, Bill Elkins, the right-hand man of Tom Bradley is your? Speaker 1: Cousin. Speaker 2: Cousin (laughter), okay keep going. Speaker 1: They have a long twisty story but he's my cousin right? And so, so they give me his number to his sister and I call her and she says, "Oh yeah, it's a, it's an interesting story of how we're all related but we're related," and then they told Bill Elkins about me and then he says, "Well, have him come by and let me meet him." You know he's kind of a lawyer right, (laughter) he's--so you know everybody wants to be he's deputy mayor you know, but anyway I meet some of them. I'd never really met William Elkins, but I met his wife [Eleanor Elkins], and he wasn't at home when I went by there at the time I did. And so also she says, "You have an uncle, your father's brother lives in San Diego [California]. You should go down there and meet him," so I go down there and meet him. I look just like this guy and I was thinking like I had never met anybody that I actually looked like and so talking to him I discovered that I grew up in the foster home the next street over from where he lived, and he remembers me. I went to elementary school with my cousins, his children. Didn't know we were related. His brother lived only blocks away, Uncle Spike [ph.] who was probably him and Don King was the only accepted members in the Italian Mafia (laughter), so anyhow he--so I have this big, big family from Chicago [Illinois] to Atlanta [Georgia], to Los Angeles you know and all points north you know, going east and west, and so they wanted to meet me. So I didn't have the money to buy a ticket. This was Thanksgiving time to go to Cleveland, so they paid for my ticket to come to Cleveland. So everybody converges on, on Cleveland because you know my father had passed away before I was born and so they hadn't seen him since 1959. Everybody was telling the other members that I looked just like him, and so--even my mannerisms, which is an odd thing but I think people, I don't know how you get that but you get it right? So I get to the airport and there's all these people, some of 'em I knew from childhood and some of 'em I'd never met but these were my family. So we had Thanksgiving, it was wonderful and it was really emotional for everybody and-- Story_ID: 466406 Speaker 1: Did you see pictures of your father [Edward Elkins] for the first time? Speaker 2: Yes, for the first time yeah; I had sisters, you know he had children, two girls with someone else before he had passed away and the day after Thanksgiving I was one of the sister's house, I spent the night with her at her house and she came into the room and said, "Uncle Spike [ph.] told me to tell you to put your clothes on, they think they found your mother." I thought she was kidding me and so I put my clothes on and I was thinking I didn't come to Cleveland [Ohio] to meet mother--I didn't--I was like--it was kind of overwhelming as it was you know 'cause all this stuff was happening really fast. So I put my clothes on and then Uncle Spike came over and he says, "You know what I was talking to my wife last night and we were thinking that you know, Fisher is a pretty popular name but you know people who have that name usually don't move that from where they grew up here in Cleveland. So we knew some Fishers and we called Jess Fisher to see if he knew anybody named Eva Fisher who is the name of your mother right?" I said, "Yeah that's my mother's name." He said, "Well, Jess Fisher says that his sister's name is Eva Fisher." I said, "Really." He says, "Yeah." He says, "I'm gonna take you over to Jess' house." So I go over to Jess' house and he looks at me you and you know. This is black people's DNA test--they give you a good look, "Yeah that's (unclear) (laughter)," you gotta get the older person in the family and they give you the test. And so he says, "Well you wanna meet her?" And I, I felt like I had to say yeah, I wanted to say no, but I felt like I had to say yes because it's no time to be a coward now, because all this stuff was--even meeting Jess was a lot, so I said yeah, so Jess said, "Well let me get my cap." So he goes and get his cap and I look at Spike, and I don't know why I said this but I said, "You're not gonna let anything happen to me," and he looked like he was gonna say what are you talking about? Then he caught his self, probably thinking like well this is probably a lot for him, so he's says, "No I'm not gonna let anything happen to you." So we get in Jess' car, we drive over there together, knock on the door and what would be another sister of mine, one of my mother's daughters, open the door and said, "Hey Uncle Jess," and we all came in. My mother was at the stove like she was stirring a pot or something 'cause when you come in the room you're in the kitchen. So, Jess turned to, he said, "Hey Eva how you doing?" She said, "How you doing Jess?" She looked at me, she looked and Spike and then she went back to stirring the pot, and then Jess says, "Eva, who's that," pointing to me. She said, "Oh that's Johnny [ph.], that's Johnny," or something like that, and then he said, "No, that's Antwone Quenton Fisher [HistoryMaker Antwone Fisher]," and then she's like fall out, oh, suddenly like ahhh all over the place like it was too much. You know it was too much. I was looking at her and I was thinking like that's not my mother, because in my mind growing up my mother was like the most beautiful woman in the world, I mean you always think the best you know, but this wasn't the best, and then the, the more grown up Antwone started thinking, well, you know what, you never know what people's lives have been. You know when I was born in 1959, it must've been pretty tough for a girl who was foster kid herself to be pregnant with no mother and all of that, so all these thoughts went through my mind, and all things I thought I would say to her when I was a kid, all things the actor in the movie ['Antwone Fisher'] says to her were things that I always thought I would say, but I never actually said 'em. I just looked at her and I just felt compassion for her, not because of the--not because--for one only reason I felt this compassion was because here was a human being, obviously--it was obvious to me that this person had, had a tough life and I don't know her story, and I know my story, and I know how things can happen. So the better part of me said Antwone you need to let that shit go, that was it. And so all I felt was like compassion toward her. Story_ID: 466407 Speaker 1: Months after that we were trying talking on the phone and whatever, you know sometimes she'd--you don't--I couldn't find anything for us and she--to have in common and she didn't have anything in common with me and so we'd be talking and then there'd be these blank spots on the phone until you're trying to talk to this person and you don't have anything to talk about. There's no history--what your interests are, you know you've gone through that, she doesn't like talking about my father [Edward Elkins] which was an interest of mine, and she didn't like hearing about my life because she felt guilty or I didn't want to ask about hers because I felt like it'd be too hard because I know of what I felt like, and so she was cool, hip and I'm a square, and, and the only thing we have in common is our DNA, and I think that is the thing that a lot of people don't understand, that she--that you have to build a relationship even with your own kinfolk, even with your own parent. Like if I would pass her on the street now knowing that she was actually my mother [Eva Fisher], there wouldn't be a magnetic field that would have passed between us. So what people feel when they see their mother and their father or their brothers and sisters is partly in due to the relationship they had over the course of the years together, what they've built together. It's no magic other than what time creates being together and so not having that, having that experience with her it was almost like meeting, it was like--it was meeting an absolute stranger, but when it comes to my teacher, Ms. Profit [Brenda Profit] when I see her, when I come near her there is a magnetic field because she was the one that cared about me. She was the one that asked me, "How are things at home?" The one that could see that I was a sad kid that tried to you know interject but she's your teacher, a principal. I, I had in elementary school, my first elementary school, the principal Ms. James [ph.] I still know her, she's elderly and you know we see her when we go to Cleveland [Ohio]. These people, teachers and, and chiefs from the [U.S.] Navy, officers from the Navy, these are the people that I have that magnetic field with. So that's why it's really important for people to, I feel, to build a relationship with their family members. People who they want to love them and want to be loved by, want to love, to build that relationship and it takes time to build that up. It's no magic in that and people who have that for the life of them they cannot understand how it could be possible that I could be standing in a room with my mother and not know that, that's my mother, or not feel the magic. It's, it's like, it's like they can't understand it and, and they want you to be together so badly because of what the definition of what a mother is, they want that for everybody but if you didn't have it, and you got to be in your thirties and you managed to live a certain way, you had to learn to live a certain way, then that's just how you live. Story_ID: 466408 Speaker 1: I came back to Los Angeles [California] and with my story and everyone was saying that, "Wow this would be a great story for a movie." You know I told my boss and he had told some other people and I kept just thinking I know I can't act, I can't direct, I can't produce, I can't write but maybe it wouldn't cost anybody to encourage me, to teach me how to write it. I thought that that would be the easiest thing, and so everyone kept saying no, so I got some legal pads and wrote it by hand what I thought would be. I gave it to the producer Todd Black who produced 'Antwone Fisher' and he thought I had writing talent so he told me I should quit the job as a security guard and he gave me an office on the Fox lot, bought me a computer. I couldn't even type, but they worked with me for about six months, him and Randy Haines [sic. Randa Haines] and Jason Blumenthal, they were all producing partners together and taught me how to write a screenplay and I had the writing talent, meaning that I could put the words together to create a meaningful scene, but the story structure, how to build a story and a screenplay in a movie format I needed to learn that. So then he called me one day and said he had sold it Fox [Fox Searchlight Pictures, Century City, California]. Speaker 2: Now this in--let me backtrack a little bit now. It does seem--to listen to you tell your story and I know you've told it a number of times, but you're a good storyteller. Speaker 1: Am I (laughter)? Speaker 2: So that's, yeah and I think that you, you probably were then. I don't think that people just flip and become good storytellers overnight you know. So you probably were then, you may not have all the skills you have now, but you were probably a good storyteller then and what I'm thinking and correct me if I'm wrong is that you had cultivated relationships on the Fox lot with people. Speaker 1: On the Sony lot [Sony Pictures Entertainment, Culver City, California] yeah. Speaker 2: On the Sony lot, I'm sorry the Sony lot. Speaker 1: Yes, yes. Speaker 2: I don't know why I said Fox. Speaker 1: Because Fox made the movie. Speaker 2: Okay, all right (laughter) okay, okay on the Sony lot and that's, that's one of the rewards of having--of cultivating a team spirit and a relationship with people. Speaker 1: Yeah and a lot of that I learned in the [U.S.] Navy and at George Junior Republic [Grove City, Pennsylvania]. I found out that people, people generally like anybody from the start, and what you have to do is build on it. Rarely do you meet people that just don't like you for no reason, but in the capacity that I was at Sony I felt like if I did what I was hired to do, then that's a good way to start. So when I came to work I never delayed doing my job, I was always on the lot doing what I was supposed to do to the point where I didn't have to stand at a gate or anything, my job was to walk around the lot looking for people who weren't supposed to be on the lot and I had this knack for finding people who had snuck on the lot because you know I was a prison guard and I can spot suspicious people. Growing up in that foster home having to read adults and look at people living on the street and all of that gave me the power to spot people like superman looking through a wall (laughter). Story_ID: 466409 Speaker 1: I was so good at spotting people and, and noticing irregular things like doors left unopened or unlocked doors that my job was just to walk around the lot and just be the guard on the lot. So they called it lot patrol, so and the guards were not allowed to wear sunglasses because a lot of the stars and people who wanted to be able to see your eyes, because they felt like it was intimidating when the guards walk around like that. Well I was the only guard they would let wear sunglasses. I remember I was talking to the chief and forgot I had on sunglasses. He was looking at me, I had on these dark Wayfarers and he couldn't see my eyes and he never said anything, never told the lieutenant [Lieutenant Commander Williams] that Antwone's [HistoryMaker Antwone Fisher] out there with sunglasses, tell him to take 'em off. So I had, I had done what I had learned in the [U.S.] Navy that you can, you can do your job and do it so well that people will give you a little more rope than they will give other people because you make yourself valuable. You make--I made myself valuable by putting myself--you know they hired me for the job, but I did the job the best that I could and so it gave me even more of an ability to, to be free and it was that freedom that led to me becoming a writer, not being sequestered in, in a booth or, or at a lobby. So I was able to walk around. I never asked anybody, "I wanna work in, in the industry." All the guards, most of them had been to film school (laughter), I was you know, well you know it makes sense you know because you know the studios had big walls around it and have guards to keep you out and if you wanna be a carpenter, better hang around carpenters rather than fireman, so they get a job working in the mailroom or as security guards and-- Speaker 2: They're in. Speaker 1: They're in, there's a lot of ones who were--there's a guy who was a, a guard when I was a, a guard there in the early '90s [1990] at Sony [Sony Pictures Entertainment, Culver City, California], now runs the sound department at Sony Pictures. So, it's like one of those jobs where you can--places where you can start in the mailroom. In fact, Jack Nicholson worked in the mailroom at Columbia [Columbia Pictures, Culver City, California] then. Kevin Costner worked as a security guard at Raleigh Studios [Hollywood, California]. John Singleton was a security guard and so, you know this is how this goes you know. So, I, I, said well I've, I, I you know I wrote it, my screenplay and-- Speaker 2: So they just they paid you enough to a salary to write your story (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well Todd gave me, Todd--well they call it optioning a story. Speaker 2: This is Todd Black? Speaker 1: Todd Black, he gave me money, optioned the story, meaning that I couldn't go to another producer for six months and he was gonna use the six months to teach me how to write a screenplay and sell it. And so he did do that and he did sell it and you know of course here I am I never had anything really. Well, I had a lot I had myself and I had my good sense you know which is a lot, but you know as far as material things you know I was in the Navy you live out of a sea bag and you know I never had anything and then they give me a check for a for a quarter of a million dollars. It's like you know, it's not even seemed real you know because you know all the checks I'd ever saw that had my name on it had the Statue of Liberty on it (laughter) and the United States Navy seal on it, and so and it said from Fox News Corp [News Corporation; News Corp]. So I said wow you know, took it to the bank. It's like you know wow is this real? Yeah, it was real. Story_ID: 466410 Speaker 1: And so I thought to myself well I'm a writer now, so that was the attitude that led me to continue being able to continue as a writer. I didn't know that--how hard it is you know to become a writer and, and work in Hollywood as a writer. I didn't know, it's almost like somebody teaching you how to play cards and then you learn this game, maybe you learn Gin Rummy and then you're sitting around the table with people who've been playing for years, and but you're winning, and you're like--they call it beginner's luck and I was having beginner's luck because then I got a deal to write a movie at Universal [Universal Pictures, Universal City, California], then HBO in New York [New York] and New Line [New Line Cinema, Los Angeles, California]. I've written on other movies like 'Rush Hour' and 'Money Talks' and things like that. I've written sixteen screenplays for the studios you know. They didn't make them all, but my job as a writer was fulfilled because I write movies, I don't actually get--make them you know. So, so that is really kind of an outstanding kind of--for sixteen years you know and written a lot of movies, we are writing books and the whole thing about it like I said before, I'm, I'm dyslexic so it's kind or like a tortuous kind of thing but you know but you know you do what you have to do and then you're fine you know. Speaker 2: Okay, so, so it was 1992 when they or, what year was when they actually decided--no, that's 2001. Speaker 1: Two thousand two [2002]. Speaker 2: Right when you finished the screenplay? Speaker 1: No, I finished the screenplay in, in '93 [1993]. Speaker 2: Ninety-three [1993] okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And, and they made the movie ['Antwone Fisher'] nine years later I think in 2002 or 2003. Speaker 2: Okay, so you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But I wrote the book ['Finding Fish,' Antwone Quenton Fisher] in between there. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And it came out in 2002. Speaker 2: Oh, okay, so let me--yeah. Speaker 1: Or 2000. Speaker 2: Yeah, the timeline is you--so you finished the screenplay in '93 [1993], now did you go back to being a guard after you (simultaneous)--? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, no I never did I-- Speaker 2: So you went on, you kept writing? Speaker 1: Yeah, I became--I, I kept writing and so--yeah, yeah kept writing for different studios. Story_ID: 466411 Speaker 1: Now by this time had you met your wife yet or? Speaker 2: No, I met my wife--I was a writer, I was on the lot in fact to see Todd [Todd Black] at the Sony lot [Sony Pictures Entertainment, Culver City, California] where I had been a security guard and she was on the lot. She worked for a contract company that had a--she had, her company had a contract with Sony, and I was on the lot for a story meeting and I saw her and I said, "Oh, I'd like to talk--to meet her." I told a friend of mine who was a guard, and he said, "Oh, that Ms. Canister [LaNette Canister Fisher]. I'll introduce you guys," and so then she--she introduced us and then so six months after that we were planning a wedding and the six months after that we were married. It took only a year for us to be married and then we've been married for almost twelve years now, and never have problems, always been together. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, that's--yeah so that's back in the '90s [1990s]. Speaker 2: We were married in '97 [1997]. Speaker 1: Okay, that's still before the movie ['Antwone Fisher'] came out. And all that so (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah. Story_ID: 466412 Speaker 1: So, in the meantime you said you wrote the book version of it ['Antwone Fisher']. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And you told us an interesting thing in the beginning about the book that's not on the tape, but that you--the first time you saw your book in a mall or something and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah the bookstore. Speaker 1: Yeah, tell. Speaker 2: I was in the bookstore just curious to see if my book was--you know I was always so surprised when I see my book on the shelf. You know after all it had just come out, but to see--you know I've always been fascinated by books but it was so hard to read because I was dyslexic that I would never read, but then when my--you know when I started writing I read more and then I saw my book was in this place that I was also so captivated by books and I had a book there with my name on the binder and this lady was at the shelf holding it. She was looking through it and I felt like this sense of embarrassment coming over me and I thought to myself to tell her to you know you should put that back, that's not yours, you know. That's my book but of course it's not my book (laughter). It's my story, but you know and I was--and then got to the place where I would go to bookstores and, and suggest the book to people not telling them that I was Antwone [HistoryMaker Antwone Fisher]. My wife [LaNette Canister Fisher] does that too, she used to do that and my wife would walk up to people and say to people, "You know I just read this great book, it's called 'Finding Fish' [Antwone Quenton Fisher]," and she'd give it to them and they'd say, "You really think--," and we're all standing there, my kids [Azure Fisher and Indigo Fisher], me (laughter) selling, selling this book to, to--it's amazing you know to see you know a book with my name on it. Then of course I wrote book of poetry ['Who Will Cry for the Little Boy?' Antwone Fisher] and then it was in the bookstore and you know. You know I have a new book deal and, and it's just like books that was always so intimidating to me, now it's like it's a part of like you know the thing that I love and having to, have an opportunity to write is like really like an amazing thing. Story_ID: 466413 Speaker 1: So what were the experiences around--when they decided to make the movie ['Antwone Fisher'] I mean that must have really been exciting to know that Denzel Washington was gonna be a part of it and (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) A part of me was excited, but a part of me that was afraid of all that it meant kept the other part in check. I never got too excited; you could ask Denzel or anybody. I was always cool and collected about everything, and people would mention that because for me the consequence of having a movie made about you is that you become famous and what does that mean? Of course I'm shy, of course I'm a little of an introvert and I'm a loner-kind, you know and so what does this mean? Oh I'm gonna lose some of it you know. The happy thing about being famous is that nobody knows what I look like. Some people do, but most people don't know what I look like. So they know my name. Speaker 1: They think you look like the actor that played the role. Speaker 2: Some, yeah and it drives them crazy because he's not it, and after all these years he's been in all these different movies and people always talk about Antwone Fisher but-- Speaker 1: What's his name? Speaker 2: Derek Luke. Speaker 1: Derek Luke that's right. Speaker 2: Yeah, and so I--so it was not like I was really excited even though I was, I couldn't believe it was actually happening. Denzel working on it--I felt so relieved because after meeting him and you know seeing his movies I knew he would get it culturally even though I knew what happened to me in my life wasn't as a result of me being black, but the cultural aspect as it relates to my foster parents [Queen McDonald Pack and Cronie Pack] and the way they viewed the world and themselves and saw us. Some of that is a cultural thing and that he would get that and that he was genuinely protective of my story and me as a person, and so I felt like I had somebody, and Todd Black was as well, really fierce in protecting me and the story. So I had like these people who were genuinely like on the battlefield to try to keep my story the way I originally told it. Speaker 1: Okay, did you feel any anxiety about how they were going to tell the story and the movie at any point and say hey, wait a minute, that's not right, that's you all? Speaker 2: You know the thing about it most people who have movies made about them have passed away before they get the movie made about them. The ones who are living who get the movies made about them, they're generally famous people either football players or something. Me, nobody knew who I was so I kind of had an edge on like you know I could--you know what I'm saying? Or did I get lost in the question? Speaker 1: No, I--explain further though I want you--I heard the first part what you said but. Speaker 2: Well it's easier to make a movie about a guy like me and. Speaker 1: There are no preconceived notions you're saying about (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right and then me, I haven't had a reputation in the public where I had to say well or try to repair anything anybody thought of me. Like if you thought I was this way and then you see this movie and realize that oh I had this kind of upbringing, than I and if I was the kind of person who was too proud to, to admit that my life wasn't perfect, you know--I didn't--I could start from the beginning with the way I told my story, and I told it myself, I wrote it. Most people don't write their own stories and have 'em made into movies. I'm probably the only person in history that ever wrote a movie about himself that actually got made. I think I am, and so that in itself gave me some power as to how the movie story would be told so when they got on the set you know Denzel and Todd, Fox Searchlight [Fox Searchlight Pictures, Century City, California], even the company always kept me involved, always--they said, "Well Antwone [HistoryMaker Antwone Fisher] you know we're not gonna be able to do this scene because this scene costs too much more." You know we've been--we've had the audience on an emotional rollercoaster for almost two hours now, we can't send them on another loop because it's getting to be too much, we got to have light moment here. You know what I mean, so yes, being Antwone and not Antwone the human, the guy who the story's about is one thing, but being Antwone the guy who is the filmmaker who's trying to make a film with people, mature people who, who, who are connected to the story in that they have fallen in love with the story and wanna do a good job. I can't be--I have to be a filmmaker and think like a businessman at the same time, and understand that these people are businessmen even though they fell in love with this story. Story_ID: 466414 Speaker 1: We talked off-camera a couple of times now about the opening scene [of 'Antwone Fisher']. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I really personally think though, my opinion doesn't matter to a lot of people, is that it's one of the finest scenes I've ever seen in a movie, it really moved me. It speaks to a lot of the need that African American people have for identity. That's one of the major problems in the community I think there's a lack of an identity that makes any sense, but this, this scene--describe the scene. Now this is the scene that the studio didn't wanna shoot 'cause it was gone cost too much money. Speaker 2: Right, it was the scene of a recurrent dream I had in my childhood and in my dream as a child it was so comforting to me, and the way everyone was dressed in the, in this scene in my dream was in burlap clothes and heavy cotton shirts you know like, like slaves who were in servitude in America and these were my relatives who were comforting me and they would bring me into this huge barn to have pancakes. This was my dream as a kid and I loved having this dream and everybody was always so excited for me to be there, I felt special. The only time in my childhood that it felt okay to feel special was in this dream and I loved it and when I wanted to have this dream it would never come, but, but I would have this dream as almost a surprise for me you know and so when I wrote the story I said I have to have my dream in the movie. So I wrote it out and, and the thing about this dream and filmmaking, it didn't happen in the film like I wrote in the screenplay, you know there's other filmmakers involved like for example Sharen Davis who did the costumes, did the clothes. She said, "Antwone [HistoryMaker Antwone Fisher], I think it would be better if the people in your dream--," these, you know these were my relatives I describe from, from my past that they would have on clothes that represent the entire span of time that African Americans have been in this country. So when you see the film you'll see people with clothes from the 1800s, 1700s--from the '70 [1970], from slavery time, from modern times, businessmen, cowboys, black cowboys and so these were my relatives all throughout my history--our--my family's history, they're represented in there and that, and so I felt like that was better, that's what filmmakers can bring to help you bring the story alive and give it more of a meaning--enhance the meaning you meant for it--that scene to have. What made it even more meaningful, you know in Cleveland [Ohio] you know they don't have extras like they have here in Los Angeles [California], and so I had to help find some people to be in this scene, and so I asked my childhood friends, some of the relatives that I had met since I found my family, my teacher Ms. Profit [Brenda Profit] was in that scene, just all these people who had meant something to me. It was really amazing and on this farm in rural Ohio they had this big tent they had erected for everybody to have lunch after they had put their clothes on and I wasn't there yet and then--so they said, "Antwone, let's go and see the people," you know, the people I when I got there it was just like the dream, the people, all these people you know some of 'em were drug addict, happened to be there in my, my life as a kid but I wanted them to come and be part of this. Some of them were just businessmen or people that I had known or people from the community, church pastors all put on these clothes. It was beautiful, and they were--when I came in the room they all paused because they said it was me, and everybody was saying hi and it was like such a beautiful, beautiful scene-- Story_ID: 466415 Speaker 1: If you ever interview Denzel [Denzel Washington] you ask him about that day, it was so beautiful and the people who, who owned the, the barn, Nelson Coates was the set designer [for 'Antwone Fisher'] and he designed the set you know, the--he felt like you know the fruit and all the food on the table, another thing that filmmakers bring, should be oversized like dream are. They should not be like regular size. So when you see the pancakes they're huge, when you see the apples they're big, huge apples, you know plums, glitter and just so huge because of the dream, and he said, "This is how a dream should be," and he made this table and hired these people to make these pancakes. They made all these pancakes that kept falling apart because it was too big and the batter was too soft, and so they finally had like four or five plates of pancakes and they kept having to switch 'em because they kept falling apart, and the people who owned the barn they didn't let them come into the barn until everybody was set and the people stood in the doorway and cried because it was so beautiful and that was that scene. It only lasts I think about a minute in the opening, but it took us seventeen hours to make it, a whole day you know. Speaker 2: Yeah it really makes a statement. Speaker 1: Beautiful scene you know and it was a meaningful scene you know to me you know, just to see you know my friends, and everybody--you know it was funny. We were feeding people you know 'cause we were making the movie in the neighborhood you know we had this tent and anybody from the neighborhood could come and get steaks and so, and so everybody was there and they were all eating and somebody was telling me that one of the neighbor people were, was like a crack [crack cocaine] addict right and he was walking down the street with my book ['Finding Fish,' Antwone Quenton Fisher] and he said, "Well what are you doing with book," and he told him, he said, "I'm gonna read it," everybody in Cleveland [Ohio] man they would've read that book, crack heads, everybody (laughter) and it, in the neighborhood [Glenville, Cleveland, Ohio] it was referred to as the book (laugher), "Did you get the book," because the book is about them too, a lot of them are in the book. The neighborhood and the times, things that happened in the neighborhood during that time is in the book too, so they remember those times and they remember some of the people I describe. So, so the book has a personal meaning to them even if they didn't know me, because it was about Cleveland and about this community inside of Cleveland of course that was attached to the whole city. Story_ID: 466416 Speaker 1: I know I remember the, the some of the press leading up to the, the movie coming out and on especially 'The Oprah Winfrey Show' and I think that you actually appeared on the Oprah show (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I wasn't--I think only Denzel [Denzel Washington] and Derek [Derek Luke]. Speaker 1: Oh, just Denzel and Derek? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I thought that-- Speaker 2: I think that Joy [Joy Bryant] might have been. Speaker 1: Did you do any personal appearances at all? Speaker 2: Oh yes, oh yes, but I, I was never invited to her show, but I went on 'The Montel Williams Show.' He invited me to come on his show. He was the other African American talk show host I guess at the time. Speaker 1: He's still got his show too. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, so that was a great experience and my, my (laughter) my book sales went up a lot you know. It's funny the book ['Finding Fish,' Antwone Quenton Fisher] still sells all the time. Some social services departments around the country it is required reading for people who wanna be foster parents, and social workers who wanna be social workers. Speaker 1: Yeah, I think it's got a life sort of like 'Manchild in the Promised Land' by Claude Brown and some of the other classic books about growing up you know, 'I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings' by [HistoryMaker] Maya Angelou that was--you know. Speaker 2: What a company to be in you know that's--you know it's kind of hard to believe you know 'cause you're just living life and you're doing it a day at a time. Something I discovered when I was homeless is that when I was a--in the morning it was too much to think about what I was gonna eat at lunch or if there was gonna be any lunch or if I was gonna eat that day. It was too much to bear to think about the night coming again. So I would only think about the moment that I was in. I never planned anything and so the days seemed extra long because I didn't measure them. The day--the nights were extra long, even longer than days it seemed like, but I learned to live a day at a time and I think to some extent I do that now but since I have a family I know I have to plan. My wife [LaNette Canister Fisher] helped me to learn how to plan and I helped her to learn how to live in the moment too, so it was a good time for me I think. Story_ID: 466417 Speaker 1: Okay, well since we're on the subject you've got two little girls [Azure Fisher and Indigo Fisher] right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: Sweeties, man (laughter). Speaker 1: We, we were talking you know how they light your life up I guess in the beginning of this. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But, and what anything you wanna say about your--are you still maintain contact with your extended family that you met? Speaker 2: Oh, you mean Uncle Jess [Jess Fisher] and all them? I talked to Uncle Jess the other day. Uncle Jess is fine, he's a very-to-the-point all the time and you know the way he grew up probably there wasn't a lot of hugs or things going on but he's like kind of a man's man kind of guy and you know when he talks to you, "How you doing, if you're doing great we don't need to elaborate on how well you're doing, just that you're doing fine, I like to hear that." He said, "Are you working?" "Yes, I'm working." "Good you're working, that's good, always good. Don't mortgage your house, buy everything cash, keep just one credit card, pay it off, you're good." That's Uncle Jess, you know (laughter). He says, "People need to get money at least two times before they know what to get about--know what to do with it; if you got it once I'm gone trust that you know what to do with the money you have." Just simple, cut dry to the point, you know it's a lot of wisdom in that, you gotta listen close because he says it and he cut to the next subject you know. Just a beautiful guy you know, everybody has their life story but at this point in his life I don't know his life but, but my view or estimation that he's a beautiful guy to have lived into his seventies and has a lot to say with a few words. Story_ID: 466418 Speaker 1: Now what major project are you working on now, I mean what's your--or have you finished a major project? What are you conceiving as your next big project? Speaker 2: Well I just finished writing 'Training Day 2' for Warner Brothers [Warner Bros. Entertainment Inc., Burbank, California]. I have a deal with Simon and Schuster [Simon and Schuster, Inc.] for an etiquette book for inner city youth, not altogether for inner city youth, but it's an etiquette book called 'A Boy Should Know How to Tie a Tie' ['A Boy Should Know How to Tie a Tie: And Other Lessons for Succeeding in Life,' Antwone Fisher]. I've, I've written a children's book that maybe published by Simon and Schuster, I'm thinking that is where--me and Verdine White wrote it together. You know Verdine? Speaker 1: Of Earth, Wind and Fire (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Of Earth, Wind and Fire yeah, it's about the bass, a kid discovering electric bass in the '50s [1950s] and I--I played bass guitar also, and so it doesn't make me as good as Verdine (laugher), but I play and so we wrote this story together and also [HistoryMaker] Nikki Giovanni has a new book for children that's coming out soon that's called 'Hip Hop Speaks for Children' ['Hip Hop Speaks to Children: A Celebration of Poetry with a Beat,' Nikki Giovanni] and my poem 'Who Will Cry For the Little Boy' [Antwone Fisher] is one of the poems. It's a compilation of different people's poems. Speaker 1: Now the poem was in the movie ['Antwone Fisher']? Speaker 2: Yes, I actually wrote that poem when I was sixteen while I was at the orphanage [Metzenbaum Children's Center, Cleveland, Ohio] and then the psychiatrist [Lieutenant Commander Williams] asked me to write something to express how I felt and I had remembered I wrote that and I enhanced it and gave it to him and he liked it very much and so when I wrote the book and the movie, I felt like I should include it because it was kind of a milestone in my life. Story_ID: 466419 Speaker 1: We talked a little about the reception of the movie ['Antwone Fisher'] and all that and some of the projects you're working on now, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: I think to understand that they are a part of the human race and people see them as a part of the human race and especially when you travel, one of the things that stood out for me when I was in the [U.S.] Navy going to other places, other countries, a lot of people especially the downtrodden in other countries look to African Americans because we were this example during the '60s [1960s] and '50s [1950s] and '70s [1970s] of what they aspired to, more freedom and independence. We have a lot of freedom and independence that we don't recognize. We don't recognize I think how valuable our contribution to the world. The image of Africans as a whole is and, and while some people are, in some countries are arrogant when they think about African Americans and they feel like we're not up to snuff because of our story and that somehow we had a hand in the dismantling of our culture or language or that--I think that it's never too late and to, to try to get some of that back and I think it's important, and I think people look to, to us because we are greater than we realize is what I think. Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done to this point and you're still young and working on things, but when you look back on everything, is there any major thing that you would do differently now if you could? Speaker 2: No, you know it's all like a perfect year you know, it's a good spring, a good summer, a good fall and hopefully it'll be a good late fall and winter. Story_ID: 466420 Speaker 1: Likewise when you look back on everything you've done to this point, and we always ask this question, what today would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: To have had an opportunity to raise in a big way the issue of children, foster children being emancipated from, from the foster care system, just the humanity of a child alone in a world, raising it in a way that people can't ignore it. I think a lot of people probably never considered as they fly off to Europe or Africa to get a foster child or to adopt a child that they're driving right by orphanages and foster homes where there are American children that need the same thing, but wind up pimps and prostitutes because someone who had the means to raise them and give them a life that they would give someone from Africa or Europe, you know send them to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] or Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey] and have them be on Wall Street and have a, a voice to make policy differences in America, children from other countries whose parents weren't American citizens, and then American citizens you know though the situation is unfortunate are left to the streets and it is an industry that involves children in the streets, just like 'Oliver Twist' [Charles Dickens]. It is a real thing and you know and it involves a lot of horrible things that people don't like thinking about like drugs which is probably not the worst of it. You know people harp on drugs, yeah drugs, yeah, right, yeah, yeah, but what about you know all the other horrible things that happen to children. What about, what about seven years old being hooked on cocaine or heroin and made to be prostitutes for adults. That's horrible and it's something that exists here and it's all around and you know if you have ever lived on the streets, I mean it's like you can't you know--I know when you're in your car and you drive around--I always say this you know but you know you get out in the streets and it's kind of like a third world situation, in a first world country. Story_ID: 466421 Speaker 1: Is there anything I have not asked you do you think we need to cover before I ask my (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm a vegetarian (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, oh okay so. Speaker 2: Why not? Speaker 1: Well how did that come about and when did you (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I married my wife [LaNette Canister Fisher]. Speaker 1: Okay so that happened-- Speaker 2: Pretty much made me a vegetarian (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Well I, I actually hadn't eaten meat, well red meat since I was twenty-two. In the [U.S.] Navy you know they kind of thaw out some of the things while they were actually cooking and so I just stopped eating red met. It kind of felt hard to digest so I, I didn't eat that since I was twenty-two, and my foster parents [Queen McDonald Pack and Cronie Pack] were like from the South and they would bring up a lot of wild animals that relatives had caught like-- Speaker 1: Possum, Raccoons. Speaker 2: Raccoons and things like that and I was kind like turned off to it you know. Like when you go to the grocery store and you see the stuff on the counter it's kind of packaged and everything and you don't really associate it with an actual animal. It's just food when you look at it so but when you see a raccoon or something with a head on it and it's like half the head and snout is out of the pot and rest of it is getting cooked and you're trying to make it fit in the pan you know it kind of turn you off, you know what I mean (laughter)? So I was kind of not like a big meat eater growing up so it easier to become like a vegetarian. I met my wife I got introduced to lot of foods that I didn't know that I could eat you know, things that they make that are not actual chicken but it's supposed to taste like chicken but it doesn't but after you eat it for a little while, just say hey, it tastes like chicken right? So and I feel like I feel better. I was eating things that I was allergic to that didn't realize that I was having this allergic reaction based on the food I was eating and so even with vegetables and fruit you have to be, know what it is that's good for your own self, and I feel a lot better. I think it's probably why I'm such a clear thinker. I think I'm a clear thinker and probably due to she's always on me about drinking water. "Make sure you drink water all time," you know. It seems like it would be hard not to drink soda or not to have a chicken wing or like a steak or something, but after you don't have it for a while, it's not like what you're looking for and as a result you wind up benefiting someway, somehow, you know I think--health wise and I feel like I have little kids [Azure Fisher and Indigo Fisher] and you know I have to be here for them. Story_ID: 466422 Speaker 1: Our last question is similar to legacy, but a little bit different. Sir, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Wow, I think to be remembered as somebody who--wow, a good guy, somebody who just found themselves in a situation and tried to do the best he could with what he had, and you know what the best discovery about it all, if there's a lesson from my life I think that you can start anywhere in a low place, I was born in prison, wasn't my fault but I was born there and then to one day be in the president's [President George Walker Bush] apartment in the White House [Washington, D.C.] having lunch with his mother [Barbara Bush] and father [President George Herbert Walker Bush] and his wife [Laura Bush], and not feel like I didn't belong there or you know walking the streets in Tokyo [Japan], buying a shirt and looking at the proprietor who's looking at me and I'm not looking down or to the side or like yeah, I'm in Japan and I'm the only African American in this building, probably in this block or in this district right now, but I feel comfortable in the world. I feel, I wanna be remembered that way that you know you can start in one place and then came to another place and had something to show for it for the trouble, for other people to, to see and to be an example, truly that you can--it's not gonna happen in a day but I'll be fifty next year, so that's a half a century. It took a half a century for me to get here, so when people are in their childhood and they feel like life is hard, or they're in elementary school and junior high like I'm not gonna make it--well you're just getting started. Life has more chapters to live through and you have to get through those rainy days and those snowy days to get to the sun shiny days, the day that you know you feel like the day that you enjoy the most. You have to have a life, a story, we all have stories. It's just how you tell it, you have to tell it in a way, I feel like telling--I told my story in a way that could help somebody, and help somebody see that there's hope and that there are good people in the world because if anybody's impressed with my life it's not because of my own doing and it wasn't because of my mother [Fisher's biological mother, Eva Fisher], in a way it was. If it wasn't for her and not taking care of me and having me I wouldn't have this life to show as an example of what can happen if you pay attention and look for the good people in life, just an example of a life you know. Speaker 1: Okay, well thank you very much for your story. Speaker 2: Yeah, you're welcome (simultaneous)...