 Story_ID: 609380 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Ma'am, could you please state your full name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: I'm Frankie Muse Freeman [HistoryMaker Frankie Freeman]. Do you want me to spell? Speaker 1: Yes, ma'am. Speaker 2: F-R-A-N-K-I-E, M-U-S-E, F-R-E-E-M-A-N Speaker 1: I was--I thought I read that you had another first name at one time or another lost it-- Speaker 2: Yes. When I was born I was named Marie Frankie Muse and that was what I was called all during the time that I was growing up in elementary school and high school [Westmoreland School, Danville, Virginia]. I dropped the Marie instead of having people call me Marie. Only my sisters still call me Marie. Speaker 1: Okay is there a reason why you dropped it? Speaker 2: No, it's just that it got to be a whole lot of name, you know Marie Frankie Muse so I got to be Frankie Muse and now I truly am Frankie Freeman and that's usually--just the two names. But I use professionally Frankie Muse Freeman. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Okay, and what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: November the 16th, November the 24th, 1916 in Danville, Virginia. In fact, just about two weeks ago I celebrated my ninetieth birthday with a party that my daughter [Shelbe Freeman Bullock] gave me and we had a ball. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And ma'am, what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm a lawyer and I have been a lawyer for almost sixty years. I was admitted first in the District of Columbia [Washington, D.C.] in 1947, and then Missouri in 1948. Speaker 1: Okay. All right, and would it be proper to say that you're a civil rights lawyer or specialized in civil rights? Speaker 2: Well I did, but I have a general practice [at Montgomery Hollie and Associates, LLC, St. Louis, Missouri] but actually I probably handled more civil rights cases than other cases over a period except during the time that I was a full time staff attorney for the St. Louis Housing Authority but those were cases--but that was fourteen years in which I was a full time staff attorney and not handling any civil rights cases during that time. Speaker 1: All right, okay. And ma'am what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today is December the 19th, 2006. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We are in my home and welcome, welcome to St. Louis, you are in my home, a townhouse in St. Louis, Missouri, 4400 Lindell Boulevard, Apartment 15H, one five, H as in Harry. Story_ID: 609381 Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that management compels me to ask and they only require a short answer. The first question is do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yes I guess, I, I like food, yes I have a favorite food. Speaker 1: Okay, what kind of food is your favorite? Speaker 2: Soul food. Speaker 1: Okay, all right (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, Soul food. Speaker 1: Now, do you have-- Speaker 2: I like collard greens and corn pudding and sweet potatoes, yams; actually, I like baked potatoes. I also like steak. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Red Speaker 1: All right. Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: I think probably the holiday season; Christmas, around that time is my favorite time of the year although I love spring. Speaker 1: Okay, and do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Anywhere there's sun, although I think the times I've been to Africa a number of times I think probably my best--my favorite destination--I've only been there once, but I want to go back to Cape Town [South Africa]. Speaker 1: Okay. Now do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Not that I recall--probably, do your homework. Story_ID: 609382 Speaker 1: Now I'm going to ask about your family history and I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [William Muse, Sr.] side, but we'll start with your mother's side first. Speaker 2: Um-hm. The Smiths. Speaker 1: Okay. Can you give me your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Maude Beatrice Smith Muse [Maude Smith Muse]. Speaker 1: Okay and that's M-A-U-D-E? Speaker 2: Yes Beatrice B-E-A-T-R-I-C-E, S-M-I-T-H, M-U-S-E that was her married name, Smith of course is her maiden name. Speaker 1: All right. And what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: May 16th, 1986, I think. Speaker 1: Eighteen ninety-six [1896]? Speaker 2: Nine--1896. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Eighteen eighty-six [1886]. Speaker 1: Eighteen eighty-six [1886]? Speaker 2: It was 1886. Speaker 1: Okay, and where was she born? Speaker 2: Almagro, Virginia. A little suburb of Danville [Virginia], I'd say Danville probably. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now, what do you know about your mother's side of the family? How far back can you trace that side? Speaker 2: My, actually I only know my grandparents, my grandmother [Mary Swan Smith (ph.)], my mother's mother. My grandfather's name was Charles Smith [ph.] but my Grandpa Charlie died when I was very young so I don't really remember much about him. But there were other members of the Smith family that I knew. His brother Moses [Moses Smith (ph.)] who had a grocery store in Almagro, I knew him because he lived longer and then another brother Joe [Joseph Smith (ph.)] who lived in Rutherford, New Jersey, I knew them. There was my great uncles on my mother's side of the family. Speaker 1: Okay. Are there any stories that they passed down on that side of the family about the end of slavery or Reconstruction, or? Speaker 2: Unh-uh. I don't have any particular stories from them. Speaker 1: No stories that you remember from that side? Speaker 2: No, not that I can recall. Speaker 1: Okay. Were they, did they have a tradition of having lived in that part of Virginia at the time? Speaker 2: As far as I know. Speaker 1: So they never talked about being from any other place? Speaker 2: No they weren't, they were from Virginia and they all owned their own homes, and-- Speaker 1: Okay. You say your uncle was a grocer? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah he owned a grocery store in Almagro. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My Uncle Moses. Speaker 1: Moses Smith, right. And what did your grandfather do for a living? Speaker 2: I really don't know because as I said, I don't know; what work, I don't remember, you know, I'm sure they're--but actually my mother is not living and none of my aunts are living. My sister [Allie Muse Peebles] may remember but I don't remember. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: But I just--none of us really knew him because as I said, he died very early. Speaker 1: Did your mother talk about growing up (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, yeah my mother and my mother, grand- talked about growing up and my mother attended, my mother graduated from Hampton [Hampton Normal and Agricultural Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] in 1911. Speaker 1: Okay. What kind of stories did she tell about growing up? Speaker 2: She's probably told a lot of them that I can't remember, any of them (laughter). But actually it was all of family there were five--she had--the stories that they talked about were, were stories that happened among the family and within the family and also the stories that they did. I think she did tell the stories about when my grandfather and a number of forty--there were people, forty people who started Calvary Baptist Church [Danville, Virginia] and she told something about that and you know, how they got started, and, but they were all-- Speaker 1: Okay, so (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The details of which I don't remember. I'm-- Story_ID: 609383 Speaker 1: Your [maternal] family was amongst the group that started Calvary Baptist [Calvary Baptist Church, Danville, Virginia]? Speaker 2: Oh yes, oh yes, oh yes. Speaker 1: And--okay. Speaker 2: Family was a member amongst the group that started the first blank bank, first black bank [The Savings Bank of Danville] in Danville [Virginia]-- Speaker 1: Oh okay, now that's (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) which is now First State Bank [Movement Bank, Danville, Virginia] but it was not, that was not the name when it was started. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In fact, every member of the family had stock in that bank and I still do. Speaker 1: What was the original name? Speaker 2: As I said, I'm trying to remember, I can't think of it (laughter). I'll probably have to, I'll probably have to call the people at First State Bank. Speaker 1: Okay but it was in Danville, and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, it was in Danville, it still is in Danville, Virginia. It is now State First--First State Bank, but it had a different name as I was growing up. Speaker 1: Yeah, when did that get started, when did they start? Speaker 2: Probably about 1915, 1912, 1915, 1915 or something like that. Speaker 1: That's been around a long time. Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely, absolutely and it's still doing well. Speaker 1: Okay. That sounds like quite a community to have a black bank that's still -- Speaker 2: Black bank, black hospital it was a community that decided they were going to take care of themselves. Speaker 1: Hm. Yeah that's impressive. Story_ID: 609384 Speaker 1: So your mother [Maude Smith Muse] went to Hampton [Hampton Normal and Agricultural Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia], right? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And what did she major in? Speaker 2: She's a teacher, so-- Speaker 1: Teacher, okay. Speaker 2: --and she taught after she finished, she taught--well actually, she taught for about, until about a year after she was married [to Freeman's father, William Muse, Sr.] then she was a homemaker, 'cause I was the first child born in 1916. So probably she taught probably until 1914, although she was a teacher in her family--of all of us. In other words, we--she was always correcting us you know, so, so she continued as a teacher- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --but she was just not employed as a teacher-- Speaker 1: Yes, ma'am. Speaker 2: --but she was very much involved in the community. Story_ID: 609385 Speaker 1: I'm gonna go to your father's side of the family now. Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: My father's William Brown Muse [William Muse, Sr.], do you want me to spell that? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: W-I-L-L-I-A-M, Brown, B-R-O-W-N, Muse, M-U-S-E. Speaker 1: All right, and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And his father's name was Frank Muse and they're from Franklin County, Virginia; Penhook is part of, is in Franklin County. Franklin County was the county seat- Speaker 1: Okay. --but Penhook is where my grandfather lived. Speaker 2: Okay. Now, Franklin County is that near Danville [Virginia]? Speaker 1: About I think Franklin County, Gretna [Virginia] is--Rocky Mount [Virginia] is the county seat of Franklin County. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: That probably is about thirty miles from Danville 'cause I think Penhook is a little closer. Penhook is where my grandfather lived, it is a lot closer (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. All right. Now, what is your father's date of birth and place of birth? Well you gave me the place, but what's the date of birth? Sorry. Speaker 1: It would have been--he's, he was a year younger than my mother [Maude Smith Muse]. Speaker 2: Okay, so (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So March the 4th was his birthday, so-- Speaker 2: So-- --therefore it would have been probably '87 [1887] 'cause my mother's birthday was May 16, 1886 and my father's would have been March 4, 1887. Just, I'm trying to count back now (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, he's a year older? He's a year older? Speaker 2: Huh? She is a year older. She, she, she was, yeah-- Speaker 1: Oh, she's a year older, okay so he was born in 1887 okay, I got you. All right. Now, what do you know about your father's side of the family and how far back can you trace them? Speaker 2: Oh, I don't know any further back, I just know my mother, my father, my fath- my mother, my grandmother--both grandmothers were named Mary, my mother's mother, Mary Smith, Mary Swan Smith [ph.] was my mother's mother and Mary Finney Muse was my grandmother on my father's side. Both of them, both of them were Grandma Mary. Story_ID: 609386 Speaker 1: That side didn't te- tell any stories either about how they acquired property or how they were able to-- Speaker 2: Not either, my, my Grandfather Frank [Freeman's paternal grandfather, Frank Muse] bought land. He was a tobacco farmer and tobacco was very, a very major business in Virginia and he also acquired land, and--the, there are a few stories about Frank, about Frank. In other words Frank he had some very--he believed that if you worked hard and that if you acquired, he didn't have any patience with not, with folks who didn't do anything or didn't have anything because he felt that if you worked hard you could get it. And he did not accept the fact that he had to release kowtow to anybody because they were white. When, the story we know--we, which we never really knew whether it was true or not but when the KKKK [sic. Ku Klux Klan, KKK] came on to his property, he shot their horses out from under them. They ran and then he told them to come back and move the horses off his property and we don't know of any instance in which he had encountered any problems because of somebody trying to take advantage of him. Speaker 1: Wow, well that's quite a story (laughter). Speaker 2: Well (laughter). Speaker 1: He shot the horses out from under them and then told them to come back and move the horses off his property. Speaker 2: Uh-huh, uh-huh, uh-huh. Move and get it off of his property. One of the things we always heard--they always told us, "You just didn't mess with Frank Muse," (laughter). And so, because--I am the oldest child and I am named for him and of course during, as I was growing up and something would happen somebody would say, "You're just like your grandpa," (laughter) or your grandfather. But they didn't necessarily mean that as a compliment when they said it--when I was doing whatever they were talking about. Speaker 1: Okay 'cause he could be a tough customer. Speaker 2: A tough customer. Speaker 1: Right, I see, I see. Man, come back to get them, now that's, that's bad (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well as I said that we've heard all of our lives and his friends in Virginia and around Museville [Virginia] included black and white, yeah. Speaker 1: I was going to say to be able to command that kind of--to be able to say something like that would take more than just one man, he'd have to have some, some people behind you--I guess some friends that were willing to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, just, I said, he, he, he was a solid citizen, um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And he did not, you see, he did not have to go--he didn't ever feel that you should go to somebody and ask for something, you get it all yourself. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 609387 Speaker 1: So that area sounds like, around there sounds like it's pretty independent in terms of the black population (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Very, oh--um-hm, um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 1: So there's no story about how--yeah (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That was during that, that was during the time we were growing up-- Speaker 1: There's no story about how that that came to be, because I know we'd come out of slavery into (unclear). Speaker 2: Well, maybe, I just, I just don't have it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, I just don't--yeah, I just don't have it. Speaker 1: To be able to come out of slavery not that long before then, I guess, before his birth. I mean, slavery was only twenty-five years you know, before he came into the world. To think that that community would be that organized, you know. I mean, there's a story there (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I'm not saying that--I'm not, I can only talk about what I hear about the family. Speaker 1: Okay. I guess what I'm doing, to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And then there were varying you see in terms of there were people who even during slavery, received an education. And they learned how, they were taught how to read and, and, and, and to write and, and, and, and so they were also--they were, although at that time I have absolutely no knowledge or any story about how that family, you know, survived slavery except that they came out and they were going to make it on their own. On their own. That-- Speaker 1: Okay. That's quite, that sounds like quite a group of people and somebody watching this tape in some future time might want to do some research to see how that group got so independent-- Speaker 2: And there are people who have done some, I just, I'm not the one who has it. Speaker 1: Okay. Yes, ma'am. Speaker 2: Because, when we-that was the thing that--none of us lived that, even back, because, but I do know--I have, I have a nephew--I had a nephew, he died last year--he died this year really who was doing some research and if Billy [ph.] was living he might be able to share some of it because he did go up to Rocky Mount [Virginia] and check out some of the records, but I didn't. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, you're--I asked you when I came in if you were related to Clarence Muse. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And you said-- Speaker 2: My brother Andy [Andrew Muse] said yes, because he knew him--you know, he met him and he did I think at one time they were on a plane together and they got to, and he started talking and they, he did come from Rocky Mount. Speaker 1: Okay. Oh, okay (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, you see my [paternal] grandfather [Frank Muse] also knew Booker T. Washington who was born in Franklin County [Virginia] and you see that is part of the highway there is named Booker T. Washington Highway. There is a--the federal government has a--you know, they have these parks and there is one there. We have visited that, we-and when we would go back for our family reunions we'd always spend time at that, at the Booker T. Washington memorial [Booker T. Washington National Monument, Franklin County, Virginia]. Speaker 1: Okay. Now are there any stories about Booker T. that your grandfather passed down? Speaker 2: No, no (laughter). Speaker 1: What he liked to eat for breakfast, or (laughter)? Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because you see he was just there during his early years and then he moved on to somewhere else. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: But, but there may have been, but I don't, as I said and you see my grandfather lived in Penhook [Virginia], I lived in Danville [Virginia] so we would go up there to visit during the summer for maybe two, two weeks and, and then--but he would come down, but usually when they came down to visit us it would be on a Sunday afternoon or maybe on a Saturday or at a time when he was bringing--you see, when they would bring the tobacco to Virginia to Danville, he would, they would, that was their business juncture, you know. So they may come by but that wouldn't be a lot of socializing with us. Story_ID: 609388 Speaker 1: Did your father [William Muse, Sr.] go to college too? Speaker 2: Yeah well my father went to a, what I call, is a technical school. I don't believe that you would define that as a college but anyway he received enough training and he also did a lot of reading. So he was--when the federal government announced an examination in Virginia for postal employees he took that examination and he was the third black employed by the U.S. Postal Service [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service] in Virginia as a railway postal clerk which meant that he travelled and they processed the land--the mail on the train. That was back during that time that of course is not done now. But he had that job for all of my life, you know. I mean all of the time up until he retired before he died. Speaker 1: Well that's the kind of job a lot of people coveted that kind of job, because there are benefits and-- Speaker 2: Oh absolutely and he did well. Being a federal employee and entered it because of the nature of it, his work and that is that he had some time off when he, between trips that's when he engaged in some other, you know, enterprises and things like that. Story_ID: 609389 Speaker 1: Is there a, a story about how your mother [Maude Smith Muse] and father [William Muse, Sr.] met? Speaker 2: (Laughter) I don't know, I mean, I mean I'm sure there was, I mean. They had--I know, the only thing, I don't, the only thing that I remember is that when they got married they got married at 5:30 in the morning because the time that they got married it was consistent with his route [with the U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service], his railroad route and then that's, so that I remember (laughter). But as to, and I always thought that was strange. But anyway, they signed permits, he was having to leave and they couldn't get the schedule together and so they got married. But again you see there were people--five o'clock in the morning was not strange. Like for me, I get up at five o'clock in the morning anyway you see, so. But that's when we would, that's when I heard that, that--but I did hear that but as to how they met I'm sure they met--I don't know, ob- obviously they met. Story_ID: 609390 Speaker 1: Well do you have any brothers and sisters? Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They are the parents [Freeman's parents, Maude Smith Muse and William Muse, Sr.] of eight children and I'm the oldest and-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: One, my brother--I'm the oldest my next brother is William [William Muse, Jr.], I mean he was the one--he's still living and he was for many years--he was the president of Imperial Savings and Loan company [Imperial Savings and Loan Association, Martinsville, Virginia] and the next one was my brother A.R. [A.R. Muse (ph.)] who was a year apart who we called Tweed, Charles Sumner Muse [Charles Muse] who was on the faculty at our--South Carolina, South Carolina State [South Carolina State College; South Carolina State University, Orangeburg, South Carolina] for a number of years until his death in '80 [1980]. Next to him was Edward Muse who for about twenty years was a director--national director of life membership for the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] he lived in New York [New York]. Everyone--then my sister Allie [Allie Muse Peebles] then Andy [Andrew Muse] who is my brother who is a lawyer. Two of us lawyers, the oldest and the youngest child, children were lawyers. My sister, two sisters, two sisters died. One, when she [Maudina Muse] was just after one year at Shaw [Shaw University, Raleigh, North Carolina] she died and she died when she was twenty, she died the same month that I entered law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.]. But the other, the first death was Virginia [Virginia Muse (ph.)] who was, who died when she was nine months. So actually six of us who grew up, you know, who were together for, for most of the time and everybody other than the banker has a bachelor's degree. Story_ID: 609391 Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: Oh yeah I think my--I have many early childhood memories. Speaker 1: What's the earliest one (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well one, I don't know, I cannot separate my childhood memories from going to church you know, and Sunday morning, Sunday morning breakfast was special because we were all, you all had breakfast together and you all had--I remember we had oyster stew. My father [William Muse, Sr.] because he worked on the railroad could bring oysters from Norfolk [Virginia] or Virginia or somewhere. So we had oyster stew and, and nobody ever, who I--the friends that I have met have never talked about having oyster stew for breakfast but we, that was special to us (laughter). And the fact that we had a family prayer, almost--every Sunday morning that was, that was a given. The early childhood memories was that you went to church, you went to Sunday school, you went to church, you went to BYPU [Baptist Young People's Union of America], you went to whatever was going on and you were not able, if you were too sick to go to church then you didn't get to go anywhere else either. And those memories I have and I also have the memories that no matter what you--you may as well do what you're supposed to do because in the neighborhood if you were not doing what you're supposed to do don't worry about the fact that--your parents would know about it before you got home. So those, those were--I have a few of those that at least I think probably I didn't appreciate sometimes then that I think about now and I'm, I'm thankful for it. Story_ID: 609392 Speaker 1: Can you describe where you grew up in Danville [Virginia] to us and, and give us what were the, what were the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Well first of all I lived on Ross Street in Danville in the 200 block. In the--going from Main Street down you had the 100 block and then the 200 block and then the 300 on, on down and I think it was true in Holbrook and most of Danville but I know mostly about Holbrook and Danville because Holbrook was right next--the next street over from us. In the 100 block of Ross Street all of the families were white families. Speaker 1: How do you spell Ross Street? Speaker 2: R-O-S-S. Speaker 1: R-O-S-S, okay. Speaker 2: We lived at 215 Ross Street (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Ross Street. Speaker 2: And so the families from 215 in the 200 block and the 300 block--I mean my recollection is mostly about the 200 and 300 block, they were pretty long blocks. The black families lived on both sides of the street, and as I remem- so usually--and on Holbrook Street which was the next over you would go, going like going from one block north to Holbrook Street where families the same way and our church, Calvary Baptist Church [Danville, Virginia] was on Holbrook Street, Holbrook and Gay [Street]. So actually I would think now they would probably call that about four or five blocks or what, you know. And our school where we went to Westmoreland [Westmoreland School, Danville, Virginia] was down the street on Holbrook further on another street but anyway probably about seven or eight blocks away from there. But anyway it may have been even longer but anyway there was no question you walked to school, you walked wherever you were going. If you were going to be going downtown up to Main--you were going downtown for anything then you would walk up and if you ask me what I remember. The, our, the black children would be walking, I remember and I talk about this in my book because when we walked there was never any--everybody smiled or talked to each other. But when we would walk--and usually we--pretty much, but children go places together when I remember. We would walk up, up to pass 100 to Main, you passed the 100 block and the children would be playing. The white children would be playing just as we would be playing and as we pass the white children they would go, "Nigger, nigger, nigger," and we'd say, "Cracker, cracker, cracker" (laughter). And there would be, and always there was somebody sitting on the porch. They, but nobody could hear us except the children talking to us but while we were calling each other those names we were still smiling and keep going. So that was kind of a thing that was--it was not any hostility except if that's how you, you know--but we didn't take it from them and they didn't take it from us. And up at the end of the street was, that's where the shoe repair place was the man and he had I think in his basement, I'm not sure where it was, but that's where we all got our shoes repaired. But if we had to have shoes repaired we would go take the shoes up there and then when the parents, when he got his, got the repairs done he'd send them back by his children. So that was, that was the life in which, you know, we lived. There was a separateness but there was a, there was a kind of at least you did what had to had to be do, what had to be done and, and if, and nobody paid any attention to it. Story_ID: 609393 Speaker 1: People kind of tried to work around it, you're saying? Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: They tried to work around the segregation? Speaker 2: Well, I, I don't, as I said--I think that--I don't know that there was a method--working around segregation to the extent that, we didn't, we did not ride the streetcar, we walked, you know. We didn't, I did not ever go to a movie in Danville [Virginia], because you--we didn't do that, you know. Speaker 1: Why, did your parents [Maude Smith Muse and William Muse, Sr.] talk about it or was (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah you just don't do that. No, you don't have to go to a movie and of course even for the--if there was a store that you couldn't try something on that was not a problem because we would just have a dressmaker or tailor to do whatever had to be done, make your clothes unless there was somebody who was not like that. You did not spend any money with somebody who did not respect you that was what they told us. And that was why we had the bank because they said you don't borrow money from them, either. Speaker 1: Okay. The bank survived the Depression [Great Depression] and came all the way through-- Speaker 2: The only day it was closed was the day Roosevelt [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt] closed it that one day that's First State Bank [The Savings Bank of Danville; Movement Bank, Danville, Virginia] and that's historical now, I mean it's still open. Speaker 1: Yeah. Is it the oldest black bank in the country? Speaker 2: I don't know, I don't know, I don't know. Speaker 1: It seems like it would, would be closed if it wasn't (unclear). Speaker 2: It probably has more white depositors now. I mean, I have stock in it but I don't--I live here. But I don't have that much stock in it. But we've always had it so I just keep it. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Well-- Speaker 2: But we had Imperial Savings and Loan [Imperial Savings and Loan Association] in Martinsville [Virginia] in which my brother Bill [William Muse, Jr.] was president. So during the time when I was--I, we had prob-, any cri-, any crisis in the family, if we had to borrow money we borrowed it--we didn't even go here we went, you know, and got it from either there. Story_ID: 609394 Speaker 1: What did you like to do when you were growing up? What, what things really did you like to do? Did you like music, or? (Unclear). Speaker 2: Um-hm. All of us loved music everybody, everybody had, everybody had, was trained. My brother had a clarinet; I had the piano we all had to be trained in music. And not (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What did you play? Speaker 2: Not, not that we have musicians but we know--I play the piano and Bill [William Muse, Jr.] played clarinet, Tweed [Charles Muse] played the trombone, I don't know who played the drums but anyway we probably all did (laughter), but were just--and the choir. Every member of my family other than Bill and me have a great singing voice other than the two oldest. My sister [Allie Muse Peebles] is still in the choir in Raleigh [North Carolina]. Speaker 1: All good singers okay. What, what else did you like to do? Speaker 2: Well I liked to, I liked to dance, I liked to--I still like to dance even in my party--my ninety year old party I was dancing (laughter), visit friends, play whatever games there were. I think it was my father [William Muse, Sr.] in the backyard put up a sort of a, you know, miniature golf course. I did whatever my brothers were doing. One of the things our parents never had any assignment that was related to gender. In other words if the dishes had to be washed Bill had to wash them as well as I, you know, and everybody. You know, so that's one of the things that I was blessed with. So therefore when they'd be playing ball I would try to play and they would put me out but anyway--whatever. 'Cause I had four brothers growing up so, so-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --I did whatever they did. Story_ID: 609395 Speaker 1: Well, what school did you go to? Speaker 2: In (unclear)? Westmoreland. It's no longer that name. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I think it's called Langston now [John M. Langston Focus School, Danville, Virginia]. Speaker 1: Westmoreland School. Was it named after somebody black in the community? Speaker 2: Not that I knew of. Speaker 1: Okay that was right there in Danville [Virginia]? Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I graduated when I was sixteen and I was valedictorian of my class. Speaker 1: So just one school for all the grades? Speaker 2: Oh for, oh probably so, probably so at the time. I graduated in 1934 it may have been, I mean different buil- one building, you know. Speaker 1: Okay, so-- Speaker 2: We were all in, we were not--we had different classes- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --there may have been other buildings I don't recall (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But the school went all the way from first grade through, up to high school? Okay. Speaker 2: All the way up to high school, oh yeah and one of the focuses on Danville always has been in the community is that you didn't stop at high school. You had to go somewhere even if somebody had to raise the money to send you there. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And usually my mother [Maude Smith Muse] did a lot of that. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, so did you have a favorite subject in school? Speaker 2: Mathematics. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now that's, that's usually considered unusual for girls to like math as much but (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) About everything I've done somebody has considered it unusual (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Was it really unusual then for you to be, to be good in math? Speaker 2: I don't, I don't recall. Speaker 1: All right. Did you have a favorite teacher? Speaker 2: Oh Ms. Kay. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Kay Taylor [ph.]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was my mother's best friend. Speaker 1: Okay, okay and why did you like her so much? Speaker 2: Well first of all she had great expectations of me and she made it very clear and of course so did most of my family. They said I was brilliant. I don't know, I just said I don't--I just want to be me and they just said you just have to do better. And I remember the disappointment when I was--and sometimes I would mess up 'cause in algebra Dr. Givens said--Gibson [Edwin A. Gibson], I think he was the principal I think his name was Gibson. He said, "You think you're going to pass algebra and you're not doing any better than this?" So I didn't pass it and then I had to take it again. But so therefore--but I took it and sometimes you have to get knocked in to do something right so therefore I took it. So (unclear) the next time I took it I did a higher grade. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But I think in the beginning I probably had trouble getting through what X, Y, Z meant. Speaker 1: Okay. Now were you involved in--did they have clubs and organizations in school that you could (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not in high school that I know of. I don't think they had any in high school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: If they'd been involved I probably would have. It depended upon what my parents thought on how we were using our time. If they thought that--if they didn't know where we were going to be 'cause if I was going out, one of my brothers was going with me. So I don't have, I don't remember that. Speaker 1: Okay. Did you run for class office or anything did they have offices? Speaker 2: No, no, no. Speaker 1: Okay. I don't, I don't, I have no recollection of it. Speaker 2: Okay, so-- Speaker 1: We did--there may be clubs and if there was something that was going on or if there was a program we were all on it (laughter). But I don't remember--what that was except that I do know from the church [Calvary Baptist Church, Danville, Virginia] or from whatever groups that were going on; if there was a program we would, we would participate. Even if we didn't volunteer our parents would volunteer us. Speaker 2: Okay. So, so were you very active in church? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: You mean active, active as a--you see remember as I'm saying this is my first sixteen years of my life so therefore I was studying, I was studying the Bible and then when you got to a point if it got to where you were on a program or you were teaching a, a younger class all of that I did within the context of, of the, of the other things that you had to do because we were still in school. Story_ID: 609396 Speaker 1: How large was your graduating class in high school [Westmoreland School, Danville, Virginia]? Speaker 2: Maybe about thirty, forty. Speaker 1: Okay so this was a kind of a small school? Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah see the population was about thirty thousand. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Did you have any advice about college from your parents [Maude Smith Muse and William Muse, Sr.]? Speaker 2: Oh my goodness there was no que- (background noise). Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION) Speaker 2: Okay, so your mother being a graduate of Hampton [Hampton Normal and Agricultural Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] influenced you to do, to do likewise. Speaker 1: Absolutely as I said--that's a nice word was influence (laughter). Yeah, I mean, everybody just, if somebody said--if somebody asked me, "Are you going to Howard--?" I ended up, 'cause my law--so it's Hampton and Howard [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.], I'm a product of Hampton and Howard that's what I am now for which I am indebted to both Hampton and Howard. Speaker 2: Okay. Now did your mother know people at Hampton still when you went to Hampton? Speaker 1: Oh yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. We had probably family members who were on the faculty there, you know. I mean, our family has had a long tradition with Hampton. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah there were family members who were on the faculty there. Story_ID: 609397 Speaker 1: So how did you like Hampton [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia]? Speaker 2: I liked it--I loved it (unclear). Hampton is the most beautiful campus, it's home-home by the sea. Speaker 1: Did you have any mentors at, at Hampton? Speaker 2: Probably so and I did, I did get involved in clubs in fact I was probably not--I was a brilliant student in high school [Westmoreland School, Danville, Virginia], I was not brilliant at Hampton 'cause that was, that was my first time away from home. I was, I was very popular, I was very active, I studied but I was not, I mean I was, I was more interested and if I would get invited to--if a club was giving a dance so I had friends and we had, we had--it was very interesting at Hampton. And when we go to Hampton--Hampton was good but the City of Hampton was still segregated. So when we'd go into the city we would have sometimes problems. And so therefore that would mean that I wouldn't particularly want to go into Hampton because Hampton, Virginia itself--which of course is much different from Hampton now, I mean Virginia but it was one in which when we would go we would go, we would go with permission but we would go as a group, and to maybe to shop or whatever. But we would only go if our parents gave permission for us to go. Speaker 1: Okay. So what was your major in college? Speaker 2: I said math. Speaker 1: Oh okay, math. Speaker 2: But I chose it but then I was realizing once I was there that really was not what I wanted to do. I made that--that's when I decided because I was still reading a lot and then, and hearing a lot and it was during that time that I said, "I'm going to be a lawyer." Yeah, it was during that time. Story_ID: 609398 Speaker 1: Were you inspired by any black lawyers that you knew? Speaker 2: No, that I met or heard about. I'm not sure whether how many I knew then, I read about them and they were in the news and they were, but at that point I don't--the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] I learned about it and was reading about it so at that point. Speaker 1: Okay, did you keep up with (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In terms of a personal relationship with a lawyer during that time, no I did not know. I don't remember except there was a Yancy [ph.] who was a relative of mine who lived in New Jersey, but actually I don't think at that point that I had any conversation of any substance. Speaker 1: Okay. All right, so did you know of any women who were lawyers, any black women who were lawyers when you went? Speaker 2: I'm trying to remember when I met--Sadie, when I heard of Sadie Mossell, Sadie Tanner Mossell Alexander. I, I don't remember that it was--that I heard about her at Hampton [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] but I met her very soon afterwards. I knew there were some women but I mean, but when I got to meet (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Sadie Mossell that's a, now that's-- Speaker 2: Sadie was among the first that I met. Speaker 1: She's the one that married Raymond Pace Alexander? Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 1: Right okay, right, right. Okay. Yeah she was an early lawyer, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, 'cause we soon became good friends but I mean, but I'm, you're talking about from that, at that point in Hampton- Speaker 1: Yes (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No I did not know her then. Story_ID: 609399 Speaker 1: Any other stories about Hampton [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] before we move you on to law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.]? Speaker 2: No--one, remember one incident that I remember at Hampton when I first got to Hampton, I, when I--it was personal. One day I wasn't feeling good so I decided that I would stay at school. We had a matron on the campus in the dormitory, I don't think they have that now but anyway, that is so she came into the room and I was still in bed and she said, "What's wrong with you?" I said, "I have cramps, I can't go to school." So she said, she got me up and told me to go to the dormitory so I did feel better. I don't think she told me that I'd feel better but she told me I wasn't going to stay in the room in the campus and so then I remember that. And I really--that taught me a lesson. So after I, I went to class, went, went back, I don't know what they gave me a dose of but anyway I went to class and that's the last time that happened. Story_ID: 609400 Speaker 1: Where did you decide to go to law school at? Did you, did, did you apply to law schools while you were a senior? Speaker 2: I--no I prob-, I decided to go to law school after the third year. I decided where I, I wrote, I was asking--I was inquiring and I was told--somebody told me that I didn't, that there were some colleges--some law schools that would take you after you finished the third year and I heard this from St. John's in Wash- in New York [New York]. So I think I wrote and then I talked to my parents [Maude Smith Muse and William Muse, Sr.] and my aunt lived in New York, Aunt Dee [ph.] and so therefore I decided that I would go to St. John's [St. John's College of Law; St. John's University School of Law, New York, New York]. And I filled out an application and went to St. John's and after a week I got my credits and I was told from St. John's that they did not accept Hampton's [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] credits. I had been also told that because my name is Frankie [HistoryMaker Frankie Freeman] that they probably thought that they were getting a male; anyway, after a week I was not at St. John's. And so therefore I (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So they would not accept--was that common then? Speaker 2: That was 1936. Speaker 1: Yes. Was it common for them not to accept the credits of a black institution [HBCU]? Speaker 2: From Hampton yeah then, then, but that's not true now but I mean that was, that was then. Now as I said I was told and I did not pursue it, I mean, accepted it. So whether that was--which was as I said when it happened two or three years later when I was talking to someone about it they questioned--they felt it might have been gender, you see. Speaker 1: So they were just telling you that (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. As I said, so at that point. Speaker 1: Yeah. So you could have been discriminated against because of gender or race? Speaker 2: I said but it was, but it was one of which, I mean (unclear). Speaker 1: And even the, even the policy might not have been true you're saying? Right, right. Speaker 2: That's what I'm saying, that's what I mean, that's, but I mean what happened was that at least that. Story_ID: 609401 Speaker 1: But in the meantime my, my, my, my aunt was a member of Abyssinian Baptist Church [New York, New York] and, when I had, soon as I had gotten there then I started going to Abyssinian and Adam Clayton Powell, Sr. was the pastor there. Adam Clayton Powell, Sr. originally had come from Virginia, Franklin County also (unclear). So at least there was that connection in terms of my aunt but then Adam Clayton Powell, Jr. was the associate minister and it was during that time that he became actually the minister. But he also started, was working with a group of young people. He was very active in challenging some of the problems in New York [New York] and he was at least working with young people to encourage. So this was during the Depression [Great Depression] years too and so there were a number of young people who were working and remember, I had been a member and I became a part of this group. In the meantime this was in 1938, Shelby Freeman [Shelby Freeman, Jr.] who had finished Lincoln University in Missouri [Jefferson City, Missouri] had decided he wanted to go to graduate school. Missouri had a policy as did seventeen other states with segregation laws that if a person--if a student wanted to go to graduate school they would pay for them to go to another pla- another state. And so Shelby had gone to Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York] for Teachers College and that's when--and during the time when they would have some students trying to make connections and socializing that's when they came up--he came up with a couple of other people to Abyssinian with this group of young people and that's how I met Shelby--that's how I met my husband. Speaker 2: Okay, okay. Well, was it love at first sight (laughter)? Speaker 1: Oh no not necessarily first sight, but it was not real long afterwards. Because the first time he told me about Lincoln I'd never heard of Lincoln. I thought that Lincoln was in Pennsylvania [Lincoln University, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania], I mean I thought that was the only Lincoln, you know, yeah, but anyway, yeah, it was, we sort of connected. Story_ID: 609402 Speaker 1: In the meantime, I was trying to, I was doing something--getting some courses, I was trying to figure out--I mean I was doing something. But I meant, I mean I had a job or something--a part-time job and I was doing that. But then in December we got married and that was to the disappointment of I think his parents and mine [Maude Smith Muse and William Muse, Sr.] because I had gone there to go to law school [St. John's College of Law; St. John's University School of Law, New York, New York] they didn't send me--and so, but anyway. It was also you see then the world--you don't know about this but anyway this was in 19--and our daughter [Shelbe Freeman Bullock] was born in 1939. He [Freeman's husband, Shelby Freeman, Jr.] was working as a teacher with the MP [ph.] whatever that was, but in the meantime the United States was advertising for employees to come to Washington [D.C.] gearing up which we did not really know. So there was an application for employment for the [U.S.] Department of the Army, he filed it and was appointed. So then we moved from New York [New York] to Washington and it was in early 1940, I guess the early part of 1940. So then we were able to find a school for our daughter who was about four or five then. Because everybody was--they were offering employment--federal employment to everybody so I was offered a position with the [U.S.] Department of the Treasury, Foreign Funds Control [Office of Foreign Funds Control; Office of Foreign Assets Control]. And then December 7th of course there was Pearl Harbor and so everybody was working and then I decided that I wanted to do something so I took courses to be trained as a statistician and got a certificate for that and moved to the OPA [Office of Price Administration]. While I was there I met Motley Martin [ph.] who was from Danville [Virginia] and a lawyer working in Washington who knew me and said, "What are you doing?" And I told him. He said, "What about law school what happened to you?" And I said, "Well I'm thinking about it." And when he finished talking to me I decided that I better do something about it because I remembered all the things my family had said about, "What you're thinking about?" Or, "What you're fixing to do?" So I took off one afternoon maybe probably in the next few days and went up to Howard and asked to see the dean, Dean Hastie [William H. Hastie]--I saw Dean Hastie. I told him I had come to find out about entering law school and Dean Hastie looked at me and he said, "Mrs. Freeman [HistoryMaker Frankie Freeman], have you applied?" I looked at him and I felt so stupid, I was there at Howard law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.] with the dean and hadn't done the first thing that you're supposed to do if you're going to go to law school you first have to apply. Story_ID: 609403 Speaker 1: Dean Hastie [William H. Hastie] asked you to, if you had applied and (laughter). Speaker 2: I said no but I went home and I told, that's when I told Shelby [Freeman's husband, Shelby Freeman, Jr.] that, "I think I'm going to law school [at Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.]." He looked at me and he said, "Okay." But I knew law school isn't free so I decided that I'd call my parents [Maude Smith Muse and William Muse, Sr.] and so I talked to them. I talked to my father and realized that they had been disappointed because I had not pursued what I said I was going to do in the first place. But anyway I told them that I wanted to go to law school and I said, "I need your help." And they said, "Okay." So then I, then applied for law school and I was accepted. But when Dean Hastie had talked to me and I'm trying to remember whether I had another meeting with him after I applied or not, I don't know. But he did tell me the law is a jealous taskmaster, it's going to take a lot of work, you know all of that and he also said, "You have a family." He knew I was married. He said, "So if you choose to go to law school it's going to take all of this," and I said I accepted. So he said, "You're not going to be able to keep your job." So I said okay but then I was still a federal employee, I was working as a--I had a grade as a statistician [at the Office of Price Administration] and so I figured that probably I could ask because at that time the war [World War II, WWII] was winding down and I could probably work four hours a day. Anyway I applied to--filed the application, was admitted. They had gotten all my credits from Hampton [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] and I was admitted and actually I tried with his support because Shelby had said he was going to help me at least with laundry and things like that because with respect to our daughter [Shelbe Freeman Bullock] in daycare that was going to be taken care of. I lasted working and trying to go to law school for about two month then I said I can't do it, so I quit. So that is something that I was able to do that because of my, the support of my husband and my family. I would not have been able to do that. And anyway I knew then that it was something that I had to do, I had to study and to do, so what I would do was to determine that I was going--people said you have to do--as women if you're going to be a lawyer--if you're going to do something like this then you have to choose. I did not feel that I had to choose, I felt that I had, that if I wanted to do all of it then I could do it. But I also was determined that I was going to be a good mother, I'm going to do what I could to be a good mother, I was going to be what I could to be a good wife and I was going to do what I could--and was going to study and I was going to be a good student and, and that's what, what I did. I did very well my first year-in, in my, my freshman year in law school. Story_ID: 609404 Speaker 1: Because I would get up in the morning very early, I would, I would, I'd get up like at three o'clock and do--and, and study. In the meantime however, there were a group of us (unclear) about four of us who were, you know, a study team. We would study to, all of us were pretty much around the same age at that time and same interests and so we studied together actually. And so I did very well and then my second year I became pregnant and so I still got through the second year but the baby was due in, in September which would be the beginning of my senior year. And the summer was fine because you see I was out of school and so I at least could do, do all of the things that I would ordinarily be doing. But class was to start in September the 10th and I knew my son [Shelby Freeman III] was due soon in September. So I wrote to--in the meantime Dean Hastie [William H. Hastie] had been appointed governor of the [U.S.] Virgin Islands so we had a new dean, Dean Johnson [George M. Johnson]. So I wrote to him in August and asked for permission to register late--to register after my baby was born and he wrote to me and reminded me of the rules that I couldn't do that and that only the university registrar could make that decision. So I--on the date of the--of September 10th Shelby [Freeman's husband, Shelby Freeman, Jr.] took me--by the time, I don't know what the arrangement was but anyway he took me up there and left me and I went over to the university registrar and filled out the form and asked to be, to register, you know, to register late. Dean Wilkerson [ph.] who was the registrar looked at me and he said, "Mrs. Freeman [HistoryMaker Frankie Freeman] I think you should stay out a year and come back after your baby is born." Well the war [World War II, WWII] was ending this was in '44 [1944] and I knew that my husband who was a St. Louisian that the decision was that we were coming to St. Louis [Missouri] and so I was afraid--I couldn't afford that, I couldn't take that chance. So I said thank you and then I came on back over to the law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.] and stood in line to register and all of the people who were ahead of me to register immediately dropped out and got behind me and I registered. As soon as I had registered Ms. Cooper [ph.], Dean Johnson's special (unclear) secretary came to me and said, "Dean Johnson wants to see you." So when I went into his office he said, "Now Mrs. Freeman you have registered and I want you to know that you are already in good standing so you can go home and after your baby is born and your doctor releases you then you may return to school because I think your team will probably help you during that time." So I, I called Shelby and he came and picked me up and my son was born four days later on, on the, the 14th. Story_ID: 609405 Speaker 1: And so after two weeks my doctor released me, in the meantime a family member had come and, to live with us to help take care of the baby [Freeman's son, Shelby Freeman III]. And so then I came back also in the mean--during the time that I was at home my friends came over and they would help bring me, keep me up to date during the time that I was home. So in '47 [1947] I graduated second in my class [at Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.]. And during the commencement--after the commencement one of the members of the faculty came over to me and congratulated me and he said, "I wanted to tell you now about what we thought about when you were standing waiting to register," he said, "we thought you were going to give birth then and you looked as if that's what you wanted to do." That's how frightened they were, that of course they had never had anything like that happen and they were just, I guess scared to death. But you see all I wanted to do was register and get out of law school. So then after I finished law school then I studied for the District of Columbia bar and I was admitted in the District of Columbia in that year. But in the meantime I just did that just to test because I knew that we were going to be living in St. Louis [Missouri]. In the meantime however, my husband [Shelby Freeman, Jr.] was teaching because the war [World War II, WWII] had ended and they had been applying for members of the faculty in Sampson College, junior college in New York and so he was teaching, he was there and he was coming down to Washington [D.C.] about every other week. So that was pretty much-- Speaker 2: Hm. Yeah, that's quite a, a story. Story_ID: 609406 Speaker 1: Who were some of the professors at, at Howard [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.] when you were there? I know, was a(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, my goodness. Spottswood Robinson [Spottswood William Robinson III] was there and Reid--Frank Reid [ph.], Houston was no longer--he had just left the faculty but he was still very, very active. He was the one that was very, very active in the civil rights, Charlie Houston [Charles Hamilton Houston]. And it was during the time--I had indicated as I said my interests in civil rights had continued during all of that time. So I had then--especially during my senior year, I had indicated an interest in participating in it with some of the students in addition to the constitution and law and all that. When Thurgood Marshall and the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] lawyers would come to Washington [D.C.] to argue cases before the [U.S.] Supreme Court there were a group of us that would come and argue their cases before or try it, try it out on us before they went (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So kind of sharpened themselves up. Speaker 2: Sharpen yeah, that's and so that's how I met Thurgood Marshall and of course Charlie Houston was very active in developing the whole criteria for the attack on segregation, racial segregation. And so-- Speaker 1: Was Oliver Hill [HistoryMaker Oliver W. Hill] in that group too? Speaker 2: Oliver Hill who is still--back when I received that, that honorary degree from Howard, I think he was there at that time. Speaker 1: Okay so that's quite a group we have, Thurgood Marshall, Oliver Hill, Spottswood Robinson (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They were, they were really, they were. And of course during the years, you know, after I became admitted to here and they would come in to argue cases before the court of appeals then very often I would, they would come by our home and we would just share experiences. Share experiences. Speaker 1: Are there any good stories from those sessions? Were they, did, did, were there anything, were things sometimes revealed that they hadn't thought about before? Speaker 2: Not really, not, no. One of the things that happened is that, that was during the period before Legal Defense [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.] came in as a separate organization. So at the NAACP conventions and I would attend them you would have sort of a meeting, two day meeting of the lawyers who at the local level were actually handling cases on behalf of the NAACP. That was very, a training session and then an opportunity to at least share from some of their experiences and some of the things that happened. Also to relax 'cause it's very important, it was very important and Thurgood used to say this all the time, "Work hard but also play just as hard and relax, learn to relax and learn," if, if there is something crazy that's happening, the judge may do something or say something maybe you will have to say, "Yes your honor," or something like that but then find the time--you can at least put it to where it will not diminish your ability to keep on going. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Do you remember the cases that were being worked on? Speaker 2: Not particularly. Speaker 1: These were cases though that were the preliminary cases (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They were still preliminary to Brown vs. [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954]--to, to, yeah. Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: These were--you see, there were several cases that they argued. Speaker 1: That lead to--I know there was one in Virginia in particular. Wasn't it a school desegregation case in Virginia that was pretty big (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Virginia, yeah. But you see I was in, I'm talking about the period that I was in law school but actually my involvement as, as a student who probably listened as a group was actually during the latter part of my senior year in law school-- Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: --because then I'm getting the basic legal training. Speaker 1: Okay. You, you came out--yeah. Speaker 2: So I'm talking about years '46 [1946], '47 [1947]. Speaker 1: Okay you graduated in '47 [1947] right? Speaker 2: Forty-seven [1947], yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So that's-- Speaker 2: See come, come this year will be my sixtieth year as a graduate of Howard law school. Speaker 1: All right, okay. You're still practicing on some level? Speaker 2: Yes I am practicing, I've limited it to probate though-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and I'm going to cut back even further because I'm close to sixty years I've been a member of the, of the Missouri bar since 1948. Story_ID: 609407 Speaker 1: When you moved back here in forty, was it in '48 [1948] that you came back to St. Louis (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, I took the Missouri bar, we moved back, I took the Missouri bar and I was admitted to the Missouri bar. I passed it and was admitted in December of 1948. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And Belford Lawson [Belford V. Lawson, Jr.] and some, some other people in Washington [D.C.] knew of some larger law firms in St. Louis [Missouri] and they had suggested that I contact them (unclear) 'cause I had not--when I decided that I wanted to be associated with a law school I had no plan to have to start my own law firm I was just going to hopefully become associated with some of the law firms. I knew of black law firms, of black lawyers, who--Sidney Redmond [Sidney R. Redmond], Henry Espy [Henry D. Espy] and they were all NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] lawyers but they did not have any space and this, and then as I said, I wrote to some of the larger law firms and I didn't hear from them. And then I decided that after all that I had put into it and my family had put into it and I want to be a litigator and I want to be a civil rights lawyer, I want to open my own firm. So when I spoke to my husband [Shelby Freeman, Jr.] and family here and I said, "I want to have my own office," and I got their support and opened my office in June of 1949, at the second floor of the Jefferson Bank building [Jefferson Bank and Trust Company] which was at Franklin [Franklin Avenue; Dr. Martin Luther King Drive] and Jefferson [Avenue]. Story_ID: 609408 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now this is the famous Jefferson Bank [Jefferson Bank and Trust Company, St. Louis, Missouri]. Speaker 2: That's right and at that--it was very interesting because when that bank was at Jefferson [Avenue] and Franklin [Franklin Avenue; Dr. Martin Luther King Drive] it had employees--black employees as (unclear), as tellers. You see that's, and now because--one of my dearest friends who lives in Los Angeles [California], I met her when she was employed at Jefferson Bank. It was when they moved from Jefferson Bank at Frank- when they moved from Franklin over to Washington [Avenue] was when they no longer had any black tellers. Speaker 1: So did they deliberately divest themselves of black tellers because of the location or what? Speaker 2: Anyway they didn't have any, so I mean. Speaker 1: Hard to tell they (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, um-hm. And a lot of people think they never had any as I said and there are people who, and as---there are people who I know who are living, you know, now who is a friend of mine, Genevieve Walton [ph.] was, that's how I met her. She was employed as a teller at Jefferson Bank and, when it was at Jefferson, but that was again you see--I opened my office in 1949. Now how long I don't remember I'd have to ask her how long she stayed there when they moved. Speaker 1: How--what sense do you make out of that of why they would have them and then not (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well of course you see when you have a pattern of some corporate--well you have a large--we still have various levels of, of discrimination on race. For some reason I think they felt--Franklin Avenue of course, which was I guess a black neighborhood. When they moved over to Washington which was then--I guess, I cannot speak to what they would have thought except that they, that they did not have any. And that of course you know by the Jefferson Bank and there were protest there which is I think (unclear) they celebrate what '63 [1963]--there's a celebration of that. At least there was a victory of that protest which got a lot of news and which is still a symbol of positive movement. Speaker 1: Okay but that's a little later on. Well, I just wanted to raise that question. I was wondering that's interesting that they actually had black tellers (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah they did, um-hm, um-hm, um-hm. But as I said it was, it wasn't called a black neighborhood. Story_ID: 609409 Speaker 1: Now how was private practice--well, let, let me just say this bef- what I read is before you got started there, there are--I mean your office was in the, on the same floor you had (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) On the second floor. Speaker 1: Yeah and there, there were two other black professional women on the same floor, right? Speaker 2: They were--no-that's, they were not--there were two professional women--three professional women who opened an, who opened our offices in the practice but we were not in the same building [Jefferson Bank and Trust Company Building, St. Louis, Missouri]. Helen Nash a pediatrician and Ruth Durley Carter a dentist, see all three of us were--I don't think each of us, any of us thought of ourselves as pioneers. We just wanted, I wanted a law practice, she wanted, you know--but each one of us--she had her family, her brother Homer Nash and she, she's is still living. Ruth Durley Carter was in--moved to California but the three of us--there was an article and I don't have that article that was that same year and some reporter wrote up about these three women in the professional field. Law because I was the only one who had my own private practice. I was not--Margaret Bush [HistoryMaker Margaret Bush Wilson] was practicing but she was practicing with her husband [Robert E. Wilson, Jr.]. But I had my own law office-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and, and Helen Nash was a pediatrician and she actually--and, and Ruth Durley Carter was a dentist. Story_ID: 609410 Speaker 1: Tell us about Brewton versus the Board of Education [Brewton v. Board of Education of St. Louis, 1950]. Speaker 2: Oh. That was the first civil rights case in which I participated with three other lawyers, civil rights, well established Sidney Redmond [Sidney R. Redmond] and Henry Espy [Henry D. Espy] and Robert Witherspoon. And when I came to St. Louis [Missouri] and I opened my office and I joined the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and I went to see them and I said, "I would be willing to work with you if any cases come." In--St. Louis had still segregated black, white in Washington Technical High School [Booker T. Washington Technical High School, St. Louis, Missouri] they had a little quote, separate but equal. Had courses that I think--they had both of them automobile and mechanics and Hadley Technical High School [St. Louis, Missouri] also had automobile mechanics but then they started a course in airplane mechanics. That hit the news and so there were three brothers who by that time there was excitement about the planes and everything. They read this and they told their parents, "We want to go, we want to take that course." So he did what parents do, he went even though he knew what the situation was he went to the school and was turned down, went to the board was turned down. They came to the NAACP and so then that's when they told me and I became--yeah I want to be involved in that too. We filed suit in circuit court [22nd Judicial Circuit Court of Missouri] challenging it as unconstitutional even under separate but equal and the judge decided in favor of the three Brewton brothers. So the board of education appealed it to the State of Missouri. Briefs were filed and we travelled to Jefferson City [Missouri], Sidney Redmond argued the case. The supreme court found in favor of--affirmed the case of the circuit court, found in favor of the plaintiffs and issued a mandate to them that they could not have a course in airplane mechanics for white student and not have one for blacks. So the board of education closed down the course for white students. Speaker 1: So they, they solved it by subtraction? Speaker 2: They solved it by subtraction and what happened, and of course we never have been able to prove this, but there were, there was a private school that we had been told that the white students went to but we didn't, but we never of course pursued that. What happened however, the three Brewton brothers during then did get trained, but they got trained to the [U.S.] military the Korean War. They got trained and one of the brothers even became an assistant manager of the FAA [Federal Aviation Administration] out in St. Louis and when he was talking and during the time several years later when I was talking about this case and somebody told him about it he called me and he told me that he was talking to his supervisor telling him about his experience and how he had gotten to be, how he had gotten his training. And then he learned that the supervisor was a student at Hadley at the time that he was, you know, was denied admission. But by that time they had become good friends and all so he shared his experience. Speaker 1: It's ironic. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So the next, I guess, big case--now this is, this one went all the way to, to, to the Supreme Court of Missouri, right? Speaker 2: Yeah that went to the Supreme Court of Missouri. Story_ID: 609411 Speaker 1: The other case we filed was with respect to public housing and in 1937 the national, the federal government had established housing authorities--housing for low income families and in many communities including St. Louis [Missouri]. They had housing for low income families and, and there had never been a law with respect to housing for low income families. But it was in St. Louis they had Carr Square Village and then they had Clinton Peabody [St. Louis, Missouri]. Clinton Peabody was on the south side for white families and then Carr Square Village that started about--they were open--they created about '39 [1939]. In the meantime of course when the war [World War II, WWII] came it cut down the construction of housing and so after the war then they were building, building another house. They were building Cochran [Cochran Gardens, St. Louis, Missouri] and they announced in 1952 that Cochran was ready for white families. And in the meantime of course during all this period there were black and white families who were waiting for public housing. So at the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] there was a very active housing committee and about fifteen families had applied and then in the meantime I was asked, in the meantime I was asked to at least work with that. And Bob, Bob Witherspoon, Robert Witherspoon and I were working with it. I wrote a letter to the national office and told them that we had fifteen families who wanted--and I wrote to Thurgood [Thurgood Marshall]. And then of course because we needed--we knew that for this one it was going to be in federal court and we needed support, you know, we needed top support. So he announced that at least he would be supportive and he would assign Constance Baker Motley also to work with us. And in '52 [1952] we filed a suit under the names of Thurgood Marshall, Constance Motley, [HistoryMaker] Frankie Freeman and Robert Witherspoon. In the meantime of course there were other cases all around the country and Thurgood was busy with that. The Smith Act [Alien Registration Act of 1940] defendants were very actively involved in and Robert Witherspoon was working with that. So it turned out that the two lawyers in that case--I was here at the local level and then I was communicating with, with Connie who was also working with other cases. So therefore I became the lead attorney, I was the lead attorney in the housing suit. With which, and we, and of course we started out with fifteen plaintiffs and things happened and the housing authority then found some openings for two of them and some other things that happened but ended up that when we did argue that case in October, we were down to at least one plaintiff that's all we needed though because the policy was, hadn't changed. We argued that case in October of 1954 which was actually after Brown versus [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] had been argued you see. In the meantime there were-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: --anyway, and so anyway we knew the importance of that because we were challenging as unconstitutional all racial segregation in housing, in public housing. And then Judge Moore [George H. Moore] ordered--decided that case [Davis et al. v. the St. Louis Housing Authority, 1955] and found that, that, that there can be no further segregation in public housing in the City of St. Louis. So that case ended racial segregation. Story_ID: 609412 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I just wanted to ask you about Constance Baker Motley, you said you've been friends for many years-- Speaker 2: Oh-- Speaker 1: --and she's on the cover of your book ['A Song of Faith and Hope: The Life of Frankie Muse Freeman,' Frankie Muse Freeman] here. Speaker 2: Yeah, well. Speaker 1: Zoom in and show her, she's standing right behind you (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Unclear) I mean, I met Connie--you see I was very active in the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], and as a lawyer and I met her even before this, you know. So what do you want to ask me about (laughter)? Speaker 1: No, well when did you first meet her and how did you become friends? Speaker 2: Oh my gosh, let's see this was, the case was in '52 [1952], I mean, I probably met Connie in 1949, 1948 'cause I was still attending the NAACP national conventions and then in participating they would have those seminars, those two day seminars for the lawyers interested in civil rights. And at least I--well I know I met her, would have met her in 1949. So I would have met, known her personally for about three years before we were actively colleagues in this case [Davis et al. v. the St. Louis Housing Authority, 1955]-- Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: --but we were friends from then on. Story_ID: 609413 Speaker 1: Brown vs. the Board of Education in '54 [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] tell us about that. Speaker 2: Well actually I was not involved in that as, you know, as an attorney. I was, because--after the, I was still involved in civil rights but not actively involved in civil rights because after we won that case during the time that I was in private practice I was also, for the last, from 1951 probably '52 [1952] or '53 [1953] until 1955, I was also an associate attorney general of Missouri. That was a political appointment but I was working, you're working for the attorney general but in Missouri actually handling the cas- the tax cases. Huh? Speaker 1: Okay so you were associate attorney general in the State of Missouri? Speaker 2: Yeah Speaker 1: Okay how did that job come about (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well that was political as I said I was appointed by that. I mean, I was an attorney the--but what the attorney general had he was attorney general for the State of Missouri and in any, many communities for, where cases had to be handled then he would have an attorney generals--who would be associate attorney generals who were local lawyers practicing there. If a state case came up, in fact I was assigned the tax cases so when taxes, if there was a delinquency and a number of people--there was litigation for the non payment of taxes then I handled those cases for the time that I was attorney, assistant--I guess assistant or whatever the title was but anyway I was not the attorney general but I worked in the attorney general's office (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, right, yeah. Okay. Speaker 2: And I got paid each month for that and I liked that 'cause that meant it helped pay the rent (laughter) and the secretary. Story_ID: 609414 Speaker 1: Well that raises another question here too, when you worked on the Davis vs. the St. Louis Housing Authority case [Davis et al. v. the St. Louis Housing Authority, 1955] I mean, did you, you were a lead attorney but did you get paid? Speaker 2: I was lead attorney but the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]--I think the total that I received from the NAACP during the entire time that I was handling that case was about one thousand dollars. The NAACP then, this was before the Legal Defense Fund [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.], the--I was not a staff attorney. It was up to the local NAACP to pay but actually I did not take that case expecting to be paid. I took that case for the experience and for me for learning and for what I could contribute. However, when I did, after I was appointed after, about five or six months after, it was over with maybe less than that. When Charlie Farris [Charles L. Farris] and there had been a change in the administration of the housing authority when he called and he offered me a job as associate general counsel of the housing authority [St. Louis Housing Authority], I was ready for, to get, for to get a decent salary. And the first thing I did when I got down there was to try to find out what their attorney had been paid for the case and I found out that his, his fee which was of course nominal 'cause that was back in nineteen fifty--fifty, fifty-- Speaker 1: Fifty-two [1952]. Speaker 2: (Laughter) No, no this was 1955 at that point. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: See the case was in court for three years but then after it was decided and then, then when I found out that his, his salary at least--and it may have been more than that but at least I was--when I saw one in which he had been paid ten thousand dollars at least I found that very interesting but he lost the case. Speaker 1: Okay so they were, the other lawyers were paid ten times as much as you. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: I see, okay. Speaker 2: But that, now of course the attorneys--the courts provide for attorney's fees. Now there have been a lot of changes in the law with respect to attorney's fees-- Speaker 1: Okay, let me ask (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) but they were not the case then. Story_ID: 609415 Speaker 1: Let me ask you then about how the Brown vs. the Board of Education case [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] affected the City of St. Louis [Missouri]? Speaker 2: Well it, of course it was the Brown versus case that affected St. Louis in a positive way and there were efforts to desegregate but of course there was also opposition, you see. The--it was a national [U.S.] Supreme Court decision that affected everybody but they actually--there's a big decision that has to be made on the part of the local community whether to comply with the law and there were people who were opposed to the elimination, and-- Speaker 1: Now, how, how did the mayor [Raymond R. Tucker] (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And then there's another factor with respect to Brown versus that was not a part of the Brown case but that is a factor with respect to St. Louis and other such communities and that is housing discrimination. Because housing, because of housing discrimination and because of where you have neighborhoods that are all black or all white in terms of the student who wants to go to that neighborhood school. If there is racial segregation and it's in only the neighborhood school then you would (unclear)--there are some people who would justify that on that basis. And that is another reason why there is a case pending that, that, that was filed suit in 1972 against the St. Louis Housing Authority because of racial segregation in the public schools. Because the fact that the resources that were available to some schools, if they were predominantly white, were different, were not provided to other schools. And that is an issue that is still, that is still part of the issue today with respect to many of the schools, many of the cities including St. Louis and that is because you have housing discrimination coupled with education discrimination and also the inadequate resources. However, there has been improvement even though we still have problems there has been improvement from that, from what it was then to what it is now. Story_ID: 609416 Speaker 1: How well did you know Thurgood Marshall at this point? Did you him pretty well. Speaker 2: Well you get to know him--I got him, I got to know him pretty well-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --because as I said at that time the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] lawyers in other words you, you communicate with each other, you learn from each other and he was helpful. In all of the cases in which we filed under the name of the NAACP as a support his name was always there. So, and so very often you didn't see him but at least you, at least he was accessible. After he became, after he left the Inc. Fund [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.] and he became the solicitor and the [U.S.] Supreme Court justice then I saw much, much less of him then because again I was in, I was working on other things too. Speaker 1: Okay. What about Robert Carter [HistoryMaker Robert L. Carter]? Speaker 2: Huh? Bob Carter I knew better. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have anything to say about him, or? Speaker 2: Oh good friends. Speaker 1: Just, okay. Speaker 2: I haven't seen him in a long time. Story_ID: 609417 Speaker 1: I was gonna ask you how the, where, where, where, where the mayor of St. Louis [Missouri] stood on school desegregation issues 'cause he was in, in office from '53 [1953] to '65 [1965] it says here? Did, did he--'64 [1964] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That was Tucker [Raymond R. Tucker]. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: That was Tucker. I do not have a particular--I mean, I'm trying to remember, hm. In '53 [1953] and '54 [1954], but actually when--are you talking about housing or schools? Speaker 1: Well, schools and housing, yeah. Speaker 2: At that time it was us against them, you know, pretty much actually. The answer that was one of the answers when we filed our complaint and then the justification that was put in the petition was that this was a pattern that was consistent with other organizations and they named the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association], the YWCA [Young Women's Christian Association], the Girl Scouts [Girl Scouts of the United States of America]. They named a lot of other organizations and they also said--and the housing, the answer to housing as their justification for separate housing units was that quote, there's a natural aversion to physical closeness between the white and the black. And I will never forget that because you look around and you look at you and you look at me, and you can see how much physical closeness. Speaker 1: (Laughter) How much aversion was actually going on and it's not us. Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: That's right, that's right, that's right. And so actually as I said I think I even quoted that in my book ['A Song of Faith and Hope: The Life of Frankie Muse Freeman,' Frankie Muse Freeman]. But because that was something that was rejected that you know, that, you know--there's no justification for being unconstitutional--acting in an unconstitutional way but they, but they even have the gall to say because everybody else is doing it, it justifies it this was a weak point. Speaker 1: It was kind of a pseudoscientific, kind of (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right yeah. Story_ID: 609418 Speaker 1: I was just reading here, I remember vividly in the early mid-'70s [1970s] I guess the destruction of Pruitt Igoe [St. Louis, Missouri]. Speaker 2: Yes, yes Speaker 1: And but you, you remember when it was built, right? Speaker 2: Well I was the, I remember when it was built because that was when, when we wrote, when we first asked the housing authority [St. Louis Housing Authority] to admit to Cochran [Cochran Gardens, St. Louis, Missouri] they said you should wait until hou- until Pruitt is under construction and Pruitt of course was under, was actually completed two years later. And we said again justice delayed is justice denied. So we did not accept it that's why we filed a suit in '52 [Davis et al. v. the St. Louis Housing Authority, 1955]. It was built when the time that I was associate--for fourteen years I was a full time staff attorney, I was associate general counsel after that during housing authority, during--but the policy of the federal government were these tall buildings with elevators stopping about every two or three floors not even stopping every--you see even the, the architecture was not even--people, people, you know didn't recognize that the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now this is, we interviewed--I interviewed the daughter [HistoryMaker Barbara Bowman] and granddaughter [HistoryMaker Valerie Jarrett] of Robert Taylor [Robert Rochon Taylor] in Chicago [Illinois] who was head of the Chicago Housing--well he was an executive with Chicago Housing Authority who oversaw Ida B. Wells projects [Ida B. Wells Homes, Chicago, Illinois] and other projects. He, he was of course--there was a whole row of high rises named for him [Robert Taylor Homes, Chicago, Illinois] but he opposed them while he was alive. He did not, he did not think they were a good idea. Speaker 2: Yeah. First of all there was no place for the children. There were things that they would quote, doing things for low income families which meant the culture was there were certain things that you would do for low income families that you would never do for the other population. So there was an attitude and a culture that prevailed there that actually now of course has caused all the destruction and some of the problems. Because well you can see what's happened--of course Pruitt Igoe has been destroyed now and some of the other (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah some of the others are going down. Speaker 2: The high rise they have recognized that was a very serious political policy mistake. Speaker 1: Could you address maybe--I know I've heard people of Chicago speak about the public housing as being a political pot of gold for people who were board members and such to--there were a lot of white people that competed to be board chairman of public housing. Speaker 2: No, I would have no information. No, I didn't even know. Speaker 1: Okay. Well some considered it a way to make (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm not saying it didn't--I have no--that was not--the problems that we encountered were pervasive. I was not, I mean, the issue with respect to whether somebody was making financial benefit as a result of it was not one that I would have any information about. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. I know it was a big deal in Chicago, investment of the money (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It may vary from community to community. Speaker 1: Yeah. Investment of the money, putting the money in certain banks, all that. Speaker 2: With respect to contracts we know, but I would probably--at the time that I was employed there I did not get that information, I'm not saying it couldn't have happened. But-- Speaker 1: Okay but at the time Pruitt Igoe was constructed did you, did you have a sense it was not going to be a good idea? Speaker 2: Well the idea of it, that is was not going to be--we were opposing racial segregation so that-- Speaker 1: From that, okay-- Speaker 2: On the basic philosophy absolutely it was not and then to find out how these tall high rise buildings were, we knew that wasn't a good idea. And but they didn't, there was nobody who would listen. Story_ID: 609419 Speaker 1: In 1955 that you started working for the St. Louis Housing Authority? Speaker 2: Um-hm, I worked for them-- Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: --for fourteen years until '70 [1970]. Speaker 1: Okay, well--and during this period of time the demonstrations--the Jefferson Bank and Trust Company [St. Louis, Missouri] demonstrations start too with CORE [Congress of Racial Equality]. So, what was your (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So I was not actively involved in any of that except probably as an attorney. I mean there were very close friends that I would be in, you communicate, but anyway I was not, not involved in that. 'Cause I was very busy as the attorney for the housing authority. I was attorney--technically they were land clearance authority, the urban renewal and they were all one big agency however, there were certain things in terms of the contracts and all that I did and everything--all of my work was with the housing authority. Diggans [ph.] was with the land clearance authority [St. Louis Land Clearance for Redevelopment Authority] and we were not actually even though he was very much--we were both involved in and supportive of what they were doing and we were behind the scenes helping them to do things. But we were not involved in it at all as, you know, as protesters. Speaker 1: Okay well can you tell us something about Norman Seay? And-- Speaker 2: Very good friend. Speaker 1: Okay. He was, he was I guess the (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Absolutely yeah (unclear). Speaker 1: Early leaders of CORE? Speaker 2: Yeah he and Charles Oldham who is deceased who just died; Charles Oldham, and we knew them all and I was involved in some of it, some of the things that they would do in terms of that. They also did testing, you know, they would send teams of white and black and I did some of that with them. Right, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Yeah what was that like I know (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Unclear) In other words you'd go to Woolworths [F.W. Woolworth Company] or you'd go to some of these stores. You'd go the two of you and you would order, they would ignore you, the other person would order and then you would share it if it was something to drink you'd get two, you'd share it. Speaker 1: So it was kind of like a scientific investigation of what happens to black and whites. Speaker 2: Yeah but we would also, but in other words we were protesting because the white person would be waited on and they would just share whatever they had with you. But in some instances when I would be going places, I was more--I would go, and I would be there and they wouldn't serve me so everybody would leave, you know--but we had different ways. Speaker 1: Okay. So you would design different kinds of (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Different kinds--depending upon who it was, yeah-- Speaker 1: --demonstrations. Okay. Speaker 2: --but that was still part of it. Speaker 1: Okay. Now one thing that's interesting about St. Louis [Missouri] is that CORE and the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] tend to, tended to work together which is not always true (simultaneous)--- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's true. Speaker 1: --though in other cities they were both involved together they usually didn't necessarily work (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But they did then in various different, you know, different leadership and all, we all worked together. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We did during that time yes. Speaker 1: I've been told that you all would actually meet together to plan strategy and decide which (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Maybe I don't, I wouldn't--there may have been committees who did that-- Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: --but at the branches I don't think so. They may have I'm not saying that but I, but I know we worked together. Story_ID: 609420 Speaker 1: Are there any highlights of the period of time that you worked for the housing authority that you can share with us? Before-- Speaker 2: Well the housing, for the housing authority of course I had a lot of work with the housing authority. I mean I was, I did all the legal work for the housing authority. I tried all the cases, render delinquencies and we had issues and we had problems and one of the things because (unclear) I got involved in some of the issues and grievances. In 1964 because of my work and my--in the earlier civil rights cases and I had continued with the involvement in the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] I was heading--in the meantime in '58 [1958], you see the struggle for civil rights was national also and in the first Civil Rights Act of 1957 they established the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights and a bipartisan, independent agency of six members. And that agency had state advisory committees which they appointed in each state. In the meantime I was appointed to that and that was in 1958 as a member which meant that even though I was working for the housing authority, I still on my free time could work--still involved in civil rights to handle, to check out and make reports on housing and we issued a report national--about what was happening in the state and--during that time. Because I was always active in the Democratic Party, I did not participate in partisan politics because of my party but I was still a member. Louis Martin [Louis E. Martin] was a friend and (unclear) and all they were active as you know with the Democratic Party. Speaker 1: Yeah, they were active in the Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] administration, as far back as-- Speaker 2: Yeah and so when Kennedy was elected he announced that he was going to appoint women to executive positions and there had been--pretty much had been like a white men's--all of the positions here to name that announcement. So with respect to a vacancy that was coming up on this six member commission, always had had men--six men and one black, he had asked for recommendations and they apparently, I did not know that at that time, had given my name. Then I had been invited to come to the White House [Washington, D.C.] and I think I told you I was at the White House on November 17th then I was interviewed by I think Lee White who was on the staff for the Civil Rights Commission. But then the assassination was the next week so I thought it was all over with. In the meantime, in the meantime on February 14th President Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] was invited to come to speak and I was at the St. Louis Housing Authority in my office and I got a call from the White House. The president wanted to meet with me at the Chase Park Plaza [St. Louis, Missouri] at five o'clock that evening. We had tickets, my husband and I had tickets for the event. So I called him and told him the event was supposed to be at like six or something and that I was supposed to meet with the president at--but in the meantime I had written all these, as I got this call I had made the notes for what he wanted me to do. So we got, Shelby [Shelby Freeman, Jr.] left early and I left early and when there was a big crowd in the streets and all and we had trouble getting through but in the meantime the notes that he had given me to what to do I still had in my hands. So when I was trying to cross the street, the police stopped me. I gave them the notes and then they came and got me anyway. To make a long story short, I met with President Johnson who told me that he wanted to nominate me for the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights which would be the first woman. And so he had checked me out with Roy Wilkins and Whitney Young. And he hadn't told them what it was about because he knew if he had told them what it was about they'd give him another man. But anyway (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So they were, they were on, on the commission (unclear)? Speaker 2: They were not on the commission they were just checking me out. You know, because there was--the Robinson was on it, was the, was retiring from the commission. He had been appointed federal judge. Speaker 1: Spottswood Robinson [Spottswood William Robinson III] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Spottswood Robinson. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Who had been my faculty member. Speaker 1: Yes. Story_ID: 609421 Speaker 1: Well what about Clarence Mitchell, Jr. [Clarence M. Mitchell, Jr.] was he on that? Speaker 2: Clarence Mitchell was never on it. Speaker 1: He was never on it? Okay. Speaker 2: He was, he was always, always in NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --in, in representative and so there are pictures that we have with him but we were, but he was sort of the (unclear)--he was the NAACP Washington [D.C.] spokesperson, yeah, very well respected. So anyway we had quite an interview and I joined my people and I didn't even let them know 'cause he had the papers. Then I was nominated by him and then when it went through the [U.S.] Senate confirmation process and then I was sworn in. And in the meantime I was able to--I knew that I would have to be travelling to Washington so Charlie Farris [Charles L. Farris], it was an arrangement that at least I would still do my job [at the St. Louis Housing Authority] but that I would take my vacation time--whenever I would have to travel it would be on my vacation time. So the entire time that I was on the civil rights commission [U.S. Commission on Civil Rights] I pretty much didn't have any vacation because I did not use--I used all the time that I had--you know, my time to travel was for the civil rights commission. Story_ID: 609422 Speaker 1: We held hearings, my first hearing was in Jackson, Mississippi in 1965. Which was probab- that way we would, investigating the denial of right to vote and actually the attorney general had even come and asked us not to hold a hearing because Schwerner [Michael Schwerner], Chaney [James Chaney] and Goodman [Andrew Goodman] had been murdered and they were doing their investigation. But we felt that we needed to hold a hearing so we held the hearings. They were widely publicized and people in Mississippi learned even of all the things they had heard about, they learned more from our hearings. Because there were, at our testimony there were two counties in which there was not one black person registered to vote in Mississippi-- Speaker 2: Okay. Did the-- Speaker 1: --and we made recommendations. And during that time the Voting Rights Act [Voting Rights Act of 1965] was under consideration. We made recommendations based upon the testimony and those recommendations--some of those recommendations are part of the voting rights act. Speaker 2: Okay, so, so did SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] activists like testify before your committee? Speaker 1: Hm? Speaker 2: Did the SNCC people-- Speaker 1: We usually had--no we subpoenaed--we had subpoena powers so we subpoenaed sheriffs and we subpoenaed registration people and one of them told--because they had some sort of rule in Mississippi that you had to read, write and interpret the [U.S.] Constitution to their satisfaction and we had quite a number of people who had been refused. And we had a sheriff to at least read and he couldn't interpret, he couldn't interpret the Constitution that he had been using to deny votes. Story_ID: 609423 Speaker 1: Yeah, can you repeat again? You were talking about the types of cases at the U.S. civil rights commission [U.S. Commission on Civil Rights]-- Speaker 2: We held hearings ranging from, from every area of discrimination on, on, on gender and we held hearings with respect to those that were not, not--the immigrants, the Mexican Americans (unclear) immigrants, the Indian [Native American] rights. We had several, we had hearings in Little Rock, Arkansas with respect to the problems that the Navajos were encountering. We had problems in Colorado and in Washington and we had problems with respect to the, as I said, gender. Then we had a number of problems with respect to age discrimination. We covered, during the entire sixteen years that I was on the commission, we covered it all. And during that entire time we still had state advisory committees reporting to us and so each year we would bring them in to at least give us their suggestions and reports on what was happening. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: And then I didn't resign--I resigned in 19--I resigned after I was appointed inspector general and after, and President Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.]--I had submitted my resignation and he accepted it upon the confirmation of my successor. But Mary Frances Berry was not, not, you know, confirmed until 1980 so for about nine months I had two presidential appointments in which I was trying to do both. Although I only, I could only get paid for one of them and so I chose to get paid for the one which I was salaried and that was the inspector general of the Community Services Administration [U.S. Department of Health and Human Services Office of Community Services]. Story_ID: 609424 Speaker 1: Now the Civil Rights Act of 1964 still kind of haunts us now and has to be renewed every so many years and there's always a lot of trepidation in the black community about what it really means and some people say well if it's not renewed then we won't be able to vote again and all these sorts of thing. So what (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, much of the problem I think is that we--the, the, I don't know of any provisions of the Civil Rights Act, the Voting Rights Act [Voting Rights Act of 1965] had some provisions that required renewal-- Speaker 1: Okay, maybe that's what-- Speaker 2: --but not the Civil Rights Act. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We still have Title IX that is still in affect with respect to gender. We still have a provision of Title VI [Civil Rights Act of 1964, Title VI] that probably I think is not used as often as it should be used because under that provision federal, federal money cannot be used to an agency that is denying--that is discriminatory. Now an example would be if the [U.S.] Department of Education--if there is discrimination, a complaint can be filed with the Department of Education, and without having to go to court on that. You can file a complaint and then because if that complaint is sustained then they cannot give for instance that school federal money. Now I have had, I have filed a suit even within the last two years, I did file one in civil rights, I thought I had given up all of them but about, but I did file one case and then it was resolved because what happened I also sent a copy of it to the justice department [U.S. Department of Justice] and so that was, that was resolved. Speaker 1: Okay. So it still--people can still (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So we still have civil rights laws but the only thing about it is if you don't see that they are enforced or if you don't use them then you still--it's a lot of work that has to be done. See, the laws by themselves--it's so many laws, we've got thousands of laws on about every subject you can bring up but we the citizens have a responsibility also and I think there is a great extent to which our citizens don't do the things that we should do. In terms of voting for instance, we should all be registered to vote. We should all vote and we should know more and participate more in the agencies of the federal government and we don't do it. We don't do nearly as much as we should. Story_ID: 609425 Speaker 1: Do you have any personal reflections about Lyndon Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson], and? Speaker 2: Oh, I think he was the best president we've had so far. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because I knew him, I mean, you know. Even when I was national president of Delta Sigma Theta [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority, Inc.] when we had a board meeting in, in Houston [Texas] the year before our regular convention, I took the board to spend the day with the president, he was no longer president then it was in sixty--in '69 [1969]. Speaker 1: So you took them out to meet him in, in Houston? Speaker 2: I took our board; we chartered a plane and spent a day down there (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, all right. Okay. The L, LBJ Ranch [Lyndon B. Johnson National Historical Park]? Or-- Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm. Story_ID: 609426 Speaker 1: Tell me about, you know, the development of affirmative action and [HistoryMaker] Arthur Fletcher? And when, when did that-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Tell, tell us what happened with that? Speaker 2: Well I can't tell you much about what happened. But, it started a long time ago actually, it--he was one but actually what has happened there has been so much discrimination and their efforts to at least change it that the decision was made that you at least you have to affirmative act- act affirmatively to correct some of these problems and that was true then, it is still true now. And there is, one of the tragedies about affirmative action is that there are people who will, who would say it's a goal, you know, we don't want goals, we don't want specific--but we still (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Quotas, yeah. Speaker 2: We don't want quotas. We still have to have affirmative action and it's still under attack because you still have disparate treatment based on gender, on age, and on race and of course you have other factors now. You even have sexual orientation and a lot of other factors but everybody who is qualified, who has training to do the job that needs to be done needs to have an opportunity to do it and every, every student has a--you know, should be trained to do whatever--the best that student can become. So it's not just one group, it's the schools, it's the community, it's the public officials and it's everybody. Speaker 1: Okay. So you're saying that affirmative action is still viable today (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I still, and it should be used, I mean, and I think there is a value in diversity. There is a value in diversity that benefits all of us. Speaker 1: Okay. What do you think about the recent attacks on affirmative action in Michigan? Speaker 2: (Laughter) The recent--I think it's regrettable, I think it's regrettable because we've seen it, I mean, we've seen the attacks, the attacks and there have been some serious attacks but it didn't just happen but I am troubled by the feeling, I mean, the feeling that the [U.S.] Supreme Court is not going to be as supportive as former Supreme Courts were. But also I remember that we have had Supreme Courts that also were not supportive, I mean, even before we had moved through a period of crisis one way or the other in this country. But I still hope, but I just--I'm still hoping. Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's what, my song, my song is of faith and hope. So even though I think we have to keep fighting, we have to keep working, we have to--but I still say I have hope. Speaker 1: So we shouldn't take the Civil Rights Act of 1964, Voting Act, Rights Act in '65 [Voting Rights Act of 1965] or affirmative action for granted, right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, no, no, no, no, no. A lot of times when things happen you think you don't have to do anything else, you know we, it's eternal vigilance. Speaker 1: Okay, all right (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Keep your hands on the plow. Story_ID: 609427 Speaker 1: Tell us about being the president; I think about, around the same time that you were appointed to the U.S. civil rights commission [U.S. Commission on Civil Rights]. You served as the fourteenth national president of Delta Sigma Theta Sorority [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority, Inc.]. Speaker 2: Yeah, uh-huh. Well that's been one of the blessings of my life, you know. One of the, the supports, one of the things that has helped because I did not know until I was writing the book ['A Song of Faith and Hope: The Life of Frankie Muse Freeman,' Frankie Muse Freeman] and we were doing some research what had happened when the issue--you know, when President Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson], you know, where it came up about my, my appointment I was at that time--let's see I was elected in 1967 and I was commissioner to the civil rights commission, so. When, when, when, when you sort of have a feeling that when sometimes these leaks come out about your being considered for something that that's the way to see who wants you and who not. But I learned when I was writing this book--when I checked back to the Johnson library [Lyndon Baines Johnson Library and Museum, Austin, Texas] to get some of the things they had on it of all the letters that had come from the Deltas from around the country in support of my nomination. But it's been a relationship that has, that has been very, very important for me and I think of course the Deltas are the best organization in the country. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: I had to stop and say that. You know, just, you know (laughter). Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think there're other nice groups too, my husband [Shelby Freeman, Jr.] was an Alpha [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity, Inc.], you know, so. Speaker 1: Okay. Well Delta does a lot more than just socializing. Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely and that was one of the things that my focus was on social action. When we had regional conferences we had mail, we had marches to the mailbox to speak--to send letters to the members of [U.S.] Congress or the state legislature on issues that needed to be addressed. And we still, it has gone now to where we have Delta Days international cap-, nation's capital [Delta Days in the Nation's Capital] in the city hall and so forth. But one of the focuses and the issues based upon my work with the commission [U.S. Commission on Civil Rights] whenever we held a hearing and we held hearings all over the country if there was a Delta chapter there they knew that I was going to be there and I asked them to come to the hearings. And so therefore whenever we had--when they became issues we were not going to be doing just the, just a dance, we were going to be involved in the community. And that was for the four years--that's what I think my presidency is still--people still, I mean sorors still invite me to talk and that's what I'm going to do two of them this, in January Founders Day speeches. Story_ID: 609428 Speaker 1: Richard Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] becomes president in '68 [1968]. Did you, what did you think of Richard Nixon and how, how did, what was his attitude towards the black community? Speaker 2: Well I don't think that he probably--I don't remember--of course we met with him and I was, I mean, I continued as a commissioner [for the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights]. Each president you see you serve at the pleasure of the president so we were you know, asked to continue. There was, I think he did--I think he asked the resignation of Father Hesburgh [Theodore Hesburgh], who at that time. But he did ask us--there was one report during the time that Nixon was president, we determined probably during the early part of that year to at least do an assessment of the enforcement by the federal government of its own civil rights laws. And I recall--you're asking me my--when we announced--we've completed our report and we announced that we were going to release it when we received a call from somebody at the White House suggesting that we delay the release of the report. We did not delay the release of the report, we released the report. That's-- Speaker 1: Was it coming at a juncture, an election juncture or something? Or, or--is that why they wanted to keep it back (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't remember whether it was an election juncture but in other words we--the, the, the summary of our report was that the federal government was not enforcing its own civil rights laws. I mean, in essence that was what we were saying. We were identifying it by the agency. Speaker 1: So the administration wanted to forestall that (unclear)? Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: The, the White House wanted to forestall that (unclear) report (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well all they just asked is that if we would not--we were asked--I think the word came to us that they wanted us to delay it. We took a vote and we released the report, you know. Speaker 1: Now that didn't make you an enemy did it or make the commission members (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well the only person who, who, who's resignation--I think it was sometime during that period. I think it was in '72 [1972] because I was with another commissioner holding a--chairing a hearing in Albuquerque [New Mexico] I think on Indian [Native American] affairs and we got the word that President Nixon had accepted or requested the resignation of Father Hesburgh who--but we didn't, I don't remember. Father Hesburgh left (unclear) and I'm not sure whether that was the time that Art Fleming [Arthur Fleming] came on or not, I'm not sure when. But, anyway. Speaker 1: Now, I think Father Hesburgh--was he (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The president of Notre Dame [University of Notre Dame, South Bend, Indiana]. Speaker 1: Hm? Speaker 2: President of Notre Dame. Speaker 1: Yeah. Now he, he was it the Vietnam War that got him, got him in trouble? Or, or- Speaker 2: I don't, I don't, I don't-- Speaker 1: I kind of, I remember him being on 'The Phil Donahue Show' back in those days and talking about the yeah, yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) Yeah, all of us do (cough). Speaker 1: Okay, well any rate. Story_ID: 609429 Speaker 1: Okay you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But I lost my job at the, the, the St. Louis Housing Authority in 1970 because of a hearing--well I shouldn't say that. At the time of a hearing in St. Louis County [Missouri] in which we were investigating affirmative action plans and we subpoenaed the records of McDonnell Douglas Corporation and McDonnell Douglas had been awarded a $15 billion contract for this, this, this plan with no affirmative action. So we voted immediately to contact the secretary of defense and the secretary of the Air Force. It was confirmed that they had no affirmative action plans. So they suspended the contract immediately and that was in the papers. There was a paper--Globe Democrat [St. Louis Globe Democrat] had an article saying that we were dealing with a (unclear). I issued, I wrote a letter--I'm the local commissioner [for the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights] so I wrote a letter protesting and giving them statistical information concerning the employment practices of McDonnell Douglas like 2 percent black or something like that. And so that, the, the next morning when I got to my office I was handed a letter signed by all of the commissioners ending my--terminating my employment as of 5:30 that day. So I just called my husband [Shelby Freeman, Jr.] to say help me get out of here and I was out of there by 2:30 that day. That was in January of 1970. So that's when I went back to private practice and I've been in private practice ever since. Speaker 1: So they, they, they took you--well it looks like those two things are related doesn't it, yeah, quite a coincidence (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well that was the position that was taken but I was asked to file a complaint and I said well who am I going to complain about, I'm going back to private practice. So I did not file any complaint. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. This is serious business though and there are cases in the '90s [1990s] and not too long ago where people have asked for federal contracts to be stalled and frozen because of a lack of affirmative action clause and the courts would back us up, right? Those that were on the side of affirmative action but it's not the case, it may not be the case now anymore, right, I don't (unclear) courts still (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well we still have challenges to affirmative action. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We just have to be diligent. Story_ID: 609430 Speaker 1: Jimmy Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] followed Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: What are your thoughts on Jimmy Carter (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was the one who appointed me as the first inspector general of the Community Services Administration [U.S. Department of Health and Human Services Office of Community Services]. So I served under him of course it was only about what, I'm sure--that was in 1979 and that was when Constance [Constance Baker Motley] swore me in. After my, see I went through confirmation, I was confirmed by the [U.S.] Senate twice. First in 1964 and then in '79 [1979], I had hearings on that. Speaker 1: Yeah I'm sorry I skipped over Ford [President Gerald Rudolph Ford, Jr.], I shouldn't have skipped Ford but Ford was in there for a while too. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: He, he reappointed you, too. Speaker 2: Oh yeah as a commissioner [of the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights]. Speaker 1: Yes, right, right. Do you have any thoughts about Gerald Ford? Speaker 2: I don't really, I don't have any present recollection. I mean I know we--you know, each time we, before each president we, we met, you know, we went to the White House [Washington, D.C.] (unclear) but I just don't, I don't have any recollection, I don't, no. Speaker 1: So you don't recollect if he was stridently in favor of affirmative action? Speaker 2: I don't, I don't remember the, that was--yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Now during the Carter administration--well we were talking about the Carter administration what was, how, how did you, was that, was that better than the Nixon administration? Speaker 2: I don't know. We--I don't remember any personal contact except we would go to the White House and then of course there was certain social events you, you get invited to those. I don't, I, I don't remember it caused issues. Story_ID: 609431 Speaker 1: Now I have it here that there was an Indian [Native American] civil rights hearings in '77 [1977] in Seattle [Washington] do, do you remember those? Speaker 2: Well I handled, I handled two or three of those hearings. Okay. Speaker 1: Where was the--? Some of it was--- Speaker 2: Yeah, okay. There is a quote in here that, that you had a kind of a run in with members Gorton [Slade Gorton] and Guzzo [Louis Guzzo] for using the slanderous monikers super citizens in reference to the Native Americans. Speaker 1: Oh I think there was something involving the testimony of one of the corporate, I'm not sure I think it must have been a coal, coal company. In fact, whatever it was and of course we would have--and I gave all of my reports, all of the reports of the civil rights commission [U.S. Commission on Civil Rights] I've given to Arizona State University [Tempe, Arizona] so they have them there. So I don't remember all of the details of that. But anyway there was this testimony in terms of what was being paid by the corporation, I'm not sure whether it's Peabody coal [Peabody Energy Corporation, St. Louis, Missouri] or what, what, who the corporation was. But it to me was a great injustice in terms of the, the Native American community was getting very little. I remember something about twenty-five dollars, I'm not sure whether, what that was for but anyway whatever it was I think I blew my top, I mean whatever it was. But remember, I may not remember the detail. But it was something that was with respect to the Native Americans some of the, some of the, some of the contractual relations I felt that was an imbalance. Story_ID: 609432 Speaker 1: In '78 [1978] it says here that you filed a discrimination suit against Southern Illinois University [Southern Illinois University Edwardsville] in Edwardsville [Illinois]. Speaker 2: Oh that was-that's, yeah. So, that was, see I was back in private practice then. That was Haynie--that was the Haynie case [Edward Haynie v. Southern Illinois University]. Haynie had graduated from the university with a degree in chemistry and applied for the school of dentistry and was a victim of discrimination, a victim, yeah. And actually in this school of dentistry, you see, teams have to work on each other and he was a victim. And so he came to me and I got the case (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What did they do to him? Did they actually do something to, to work on his--? Speaker 2: They refused him, he had problems to work on or let him work on their team, those kinds of things. Now he can tell you about that, he is around; he can still tell you about that. So anyway he came to me about that and I filed suit in federal court in Illinois against them and we had--and then I wrote to the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] national office because I knew this would involve the dean and all of the faculty of the school of dentistry and then I was the sole attorney then. So I needed the help of the NAACP and they did send and I forgot his name but I have that--none of these files do I have here now that's why I can't go. Because most of those files I've given my papers to Howard University [Washington, D.C.] they are there, you know, so. I've got to go back and refresh my memory. I'd have to go to Howard; which I did in connection with the book ['A Song of Faith and Hope: The Life of Frankie Muse Freeman,' Frankie Muse Freeman]. But anyway after we did the--we did interrogatories, we got all of that information and a staff member from the NAACP came down at the time that we were having the interrogatories and, and assisted with that. So there was a date for a hearing and so actually what happened was that the university decided to settle the case. And so that actually did not get to trial but Haynie tells me changed with respect to the, the policy practices and culture of the school of dentistry there. But as I said I have not been back over there. I went over there for something but not to the school of dentistry. But Edward Haynie can tell you--can, you know, answer those questions more. He tells me, he said they credit you with improving the school of dentistry you know, but we--and that is true with respect of some other civil rights cases. We file them in federal court and then we work out some sort of a settlement, you know. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They, they, they--so that in this case there was no trial but, but they changed the policy of the school of dentistry. Story_ID: 609433 Speaker 1: In '79 [1979] you were confirmed-you were appointed by President Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] as, to, to the office of inspector general of Community Services Administration [U.S. Department of Health and Human Services Office of Community Services], right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right, um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Now what did you do in this position? Speaker 2: I was the inspector general do you know what an inspector is? That's what I was so I had to work; so what happened was that meant that I had to live in Washington [D.C.]. So then, my, Shelby [Freeman's husband, Shelby Freeman, Jr.]--we talked about that and by that time my daughter [Shelbe Freeman Bullock] was gone and it was just the two of us and so, so I took an apartment there and he could, he could on his off times--he could fly in. We were back and forth but then, but then I was the inspector general for the Community Services Administration which meant that I was responsible for all, you know, for inspectors. We had investigators, we had auditors, we had all of that and I had a staff but that was the time when I checked with the CSA, Community Service Administration, I found that they did not have any staff for us--for our office, we were an independent agency for them. So I talked to my senator, Senator Eagleton [Thomas Eagleton]. So Senator Eagleton got an appropriation and so I had, I was able to employ my five staff, you know the necessary; the inspector for the auditing and the inspector for investigation and my general counsel and my two confidential staff assistants. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, um-hm. And so then we worked and we, we prepared our first report in September and then we did investigations. I travelled to all of the regions to the agencies, (unclear) and then of course they had to file their audits and all and we found some problems. We referred some of them to the justice department [U.S. Department of Justice] which were handled. Speaker 1: Can you give us an example of the kind of problems you found? Speaker 2: Misuse of funds. Speaker 1: In, in what ways, in, in real clever ways or kind of stupid ways (laughter)? Speaker 2: Some stu- both. Story_ID: 609434 Speaker 1: I was asking you about some of the cases and the ways that the funds and resources were being abused. Can-yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well actually as I said we, it, there was, it was our job under the community service agencies which was really--we were over the antipoverty agencies like the human development corporation in St. Louis [Human Development Corporation of Metropolitan St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri] and other places where there were antipoverty agencies. Well that was actually--so these agencies were just like other agencies but they were to administer funds for people but they were supposed to be doing it with proper audit, with proper--with effective management and all and it was the inspector general's job who was independent of the agency--you know, I was the inspector general of the Community Services Administration [U.S. Department of Health and Human Services Office of Community Services] but I was independent of the Community Services Administration which is still true with respect to inspector general. That's why there was a general counsel of the Community Services Administration but I had my own legal counsel. And the same thing was true with the person who was over finance and who would--there was a person who was accountable to the inspector general. So when they made the--and we also had a hotline so that people could, individuals could complain and we could check to find out if there was mismanagement and if there were cases then there would be an investigation. In some investigations it would require if it was criminal or if you had problems with it you would refer it to the justice department [U.S. Department of Justice]. Or you would (unclear)-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --you would refer it to the justice department. Well that was the kind of thing that we did and there were cases and there were situations when they would bring a report which we would have to issue a report and there were instances which we did have to refer to the justice department which of course is true in every office of inspector general. And some cases they were, they were corrected, some were misunderstandings and some were--there were a few that were criminal. I do not have any independent memory of any of them at this point. However, one of the important things about the inspector general is that agency is not subject to partisan. We were--in other words you're not subject to the president's appointment. That was the law, based upon the law; however, in November of 1980 there was an election and Reagan [Ronald Wilson Reagan] was elected. In the mean--after that election then President Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] called the inspectors general and told us because we were concerned as to whether we should inspect--what we should do and he said, he reminded us that we were not subject to appointment and so therefore we would not submit our resignations. So therefore none of us did however, when I came to my office on the 21st, January, it was inauguration and the 21st-the administrative CSA sent for me that afternoon and gave me the letter from the president announcing that he was dismissing all inspectors general which was contrary with what President Carter had told us. So therefore some other inspectors general had travelled but I for some reason I was, I was still in Washington [D.C.]. So of course in some respects it was a complete surprise because it was at a--when I came back after he delivered to me what the president had given saying that I was dismissed and I went back to my office and the first thing I had to ask, I called my confidential secretary, to check have I signed anything today as inspector general. Because President Reagan's order dismissing us was on January 20th and this was 21st. So as I have said to people, I said I have been fired before from the housing authority [St. Louis Housing Authority] but this was the first time I had been retroactively fired because I had been fired the day before. So it was important for me to know whether I had signed anything as inspector general on the 21st because it would have been no good. It just happened that I had not. In the meantime there was a lot of publicity about it, reaction and so then President Reagan announced--apparently a reporter said that he had said all he wanted was for us to reapply. Because what he was was, he just wanted to be sure that we were meaner than, as junkyard dogs. That was what the reporter told me and so I said, "I don't fit those qualifications, I'm going back to private practice." And so a friend of mine Charlie Oldham [Charles Oldham] called me and he said, "Frankie [HistoryMaker Frankie Freeman], you do" (laughter). And so, but anyway I returned to private practice, I did not reapply because I did not want--first of all I figured I needed to come home and so I did. So I returned to private practice, returned to private practice. And so that's where I've been with (unclear) where, where I am now, I'm still with (unclear) with Montgomery Hollie and Associates [Montgomery Hollie and Associates, LLC, St. Louis, Missouri]. Story_ID: 609435 Speaker 1: I have to ask you this did--when you were inspector general, I mean, what was your general feeling about the administration of, of public money I guess for poverty programs, were the people generally doing the right thing? Speaker 2: Well I, oh yes, most of them were--I mean, that was it. There were a few bad apples but generally it was benefiting and one of the things that I was sorry about because actually what he did was they eliminated the agency itself [Community Services Administration] and they transferred its functions to the Office of Community Services [in the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services]. See, there was no longer, there's no longer, but those agencies were actually and some of them are still surviving. Human Development Corporation in St. Louis [Human Development Corporation of Metropolitan St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri] is a very effective and important agency and I'm sure that's true in a lot of places. Speaker 1: Okay I just wondered, you know, with the--that's an important investigation. Story_ID: 609436 Speaker 1: Around that same time now--oh this is the same time that Bill Clay [HistoryMaker William Clay, Sr.] was elected to [U.S.] Congress, I think. Right? Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 1: Did you play a role in the election? Speaker 2: Well I was of course supportive of that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Oh yeah because I have always felt that there has to be, for diversity to be effective, that everybody has to become involved, I mean. So Bill Clay was active, I had known he had been active in the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] as a young--and I had known him for a long time so therefore of course I supported him. Story_ID: 609437 Speaker 1: You're back in private practice here [Montgomery Hollie and Associates, LLC, St. Louis, Missouri]. Now, let's see--okay, now tell us about the development of the bipartisan Citizens Commission on Civil Rights formed in 1982 how did that happen? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Because by that time it was pretty clear the civil rights commission [U.S. Commission on Civil Rights] had been working or what we felt had been working effectively and even though we had been issuing reports on law enforcement and the need for more effective enforcement by the time that--by '82 [1982] there were some of us who were at that point former commissioners who even though we were former commissioners were still concerned about equal opportunity and what we could do about it. So Arthur Flemming called me and he said what about we contact some of these former commissioners which were not limited to the civil rights commission. It was EEOC [Equal Employment Opportunity Commission] and see, and the justice department [U.S. Department of Justice] there were people there. So actually he and Robert Taylor--Bill Taylor [William L. Taylor] we all sort of got together and those who had the contacts were able to get I think some funding not federal funding--grant funding for what, I'm not sure what it was. And so we pulled together a Citizens Commission on Civil Rights which we would then did, get volunteers sometimes from scholars and so forth who would be doing analyses of some of, of where we are. So that and actually I think technically although we haven't met, I haven't been to a meeting in a year. We technically I guess probably still--all of us individually are doing things, other things. But that has--we have critiqued some of the work of the president since that time and sometimes it has made a difference a little bit, but we still--that at least these are people who are still concerned about the climate and what we can do about it. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: But it's a private--we have no authority except that sometimes when we issue a report it gets read by somebody. Speaker 1: Were, were you--was the group consulted by the Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] administration at all, when? Speaker 2: Probably--well you see we've been involved with--also in the meantime sometimes you see in terms of the--because you're working one thing and you know like Arthur Flemming who is a former commissioner of aging was active with the National Council on Aging and so therefore because of his interests in the civil rights and because also of the question at that point as to whether the aging issues were being attended to or that the minorities were included. I was invited to become active with the National Council on Aging and I became active with the National Council on Aging. And so therefore with that we would hold hearings and I became actually I was a former chairman of that. Then we invited, when we would hold hearings--when we would hold meetings we invited Clintons in and so therefore we still had that connection. And so therefore that's how, that's why I think one of those pictures you'll see with, with me and Clinton. But that is not at the civil rights commission that is at the National Council on Aging. Story_ID: 609438 Speaker 1: Was it 1990 [sic. 1991] that Clarence Thomas was nominated for the [U.S.] Supreme Court, I believe by George Bush, [President] George Herbert Walker Bush when he was president. Now-- Speaker 2: He was at that time--Clarence was at that time was on the EEOC [Equal Employment Opportunity Commission]. He was, he was-- Speaker 1: Right, yeah. Speaker 2: --he was with EEOC and he, you know, he had worked here, he had worked here in, in Missouri, in fact he had stayed for a while with Margaret, with Margaret Wilson [HistoryMaker Margaret Bush Wilson]. Speaker 1: He had stayed a summer with her and--yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. So when he was with the EEOC, and so he also was--see Thurgood [Thurgood Marshall]--Thurgood you see (unclear), that was fine. So when he was nominated Jack Danforth [John Danforth] who was a senator here and the Danforths were at that time--were then friends. Jack called me and asked me about supporting Clarence Thomas and I said, "I don't know," 'cause I want to know how he is on civil--on affirmative action. There was some event at the White House [Washington, D.C.], I think maybe a couple of days later or something and I was there and so was Clarence and I raised the question with him, I said, "What is your position on civil rights, on, on affirmative action?" And, and so he said that he was being misquoted and he wanted to have and I don't know what I was there for maybe it was for Delta [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority, Inc.] but whatever but anyway I was--and so he said he would want to come over and at least bring me up to date so that I wouldn't be confused about it. He actually came over and we had breakfast together the next morning and he brought me a lot of information showing his support for affirmative action and civil rights. So therefore I decided on the basis of this that I would not oppose him. Bill Taylor [William L. Taylor] called me and he said--if you know Bill Taylor but anyway, but anyway, he said he was going to oppose him. I said, "I met with him and he went over, he is supportive of affirmative action." So I did not support--I did not oppose him. I, I did not--Margaret I think went in and gave testimony for him or something, but I didn't do that but I just did not oppose him. And so of course they knew that I didn't oppose him because I was asked to do a petition or something opposing him but I did not oppose him. So he was then confirmed there was, and whatever his first opinion was I got a call, I don't know who the black reporter was who called me and said, "Well what do you think" and I said, "All I can say is I'm disappointed," and that's all, that's all I could say. (Laughter) So I have not--I haven't seen Thomas since that time and, and I just haven't, you know, but anyway-so I did not oppose him, I did not oppose him, because he convinced me that he was not against affirmative action and he showed me all this stuff. Story_ID: 609439 Speaker 1: Do you feel betrayed [by Clarence Thomas], I mean, in that? Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: Do you, do you feel betrayed-- Speaker 2: No I didn't feel no, I didn't feel betrayed, I just, you know, because he went on about his background and I knew first of all what, wherever he is he is a beneficiary, a beneficiary of affirmative action that I knew--that I know. See, so whether he--there are some people who are beneficiaries of affirmative action who don't accept that, I now realize that. So one of the things that my survival is is that I can't find--I don't spend time dealing with yesterday which I cannot change. Speaker 1: Well, he's still on the [U.S.] Supreme Court though (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You learn from it. And I can't do a thing about it but he has had not on issues of--on legal issues because I'm a lawyer and my law practice is not limited to affirmative action there are other issues and there have been a few instances, a few cases on basic constitutional rights not that, not affirmative action that he has been okay on not many but he has been a few on. But I just don't--but there are too many issues and too many things that I have to deal with and so therefore I just leave that alone. I cannot do anything about it. Speaker 1: I know but you know, okay. Speaker 2: But as I said I'm disappointed but I think if you would spend all of your time being disappointed I don't want to exhaust my energy. I want to do whatever I can to be of service and make a difference. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. It just seems to me like it's probably-- Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: --it just seems to me that the Bush [President George Herbert Walker Bush] administration really sent a, by--it was almost like he was replacing Thurgood Marshall with an anti-Thurgood Marshall (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, you know, oh, really. Of course also you see one of the things about it I felt so, so close and so good to Thurgood--I didn't even think we were going to get anybody that good anyway you see, so that, but I thought it would be better than him, you see, you see, I was hoping it would be better than him. But I thought that Thurgood was special. Story_ID: 609440 Speaker 1: Your husband [Shelby Freeman, Jr.] passed away in '91 [1991]? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: That was about the same time as, yeah--so, so did, did you devote most of your energies at this time to--now, you, you were like seventy-six then and you're ninety-one now (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I am ninety. Speaker 1: You're nin-, you're ninety now. Speaker 2: I'm ninety, I'm ninety. Speaker 1: I'm sorry, okay. Speaker 2: I was ninety the 24th of November, 19--2006. Speaker 1: Okay I'm not trying to add another year (laughter) but, but you still practice law [at Montgomery Hollie and Associates, LLC, St. Louis, Missouri] and-- Speaker 2: Yeah part-time limited practice--limited to probate. I don't take civil rights cases, I don't take criminal cases. I don't take anything--in fact beginning with next year I'm not even going to take litigation in probate court. I'll do wills, powers of attorney and trust things that I won't have to be running up and down, running to the courts on. Speaker 1: Okay, now you've been (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But I'm slowing down. Story_ID: 609441 Speaker 1: Ninety-seven [1997] they had a Mrs. Frankie Muse Freeman Day here, they've, you've been honored by The Lawyers Association of St. Louis just a lot of honors here, I'm seeing here. Speaker 2: I'm blessed. Speaker 1: Yes, they've, there's is a new development called Frankie Vill- Frankie Freeman, Ville-- Speaker 2: Ville [Frankie Freeman Homes, St. Louis, Missouri], yeah. Um-hm, yeah there's a picture in there. Speaker 1: --Estates [Ville Estates] and quite a few other things. When you look back on everything you've done to this point is there any major thing that you would do differently? Speaker 2: Not that I can think of. I love music; I would like probably to relax more. I probably, I would love to be able to go on a--I love cruises, I've been on quite a number of jazz cruises and I'd like to probably go somewhere else. I've been to Africa so many times but I probably--I think I'd like probably to maybe go--I'd like to go back to Cape Town [South Africa]. Speaker 1: Okay. So when were you there last? Speaker 2: I went with the Deltas [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority, Inc.] in 2003. Speaker 1: Okay. And I see your house has a lot of African art--well a lot of black art. Speaker 2: Yeah that's what it is and then I've got Haitian, this is Haiti and then I've got the God's eye from the Navajo, I've got art all over. My daughter [Shelbe Freeman Bullock] as I said is a quilter that's a black artist. I bought, we brought that from Kenya (points upward) and then of course there's a lot in there. I love art, I love music (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What is--okay mostly jazz you love? Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's how I go to sleep. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite musician? Speaker 2: All of them (laughter). Speaker 1: Oh okay. Story_ID: 609442 Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today? Speaker 2: To become more involved, do your homework, do you homework, do your homework. Get involved and stay involved and wash your traps. Speaker 1: Okay. Would-- Speaker 2: And, and develop your resources and save. You don't really have to spend a whole lot of money on everything, take care of yourself, take care of your family, take care of each other and be involved in the community in a positive, constructive way. Don't complain about the system if you don't know anything about it. Story_ID: 609443 Speaker 1: When you look back over your life what would you consider today to be your legacy? Speaker 2: That I tried to make a difference; that I worked to make a difference. Story_ID: 609444 Speaker 1: Tell us a little about your family. I know you mentioned your daughter before, but. Speaker 2: I have a daughter [Shelbe Freeman Bullock], I have a son [Shelby Freeman III] and one of the things, one of the things that I probably, is probably the least known is that the, my daugh- my son became ill, the--he was first ill the same day that I learned that I had passed the bar in Washington [D.C.] and then he was ill--we were in Virginia for my sister's [Allie Muse Peebles] wedding and then he recovered from that we thought but then in November of 1949, I got a call he was in the daycare center, (unclear) was falling down and then he was in the hospital for quite some time, had surgery and I think the diagnosis then was post-viral encephalitis, I'm not sure about that. He required for the next nine years--he was at home and that's how sometimes my office was at home. I had to have someone to take care of him and he lived until he was eleven but during that time, I was it was very important to me to keep my family separated from my law practice. So there were times there were people who would be talking about their own problems they did not know that probably I had the same similar problems that they had. But one of the blessings that we had is that we had the nurse that--Dr. Helen Nash you were mentioning, she was his pediatrician during that entire time. We had a family support system, our parents, my mother-in-law [Jenny Freeman (ph.)] and my father-in-law [Shelby Freeman, Sr.] and my parents [Maude Smith Muse and William Muse, Sr.]. Were, because he--there was no insurance but we got through it all. And as I said in my book ['A Song of Faith and Hope: The Life of Frankie Muse Freeman,' Frankie Muse Freeman] that one of the blessings that we all have is support of each other and I try to do that always. Speaker 1: Okay. Now is there anything that we haven't talked about that you think you want to mention before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: I think we've covered it all, I guess I don't know. Speaker 1: We got some of it; I know we haven't got it all. Speaker 2: No you don't have it all, no we don't have it all. Speaker 1: Okay, some of it. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: That's-- Speaker 2: One other thing is I'm blessed with my--Shelby [Shelby Freeman, Jr.] took care of us very well, my husband. My daughter is a blessing, an artist, my family and friends are a blessing. Story_ID: 609445 Speaker 1: And my church, my faith. I'm very active, I'm a member, vice, vice chair of the trustee board at Washington Tabernacle Baptist Church [Washington Tabernacle Missionary Baptist Church, St. Louis, Missouri] and I started the Nance Scholarship Fund [Reverend John E. Nance Scholarship Fund] many years ago. The church also should be more involved in the community and I started and was very active in what we call the Lyceum Guild there. I'm no longer active in that now but it's still there. Speaker 2: Now you were on the board of Howard University [Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 1: Howard University for sixteen years. And I'm in, in--they elected me an emeritus trustee so I'm still a trustee. Speaker 2: Okay, all right. Have you been involved in any other educational institutions since then? Speaker 1: I'm on the board of Ranken Technical College [St. Louis, Missouri]. I'm on the chancellor's council of the University of Missouri - St. Louis [St. Louis, Missouri] and I have eight degrees from-- honorary degrees from Ranken, Howard, Hampton [Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia], Washington U [Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri], Saint Louis University [St. Louis, Missouri], Howard, Hampton, Harris Stowe State University [St. Louis, Missouri] and whatever (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter) Okay. All right, well-- Speaker 1: So I'm blessed. Speaker 2: Yes, ma'am. Speaker 1: And I think I have--and as I said all of it I think I cannot even measure what I got from Hampton and Howard and I think that we all owe and I owe them and I try, and I try to make a contribution every year, every year, to both of them. Story_ID: 609446 Speaker 1: The last question we ask is similar to legacy but a little bit different. Ma'am how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: That she tried that I've tried to--my prayer each morning to the Lord order my steps, help me to make a difference, help me to be of service; help me to be of service, help me to make a difference and I'd like to be remembered that in some respects she made a difference, I hope (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) All right. Well, thank you very much for spending time with us. Speaker 2: Thank you. Story_ID: 609447 Speaker 1: This is my parents my mother and my father. Maude B. Muse [Maude Smith Muse], William Brown Muse [William Muse, Sr.] they got me where I am. Speaker 2: Oh, that is me and my husband and that would have probably been taken--that was picture of me and Shelby [Shelby Freeman, Jr.] my husband probably taken about I think probably '39 [1939] or '40 [1940] which would probably be '40 [1940]. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, go ahead. Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Please tell me about the photo now. Speaker 2: That photo I'm looking at--well, I'm looking at his leg which meant that he was probably, it was probably taken in 1948 or '49 [1949]. He has a brace on his leg. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Who is it again? Speaker 2: My son. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): And his name? Speaker 2: Shelby III [Shelby Freeman III] we called him Butch. Speaker 1: This is 1970 here I just want to let you know. Speaker 2: Yeah, I know that it had to be. That, that was taken, that would have been in August 1970. We were at the ranch of President Lyndon Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] at his ranch [Lyndon B. Johnson National Historical Park]. The board was meeting in Texas--in Houston, Texas and so we chartered--I was national president of Delta Sigma Theta [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority, Inc.] and I felt it would be an opportunity for us and I contacted the president. He invited us and so we spent the day at the ranch of President Lyndon Johnson. Speaker 1: That was a picture, I think that was in Jet magazine after as someone--it was noted that I was being considered for by President Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] for the position of inspector general of the Community Services Administration [U.S. Department of Health and Human Services Office of Community Services]. In fact that's a picture and article that appeared. Speaker 2: We're at a national convention of Delta Sigma Theta. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): And who is this? Speaker 2: Dr. Height [HistoryMaker Dorothy Height] in the middle is Betty Shabazz, Betty Shabazz and on the end is [HistoryMaker] Frankie Freeman. We were at a national convention of Delta Sigma Theta Sorority. And I'm- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: She's from Chicago [Illinois], you know her. Speaker 1: She does look familiar. Speaker 2: She just happened to be legal counsel when I was there and I can't think of her name. Her father [C. Francis Stradford] was a lawyer. That was--and that was taken at Howard University [Washington, D.C.] at the time that Lena Horne was awarded an honorary degree. And the person--I'm on that picture and the person to my left is Geraldine Pittman Woods who at that time was the chair of the board of trustees at Howard. And oh gosh as well as I know her. Speaker 1: We'll put it off and look at it. [HistoryMaker] Jewel Lafontant-MANkarious. Speaker 2: Those are pictures of my father-in-law and my mother-in-law, Shelby Freeman [Shelby Freeman, Sr.] and Jenny Freeman [ph.]. Speaker 1: You have my name under it; it is a picture on my graduation from Howard University law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 2: The one that's under the baby picture--well the baby picture I was nine months old then. Speaker 1: This is 1916 right? Speaker 2: If I was nine months old it would be 1917, I was born November 1916. Speaker 1: Okay you're the lawyer. Speaker 2: And so where are you now? That picture would have been in about 1964 or '65 [1965] right after I got appointed commissioner of U.S. Commission on Civil Rights. Speaker 1: And that picture was taken in the early part of 2006. So there are four stages of my life that you have there. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Excellent thank you. Speaker 1: In '61 [1961] we took into our home a student--a young lady from Kenya, Nairobi, Kenya who came to us after a visit to the Delta Sigma Theta national convention the year before asking us if we would give opportunity for an education for African students. Our daughter [Shelbe Freeman Bullock] had graduated and was not at home so we decided that we would take her and Wathana [ph.] came to live with us and we were her foster parents for the next nine years. She went through high school, college, a wedding and then returned to Kenya as a biochemist. She and her husband whom she met in St. Louis [Missouri], whom she met while in college was an engineer and they still live in Nairobi--returned and are very actively involved in Kenya. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Very impressive. Speaker 1: She was the one that had to suffer some incidents at Central High School [Central Visual and Performing Arts High School, St. Louis, Missouri]. The NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] asked those of us who were close to the NAACP that following summer to provide safe homes and so the first summer Elizabeth and one of the--Alma (unclear) [ph.] stayed with us. Elizabeth came back the next summer Carlotta Walls [HistoryMaker Carlotta Walls LaNier] and for several years afterwards we maintained a friendship with Elizabeth Eckford of the Little Rock Nine. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay and once again her name? Speaker 1: Elizabeth Eckford. Speaker 2: Of Constance Baker Motley on the top step and me as we're leaving the federal courthouse in October 1954 after we had argued the case that ended racial segregation and public housing in St. Louis. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: That was a picture in the campaign of Johnson in 1954. He was in St. Louis and I was a part of the group supporting him and there is a picture of me behind him as he is speaking to the group of supporters of his campaign. Speaker 1: These are the Muse family there are six of us and in order to your far right I am leading, I am the older and next in order, next to me would be Bill [William Muse, Jr.] and next to him would be Charles Tweed [Charles Muse], next would be Eddie [Edward Muse], next would be my sister Allie [Allie Muse Peebles] and my younger brother Andy [Andrew Muse] and that have to have been taken about twenty years ago at least or maybe longer. No look, because it has to have been because--well, I think twenty years ago, yeah. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: Go ahead. Speaker 2: Hm? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Can you tell us about his photo? Speaker 2: That picture was a--I really don't know who took the picture but it was probably taken in the early '60s [1960s]. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Okay, go ahead. Speaker 2: This is a picture of us gathered on the first front steps of our home at 91 pla- 91 Waterman Place where the members of the Muse family reu- reunion had come from around the country to St. Louis. Story_ID: 609448 Speaker 1: This was a family picture that was taken in 1954 and I think it was in August of 1954. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): All right. Speaker 1: We were all in Danville, Virginia. Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy [1970] it says here. This was in the '70s [1970s]? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: We don't know exactly when but it's in the 1970s. Speaker 1: Now this picture would have been taken at a Christmas Eve open house which Shelby [Freeman's husband, Shelby Freeman, Jr.] and I held every Christmas Eve for open house for our friends and welcome to international visitors. And you will notice that there are a number of international visitors in that picture. Speaker 2: This picture was taken in March, I think March 18, 2003 when my book, the book 'A Song of Faith and Hope' ['A Song of Faith and Hope: The Life of Frankie Muse Freeman,' Frankie Muse Freeman] was launched at the history museum. The Missouri historical society [Missouri History Museum, St. Louis, Missouri] is the publisher of the book and that was a reception and book signing. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, I'm ready. Speaker 2: This is a picture that was taken for the dedication of the Frankie Freeman Ville Estates [Frankie Freeman Homes, St. Louis, Missouri] which was done, which was sponsored by the Northside community center [Northside Community Housing, Inc., St. Louis, Missouri] and that event was June 2, 2006; middle income families/lower income families with single family homes with a garage and many other facilities that they would not have otherwise. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, ready. Speaker 2: I was a recipient of an honorary degree from Washington University [Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri] in I think about 1995 and that picture is me with the, with Dr. William Danzen [sic. William H. Danforth] who at that time was chancellor of Washington University. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Is there a date on the back of that one? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: That was in St. Louis [Missouri]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: And actually that is at the Club Riviera [St. Louis, Missouri] with Jordan Chambers who was the leading Democrat and all of us and also one of the members there is my classmate-- Speaker 2: This is Jordan Chambers, right? Speaker 1: Yeah, this is Jordan Chambers and Judge Draper who was a classmate of mine who at that time was an assistant circuit attorney who of course later became a judge and who is now deceased. But all of us were at Club Riviera which was a major club in the City of St. Louis in which about every black entertainer or performer participated or came to it at some point. Speaker 2: Like the Regal Theater in Chicago [Illinois]? Speaker 1: Then in 1964 after my confirmation by the [U.S.] Senate I'm taking the oath as a commissioner of the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights having been appointed, nominated by President Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: (Background noise) That same event-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, I'm ready. Speaker 1: Go ahead. Speaker 2: This is a family gathering immediately following becoming--after, after I was sworn in. My husband [Shelby Freeman, Jr.], daughter [Shelbe Freeman Bullock], sisters and brothers- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: --and that was in 1964. It was after I was confirmed by the Senate, which is-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Any time you're ready, I'm ready. Speaker 2: Ready? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): I'm ready. Speaker 2: Now this was--at that point I am speaking to President Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] who would have come to an even- that would have been an event for the National Council on Aging because at that time I was probably chair of the National Council on Aging and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It's May 1994. Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: It's May '94 [1994]. Speaker 2: This is an early meeting of the commissioners of the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights. You see, the chairman at that time was Hannah [John A. Hannah]; member was Father Hesburgh [Theodore Hesburgh] and you'll see in the center and then the member from North Carolina. And it was I think in terms of the timing of that it would probably have been about 1965 or '66 [1966]. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: You're ready? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Can I take a still shot? Okay. Speaker 2: This was a picture of me and I think it's on the campus of Washington University. This is a picture of me with Jordan--Barbara Jordan who had come to Washington University and of course we were close friends, always been close friends. So I don't know what we're talking about but we are at that event. Does it say when, what it was? Speaker 1: It doesn't say (unclear). No, it didn't have, -It was in the '80s [1980s] I believe. Speaker 2: It was in the '90s [1990s], she was, she was a speaker at some symposium at Washington University and I, I would have been in-, involved in that program in some way...