 Story_ID: 79554 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm the interviewer-producer for The HistoryMakers conducting this interview. The videographer is Scott Stearns. And sir, I'd like for you to state your name and spell it. Speaker 2: My name is Truman, T-R-U-M-A-N, K, Gibson, G-I-B-S-O-N, Jr. Speaker 1: Okay, can you give us today's date? Speaker 2: May 20th. Speaker 1: Two thousand and two [2002]. Speaker 2: Two thousand and two [2002], yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Can you give us the address and the city that we're in right now? Speaker 2: This, this interview is being conducted at 439 East 31st Street, Room 200, my law office. Speaker 1: Here in Chicago. Speaker 2: Chicago. Speaker 1: All right, okay, what's your date of birth? Speaker 2: January 22, 1912. Speaker 1: Okay, and what's your occupation? Speaker 2: Lawyer. Story_ID: 79555 Speaker 1: Okay. Now I've got five questions here that are sort of "People" magazine-type questions, and they just require a brief answer, so if you'll indulge me--what's your favorite food? Speaker 2: Well, in my old age, Chinese food of all sorts. Speaker 1: What was it before? Speaker 2: Well, barbecue, steak, salad. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, what's your favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Well, favorite time of year is the, that in which my eyes are open, and really just it doesn't matter, winter, summer, spring. In days past, I had, I had gone away for the, part of the winter, working and combining work with pleasure, but that is out, though I was in Greece in December, which, where I visited my niece with her two children with--and shared their Christmas with them. But I paid the price because, since my return, I've had what was definite--I delicately call traveler's diarrhea by the University of Illinois specialist, who use--did research that didn't show any, any cause of the condition. But I'd say--I had a good time in Greece. The weather was beautiful. She lives in Sparta, twenty minutes from the Mediterranean, an hour from the ski slopes, in a town of 17,000 people with a bar for every fourth, fourth, fourth person. So we--I had a very good time. Speaker 1: Any, any, any good time is a good time (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. What's your favorite color? Speaker 2: Well its'... If I had a favorite, it's brown, but different... Speaker 1: Okay, what's your favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Well, Greece, and in days gone by, the West Indies, the Virgin Islands, Jamaica. Speaker 1: Okay, now what's your--do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay, meaning "No" is the favorite phrase? Speaker 2: Yes (laughter). Speaker 1: (Unclear), okay, all right. Story_ID: 79556 Speaker 1: Can you state the names of your parents? Speaker 2: Truman Gibson, K. Gibson, Sr., Alberta Dickerson Gibson. Speaker 1: Okay, now can you name your brothers and sisters in birth order? Speaker 2: My brother, who died at age eighty-five, Harry Gibson, a lawyer who caught up with me in law school, and we finished at the same time and passed the bar at the same time. Harry was general counsel of Spring Liberty; my sister, Alberta Marshall, ten years my junior, who is living as, as a retired schoolteacher. Speaker 1: Okay, so just two broth--two-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --brother and a sister. Speaker 2: Right. Story_ID: 79557 Speaker 1: Okay, let's go back to your parents. Can, can, can you tell us something about your, your mother [Alberta Dickerson Gibson] and about her side of the family? Speaker 2: Well, my mother was, I would say dysfunctional in the, in the family stage. Her mother died, and she had a sister, Bernice. And then she finished the Jersey school, the Jersey school, school system. Speaker 1: She's from New Jersey? Speaker 2: Yeah, Jersey City [New Jersey]. But then she was--her, her relatives were the Indian, part Indians in the, in the Jersey tribes. But we, we had no real bond with, with the, with them. We visited them once or twice. They visited us, us Christmas, I mean in Chicago [Illinois]. But my father [Truman J. Gibson, Sr.] was very strong. And his, his family, we had, had my grandmother and great-grandmother living, and they were living in Macon, Georgia. Speaker 1: Now, what, what was your mother's maiden name again? Speaker 2: Dickerson. Speaker 1: Dickerson, okay. So you didn't have a very strong bond with the Dickersons. Speaker 2: Well, (unclear) because her mother died, so--and her father was euphemistically put on the road, a Pullman Porter. So they, they didn't, they, they didn't have a close family bond. Story_ID: 79558 Speaker 1: Okay, what kind of a person was she? Speaker 2: My mother [Alberta Dickerson Gibson]? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Very well-read. She met my father [Truman K Gibson, Sr.] in an Episcopalian school, Deacon Russell's school, at, at Deacon Russell. (Unclear) Deacon Rushell--Russell--was related to her, I think her uncle. But my father finished Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. He embarked on a lecture tour of black schools, among other things. And he lectured at my mother's school, and they had a romance, and-- Speaker 1: Can you-- Speaker 2: --she married. Speaker 1: Can you remember the name of the school? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay, it's Deacon Russell's-- Speaker 2: Archdeacon Russell. Speaker 1: Archdeacon Russell, the-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --Episcopal-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Okay, well, so, so, so they, they met at that school, and, and they started like a romance you say. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. He, I, I, I think he had a job teaching really for a short time, my father. But then he went to Atlanta [Georgia], and, and my mother followed. Story_ID: 79559 Speaker 1: And my father had gone to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] with the encouragement of Mrs. Herndon, who was the wife of Alonzo Herndon, the--not black, but the African-American entrepreneur who had a white barber shop where we had kids that amazed we had grapefruit when they made the summer home at Palm Beach. But she lived--she met my father at--when he was a student at Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] and took an interest in, in him. And [W.E.B.] Du Bois was his schoolteacher, was his professor, so they encouraged him to go to Harvard. Speaker 2: Now-- Speaker 1: Not with money, but he worked on the boats and did other things. Story_ID: 79560 Speaker 1: Okay, well, we started off with your mother [Alberta Dickerson Gibson], but now we're on your father's side. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So let's, let's go back to his be, be, beginnings. Do you know-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: --much about his ancestry? Speaker 2: More, more than, more than my mother. Speaker 1: Okay, what can you tell us about your father [Truman K. Gibson, Sr.] and his, his background. Speaker 2: Well, his--my father was born in Macon, Macon, Georgia. He had-- Speaker 1: About what time--what, what, what year do you think? Speaker 2: Eighty, eighty-two [1882]. Speaker 1: Eighteen eighty-two [1882]. Speaker 2: He had three brothers and a sister. And my grandmother did the cooking and I guess maid work at Ballard Normal School [Macon, Georgia], where my father went. And so he went to college in Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia], which was not the university like Harvard, but he, then he went to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], where he finished it in, in the class of nineteen, nine [1909]. Speaker 1: What is, what, what did his father do for a living. Speaker 2: Well, my, my mother--my grandmother was a widow, and she raised the children her--my--the youngest child was my aunt. And my grandfather died, oh, in, in, while she was an infant, so I didn't know him. He was a painter. Speaker 1: Okay, did--painting-- Speaker 2: House painter. Speaker 1: House painter, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 79561 Speaker 1: All right, can you--so, so your father [Truman K. Gibson, Sr.] went to Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia]? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And you, you said he met Dr. [W.E.B.] DuBois. He--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: He was--soon, yeah. Speaker 1: When he was-- Speaker 2: A student, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. Speaker 2: And he, then he went to Harvard. And they did not have the business school then. I think it was, originated--I mean it had a business school in 1910 or '11' [1911] or somewhere. But he was--'course he had a cum laude degree for honors and my grandmother, who had been very determined and set on her going to Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee], but who dashed her ambitions by her, her mother, who said, and I quote: "No nigger will (unclear)--one who's got a business of Fisk University." Her father was willing to send her. The father was the ex-slave owner, who was in love with my great-grandmother. And she--if the Emancipation Proclamation hadn't been signed, she would have removed it anyway. She ran away, but she always went to the Indians in Florida, and he always pursued her and brought her back. Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause I know there's, there's a quite of, quite an Indian population down there-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: --that was free of control of the U.S. Government. Speaker 2: I, I have a picture of my great-grandmother, who's just a, a squaw. She's really mixed up. Speaker 1: Yeah, do you--can you give us the name of the slave owner that, that was her-- Speaker 2: I don't, I--Cox. Speaker 1: Cox, all right, okay. Speaker 2: But-- Speaker 1: Well, can you--so, your father went to Atlanta U, went to Harvard-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and they were just starting the business school there you said, right, that he-- Speaker 2: Well, he, he didn't enter the business school at Harvard, but he took a, the business courses. The business school started in about 1910 or 1911. Story_ID: 79562 Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Can you give us some idea of what your childhood was like? And I want you to try to think back and reflect on the, some, some of the sights and sounds and smells of your childhood. Speaker 2: Well, the vivid, most vivid recollection is visiting my grandmother in Macon [Georgia], where the train, when the whistle sounded and the chicken came out of the box, we'd--about two hours, two, about two hours from Atlanta [Georgia], Macon. And we, we had the usual time in, in childhood. She lived in at 230 Jones Street, which is important because the doctor, African American, black, colored doctor, Beasley, lived at the head of this Jones Street. Speaker 1: And this is his--is he related to the Dr. Beasley-- Speaker 2: He was visiting. He was the father-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --of Edward Beasley, Ned Beasley, who is the baby doctor. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So--and to make the ring complete, my wife was Alice Beasley's best friend, who's the wife of Ned. Speaker 1: Oh yeah. Speaker 2: But Ned had been the medical director for my father's insurance company, and before that Liberty Life. So we've, we've been very close to Ned and to Ned's family when we lived in, in, in Macon. But I, I came--we came to Chicago when I was in the fifth grade, so that most of my recollections are those of Columbus, Ohio, where I went to grammar school and junior high and-- Speaker 1: Got you. Speaker 2: East High. Speaker 1: Okay, now, now, yeah, that's a remarkable connection with you and the Beasleys that, that lasted over these years and over all that distance. Story_ID: 79563 Speaker 1: Can, but can you tell us when did you go to Columbus [Ohio], and, and, and why did your father [Truman K. Gibson, Sr.] move to Columbus? Speaker 2: My father determined that the Atlanta [Georgia] race riots in 1920--1921, that that place was not for him and for a growing family, my brother and myself. Speaker 1: Now-- Speaker 2: So--Atlanta. Speaker 1: Did your family ex--did your family experience any-- Speaker 2: Well, no, I, I, I- Speaker 1: --violence--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --don't know--but my--so young. And-- Story_ID: 79564 Speaker 1: --as a matter of fact, in 1929, when I went came to Chicago [Illinois], I'd come to go to Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois]. And I hadn't--my father [Truman K. Gibson, Sr.] had not taken me into his confidences about merging companies. So when I went to Evanston [Illinois], I went to the local YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association], whose secretary was Bill Pyant, who had been secretary in the Spring Street Y in Columbus. And he said my boy, if you think Jim Crow was bad in Columbus, then you have, have not seen anything since Evanston. So, that coupled with the gloomy day, determined my course, and I went to University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: Now I don't wanna get too far ahead of your childhood. We got plenty of time to talk about-- Speaker 1: Well. Speaker 2: But-- Story_ID: 79565 Speaker 1: So, so, what was, what was life like in Columbus [Ohio], and what, what grade school did you go to, and what, what, what high school did you go to? Speaker 2: Well, I went to the Eastwood Grammar School, Franklin Junior High School, and East High School. And I think that you have a clipping that was supplied you with the euphemistically, "Local Boy Makes Good." But in high school I was on the football team, the honor society, the representative in oratorical contests, all, all good things, but very--Columbus was a very much Jim Crow town. We had not--we, no--there were no motion picture, picture theaters available, except the Empress to blacks, the Hartman Theater, the ligit--the legitimate theater, where I saw "Shuffle Along," Josephine Baker, was available only in the pigeon roost, where, where the right side in, so the le--left side, no, no center seats. So it's very--but I had known cala-Atlanta [Georgia], so that didn't strike me, you know. Speaker 1: So, was it about the same as Atlanta? Was Columbus--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Well, I was different. Speaker 1: --(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I was older. I was older. But then, the difference was that there were two dry goods stores, the Union Company and the Lazarus Company, which sold boys' suits, so that the Union Company had a football team, the Unico's, and the Lazarus store had the Hightowers, Hightowners. So, we played football. I played football (unclear)--and then we, every Saturday, had, had, we had the shows, theaters, that this Union Store or Lazarus had taken over. So that was the difference. Story_ID: 79566 Speaker 1: Okay, so, did you have a pretty happy childhood, would you, would you say? Would you--(unclear)-- Speaker 2: Well, it was not unhappy. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In school we had--oh, vicissitudes that children normally worked from the days in, in grammar school, which had, I had the, the lawn mowing concession in Beverly, fifty cents a lawn. We--I had a job with Bryant, who, the black de--developer, and who owned filling stations; I had filling stations jobs. Then we--I went--I had a job at, which I enjoyed most, as a lifeguard and assistant camp counselor in the camp where the Westside, which is the equivalent of Chicago West Side, kids went. And they went Chesterfield, Ohio. And similarly enough, last week I saw where an industry had bought the town out, that because of the smoke violations, so it brought--Scott (unclear) that the settlement house in, in Columbus and the camp. So in any event, it was working, and then with Adam, Adam Creach (ph.) in the parks. And we, we had--a vigorous boyhood, but-- Speaker 1: Who were some of your friends? Speaker 2: Well, I'm gonna tell you. The--we had--I had a--we had a club, the Merrymakers (ph.), that celebrated the 70th anniversary last August. And we were just kids we, we decided that we would tak--poo--pool our resources, meager, and rent the dancehall at, over the Empress Theater, and that's, that's where, we played baseball. The High Y-YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] was second home. Speaker 1: It was on High Street? Is that why they called it the High? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: This is the Spring Street Y. Speaker 1: Oh, okay, all right. Speaker 2: But the High-- Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: --the--we, we had a really league, (unclear)--went to Lima (ph.)--various places, Zanesville (ph.), where we, where--with the, with the YMCA basketball team, team. So it's, it was a busy childhood. Story_ID: 79567 Speaker 1: So you were a scholar and an athlete-- Speaker 2: Well, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Were you fairly popular in high school [East High School, Columbus, Ohio]? Speaker 2: Well, I don't, I don't know, you know. We don't -- popularity was measured by the friends that we made, but they, they didn't have an interracial friendships, we, we didn't. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Columbus was a Jim Crow town. Speaker 1: Yeah, so, what were your aspirations when you were a youth? I mean what did you think you would end up doing when you grew up? Speaker 2: I never, a clue, never a clue. But then when I went to--first when the first year passed in Chicago, I went to the Fraud Investigation Unit Relief, then I sold life insurance. But, so I didn't, I just, I didn't-- Speaker 1: So after high, after high school, you came to Chicago to-- Speaker 2: No, what I-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --in, in the--we--I graduated in '29' [1929], high school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My father [Truman K. Gibson, Sr.] had merged Supreme Liberty in '29' [1929]. I did not know that he and my mother [Alberta Dickerson Gibson]--I, I knew that they moving, but he didn't take me into his confidence. So, but then I moved when I went to University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois]; I lived at home. We had, we had a place on 45th and Michigan, and then 60th. And on 45th and Mich--and Michigan... Story_ID: 79568 Speaker 1: ...We had... yeah--and then 45th and Michigan, we, we--I had it--we had a rumor is, with Colonel Davis [General Benjamin O. Davis, Sr.] that said his wild, recalcitrant son [General Benjamin O. Davis, Jr.] had been admitted into West Point [United States Military Academy, West Point, New York], but subject to his, a period of a year for (unclear) (unclear) to, to nominate him, definitely. So, so Ben lived with us-oh that's--Ben lived with us on South Parkway, 4524 South Parkway. Speaker 2: This is Benjamin Davis-- Speaker 1: Four-star general. Speaker 2: Yeah, okay, all right. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: This is Junior, right? Speaker 1: Huh? Speaker 2: This is Ben, Benjamin O. Davis-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --Jr. Speaker 1: Yeah, but then I fa--I worked closely with his father in the war department. The colonel was mustered in with--as a general, in line with Roosevelt's policy of race relations. He appointed Bill Hastie as sec--civilian aide, Secretary of War-- Story_ID: 78742 Speaker 1: We're talking about Benjamin O. Davis, Jr.-- Speaker 2: Yes, junior, yes. Speaker 1: --living with you all-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --for a few-- Speaker 2: Year. Speaker 1: --a year, yeah. At, just as-- Speaker 2: He just-- Speaker 1: --you were beginning at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] when you started. Speaker 2: Yeah, Ben, Ben went to the University of Chicago. They begged him to not go to West Point [United States Military Academy, West Point, New York]. He's brilliant mathematics student. Story_ID: 78743 Speaker 1: Okay, what, what was the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] like for you? And how many other black students were there? Speaker 2: Well, there--you can count it up, count 'em on one hand. Then--the president of AU [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia], the brilliant speaker, preacher--what the hell is his--I'll think of his name. A guy from West Africa, who had developed a dic-dictionary, and he said he got the best of everything because the people here couldn't find the words there. And he just, he was the boss. Bob Ming [William Robert Ming], who was my close friend, Bob had been at Crane Junior College, but he was, of course, at, at University of Chicago, sub--subsequently a professor in the law school. And the Kansas segregation case, three guys, Joe Ackwell and two guys at the law school, three, one girl--was that's--that's it, and a guy from Cleveland [Ohio], who would astounded people by taking fencing and come--being on the fencing team, so and that was, that was it. Story_ID: 78744 Speaker 1: So and what was it like at the, at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois]? Was it what you expected? Speaker 2: Well, I didn't expect anything because, 'cause I, I came out of Jim Crow, and it didn't disappoint me there. But in my second year I worked for Harold [Foote] Gosnell, who was a press--professor in the political science department. Speaker 1: Can you spell that us? Speaker 2: G-O-S-N-E-L-L. His book is--'cause now it, it--was a hundred and died just last year--Negro in Chicago Politics [sic] ["Negro Politicians: The Rise of Negro Politics and Chicago"]. My job with Gosnell was to interview the Negro politicians, Bill Dawson, William E. King, to attend the political meetings, and to write reports. And for that I got a, a dollar and a half an hour. So along with my scholarship, I made the three hundred dollars a year for the tuition and the--then, you know. But the Gosnell job lasted until I finished law school. Speaker 1: So that's how many years? Speaker 2: Four years. Speaker 1: You must have learned a tremendous amount in four years, attending all those meetings. Speaker 2: Well, I, I had my job. I (unclear) that every, every politician I knew. We had, well, it's--the 8th Regiment Armory was the site of many political meetings. And Bill Dawson [Congressman William L. Dawson], later alderman and congressman, was speaking. And then the people, without televisions and limited radio, would go to political meetings for amusements--and great speakers. And Bill Dawson said there's a spy in the house. Let him come down front and be comfortable. So, rather than my butt being kicked, I took the embarrassing course of going down front. So, then Bill gave me--then we had--when black graduates at the University of Chicago finished law school, there were not jobs. So Bill gave me (unclear)--and Irvin Mollison, who's later, was later a judge, and then when we--Irvin, Irvin was interested in the "Hansberry" case. We had, we had--I, I had a job at three dollars a week. My 'el' fare was three dollars and, and fifty cents, so I was in the minus pool for my first year after law school. I didn't know where the courts were. In those days we really had academic training, but never any practical training. Story_ID: 78745 Speaker 1: But, so it's-- Speaker 2: Can, can you talk about some of your professors at, at the University of Chicago (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Well-- Speaker 2: --the one who hired you, [Harold Foote] Gosnell? Speaker 1: Well, not the--yeah, but the, the law, law school professors were--when my class--we, we, we had--was very good friends with--I, I was with a group of my classmates, but they didn't, then they didn't, the professors wouldn't mix with the students. Gosnell--then I had all of the political science professors, Miriam, and one guy--all, all--they, they, they were friends, you know. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: (Unclear)--you know was, that was (laughter), which was the fact, yeah. Speaker 2: Okay, so, so you grad--when did you graduate from law school [University of Chicago Law School, Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 1: Nineteen thirty-five [1935]. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 78746 Speaker 1: And what were your prospects upon graduation from law school? Speaker 2: Dim, nothing. I, I told you I--Bill Dawson got me a job, Irvin Mollison. But we couldn't join the Chicago Bar Association, couldn't get to the law library of Chicago Bar, and we learned by doing. Speaker 1: Who were the prominent black lawyers in the community when you got out of school? Speaker 2: Earl Dickerson, Irvin Mollison, who was later judge of the Customs Court, Herman Moore, who was in the office, with Dawson's office, graduated the Boston law school [Boston University School of Law, Boston, Massachusetts], who was later judge in the Virgin Islands, Lauren B. Moore, C. Francis Stradford, who Jewel LaFontant's [HM] and Rogers' [John W. Rogers, Sr., HM] aer-aerial com-company's grandfather, Sidney Jones, who was, of course, from the Northwestern law school [Northwestern University School of Law, Evanston, Illinois], Ed, Ed [Edward] Morris, who was a legendary lawyer, who kept the gambling boats moored at the, in the Chicago River, and took a trip around the, around the world, very brilliant lawyer. But that's--Bill Hooks, who was probate... Story_ID: 78747 Speaker 1: So how did you, how did you end up I guess making your mark, you know, after you graduated--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Well, I guess-- Speaker 1: --(Unclear)? Speaker 2: Like how do you go to Carnegie Hall? Work, work, and luck played a part. I, I went to, I went--I made--I was made executive director of the American Negro Exposition in 1930...'38' [1938], '39' [1939]. That was-- Speaker 1: When was-- Speaker 2: --the seventy-fifth anniversary of the emanci--celebration of the Emancipation Proclamation, and it was a tri-part (unclear): the, the City of Chicago, State of Illinois; the federal government had the sponsorship. And I had Duke Ellington as my music guy; Aiden, who was a prominent--where you had the artist--the show at Howard University [Washington, D.C.]. We had diorama, dioramas, that, that depicted the landing of Jamestown and all of that; then we had --Henry Wallace was their perpetual guest, the vice president. Paul Robeson stayed about a month. And that was-- Speaker 1: How did you get a job like that? Speaker 2: Well (laughter), just the--one lawyer, who was Wendell, Wendell Green, very--he was the second black judge. Wendell Green was with Euclid Taylor, the chief defense counsel in Cook County [Illinois]. Wendell had a starched shirt, white handkerchiefs, cried profusely, and got the people off, but he was a stern guy. But Wendell had--and then he, he had--Wendell had the chairmanship of the black Democrats when Roosevelt [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt], his second term, and I worked with him then. And-- Speaker 1: (Unclear)-- Speaker 2: But he's the one that placed me. But when we had the idea of a nude ranch, Wendell blew a fuse. He didn't, just didn't, you know, but he didn't... Story_ID: 78748 Speaker 1: But Abe Marovitz, that just died recently, was the representative of the state. He, he, he was the federal judge, great, great defense counsel. Speaker 2: Abraham Lincoln Marovitz? Speaker 1: Abraham Lincoln Marovitz. Abe said, when I had my problems with (unclear)--(unclear), he said that, you know, be at lunch at least once a week. He said well, you know, when you die--lie down with lice, you get lousy. I said what are you, Abe, what are you, what are you saying? Well, I just said that. I said well, Abe, you know, when [clearing throat]--I went to the American Negro Exp-Exposition with--when they had the Appomattox Club meetings, and you had the chauffeured Cadillac car, I said some day, I wanna be like you. But I said, you know, when the background of the Cadillac car and the chauffeur was representation of the Purple Gang in Detroit [Michigan]. So (laughter), he said enough said, so that's--but he was, he was a friend till his death. He was a sergeant in the Marines, sent me cards in the, in, when I was in the Pentagon, Munitions Building, Pentagon. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But everything in life I think was, when I got the job with Bill Hastie [William H. Hastie], I indicated that Roosevelt [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt], when he, in his all-seeing wisdom, treated the race problem with three appointments. Bill had been dean of the Howard law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.] when we argued the "Lee Hansberry" [Hansberry v. Lee, 1940] case in the Supreme Court. Story_ID: 78749 Speaker 1: Now what was the "Lee Hansberry" [Hansberry v. Lee, 1940] case? Can you, can you give us the background? Speaker 2: The University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] supported a group, the Woodlawn Property Owners' Association, which was a buffer group between the onslaught of a black scourge and the university. So Carl Hansberry bought a building in the middle of this place, and he was evicted, and we sued. And we lost in the circuit court, in the appellate court, in lower supreme court, but we won the U.S. Supreme Court. But the day that the, before the Supreme Court hearing, Bob Ming [William Robert Ming] said, you know, make your argument to the students I mean, so we argued. And Bill, Bill was, was gregarious, and he was with a, with a group, Bob Ming, Ralph Bunche. We played poker. Then I, I went to, came back to Chicago, and then Bill was appointed civilian aide, Secretary of War. And Bill got me as the sis--assistant, which was in 1940. And the draft, the thing was--all things blew me. So that, that was--one thing--everything always leads into the other. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, and Carl Hansberry was the father of-- Speaker 2: Lorraine. Speaker 1: Lorraine Hansberry? Speaker 2: And we won the case. Story_ID: 78750 Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION): Do you have a question? Speaker 2: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON: Can you go back to the exposition [American Negro Exhibition] and talk about that, because that was a really important period. Your--that exposition was important for the black community, right? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON: Can you talk about how it even came about and some of the fallout from it? Speaker 1: Well, there was no fallout because unfortunately the war [WWII] intervened. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Go ahead. Speaker 1: Unfortunately, the war intervened. We had (unclear) Langston Hughes with the "Chimes of Normandy." We had Arna, Ar--Bontemps was Hughes, Langston. We had Arts, ar--the ar--very famous artists, best artists, and the display, but then the war came along, and that was-- Speaker 2: Now, now-- Speaker 1: --that was the end of it. Speaker 2: --some of the--did you know--was, was Charles Wright in Chicago? Speaker 1: Oh yeah. Speaker 2: Gordon Parks [HM]? Speaker 1: Oh yes. Speaker 2: Richard Wright? Speaker 1: Oh, certainly. Speaker 2: Margaret Waller? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay, I just wanted--I'm just trying to get a-- Speaker 1: My, my wife's first cousin was married to Charles White. In fact I got a signed thing in there, Mar--Margaret Burroughs [HM], and, and Gordon Parks. Speaker 2: Yeah, I heard that the Abraham Lincoln Center was a center for a lot of activity in those days. Speaker 1: Well, it was, it was a center for the avant-garde, but things were bustling and moving in Chicago [Illinois]. Margaret Burroughs was struggling with her place on Michigan Avenue. But I think the exposition had a greater impact on the arts than almost any, any other activity. Speaker 2: Okay, had--were you around early in 1933, when they had the Century of Progress, the, the, the-- Speaker 1: Oh yeah. Speaker 2: But you weren't in--you didn't serve in any official capacity? Speaker 1: Oh no, no. Well, see, my--I finished law school in '35' [1935]. But I was busy selling life insurance in Detroit Black Bottom--(unclear) Century of Prog-Progress. Story_ID: 78751 Speaker 1: Okay, so, so you say the war came along and basically--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Well, see, this is--this is 1938, '39' [1939]. Then the war [World War II] heated up in '40' [1940], so that, that blunted the real impact. But we, we did Duke Ellington --he played, oh, eight engagements, Paul Robeson. Horace Cayton was Paul Robeson's friend. Speaker 1: The, the, the author of "Black Metropolis?" Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Everybody's dead, but now Horace came home to find that his wife was engaged in an amatory exercise with Paul Robeson. Paul said, you knew that. I mean (laughter) you knew I was a dirty guy (laughter); he said that shouldn't, shouldn't, shouldn't surprise you. So, that--they remained friends. Paul horrified my associate, Irvin Mollison, who was Phi Beta Kappa from Vicksburg [Mississippi], who's a graduate of the University of Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 1: There's a school named after him, right, here in Chicago? Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: Is, is a Mollison school named after him? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. But Irvin always said, said we shouldn't order watermelon out. Well, Charlie Houston always ordered watermelon with Mollison. And I took him to a place where on 37th and South Parkway, where Paul Robeson (laughter) was eating a whole watermelon. And I said well, watermelon man (unclear). Story_ID: 78752 Speaker 1: So, so what--how did people feel about Paul Robe-Robeson? I mean, what did the black community feel about him in, in those days? Speaker 2: Well, he was popular in the sense that--well, it's, it's very difficult 'cause the Communists were very active in 1930, '31' [1931]. And then there's a guy that--the perpetual candidate who's still living. Sheesh. On Drexel. We didn't have distinct lines, this, this dirty Communists, or this dirty Republican. We kind of treated people like, like they were and with ability. And Paul Robeson really had mesmerized people with singing and--then he was with Wallace [Vice President Henry A. Wallace] a team, you know, so it's-- Speaker 1: That's the vice president--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But, even so, man we didn't feel sense of opprobrium by having the Communists, or Republicans, or Democrats. It really wasn't that important. Speaker 1: Okay, it was a kind of stigma on the Communists then than I guess it is today-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --or, or, or has been. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 78753 Speaker 1: So, so how did that end? How did that--how did your tenure with--as executive dir-director of the-- Speaker 2: Well, it, it, it, it ended; the show [American Negro Exposition] ended, you know. We ended at the seventy-fifth anniversary, and that was the end. But then very soon after that, we had to go to the Supreme Court to--Lee Hansberry [Hansberry v. Lee, 1940]--and that kind of merged in the--'cause then we, we went to Washington [D.C.]. It's--Bill--I saw--you saw a photograph of George Weaver and Bill Trent. They were, the, they went to American Negro Exposition. Speaker 1: Okay, so, so the war [World War II], when the war stars, the American Negro Exposition, that, that was, I suppose it was designed just for a couple of years. Or, or, how long were the design--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh, for, it was for a year--I mean for one year. We had-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --we had June, June to September, just a summer. Speaker 1: Okay, so, so when the war starts, and-- Speaker 2: Well, then, see, then it's--the war, war was festering. And by the end of the close of the American Negro Expo, Exposition. But then, see, we had--the "Lee Hansberry" case was decided on technical legal grounds and not on the philosophical "it is wrong to treat blacks as inferior" and so forth. We had to--in fact, my job was to examine all of the contracts. They had to, they had to prove that seven-seventy-five percent of the holders of the title signed the contracts for the restrictive covenants. So we had to get that--then they're, they're very, very cute. The Woodlawn Association had a sham lawsuit where the issues were supposedly presented. And then they said that it was res judicata; we couldn't present the issues. But during the, the period of Supreme Court, [Irvin] Mollison, Earl Dickerson, Lauren Moore, and I went to the great liberal, [Robert] Hutchins, and said we, you know, we're all graduates of the University of Chicago Law School [Chicago, Illinois], and that we request that you stop subsidizing the Woodlawn Association. Story_ID: 77727 Speaker 1: Okay, Mr. Gibson, I wanna take you back to the "Hansberry Lee" [Hansberry v. Lee, 1940] case again just a second, just, just, just so everybody-- Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: --who listens to this can be aware of the sig, significance of it. This is--how long did it la--when did it, did it begin? When did it end? Speaker 2: Well, the problem of housing on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois] was simple, that every area north of 59th Street was forboden to blacks. The prime motivator was the Woodlawn Property Owners Association. But everything then was the, was black, so housing was at a premium; kitchenettes were important; there was the influx of people from the South. So it was, they...Jesse Binga, president of the Binga Bank, founder, had a house at 60th and South Park. It was bombed. So, I mean it was--they said this is the line, and you won't cross it. Speaker 1: This is serious. This is--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh, as death. Story_ID: 77728 Speaker 1: All right, so, this, this case arose when the--you said the University of Chicago-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: When Lee--when Carl Hansberry talked with Earl Dickerson, Earl was then general counsel of Supreme, later president, later, then ald-alderman, active in politics, assistant attorney general, with NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], Urban League, with--really race conscious guy, picked Carl Hansberry to buy in the Woodlawn area. Speaker 1: Okay, so it was a deliberate attempt to challenge-- Speaker 2: Oh, certainly. Speaker 1: --to challenge this? Speaker 2: Oh, certainly, certainly, yeah. And then the property sued. And then one of the--a doctor who lived on 60th Street had his house taken away, and he was evicted before the case got decided. It was a serious matter, and it was a chokehold. But Chicago was not nirvana. We had no restaurants--I mean, a chance to go to restaurants. The Palmer House, absolutely clo--and they--some popular--not Lena, but they wouldn't permit anybody at the Palm--no, no downtown restaurants would serve. Of course, they have Norris--Morris Eat Shop. We, we had a city and in it--in, in a city. Speaker 1: It was that separate in-- Speaker 2: Separate theaters, Regal Theater. So, then it was, it was always--in fact, I, I met my, my wife because of Jim Crow. She was working on a masters at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois]. She and a group of girls, in social work, went to a Greek restaurant at 63rd and--then off Stony--Cottage Grove. Greek refused to serve them, so we filed a lawsuit. And, and then Irvin Mollison--he would--on the NA-NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] legal committee--said well, you, you take your case, well, she's reading Ant--Anthony Adverse. And I guess it was June, and my hormones were working, and I said well, it's--I'll take this case. So we (unclear)--I, I won the case and won a wife, so. Speaker 1: Okay. All right now, now, now the, the "Hansberry Lee" case continues from, from 1936 until-- Speaker 2: Oh no, we--yeah, until the Supreme Court, 1939. Speaker 1: Okay, and up to that point you all had lost, really? You had lost? Speaker 2: Always, yes. Speaker 1: All the way up to that? Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 77729 Speaker 1: And, and what was the significance of this case in terms of Chicago housing? Speaker 2: Always--they absolutely abolished housing--the laws of restrictive covenants, legally. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But then, then that's, that's another story. It's a white, white flight; when blacks moved in, whites moved out, and you know, was all different things, stories. Speaker 1: Okay, now how--so, you're a young lawyer. This is one of your, your first cases, and you, you all eventually win this. Speaker 2: No, not my first case (unclear)-- Speaker 1: It's not your first case, but it's-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Well, see, and this is volunteer. This, this is nothing--no money. So I had to do it for eat, eating money for cases, you know. Bill Dawson [William L. Dawson] sent me cases. Speaker 1: Was it true that--well, that--I mean, did a lot of lawyers, black lawyers, work on civil rights cases? Speaker 2: There weren't a lot of lawyers. Speaker 1: Yeah, but would they do it for, for pro bono (unclear)? Speaker 2: Certainly. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. Speaker 2: But there weren't a lot of lawyers. See, we, we, we knew all the lawyers and--maybe fifty lawyers, some pro, probate, some criminal lawyers, or lawyers in, involved with criminal cases, but--like the flamboyant criminal lawyer who dressed with--in blue and never lost a case. Wendell Green was a crier, never lost a case, but good lawyers. Story_ID: 77730 Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON: When you--after you--that case was won, the fight really, you said that was the beginning of white flight. Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON: But also--two things: were people starting to come to you to when other--you know, to--seeking your-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON: --representation on other cases? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON: No? Speaker 2: No. Story_ID: 77731 Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON: Were there--did the fight then turn to, to government? And was that sort of hard because the politicians, were they, did they take up the, the flag at that point? Speaker 2: Well, it--but you see, the--at that point the war intervened, and then we had... With Bob Weaver, Bill Hastie [Judge William H. Hastie], the "Black Cabinet" that you have a picture of, great--was--put great pressure on Roosevelt, so he initiated not by law, but by executive order, the Commission on Fair Employment Practice. Then that switched, went over until Truman [President Harry S. Truman] said that this race thing is out. So he issued a directive, on which I worked, eliminating discrimination in the armed services; took two presidential commissions to enforce it. And that's when, when my letter to General [Colin] Powell [HM], and his reply, when he said that Truman had been actuated by politics. I, I showed him several--two letters and one personal situation. Speaker 1: Okay, that's--lets'--I wanna backtrack to your, I guess the beginning of your involvement with, I guess in the Roosevelt Administration, I mean with national issues. Speaker 2: Bill Hastie. Speaker 1: Okay, through--so you, you worked with Bill, William Hastie. Speaker 2: He called me-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --to, to be his assistant, yeah. Speaker 1: Can, can you tell people who Bill Hastie is (unclear)? Speaker 2: Bill Hastie was one of the most brilliant legal minds, Amherst [College, Amherst, Massachusetts] graduate, Harvard Law [School, Cambridge, Massachusetts], Harvard S.J.D. [doctor of juridical science], Harvard Law Review, dean of the Howard law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.], Governor of the [U.S.] Virgin Islands, judge in the Virgin Islands, and you know, that being that. Story_ID: 77732 Speaker 1: Okay, so how did--did he contact you and-- Speaker 2: Oh, certainly. I didn't, I didn't go to him. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It never occurred to me. Speaker 1: Where, where did you know him from? Speaker 2: I told you, when I--we went to the Lee Hansberry [Hansberry v. Lee, 1940] thing. Bill [Judge William H. Hastie] was dean at the Howard law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.]. And Bill was very friendly, he was. Bob Ming [William Robert Ming], who was my very close friend, was a professor at the Howard law school. At Jefferson, Ronald Jefferson--not Ronald--Bernard Jefferson, whose brother, Ronald, was a doctor here, was a graduate of the Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts]. Jim [James] Nabrit was a graduate of Northwestern [University School of Law, Chicago, Illinois], who was, Coif. Coif was a, a fraternity for at least for ten leading men from law school, so those are brilliant lawyers. And then Charles Houston then was Bill's mentor. Charlie was Amherst [College, Amherst, Massachusetts], was head of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] legal defense, so they're very high-powered lawyers. Speaker 1: So this is--yeah, these are--this is pretty big com-- Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely. Speaker 1: --company here, right. Speaker 2: These, these guys taught, taught Thurgood Marshall. Thurgood had a manner of presentation that Bill and Charlie did not lack, but was unique. So, but we, we called Thurgood "Turkey," so, for Wild Turkey whiskey, and there was a picture. But they, they're really close friends, and, and close and very able people. Story_ID: 77733 Speaker 1: Okay, so, what was your role in, in, in the-- Speaker 2: Assistant to him. Speaker 1: Assistant to Bill Hastie [Judge William H. Hastie]? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Bill is, was--we had a compatible relationship. Bill had never practiced law. He went to the Department of Interior when he went, when he went, graduated from Harvard [Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. And--but then I had knocked one of the university of the streets from Bill Dawson [William L. Dawson], and from here, from scratching in Chicago [Illinois]. We, we had a compatible relationship, but compatible relationship was not the answer. The Army in 1940 had, by statute, four regiments of Negroes: 24th and 25th Infantry; 9th and 10th Calvary, by law. Speaker 1: That's, that's the same as what existed in the nineteenth century, right-- Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: --pretty much? Speaker 2: Before, before that, it, it was--by the end of World War I, it, it was in. But they--the pressures mounted. The "Pittsburgh Courier" and the "Chicago Defender" had a slogan: "Double V" - victory at home, victory abroad. And my friends from England--I was a, I, I had, had, had been amazed at the fact that we didn't sabotage the war effort, but we had been, we had been--we were fighting to be included. So Bill, we--Bob Weaver then was housing. The person that, the key person, the point person was Mary MacLeod Bethune. Mary MacLeod Bethune, with our Appalachian Mother Bethune, had the ear of [First Lady] Eleanor Roosevelt. Eleanor Roosevelt made life miserable for [President] Franklin Roosevelt when he said: well, Goddamn it, just get the nigger pilots; good--let me sleep. So that was no philosophical--and, in fact, war department was a monolithic behemoth. The people actually believed in the inferiority of black soldiers. They absolutely believed that blacks couldn't fight, and in the official war department history, Integration in the Armed Services, 1940 to '60' [1960], Stimson [Secretary of War Henry Stimson] and Marshall [General George Marshall], General Marshall, said that the problem was that the, the inferiority of blacks intensified by Eleanor Roosevelt, who wanted miscegenation. That's, that's the in--so-- Speaker 1: That's incredible. Story_ID: 77734 Speaker 1: I, as example, I went to Hap Arnold [General Henry H. Arnold], the head of the Air Force, and he was, had [Robert A.] Lovett, the secretary--assistant secretary--head of, head of Brown Brothers and Harriman, he said, Arnold, you will never, ever use niggra pilots in my Air Force. They--he said well, we don't--they, they will, will stay where they belong, and you wouldn't expect white soldiers, say--our airmen--to service an airplane flown by niggra pilots. I said well, General, I said I, I, I am amazed the three stars on your shoulders means that you, the inmates are taking over the institution. He never saw, saw--spoke with me. But Mrs. Bethune changed that. But, this, this was a wearing pra--process. It wasn't anything just--when the General [John C.H.] Lee issued order, he said this is really enough integration. When we started--when I went to the 92nd, the vice commander in the Mediterranean Theater had been at--General [George] Marshall's guy in the general staff. He was a lieutenant, who's had gone, gone to the Harvard Business School and was in the office next to Bill [Judge William H. Hastie] and me. Story_ID: 77735 Speaker 1: So I got--when the joes first volunteered for the service, we got--I got fifty tickets for the Army--fight for ar--Army relief and fifty for the fight for the Navy relief. Well, I gave those tickets to Otto Nelson, and I was the biggest guy in the Munitions Building because General [George] Marshall take, took the party of the generals to the Army fee--fight, Buddy Baer, and the admiral king took fifty guy to the Navy. But then he, the guy, had been my friend. He went up through the ranks. Speaker 2: He got Joe Louis-- Speaker 1: No, this guy, Otto Nelson. Speaker 2: Oh, Otto Nelson, okay. Speaker 1: He get up, got up to the full colonel--not his sole duties, but he was the chairman of the Joint Commission on Negro True Policies. So I reported the crap that the 92nd dispensed in Fort Huachuca. The 92nd Division comprised of, with pressure, black soldiers, black officers from the Illinois National Guard and Massachusetts National Guard. But the division command issued an order that no white officer could serve under a black officer. So, when the 92nd screwed up, Otto Nelson called me. He says, gotta get over here. So, he said when you--General [Joseph T.] McNarney was the commander-in-chief. He said, ask General McNarney whether in his thirty-five years in the Army, nobody have the grade of second lieu--lieutenant above made a, had, had made a single mistake. So McNarney said well, what, what are you saying? I said well, said well, the privates couldn't make the orders for division general, two-star general. So, that, Nelson's--he had the, the belief that Jim Crow as all, was wrong, that you can't have--so I said two armies: one ar--black army and one white army. Story_ID: 77736 Speaker 1: So in any, any event, that's, but that was Joe Louis, and Joe Louis, when he, we--when he vol--volunteered, he went to the Calvary, last (unclear)--cross--horse training service; he's a great horseman. And--but he was--then we put him on a, a group of black champions, light-heavyweight champion, four, five, five champions, and they fought every, in every post camping station, in other words, to bring the, bring blacks to whites. And Joe bought steak dinners to every soldier in the camp to the tune of $300,000 dollars at the--but, but any event, I digress. Story_ID: 77737 Speaker 1: I wanna go back a little bit, to the begin--the--your thoughts about the war [World War II]. Were you convinced that that, that, that, that, that, that the Double V [victory] policy, I mean was the best policy? Double V was the best policy? There was opposition. What did you think about the opposition of that, or, or was there any significant opposition? Speaker 2: There wasn't any significant--the whites opposed it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But no, blacks-- Speaker 1: None in the black community? Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: Okay, because you said that people in Britain are surprised that, that-- Speaker 2: Just the BBC [British Broadcasting Corporation] guys. Speaker 1: Yeah, surprised-- Speaker 2: I've-- Speaker 1: --that, that black people were enthusiastic about serving. Speaker 2: Well, not that, they--they're not, were not united in their opposition. Nobody in his right mind would just be enthusiastic about-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --you know, going to war, until Sherone (ph.) got here. But, but that's--but they said that we don't--we won't releg--be relegated to stevedores. Story_ID: 77738 Speaker 1: Okay, well, what were some of the incidents in the war [World War II] that may have--what--or, or were there any incidents in the war that sped up the integration of the-- Speaker 2: Well, yes. Speaker 1: --difference. Speaker 2: Well, the, the--every year--I mean every day, there are cases where white peace officers would shoot black soldiers, particularly the bus drivers, and where they had been sworn to keep blacks at, at the back of bus. So that, that just was a constant irritant, and General Davis indicated it's, that it was a dereliction in, in the responsibility of the Army to black soldiers. The answer was that the Army is not a sociological laboratory. We find that in the books (unclear) Marshall [General George Marshall], Stimson [Secretary of War Henry Stimson]. But so you had to, had to change that. But Joe [Louis] did his bit. When Jackie Robinson at, was at Fort Riley, he was in the last stages of officer candidate training, the Calvary. A white officer in his presence said to a black soldier: well, you stupid, nigger, son of a bitch. Jackie said, sir, that man's a soldier in the U.S. Army. Fuck you, nigger. That goes for you too. Well, he didn't have any teeth in his head, and Jackie, who was a terrific fighter and all-American football player, baseball player, whatever, was gonna kill him. So Joe said, man, get out, get, get out of here. So said to the general, I enscapsulate, the, the story, but he said, general, been my pleasure to serve in your command. And I, I'm gonna leave, and I'm gonna give you my watch to, for the, the time and then to remember me. And it's a Piaget watch. And he said well, I--you know and a--I was--I had taken the liberty to send a case of champagne crew to your quarters for, you know, you, have (unclear), you entertain. Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: He said but now--I said I don't want, you know, to make--do this, you this, you know. I'm, I'm doing this for you. But he said please, help Jackie Robinson, says man, he, he--so, Jackie got off with Joe's doing the business of Piaget watch in Champagne. It--but any event, Jackie went to Camp Swift, Texas, and a newly admitted second lieutenant. Bus driver--Jackie wait--went to--the bus to go back to camp. The bus wasn't loaded. The bus driver said what you looking at, nigger? Jackie didn't say anything. I'm talking to you, nigger. He didn't say anything--pulled his pistol out. Then he then had trouble because Jackie took the pistol and whipped his head. But incidents of that sort--of course, Jackie, they had, they gave him an honorable discharge for the good of the service. But those were irritants that reflected on the, on the Army, but irritants that weren't really cured, except that we built up a litany. But then, Truman told me-- Story_ID: 77739 Speaker 1: You were, you were just getting ready to tell us what Truman said-- Speaker 2: Well, that is in my letter to General [Colin] Powell [HM], where Powell said that Truman's [President Harry S. Truman] actions were taken for political purposes. In 1945 [sic, 1946], when I served on the committee on which that picture was taken, Truman--we were meeting in the Oval Office--said come here, namesake. My brother's first name was Harry, so he, he was kidding, you know, always namesake. He said come here, namesake. He said Mr. Sam and Ms. Anna--Sam was Sam Rosenman, who was Roosevelt's [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt] speech writer. And Rosen--Rosenman was Roosevelt's confidante' and she was made afterwards Secretary of Defense. He said well, he said I don't--I didn't sleep last night; said my wife kept me awake, not for what you, what you think. I said, you know, what, whatever. But he said, she didn't, she doesn't agree with my policies on race. Now he and his wife had been, had, have been, had been and were very close. He said, until everybody can free from, can be free from the threat of physical, physical violence, like that sergeant in Mississippi, who was blinded in one eye with the chief of police and mayor looking on, when everybody can be free to vote, when every kid can be free to go to public schools without restriction, and he said Ms. Anna and Sam, now, you don't realize, but Truman does, when we eliminate Jim Crow on the, and on the, on ra-ra-railway trains. He said nobody's really free, he said I believe this. Story_ID: 77740 Speaker 1: So now, that was when we had two, four, really four abortive commissions: see, Gillam (ph.) Committee, two other arm--the, the, the Army was festered when, when General [John C.H.] Lee broke Jim Crow. And Eisenhower [President Dwight D. Eisenhower], who really ever, always for Jim--the--for segregation in the Army, but--and the irony is it, it was he that took, took, took Washington, D.C., on the paths of liberty. But in any event, Truman said--and I've, I have letters when he wrote his good friend, said when you, you people in the South for eighty--are eighty-five years behind the times. You'd better wake up. This is a letter--I, I showed it to Powell. But Truman had been--see, before '44' [1949], before I left the war department, working on integration, it was a guy that while--prematurely gray guy, Philly O. Nash (ph.), who was lived with my neighborhood; we were neighbors. And my wife and his wife organized the Georgetown Day School, first integrated school in the District [of Columbia]. Any event, Philly O. was the assistant to Niles, the presidential assistant. We drafted the non-discrimination clause for the Army. Steve Neal says when, when his new, his new book, Harry and--"Harry and Ike," Steve Neal makes that reference. But Eisenhower always resented the Jim Crow, segregation. Speaker 2: What did he say about it? Speaker 1: Oh, well, he said, he said whatever. I'll, I'll show you a letter. He says it, it's wrong, you know, it's crazy. This, this is a letter he said this is not for publication; this, this from his heart. So I said to General [Colin] Powell [HM], "You dead wrong." Then he said well, I still think (laughter) that was right. So there was a letter about that event. Truman had the courage of no president on, on--he made mistakes, but on that mis, on this mis--on this race thing, absolutely correct. Story_ID: 77741 Speaker 1: Do you, do you think that people understand today the significance of [President] Harry Truman in terms of that? Speaker 2: If they read they would, will, but it's full of Vo--not in vogue. Long, a long time ago, all waters passed under, under the bridge. Powell [General Colin Powell, HM] says it's political. Well, he is the recipient of what Truman did. But so this--but Steve Neal really recognized it and recognizes it. It, it wasn't--he wasn't really com, com--converted by a ray from God. It's just his deep, deep feeling. Now he--Powell said that he would call and say nigger and that, so I said well, you know, that is his feeling. That is the appellations from his upbringing. But, you know, it's--at the war department that was really very common. Speaker 1: So you--what do you think about Eisenhower [President Dwight D. Eisenhower]? Did Eisenhower ever change or-- Speaker 2: Never, never, never. He went to, he went--he called the troops out to Little Rock, but his heart, he, he never changed. Speaker 1: Okay, so you think he basically was responding to politics himself--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Well, not politics, military necessity, you know. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No, really not politics, just he, he was above politics. He, he was like the invisible man, like Bush [President George W. Bush] until now. He (unclear)--well, wasn't reached by the brush of politics. Story_ID: 77742 Speaker 1: Okay, so, could you I guess talk about your relationship to Joe Louis? We just mentioned Joe Louis, if we can-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --go back to that. Speaker 2: One of the greatest men that I have ever known. I, I met Joe in 1935. Joe was managed by Julian Black, and I represented Julian and so forth. But Joe got the Legion of Merit for working the, in the Army. He went to every post camping station in this country and overseas. When he went to Fort Bragg, Joe called, called every day. He said well, Chappie, they solved the race problem here. I said what do you mean, Joe? He says well, you know, no, no, no, nothing on, on buses, no, no going to the back. They don't let us on, (laughter) so he said. So I went to Under Secretary [Robert P.] Patterson, who was really my mentor. And I said judge, Joe Louis says that at Fort Bragg there had--they have a unique problem of doing the race thing, exclusion--oh, impossible, then he called two generals in--impossible. I said well, now if this is impossible, call the commander of Fort Bragg and what it--and tell me--tell him tell you what it--what is. So, the commanding general said that is the app--issued an order that no facility or any post camping station would be Jim Crow. So then Joe went to Europe. He said well, man, you can't, you can't have everything. I said what do you mean, Joe? Well, he said the boys can't go into town. I said what do you mean? He said well, the bo--the boys, fellows, the town is off limits. So I said well, tell General [John C.H.] Lee that. Joe busted three generals and sent 'em back to the United States. They said well, Joe, you know, you, you can do it. He said well, I, I'd rather not. Story_ID: 77743 Speaker 1: But he, he's very, very tough-- Speaker 2: Yeah-- Speaker 1: --very soft, and not--see, the Army doesn't relate to threats. At the NA, NA-NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] probably stiffened their backs. But when it's move, movement within, they, they, they go. So Joe [Louis] is really--and then, of course, we had the fight, (unclear) fighter from [Billy] Conn and Louis were in the service. Pat would--Judge Patterson, we were gonna put the fight on with the two fellows, but Mike Jacobs, the promoter, felt that he couldn't get the tickets. See, he done, he made his money scalping tickets. So that was the fight, but then Joe went to--when he got out, go discharged, he then went to Conn, Conn, the Conn fight. When the largest of his Army service arose to haunt him, Mike Jacobs, when he advanced Joe of about $300,000 dollars for, largely for meals to soldiers, Mike Jacobs says let's, well, let's take the income tax as business expense. Then with a chain of circumstances, Mike sent his lawyer, a cousin, to represent Joe in his divorce from Marva [Trotter]. When Julian Black had promised Marva $50,000 dollars and had reneged, Marva got his--the fourth of his manager's purse. So, when Marva got that, the--she got the money, the item was taxable to Joe because they left off in the agreement support. They put it in alimony. That's taxable to Joe, and he, he didn't know it. So that, that was his, story of his tax problems. But any event, he was a great guy. Speaker 2: Yeah, he was in a, in a, in a unique position to, I, I guess--and he didn't have to I suppose, but he, he used the, the position he was into to do a lot of good and make a lot of changes from within the Army. Speaker 1: Oh, it was certain. He wanted it. Speaker 2: And a lot of people don't know that about Joe. Speaker 1: Well, certainly, but that's--they don't--see, Joe don't--the Army is a peculiar institution. You got to change it from within. And Roy Wilkins, Walter White, they could yell and rail, like water off, off a duck's back. But Joe, Joe did a tremendous job. In fact, the BBC [British Broadcasting Corporation] thing, about two years ago, went in depth, depth through his military service. Speaker 2: Was it a BBC biography of Joe Louis that you're referring to? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 77744 Speaker 1: So you, you got involved more deeply with boxing. And maybe you can share some, some of your involvement with the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: --position. Speaker 2: --more, more--when Joe [Louis] really lost to [Jersey Joe] Walcott in the first--we had--Joe said well, the whitie got every, got everything. So we produced the--Joe Louis Enterprises produced the fight film for the two Walcott fights. The film was, was greatly im-important 'cause they, they had no television. So then Joe said well, I'm, I'm gonna quit. So--and, and don't-I'll keep here for months. But the Hearst people had a guy that, that you put up to be a partner with Joe on his promotion. It didn't work, and we--I'd--when Joe was on a, an ex, exhibition tour in Florida, the guys said well, I, I can't get the money. So we--Harry Mendel, who was Joe's publicity guy, said I, I know a guy, crazy Irishman, in Coral Gables who want a--would make a good partner. So he called Jim Norris, and Jim was bagged, and had been drinking, and Joe hit golf balls. So we presented a proposal. We would have four leading contenders under contract to Joe Louis Enterprises. We would sell the contracts to a promotional venture, and Joe would get $400,000 dollars. Norris I said I, I like it, so we--but he said, we gotta talk to Arthur Wirtz. Well, we started out to Chicago [Illinois], got down to Cincinnati [Ohio], and it--plane, plane was grounded, so I never, I'd never seen Wirtz, little seven foot guy. Speaker 1: Now Wirtz was-- Speaker 2: His bar--Joe-Jim [James] Norris's partner. Speaker 1: Okay, and--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --Chicago Stadium, Detroit Olympia, Kansas City-- Speaker 1: He owned all--(unclear)-- Speaker 2: --all those, all those, Sonya Henie (ph.), the Ice Theater on 6th Avenue with the Rockefellers. So Wirtz said well, I gotta talk to, to my partner, Jim Norris. I said well, forget it. Just left Joe Norris at (unclear)--forget it. I said no, no, no. Well, we then, I got the contracts (unclear)--I had them. Then Wirtz said what will we call this organization? I said well, International Boxing Club. Story_ID: 77745 Speaker 1: So we, then we presented the first fight at the White Sox ballpark as (unclear) Charles, and he said well, let's, let's get a news release. So Madison Square Garden called the next day. In fact, they owned a substantial block of stock in Madison Square Garden--knew [Arthur] Wirtz and [James] Norris. So they decided that they would get International Boxing Club in New York; we'd get Illinois, but we had to do--had to run New York, so that's--we had the Gillette Show, NBC, ABC, and CBS for eleven years with never under four in Nielsen ratings. And we were put out of business by the Supreme Court. It ruled us a monopoly. That's-- Speaker 2: This is the Friday night fights, I think it was called-- Speaker 1: Yeah, sure. Speaker 2: --was called. I-- Speaker 1: Gillette, on the Wednesday nights, the Pabst fights. But Joe [Louis] got his money, and he got twenty percent of the stock. And--but then the tax thing rose up to haunt him. And then he fought three fights at [Rocky] Marciano, which was devastating. But then he had, he had--we had presented a petition to--for the--to the IRS [Internal Revenue Service]. So, but they didn't rule in our, our--rule on it for ten--twenty years. So that's just it. Speaker 2: And when was the final ruling? Speaker 1: Oh (unclear) was--sure it was nothing, you know. But in any, any event, Joe was moved out, and didn't take checks, and took cash, married Rose Morgan [HM], and that was that. Speaker 2: Okay, and, and so IB-IBC [International Boxing Club] eventually was--you said it was closed because of the-- Speaker 1: No, we decided to dissolve. We-- Speaker 2: Dissolved. Speaker 1: --we had a ruling by the Supreme Court that was reversed. They said sports didn't come under the purview of the Sherman and Clayton Acts. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Then they said it's Justice [Oliver Wendell] Holmes. Then they decided to change that. So that put us out of business. Story_ID: 77746 Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON: How much money did you make during that whole time? Speaker 2: Who? Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON: You made--the, the a--how long a period are we talking about that IBC [International Boxing Club] existed? Speaker 2: Ten years. Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON: Ten years. You made a lot of money during that time. Speaker 2: Yes. Well, it was a corporation Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON: Right, I know, but-- Speaker 2: Yeah. We had the Gillette fights, paid $50,000 dollars for Friday nights, the Pabst and Mennen, $40,000. But we gave the fighters forty percent of the television take, which is way is unique, was unique in television payments. Speaker 1: What was the usual deal? Speaker 2: Nothing. I mean it's whatever. Speaker 1: So you all were generous by comparison? Speaker 2: Well, we're not generous, but it, it was right. And you know, they--but they, they paid--we paid them, and we got good fighters. Story_ID: 77747 Speaker 1: Okay, so did, did you have any other sports business deals-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --at all? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: And that was it? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. So-- Speaker 2: That was it, and that is it, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, did, did, did, did you remain friends with Joe Louis throughout? Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely, but when Joe went to Vegas [Las Vegas, Nevada], and he had his problems with the controlled substances--in fact, I didn't know about Joe's problems until he visited Chicago [Illinois], when he went to Herman Roberts' motel. And he said man, your voice is coming out of the thing and (unclear) he just--I said Joe what--then he drank brandy and smoked a cigarette. I said man, this isn't like you. Joe never had a drop of liquor the twenty years that I was with him. Speaker 1: What do you think changed him? Speaker 2: Well, it's--I don't know. I, I think his mental problems caused 'em. But I think Joe, he had taken a--given a wrong piece of advice by a woman that said that cocaine would enhance his physical powers. And you know when you get old, any age, (unclear) would be taken. But I think that they had laced that, that cocaine with something that, that's--I don't know. But that--I, I was friendly with Joe's lawyer--doctor. And he told me this is--(unclear)--impossible and--but it's--to be trite, women was the cause of it all. Story_ID: 77748 Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON: That must have made you feel badly though. I mean you really liked him, right? To see him-- Speaker 2: Oh-- Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON: And he died so badly. Speaker 2: Well, he didn't die badly. You see, Joe [Louis] went to Vegas [Las Vegas, Nevada]. He had a house with swimming on a golf course. And then the--no sad songs for Joe Louis. I don't wanna keep you here until dawn, but Joe was the cause of my problems with Kennedy, Robert Kennedy. In fact, the--we--I, I had a call from New York [New York City, New York], from our building manager, to say that two Italian guys were going to be the matchmakers for the International Box--Boxing Club. So I said no, so they said they would call a strike, Teamsters. So I got a, a lawyer to get an injunction. So, it was the strangest thing; we, we had a back, back-to-back run. So, the next week I went to Detroit [Michigan], and the guys--one this sh--wide and this tall, and the other cleaned his fingernails with a knife. He says you think you're fucking smart. I said look, I don't think I'm fucking smart, but I know you're fucking stupid. Now, this is in the office of the Michigan State Athletic Commission. A hundred people are out there and watched me come in here. Now if you are crazy, you're gonna do something, so I went. Next day, a guy who was at the fights constantly, Paul Dorfman, "Red" Dorfman, called and said, you wanna solve that problem in Detroit? I said no, we're not gonna--he said no, go there. We're, we're gonna-go there. Well, I discovered that Paul was the head of--I mean the close, closest friend in Jimmy Hoffa's world. Paul said get--got these guys into our office. He said you know, look, you see the sunlight? You hear the birds chirping? He said you sons of bitches, you gonna be at the bottom of the Detroit River in chains until the sun--until the fall. No problem. So, I said, Paul, what's, what's the--what we owe you? He said noth', said I'll call you. Story_ID: 78754 Speaker 1: Well, where we pick, where we left off anyway, we were discussing the fact that Paul--what's his last name? Speaker 2: Paul Dorfman. Speaker 1: Paul Dorfman had done something for you. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: Paul Dorfman was a customer on the, in the fights, "Red" Dorfman. We were being threatened by two alleged represent--representatives of the Teamsters Union, who moved the chairs in the Detroit Olympia, to be their matchmakers--be our matchmakers. So I told our lawyer that the threatened strike would be illegal, and which made the two gentlemen that claimed they had the Teamsters union backing furious. So Paul Dorfman, when I called--came back to Chicago, called a meeting with the two representatives of the Teamsters, and in no uncertain terms told him that the boss did not u--want his union used for that, those purposes, and that they should cease and desist, which they did. Paul then said--I asked him to determine what we owed, nothing until we--until I, till I got you, you know. So a year later, Jimmy Hoffa was a defendant in a trial in Washington, the "Chesty" trial. And Paul Dorfman said that we would not want Joe Louis to serve as a character witness for Jimmy Hoffa. I told him that we, that was not acceptable, and he filled--was furious. But he said now look--I said get Marva [Trotter], Joe's wife, and a good lawyer to sit at the counsel table with Edward Bennett Williams, then was peer of all defense counsel, and then Paul--Joe--to ser--start to sit with in the trial with--for about a week, said but don't pay him any money. So [Robert] Bobby Kennedy said if I don't win this case, "Chesty" case, I'll blow my top and go off the Washington Monument. But after Jimmy beat the case, which was one of the, one--the, the case, first case he, he won, one of the only cases, he said I wouldn't want to miss Bobby's flight from the Washington Monument, so be sure and give me a ticket. So then the gentlemen from the justice department gave me memoranda--affidavit--that Joe had taken fif--$45,000 dollars to, to go with--for the trial--get vis, a visitor for a trial, Hoffa trial. So I said no, so I relayed it. But then, he then was my mortal enemy, or his mortal enemy, so. Speaker 1: Bobby Kennedy? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: Any event, that just--but mar--Marva represented the South Cent--Central States to the extent of maybe a million dollars in fees. She worked at the, the nursing homes, and she did--and she's a good lawyer. So, but any event, that's-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --that was it. Story_ID: 78755 Speaker 1: What, what was it like being one of the, I guess a black man involved in the boxing business in the, in the business end of boxing? Speaker 2: Well, a black man involved in the bit--in the boxing business, but and Joe [Louis] was, you know, called the shots. And we, then we put on a hundred and four fights a year with NBC, either CBS, or ABC, so it was, it was business. Speaker 1: Were there any other black men involved with-- Speaker 2: Oh no. Speaker 1: --boxing (unclear)-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: You were the only one? Speaker 2: Not, not there, not at that--they were there, were managers, George Kingsford managed Ray Robinson--well, not, not any professional sports then. Speaker 1: Okay. So you weren't involved in sports anymore? That, that was it with your involvement in Joe Louis? Speaker 2: You, you mean after that? Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: I see, okay. Story_ID: 78756 Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON: Sir, can you talk about 1959 when you were arrested? Speaker 2: Well, that was in connection with [Robert] Bobby Kennedy. And the indictment charged a conspiracy to get a manager to--guy had, had died last week--a Joe Brown fight, so that was, that was that. Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON: Wasn't that--I thought that was Don Jordan, was it? Speaker 2: John Jordan, yeah. Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON: Don--John Jordan, okay. Speaker 2: Don Jordan, yeah. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: Julieanna Richardson, interviewer changing from Larry [Crowe]. Sir, when that happened, what--how did you--how did that, because that was--you had had a meteoric rise really with your career. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: And how did that really--how did you handle that here in Chicago and you know, all the controversy around that? Speaker 1: Well, I don't know how it--I handled, I went on with my business, still practiced law. Story_ID: 78757 Speaker 1: Now when you--were there things unique about the boxing business that, you know, were different from anything that you had experienced before? Speaker 2: Certainly. I, I had experienced television, television contracts. We had really exceeded the bounds of presenting television shows. Ray Robinson, impoint--important, important to, to me are the prize fighters were taxed on the day and on the year that our, the, the, the event took place, and everybody else has an income spread. Well, we changed that. We, with the U.S. Court of Tax Appeals, all these fantastic salaries in professional sports rep--work as the result Robinson's desire and our contract. Speaker 1: Did you--when you look at someone like Don King today, what are thoughts? I mean, 'cause it's-- Speaker 2: More-- Speaker 1: I mean it's only been the two of you. Speaker 2: More power to him, yeah. I know-- Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: --Don. Speaker 1: So are you impressed with him, and-- Speaker 2: Well, not-- Speaker 1: --what he's been able to do? Speaker 2: Well, I know Don. I, I had a client in Vegas who, who was, who worked in a, in the Ali-Holmes fight for Egypt. And I worked closely with Don, but things happened and then didn't, didn't happen, so. But I, I know him well, so. Story_ID: 78758 Speaker 1: And what would you say is unique about boxing, boxing as a, as a business, I mean that's different from other, other types of businesses? I mean you know you, you talked about the fact that, you know, it--you were experienced as a lawyer, you know, TV and I mean all kinds of different other contracts. But what, from the business side of it, what is sort of unique about it? Speaker 2: Television business, not unique, it's just television business. We had--when we presented our shows, we had the approval of the producer. We had archaic views about white fighters and black fighters and you know, but it's television; it was a television show, shows, you know, and a hundred and four. Story_ID: 78759 Speaker 1: Now with Joe Louis, one other question, I had about he and his divorce from Marva [Trotter]. Do you think had you been able to--you weren't related--but you weren't representing him on that? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: So, had you represented him, he might not have gotten in the trouble he did? Speaker 2: Well, he wouldn't have gotten in the tax trouble. Speaker 1: That's, that's what I'm saying. Speaker 2: Yeah. Well, it, it was simple. The, this, the words and support, were, were--omitted. So it's--but I hadn't been advised and consulted, so I--was all. Speaker 1: And then were you his, his--you had mentioned his marriage to Rose Morgan [HM]. That didn't really last all that long, but-- Speaker 2: Well I, I don't know. I, I'd known, known Rose. She'd said, you know, we, we have the pictures; we, we had--when the BBC [British Broadcasting Corporation] came down, she said well, you weren't at the wedding. I said well, I didn't, I wasn't invited, so, that's all. I think, with all due respect, it was a mutual case of misunderstanding. She thought he had money. He thought she had money. So that was (laughter) a classic case of misunderstanding. Story_ID: 78760 Speaker 1: Now, you know you've had--I, I don't know if Larry [Crowe] had, if--did you talk about the whole role that you played with the, you know, numbers runners, and, and what-- Speaker 2: Well, I, I, I didn't play any role with numbers. Speaker 1: No, no, I'm-- Speaker 2: You see-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous)--were representing the policy. Speaker 2: No, well, you see, the people, they had thirteen policy guys. The Dawson kept the white forces out of policy. When Ed Jones went to Indiana, Sam Giancana was his cellmate. He boasted, Ed, to Giancana about the money, and that exploded. Then that was--the, the guys, when I met them, I mean I, I worked for Henry Young. They had--Henry had three drugstores. We had several businesses. We had Peaceful Valley Country Club, where we had Momence, Illinois. They, they were businessmen. They didn't have anything. They, they--the, the guys that represented them in policy were guys that went to 47th, 48th Street and--but they, they had a license, you know. Speaker 1: Well, can you talk about how it worked here in Chicago, how the whole business worked? Speaker 2: What do you mean? Speaker 1: The business of, you know, of, of the policy, how it worked. Speaker 2: Well, they had drawings; they had a.m. and p.m.; and they had other--the--what, what the hell is--they had a gambling casino at 51st and Michigan. But they all, always--we had a, oil deals to Centralia, Illinois, where we go, go down and some get some, and others get nothing. But they, they got--they, they were businessmen. And, and Ed Jones had the department store, about eight mo--hotels, motels, brilliant guy, but with a mouth with no shutter when, when he call--talked to Sam Giancana. Speaker 1: So this, this, this, the numbers, they were a very vibrant part of the, the black community really-- Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely. Speaker 1: --in terms of business. Speaker 2: Sure. Well, they had, of course, we had insurance companies; we had Overton Hygienic. But it was--they, they were an important part of the business community. Speaker 1: And how many were there that, that were there (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Well, there, there--the important ones, about fourteen. Speaker 1: And then the numbers business, it lasted up until when? Speaker 2: I don't know. Speaker 1: It was five--up until-- Speaker 2: I, I don't know. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: When the lottery came, they, they, they--I, I suppose now they, they play the lottery, you know, the--they have the odds, lottery odds and the, they, they play--pay. But I didn't--I don't know. Story_ID: 78761 Speaker 1: Now when, when--you had a role also to play with Muhammad Ali, didn't you too in some respects? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: What did you think of the film when it was done? Speaker 2: I didn't look at it-- Speaker 1: You did-- Speaker 2: I didn't-- Speaker 1: You didn't? Speaker 2: I didn't care to look at it, so, no. Speaker 1: 'Cause Warner Saunders said he saw you during the taping, or the press conference. Speaker 2: Well, no, that, that was the play. I thought that was excellently done. Yeah, Warner, Warner said well, it's--Muhammad Ali was the greatest. I said no, he wasn't the greatest. He was great. The greatest fighter was Ray Robinson. But-- Speaker 1: Didn't you rep, you represented him too? Didn't you rep-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah, we all, all-- Speaker 1: All, all-- Speaker 2: --all the guys, yeah. Speaker 1: And why did you say he was the greatest fighter? Speaker 2: Because it's scientific. He was--he started at the lightweight division and, and ended up with the light heavyweight division. And I think he, well, he had, he had the, the light heavyweight crown till the heat got, got him. And he was well, well, well in front of the fight, great fighter; mixed up, but great fighter. Speaker 1: Any other great fighters that you thought (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh, well, any--yeah. Speaker 1: Can you name some? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, the--well, of course, Joe [Louis] and Sandy Saddler; we--Archie Moore, brainy fighter; all--but, but they were journeymen fighters. They were fighting, they were fighting once a week or once a month, you know. I don't think you know, but they, they were fighting regularly, and the old fighters, Sam Langford. Sam Langford fought heavyweights. Langford had his sight taken from him and put a foot in a bucket, and in a fight in Boston, fought a guy that couldn't touch him, with his body control. Joe had a trainer, Jack Blackburn, who--well, Jack Johnson always resented Joe because Jack Blackburn at 135 pounds ran Jack Johnson out of a, out of the ring, you know, out of the building. There were great fighters, scientific. Speaker 1: And when you say they were journ, you said journey? Speaker 2: Journeymen, journeymen. Speaker 1: Journeymen, meaning that they were fighting regularly? Is that(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yes, yes, wherever, yeah, Australia, Vancouver [British Columbia, Canada], Montreal [Quebec, Canada], Chicago [Illinois]. Story_ID: 78762 Speaker 1: Now when you look at the changes that have been--existed in the industry, it's a different, it's different than what it was, was before when-- Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely. We had two gyms: Eddie Nichols on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois]; and Midwest Gym on the Madison West, West Side [Chicago, Illinois]. We had fifty guys. Then we had a club, Rainbow Arena, where we paid, you know, a farm club. Huh? Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: But he said we--well, it's--the we had a gym in Miami [Florida]; we had a gyms in New York [New York City, New York]; we had--with the business, there is no business now where the, where the, where the kids come in, keep out of trouble, pay them, you know. But that was--we had really a farm club. It's in the baseball barns. Speaker 1: And how many people would you come, would come through those clubs on a like an annual basis? Speaker 2: Oh, well, the fight, I mean the fights, 104 they had--we have ten fights in a card, you can fig--figure it out. Story_ID: 78763 Speaker 1: So, so the business, the business of boxing, what would you consider the heydays, heyday for them? Speaker 2: Well, it's, the heyday is, was the International Boxing Club. We had, of course, boxing in Chicago, Rainbow Arena, Chicago Stadium, Zale, Zale-Graziano fights, real fights, Johnny Bratton, but not any regular, re, regular basis, and not where the money is guaranteed, where the television money is guaranteed, where the kids go--went in from, from the gym, you know, to, to the gym and get a, got on a card. Story_ID: 78764 Speaker 1: Sir, how did that--how--you talked about [Arthur] Wirtz's involvement, and you talked about New York, you know, and you know, the split between the, you know, the financial split. But how did the, how did it come about that that, the deal came about for TV anyway? Whose idea was it and-- Speaker 2: No, the idea of the International Boxing Club was not television, but we had television thrust upon us. Then Wirtz was pestered by a guy from a New York advertising agency, Warwick and Legler, Lester Mallets. Lester pestered Wirtz so that Wirtz told the gentlemen to the equivalent of the office boy, talk to him. So Lester thought--I mean, put 'em--propositioned to originate fights out of Chicago, but there were no originations out of the West to the East. So we built an, a relay station in Akron. So we got--the first event from West to East was a fight. Then we put, got Mennen in, and then Pabst. I guess Pabst hadn't--and then Mennen, and then we built to Wednesday night fights. Story_ID: 78765 Speaker 1: So when you say that TV was thrust upon you. What do you mean by that? Speaker 2: We did not, we did not have-- Speaker 1: You didn't even think about that? Speaker 2: No, we didn't-- Speaker 1: But it was the best thing that happened? Speaker 2: Everything happens, but we--when the Gillette people came to us, we said oh, the heavens have opened up. Then Lester Mallets, with his idea of originations from West, he was impossible. Then we got that, so luck, luck plays a part in--then of course--then when you get four or five hundred million dollars, it, it, it--they, they work out. See, Wirtz, Wirtz and Norris--Norris was the son of the grain guy who had the grain elevators, Norris Grain Company. And then he, he was a sportsman. (Unclear)--he got to hockey. Norris had Spring Hills Farms (unclear) horses and three derbies, where we go--went. And they, they, they--were compatible fit, where they were rich and sportsmen. Speaker 1: And--don't wanna--Gillette, do you know why they were interested in, in it? Was it, was it something that came as-- Speaker 2: Sold-- Speaker 1: --from the company itself-- Speaker 2: Sold-- Speaker 1: --or from advertising. Speaker 2: Sold products, absolute feel sharp, look sharp, feel sharp, be sharp, Gillette, oh, absolute--we, we had number three and number four on the Nielsen ratings for ten years. Speaker 1: This is unheard really for a black man in many ways at that time. This is, the early--this is-- Speaker 2: Well of course, I, I didn't have anything to do with Gillette, but this-- Speaker 1: No, but no, I'm just saying-- Speaker 2: Yeah, (unclear)-- Speaker 1: --no, you didn't have anything to do with Gillette, but I'm saying-- Speaker 2: Yeah, but, yeah, but-- Speaker 1: --it did have a, it did have-- Speaker 2: That's different; it's different. But [Arthur] Wirtz and [James] Norris, it's--I didn't, in my remotest dreams, think of being with the International Boxing Club. Wirtz said Joe was being paid as a matchmaker three hundred dollars a month, which is good money after four hundred thousand. So he said you gotta do it or you know. So then I, after a year, I said well, bye, and they said all right, this--there, but I didn't have any notion of staying with boxing. Story_ID: 77761 Speaker 1: So, but here in Chicago [Illinois] you were really a big deal at that point. I mean you had always been a really big deal, but you were a big-- Speaker 2: Yeah, well, I was a big deal, newspapers, the guys were friendly, you know. Speaker 1: And when you returned to your law practice, what, was the practice at that point like, after, you know, in the '60's [1960s]? Speaker 2: What do you mean? Speaker 1: What were you doing, what kinds of cases did-- Speaker 2: Whatever-- Speaker 1: At (unclear)-- Speaker 2: --whatever, not picking and choosing. Well I got in the '60's [1960s], I represented a guy who had the waterworks at East Chicago Heights, who, who sold water to the City of Chicago Heights. Then with Dawson's help, we got a contract for the building of prefabricated homes for West Africa, for aide personnel. But with our unerring look, the first house sheared, got it sheared away with a bridge at Rome, Illinois. The next house arrived in Monroe, Monroe via Liberia (unclear) the maid's--had no maid's quarters. So we had as much trouble getting out of the contact as getting in. So we just-- Speaker 1: Who, who was doing a prefab? Who was this--this was your client? Speaker 2: We had engaged a prefab builder. It's Herman, Herman Roberts' [HM] brother [Colvin Roberts] who was Rob, Robert's Motel. He was my client in the early days. So in any event, we had things, serious things, good things. Story_ID: 77762 Speaker 1: So what other things about your, your, your legal career, the things that you did, you know, you think important or that you would like to sort of talk about? Speaker 2: No, just, really just going, going along. Speaker 1: Now, you got in--there was also in the late '70's [1970s] that you got into another thing with Bahamas deal, right, Bahamas, resort? Speaker 2: Not resort, the, the-- Speaker 1: It was a, it was a-- Speaker 2: No, they had--we had a friend, a friend in the Bahamas, the permanent Secretary of Ministry of Finance. We--and I had a friend in, a longtime friend, Bob Kitchen, head of the OPA--not OPA, the government agency. Speaker 1: OPIC? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: OPIC [Overseas Private Investment Corporation]. Speaker 2: They had a pile of sludge at Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] that was remove--would, the government would pay for the removal. The sludge was located in Fulton County by sanitary, with the sanitary district. And my client, Bruce Norris, had a 27,000-acre farm, who put his, put twelve pregnant heifer on ten acres that were, that was treated with sludge. And they get--and he got Sudex grass twelve feet high. So Bruce, who was a naturalist, Jim [James] Norris's brother, would--I digress. He had Maple Leaf Mills in Canada. Maple Leaf Mills had a deal with Papa Doc [Francois Duvalier], where they got, Papa Doc got 40 percent, and Bruce got 60 percent. Well, Bruce had the--got his money out, and he had--he gave the Haitian government 60 percent, and he took 40 percent. So he went with the--to the Haitian government for this treatment because the, the ground in the West Indies was absolutely denuded. So then they got this--we got the 30,000 acres on the Plateau-Central, where we off, off ship the--they had a military installation. But so then we had the Bahamas. The Bahamas, we took them, we brought them to Fulton County. The Ministry of Health said that we can't take anybody's crap here. And Pindling said if we got a mosquito bite, he said I can't take it, so that was it. Story_ID: 77763 Speaker 1: So you had--there were a series of legal problems afterwards, just with, you know, either--that started with the boxing thing, but that sort of continued over deals, different deals that you did. Speaker 2: Well, not--what, what difference? What different? Speaker 1: No, no, I didn't say different. I just said different deals. Speaker 2: Well, they were all so, all so many deals. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It--no, it's-- Speaker 1: But you had really--the nature of when I think about the fact that you started really as a not--I mean you're--you know, you said you did lots of things in your career, but you know, you were doing civil rights cases, and then you really became a business lawyer in many ways. No? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: No? Speaker 2: My background was business. My father [Truman K. Gibson, Sr.] was head of the Supreme Liberty Life. I sold life insurance. (Unclear)--with the guys in the 1938, '39' [1939], all business deals, drugstores, Jones with the department store, hotels. No, it's--but then we, we had to eat, but then we had the luxury of doing work and then being a civil rights lawyer. There's no money in civil rights law at all. Speaker 1: Right, there's still no money in civil rights law. Speaker 2: That's--well, Jesse Jackson [HM] prove, proves, proved that to be contrary, so I, I wouldn't-- Speaker 1: Well, you were-- Speaker 2: --say that, yeah. Speaker 1: Well, he has a--(unclear)--no, but I'm just saying he--those are recipients of things. But I'm just saying, you know, he wasn't a lawyer. I'm saying that there's still not a lot of money in civil rights. Speaker 2: Well, his sons came out with the beer company and it, believe me (laughter), so, all right. But no, it's--and the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] raises money. The United Negro College Fund, huge amounts of money. So, this, it, the atmosphere has changed. Speaker 1: Now, you're just saying that, you know, thing--people--you did things out of sense of obligation, and right, and also need. That's all you're saying, at that time. Speaker 2: Well, no. What we, what we did was what we wanted to do, not obligation. It was freely given and freely received, not obligation. But we had to move in our business to maintain the, the source of other things. Story_ID: 77764 Speaker 1: Now, Sir, with, with--when you look back over your career, what are you most proud of? Speaker 2: I don't know. Speaker 1: No-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --nothing? Speaker 2: Well, it's, it's almo--always--I mean, a whole lot of jumbo. The war department, we, we went in with absolute segregation. We came out with integration. So, it really, it just--when you look, look at that--and [President Harry] Truman, a president recognized it, decorated me, so it was--that was that, you know. Story_ID: 77765 Speaker 1: So when you look at the black community now, what--do you have any hopes or concerns about that community? Speaker 2: It's, there's no community. There's no black community in the sense that we have organizations that raise money. But the community; we have churches; we have the Jesse Jackson people, and it's--we have the Trinity people, we have islands. We have no community. Speaker 1: So you say that as if you feel the black community is lost out in some respects. Speaker 2: No, it's changed, it's changed. Speaker 1: Do you think the change is for the better or for worse? Speaker 2: Well, I don't know. It's, it's changed. I think that the change is selfish. When we worked, it was unselfish 'cause we had no money, you know, we're not, not paid. But here, there's huge amounts of money. Speaker 1: But you were part of that change and, and helping the change occur, so I mean that's why I'm asking you your opinion-- Speaker 2: What? Speaker 1: --about--I'm saying that you played an instrumental role in the change that happened here in this country-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and, and I'm sure you have some viewpoint about whether the work--'cause you had an idea about what you were trying-- Speaker 2: Well, I told, I told you that I think the war department thing, that was a serious impact, and then the--well, it impacts the war--the, the presidency, that you can't have a myopic view; you got to have--if, if even our present president, with his national security director and--but they, they--really I, I contrast that with Roosevelt [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt]. Roosevelt said to Walter White: I have the best assistant secretary of the Navy, best mess (unclear) thing--(unclear) guy, just coffee and ever--he, his view was a servant. Here we have partially inclus--inclusion, and even more as time goes on. Speaker 1: More inclusion-- Speaker 2: More inclusion. Speaker 1: --for black people? So you think what you fought for has, has been, you've been able to see the fruits of that, or are you disappointed? That's what I'm trying to-- Speaker 2: No, I, I don't, I don't even have a judgment. Speaker 1: You don't have a judgment (simultaneous) (unclear)-- Speaker 2: I don't have a judgment. You see, what, what we had seventy years ago is so different than what is present today. We had Bronzeville; we had the black community; we had nightclubs, we had--that's all gone, so, the, the inclusions is at a price. Speaker 1: Well, then you do have a viewpoint. Speaker 2: No, I said the inclusion is at a price. Speaker 1: Was at a price. But-- Speaker 2: Whether, whether it's good or bad, I can't, I can't judge, but it's different. Speaker 1: What do you think has been lost with the inclusion? Were you--you were an int--integrationist, right? All along you've been an integrationist? Speaker 2: Well, certainly, yeah. Well, I take my father's--my father [Truman K. Gibson, Sr.] finished Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. He went to Atlanta [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia]. Ben Davis had a bank. They had Standard Life. The guy had Standard Life, developed the Piggly Wiggly store concept. They had, they had people there that were different. But now that's--the, there will, there will never be that group, so it (unclear)--whether it's good or whether it's bad, it's different. Story_ID: 77766 Speaker 1: So, well, Sir, I know that you--I mean you've lived a very long time, and you've seen a lot of things, you know, come and go. And I'm just saying, you know--and your family was a very, you know, a very esteemed family. And your father [Truman K. Gibson, Sr.] did things during his time that were atypical of you know, of, of the typical black population. But I'm saying so there's no introspection on your part at all, just that it's different and-- Speaker 2: I didn't say that. I, I know the introspection, but you can't be judgmental. It, it, of course, it's different, whether it's good or bad, it is. You can't, you can't look back and pull the curtain back. So I can't be judgmental. Speaker 1: But if you could pull the curtain back, would you do--would you think things, some things could have been done differently? Speaker 2: Well, always, always. Speaker 1: But can you give some examples? Speaker 2: No, but that's-- Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: Whenever you go, it's, it's judge mis--mistakes in judgment about people, but then that's, that's life. There had, there has been only one perfect human being, so that's--don't--you, and you can't, you can't gauge it, you can't want perfection. That's not human. Speaker 1: I don't think you, you get perfection, or want perfection, or that anyone can be perfect, but I think, you know, this, that our history in this country has been, you know--that at times that it's good to sort of look back and sort of take stock, and sort of plan, plan for the future. That's all I'm saying. Speaker 2: Well, if, if that is so, then, it has not been the case. So, maybe the area has changed. There's no looking back on my experiences in the war department. People don't care. They don't care. Kids--when I went, when I went my, to my health club, one day two, two black girls, college girls--who was Joe Louis? You know, just who, you know. Things, things pass. But his, his going left a stamp, indelible stamp. Speaker 1: His being here and what he-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: --accomplished-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --left an indelible stamp. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But, see, what you're saying sort of flies in, in the face of what we're trying to do here even with this project, you know, to say that things did matter and that it has to be, you know, that if you don't have any recording, then you don't have anything--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Well yeah, but that's, that's what your, your, your judgment. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: What you do is give the facts-- Speaker 1: Right, that's right. Speaker 2: Then, then your conclusion is-- Speaker 1: (Unclear)-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 77767 Speaker 1: You give the facts, then you draw the conclusions. It isn't up to us, us or your guest to say well, I--this--I didn't cause the integration in the armed services. I facilitated it because I got guys that at least, well, smart enough to know that I couldn't change the system, but you get people to change the system. You get [General] John C. H. Lee. I didn't know, I don't know that you heard when you--John C. H. Lee is General [Robert E.] Lee's grandson. He sacrificed his Army career for integration. But I didn't do it, but I helped him when I get that, got that statement in, when I talked about the nurses and everything. So it's, you, you get people. What you do is you gotta cat--be a catalyst. Speaker 2: But, Sir, you know, the only thing I wanna say, you know, and this is, this is such a different style, your approach and your style are so different from even let's say the style of a black person or leader that we start--saw emerging in the '60's [1960s]. And, and I appreciate what you're saying, and even when you talked, you know, you explained about the armed services and how it wouldn't have mattered what the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] did, you know, that the Army was-- Speaker 1: Well, no. Speaker 2: --no, I'm not--but you said that change was gonna happen in a different way, and you had to work with that institution, right? Speaker 1: Well, we, we use the NAACP. As a matter of fact, when "Chicago Tribune," during the early part, years of the war [World War II], in an editorial questioned the influence of the Japanese on the part of black Americans. I took Bill [William] Dawson to John McCloy, said look, goddamn! this is--you know. But you have to--it's--you have to be a catalyst. You don't--but (unclear) certainly you have to be irritant--have an irritant or the salve wouldn't, won't work. Story_ID: 77768 Speaker 1: Now, do you think that Bill [William] Dawson was a good catalyst? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: But you, you've always been a catalyst? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, yes. See, Bill Dawson is, was a different, a different person, a different time, and he's, he was an efficient political organizer. Huh? Speaker 1: Look at me. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: But Bill Dawson was a, a leader, and efficient, and a terrific orator. But he's had his share of heartbreaks. He made Kennedy--I mean Bill Daley [William M. Daley] with Connelly, ditched Connelly, made Dawson. And then when Kennedy [President John F. Kennedy] recognized his services, he wanted 'em to name me postmaster. I said, Bill, you had, had, you got a, a long life ahead of you. Don't deliver that up to be postmaster general. But he's just, he's a different person. And Bill was very efficient, very efficient organizer, political organizer, and a tremendous orator. Speaker 1: What did, what things did you learn from him? You had a long association with him. Speaker 2: Yeah, well, you know, he--I don't know. Yeah, what, what, what did, did, did you learn from school? You know, if you give--get a background--Bill, Bill and I went to Evanston [Illinois] to represent a guy, shit, from Boston who was an alderman, kicked out the council. Well, we, we instated him. Well, I learned from that. Bill said one day: I, I had a judge talk about you. I said well, yeah. He said--I said--he said well, what, what did he say to you? He said young man, sit down and shut up, and if you don't, then I'll kick you out of court, and he said well, you learned that too, did you? Well, you--it's, it's a learning process. University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], you would know all of the law in the world, and you don't know anything. I didn't know where, where the courthouse was. So it's what you say, what is that you learned? All things. Story_ID: 77769 Speaker 1: I had a young man, very close in film school at Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois]. He said well, I'm gonna go to Columbia [University, New York City, New York] because I--I said trade school? Now he finished Northwestern and Hollywood [Los Angeles, California]. All the people at then Northwestern, the film school, came to him. And you know, he's a black guy and (unclear) helped him. (Unclear)--(unclear) I said you know, it isn't the various, the thing that you know. It's the background. Now that's what you want me. That's my background. Speaker 2: That's all I was trying to get. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Just some insights, that's all. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Okay. Sir, when you look back--I mean not look back. We won't go, go back. Speaker 1: Geez. Speaker 2: But we won't go back anymore. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay, but when you--what do you wanna be remembered for? Do you wanna be remembered for anything, or are you gonna tell me no? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: Okay, good. Speaker 1: You see, if I want to be--if people will remember me, great. I don't wanna--if in the first place, I'm not gonna be here to have the wants or, or whatever. But if, if you go along, and if you do good, and if you do what, on a daily basis, you ultimately good. And then, what, that's, that's, that's your satisfaction. Story_ID: 77770 Speaker 1: Well, how, how do you think your life has exemplified the tradition that your father [Truman K. Gibson, Sr.] started in your family, your family tradition? Speaker 2: Well, my father didn't--see, he's, he's for a different generation. Now what--my father started a life insurance company. He would kick the coffin's lid because United bought Supreme. This was a different day, different time. He lived his life when, when, when it was different, but he's a great guy. But he wouldn't--he would now be Harvard MBA, and he wouldn't do what he did, you know. Speaker 1: Anything else you wanna say. Otherwise, we're gonna move--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Don't you tell me 'cause I-- Speaker 1: --(unclear). Speaker 2: --can't look at him, yeah. Speaker 1: I know, you can't look (laughter). Story_ID: 77771 Speaker 1: This picture is important in that the two gentlemen with me had come to the exposition, American Negro Exposition. Bob Weaver on the left was the first black secretary in HUD [Housing and Urban Development]. Bill Trent was an important part of the Black Cabinet, which more or later, and Bill was in the Department of Interior with Ickeys (ph.). And that was part of Michigan Avenue. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE): Do you remember approximately the year or date? Speaker 1: No, it was in 1939. Speaker 2: Well, Thurgood Marshall told me in an NA-NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] meeting that his--asked me where--when I would, when I planned to go to the Virgin Islands. I said tomorrow. He said well, I will be there, so take me fishing. So this is the fishing trip, but Thurgood married so that this was his honeymoon. So we had Thurgood announcing that he was the captain of the vessel, and that as its captain, he would have all the crew take a drink of Wild Turkey Whiskey. So we caught these fish and more. And the chaps from "Ebony" magazine, who really heated his injunction, they, they took the Wild Turkey Whiskey drink and they ruined their digestion for all, for all time to come. So, I put my tongue on the bottom and said oh, this is good stuff. Speaker 1: Oh, can you just say what the staff photographer-- Speaker 2: I don't know. (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE): It's a staff photo by David Jackson of Johnson Publishing. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: That was another. I think that's Mrs., Mrs. Marshall on this, Mrs. Marshall on the, on the right. This is the same fishing trip on which the-- Speaker 2: Is that Cissy Houston? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: That's Cissy Houston? Speaker 1: Huh? Speaker 2: Is that, that, that's (unclear) wife, right (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yeah, right. Speaker 2: Cissy Houston. Speaker 1: She, she had-- Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE): He was married to Cissy Houston? Speaker 1: I mean not--I'm saying Cissy--no. Speaker 2: Yeah, she was his secretary in-- Speaker 1: A picture of the university, a Universal Military Training Commission, Carl Compton, chairman, Father Walsh, Ms. Anna Rosenberg-- Speaker 2: Sir, can you go from left to right? Speaker 1: Well, I was talking about (unclear) Father Walsh-- Speaker 2: Well, right to left with the two. Speaker 1: All right, well, then there's Dan Poline (ph.), a Baptist leader, who was chairman of the subsequent Committee on Religion and Morals in the Armed Service, on which I served. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE): Gonna have--the, the man, the man you were just talking about, Larry wants to be sure we identify who that is. Speaker 2: Dan Poline, Baptist leader for one of the Baptist groups, me [Truman Gibson], Sam Rosenman, who was Roosevelt's [President Franklin Delano Roosevelet] speech writer, a judge. Speaker 1: How did you, how do you spell that, Sir? Speaker 2: L-O-R--I mean R-O-S-E-N-M-A-N; Carl Comptom, MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts]; Father Walsh, Georgetown [University, Washington, D.C.], an imminent Catholic theologian--who is that? What--Anna Rosenberg is next, yeah; this--he was president of one of the conglomerates, not, not wa--Westinghouse. I don't, I don't remember his name. Speaker 1: That was a story of when Harry Markson, the office manager of International Boxing Club of New York joined me with a photograph for when the IBC of New York was moving. Speaker 2: And that is-- Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE): I got the date here, April 23rd. Speaker 2: Where the city honored me and where--no, no, this is not--no, no, I don't think that's any moment that Louie--this is the chairman of the-- Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA INTERRUPTION) Speaker 2: --who was the--Lester Mallets, who was the--I don't know who that--that's Lester Mallets. Lester Mallets of Warwick and Legler, who started the Wednesday night fights; Louie Radzienda--the right, yeah--of the Illinois State Athletic Commission; and, and General Greenbaum from the war department; and yours truly, yeah. Speaker 1: Truman Gibson. Now how did you spell Rad--Razi--Was it-- Speaker 2: R-A-D-Z-E--Z-I-E-N-D-A [Radzienda], Radzienda. Speaker 1: This was a picture of my father on the left, I in the middle, and Ray Robinson, whom I recall as the greatest fighter of all time, as, as I, as I see it, yeah. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE): What year would this have been taken, Mr. Gibson, can you remember, approximately? Speaker 1: Oh, well, it's 19--1956--'61' [1961]. Story_ID: 77772 Speaker 1: Okay, go ahead please. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: This picture was taken in New York. And it's a collection of men euphemistically called the Black Cabinet. I--call--recall the names of those whom I recognize. And I my infirmity in age-- Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: On the seated men, Frank Horne, who is Bob Weaver's longtime assistant, and is the uncle of Lena Horne; next is-- Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE): Do you know who this is? Speaker 2: Yeah, this is Campbell Johnson, the original appointee in, in selective, Selective Service System; Bob Weaver; Bill Hastie; Bob Ming, my law friend; and Ralph Bunche. And I, I have to draw a blank on--this, this guy was head of the Red Cross Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE): Which one? Speaker 2: Right there. And Ted Poston there; Bill Trent was there; a judge from Detroit was there; and Truman Gibson was there. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE): Is that it? Speaker 2: Well, the head of NAACP is there. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE): Roy Wilkins. Speaker 2: Roy Wilkins? Speaker 1: Roy, Roy Wilkins; and Ted Jones, who's head of--who was with F--FEPC; and as I know my name, I know his name, but he's head of the Red Cross, was head of the Red Cross. Speaker 2: Sir, don't you think people would find that picture surprising? Speaker 1: Well, yes it was. It, it is one and only. Speaker 2: It's huge. No one would think there were that many people serving. Speaker 1: This is a visit of President Tubman of Monrovia Liberia to the City of Chicago. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE): Here he is right here. Speaker 1: And Joe Bibb to the left was the Republican director--not republic, but he's Republican Party. But he was the safety director. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE): This is--(unclear)--this one? Speaker 1: No, left. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE): This one? Speaker 1: Left. And then I don't know who that is. (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE): There, there you are. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's me. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE): That's Truman Gibson. Speaker 2: But--and skip. This is J. Ernest Wilkins, who was assistant Secretary of Labor under Eisenhower [President Dwight D. Eisenhower]; John Sengstacke of the "Chicago Defender"; Archie Carrey, minister, son of Bishop Carrey and circuit court judge; and then my father. Speaker 1: That was my father [Truman K. Gibson, Sr.], chairman of Supreme Liberty Life Insurance Company, name, named change to Supreme Life Insurance Company later years. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE): His name? Speaker 1: Supreme, yeah. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE): His name, first name? Speaker 1: Truman Gibson. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMRERA MALE VOICE): Senior. Speaker 1: Senior. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE): In what year, Sir, approximately? Speaker 1: Tubman, that was 1950, '51' [1951]. Speaker 2: This is the reception from--given by my father when I left the war department in 1945. And this is my wife, Isabel, my sister-in-law, Mildred--my memory fails me on--that, that's my mother, Alberta Gibson, and my father, Truman Gibson. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE): And this was? Speaker 2: Who, I don't know who's the fellow past the reception. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE): Where, where was this photo taken? Speaker 2: My father's home on Loomis Boulevard. Speaker 1: This was a picture of a signing of Chuck Davey, the Michigan State flash, his manager, Heck Knowles, Joe Triner, Jim [James] Norris, and Arthur Wirtz, the bankrollers of the IBC, and the secretary of the Illinois Boxing Association. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE): And who is being signed, the, the, spelling of that name, Tri-- Speaker 1: Triner, T-R-I-N-E-R. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE): In what year? Speaker 1: Nineteen fifty-six [1956]. Speaker 2: --old hat. That was the fishing--Ms.--Mrs. Thurgood Marshall was notable person in that picture. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE): Is that the Virgin Islands again? Speaker 2: Virgin Islands, yeah. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE): Is that the same as those two photos in the beginning? Speaker 2: Yeah, right, on the, on the trip, in my virgin youth. Speaker 1: This was a Gene Ward story on the "New York Daily News" on February 26th, 1961, where he says that the boxing capital has moved to Chicago, as a result of the International Boxing Club. Speaker 2: A story for the "Chicago Daily News." Jack Griffin on the advent of the IBC [International Boxing Club]. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE): And I see where you are, but those other three gentlemen-- Speaker 2: Joe Louis, Jim Norris, and Arthur Wirtz. Speaker 1: Well, this was a medal for merit bestowed by President Truman on me for my war service in the war department. And Mr. Stimson came--had come back from retirement to pin the medal on me, which is the next picture. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE): Okay, and what year did this take place? Speaker 1: Forty-five [1945]. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE): This is the actual event? Speaker 1: That's the--yeah. That is Secretary of War Henry Stimson, ex-secretary, former Secretary of State for--in the Hoover Administration, and very respected in the Roosevelt era. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE): It's S-T-E-N-S-O-N, is that right? Speaker 1: No, it's S-T-I-M-S-O-N, Stimson, Henry Stimson. Speaker 2: Picture and story notably for fans and fans for writers by Richard Wright, who was, had written with the Communist point of view. Joe had Julian Black, his manager, Colonel Nelson, his trainer, and that was the fight in which he won the heavyweight champion, championship. Story_ID: 78766 Speaker 1: My name is Warner Saunders [HM], NBC-5 Chicago. This is June 17th, 2003. We are in the offices of Attorney Truman Gibson, Jr. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Say your name please. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA OBSERVER): Elaina Lee. Speaker 1: Elaina Lee. Elaina is a, is a, an intern at, at, from Xavier University, working at NBC with us for the summer. Speaker 2: SCOTT STEARNS: Okay. And the videographer is Scott Stearns. Alright, go ahead Speaker 1: Scott Stearns, the videographer. Speaker 2: SCOTT STEARNS: Okay, thank you. Story_ID: 78767 Speaker 1: I listened to every word of what you had to say on the other interview, and it made me wonder what was I gonna talk to you about. But I wanna go to a--I wanna approach it in just a bit of a different way with you. You had some fascinating things that happened to you, even in childhood. You were born 1912, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Which makes you how old now? Speaker 2: Ninety-one. Speaker 1: Ninety-one years old. "Plessy v. Ferguson" was 19--pardon me--1896 I believe. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: So you were barely 20; you were born barely 20 years after "Plessy v. Ferguson." Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: The war ends in 1965. There is a period of reconstruction during that time where blacks do make some headway, however, slammed the doors, then slammed again with "Plessy v. Ferguson." And then we go into a period of segregation. How is it that your father [Truman K. Gibson, Sr.], your father, was able to go to Harvard University [Cambridge, Massachusetts] when most black people were still cotton field refuges and barely know how to read? Speaker 2: The answer to that is W.E.B. Du Bois. Du Bois was a professor at Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] and taught my father. He got interested in, in him and interested a woman, Mrs. Herndon, who was the wife of the proprietor of the most popular barber shop for whites in Atlanta [Georgia]. Du Bois wrote a letter, a copy of which I have, to somebody at Harvard recommending Truman Gibson [Sr.] for a scholarship, saying he's an obedient, wise, and most intelligent student I've ever, I've ever had. Consequently, my father went to Harvard. This letter has come to me, oh, in the last five years because I always thought that my father worked on the Fall River Line, injuring his back going--taking--putting himself through Harvard; in fact, he had help. When he went--finished Harvard he went into the newspaper business in Boston [Massachusetts] with another black Harvard graduate; business failed; then they decided to embark on a series of lectures to black colleges. In the course of the lecture, my father went to Lynchburg, St. Paul's School, and he met, wooed, and married Alberta Dickerson from--who was a teacher, and who was the first cousin of the head of St. Paul's School, Deacon Russell. Mrs. Herndon prevailed upon my father [Truman K. Gibson, Sr.], who he had kept in touch with her, to come to Atlanta, where they had a fledging insurance company, Atlanta Mutual, where my father were, was the first debit collector, and supervisor, secretary, and then on Saturdays and Sundays--Sundays we went to the Herndon barber shop, where he did the books for Mr. Herndon. So Atlanta Mutual prospered, became Atlanta Life, which was one of the most solid financial institutions in the black insurance field. Speaker 1: Now, now what years are we talking about? Speaker 2: This is 19--oh, '15' [1915] to '16' [1916]. Speaker 1: So you were just a child? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I was just a child. Story_ID: 78768 Speaker 1: And in fact, I pegged on that because the Atlan--fields around [Clark] Atlanta University [Atlanta, Georgia] were training fields for aircraft for the war, the First World War. When my great-grandmother, who was a slave, saw these airplanes, she says well, the devil done -take--done go--take, take us. But that was my most vid--vivid mem--memory. We were visiting Mrs. Herndon. The Herndons had a mansion near--a mansion then, but a, a great house now. But then in the early '20's [1920s] the Atlanta race riots broke out. And my father [Truman K. Gibson, Sr.], who never consulted me of course, decided that he would embark on a venture far from Georgia. Speaker 2: Well, that's when you went to Columbus, Georgia. Speaker 1: Columbus, Columbus, Ohio. Speaker 2: Now--Columbus, Ohio. Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 78769 Speaker 1: But I wanna go back just a, just a-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --just a bit if you don't mind. Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: Your, your dad [Truman K. Gibson, Sr.], it was W.E.B. Du Bois's notion of the "Talented Tenth." Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: That was something that he was always pushing-- Speaker 2: As against Booker T. Washington's-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: That's right, against Booker T. Washington's, be useful to-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --to white people-- Speaker 2: Help your hands and-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --your hands will help you. Speaker 1: That's right, so he, he, he differed from that. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: What did your dad have that attracted him so much? Do, do you, do you know? What, I mean what, what-- Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: --was there? Speaker 2: I think it was--you talk about inheriting genes, my grandmother was a ambitious woman, widowed with five children, who pressed my father to, to take advantage of whatever opportunities he had at Ballard, Ballard [Normal] School [Macon, Georgia], Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia]. He was on the football team, and he engaged--I have pictures. But he was ambitious, very ambitious. And then he, he evidently had it in, in him because he graduated cum laude from Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], and which I never knew until my graduation from college. But he had ambition. He had organizing ability. He was one of the organizers of the Negro Business League, and he's--I think it was that spark, organization, and zeal, zeal, and ambition. Story_ID: 78770 Speaker 1: Was he considered--and we remember 'cause I'm going back to 1915 and 1912 and in, in that era. Was he considered what they called an uppity nigger? Speaker 2: No, it's, it's interesting. He was bright and smart. He always liked to play poker. And the, the guys that, the owner of the motion picture theater and all of the other guys would play poker and would go out. He was not uppity, ambitions, but ambitious within the pattern of the segregated community. He--one of his closest friends organized the what the stores, Piggly Wiggly stores and Standard Life, and Harry Pace was his close friend. Harry Pace went on to have the Pace-Handy Music Corporation. Speaker 1: Now these were white people? Speaker 2: No, black. Speaker 1: Black people? Speaker 2: Black. We never had any, any contact--other than the people in Atlanta, Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia], the teachers, who were from New, New England, we had no contact at all. Speaker 1: Zero contact. Speaker 2: Just a co--just a cocoon. We, we lived near Atlanta University. We all--the--for--we went to Atlan--the Atlanta University musicals, no contact at all. Story_ID: 78771 Speaker 1: Did now--I, I wanna talk about the issue of color. And you're obviously a mixed race-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: --person. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: In New Orleans, I remember New Orleans [Louisiana] they'd call it passe blanc-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --when you would pass for white. Probably as a very young man you could have easily done that. Speaker 2: Well, one, one time--and this is how deeply ingrained segre--the pattern of, of segregation was--my grandmother took me to a drugstore. And, and I said gran, granny, you can't, we can't eat here. She said yes, you can. But you know, I, I had a feeling, just as a kid, this like eight or nine years old, I, I don't, I, I don't belong here. Then we had--that pattern was deeply--I, I wasn't surprised at Columbus, Ohio, which was a deeply segregated town. But when kids grow up, they don't know anything. It's like the song, World War I song, "How Ya Gonna Keep 'em Down on the Farm (After They've Seen Gay Paree?)" Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: We, we didn't know anything. We knew, knew Oglethorpe school. I went to school in Atlanta University, (unclear)--Oglethorpe Grammar School. But my ambition then was to do march, march--kids would march then. I, I would--my, my greatest ambition was to be in a marching group, you know. But it's, it's interesting. Story_ID: 78772 Speaker 1: I never knew anything about it. Speaker 2: Yeah, but what, my, my, my point being, darker skinned blacks versus lighter skinned blacks. When I was in New Orleans during the, during the '50's [1950s] that was a very--I mean it was separated by class-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --in terms of color like that, that color and class situation. Did that exist with, with, with, with your family? Speaker 1: Well, I-- Speaker 2: This is not a negative tort-- Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: --because you can't-- Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: --(unclear) who you are. Speaker 1: Spike Lee wrote the thing, movie, but developing the attitudes of the light skinned, dark skinned in Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] and Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia]. I didn't--my, my great-grandmother, who lived till we--I was in, in, oh, twelve, thirteen years of age, was dark, but she looked like an old Indian squaw in the face. Matter of fact, she ran away from slavery five times, but she always went to the Indians in Miami. And her slave master's son got her back. But I didn't-- Speaker 2: So your grandmother is the issue of a white slave master and-- Speaker 1: The slave owner. Speaker 2: --a slave owner and black slave? Speaker 1: Yeah, right, my, my great-grandmother, and I have a picture of her. But it's--I didn't really feel the onus of color because at Atlanta University it was a mixture then, and it didn't, didn't occur to me. Speaker 2: Yeah, it wasn't an issue. Speaker 1: Wasn't an issue. Speaker 2: Wasn't an issue at all. Speaker 1: Wasn't an issue. Story_ID: 78773 Speaker 1: But your dad [Truman K. Gibson, Sr.], do, do you think that it was your dad that, that gave you, or that prompted you with the kind of ambition to go forward? Was, was it, was it his impetus and his example that did so? 'Cause here's a man in the early 1900s who's black and graduated from Harvard University [Cambridge, Massachusetts]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: I mean even today that's an unusual issue. Speaker 2: Yeah. Well, that, that is so. I--my father was always busy. In Columbus [Ohio] he had developed Supreme Life. He was always on the road and selling stock. But the--he was, to be trite, my role model, but--and I always wanted to get his understanding and appreciation. Speaker 1: Did you? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: He, he did appreciate you? Speaker 2: Yes, he did, yeah. Only when I was the president of International Boxing Club did he say something. But my mother [Alberta Dickerson Gibson] was, she went to all the football games, and she went to--I was in the oratorical contest in the Columbus schools. And my mother, my mother really--and she was an avid reader, always quoted Shakespeare. But I think she tempered the, my crass ambition to be just like my father, to be understanding and you know, do the best where you can. Story_ID: 78774 Speaker 1: You, you do, you do see see, even above your modesty, and, and, and it is great modesty that you have. I've always admired it in you. But you do see that you, you lived in a highly unusual family for the time? Speaker 2: Oh yes, yes I--and I attribute that to my mother because really my father [Truman K. Gibson, Sr.] was busy, busy. It was my mother [Alberta Dickerson Gibson] that steered me to reading, Shakespeare, for which, which I've forgotten, but (unclear) sharper than a serpent's tooth. She was repeated it all over. But yeah, she was, she, she was a graduate of a New Jersey school for teachers, teachers college. But she was always an avid reader. Speaker 1: So she was a Northerner by birth? Speaker 2: Oh yes, she-- Speaker 1: By birth? Speaker 2: Yeah, she lived in New Jer--born in New--Jersey City, New Jersey. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: She had been to St. Paul's School because her first cousin was Deacon Russell there at the school. So that was how she got there and how my father got there. Story_ID: 78775 Speaker 1: Now you, you all moved then to--and I wanna go quickly over this-- Speaker 2: (Unclear). Speaker 1: --because they've already talked about that. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: You all, you guys moved to Columbus, Ohio-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --where you lived and grew up through your teenage years-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --in, in Columbus, Ohio. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: How did you make--what happened in Columbus that, that, that you always knew you were gonna go to college. I'm, I'm sure, you always knew-- Speaker 2: Oh, that was a given, yes. Speaker 1: You must have been a very bright student. Speaker 2: Well, yeah, bright then in high school, but I was on the honor society and got all E's; never understood mathematics, but got, got E in 'em, so. But yes, and East High School [Columbus, Ohio] was a mixed school, but mixed in an interesting sense. There were separate schools in Columbus, Champion Junior High. But I--we lived on East Long Street, a block away from the Governor's Mansion. The governor's daughter was Doheny, was my classmate. But there was no mixing of the kids, in athletics, yes, but never any warm feeling. Columbus was a very segregated community. Speaker 1: You, you mean you went to the same schools-- Speaker 2: Oh yes. Speaker 1: --but socially-- Speaker 2: Never-- Speaker 1: --you were, as Booker T. Washington said, as separate as fingers on the hand. Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: So there was no relationship-- Speaker 2: Prom-- Speaker 1: --whatsoever? Speaker 2: --girls, no, never. Speaker 1: You, you had dual proms? Speaker 2: Well, in fact, they had their prom. We didn't have any, you know. But you know, it just, it was a given, you know. We, we, we understood, because we'd never seen anything more and-- Speaker 1: Now, now, let me ask you this. Speaker 2: --or different. Story_ID: 78776 Speaker 1: Did you--there, there's a theory about the feelings of inferiority and how blacks receive it os--by osmosis practically. Did you ever suffer feelings of inferiority of, of, of, of white people? Speaker 2: Well, a feeling of difference. I was better than them in, in, in the classroom, so I couldn't feel inferiority in, in school. In football, we didn't--I didn't feel in--inferior, but, but different. We, we, we just didn't mix, and no friends. The only friend I had was a son of a sergeant in, in the Army, Toigo, T-O-I-G-O. But that was the only friend that I had in--in fact, I, with a group, organized the club that celebrated its seventy-fifth anniversary last year. We, if we were separate, we were separate. We had our club, Merrymakers. We went, had the dances, and we had the tally sheets with the girls that danced the Empress Theater, which was the black theater in Columbus [Ohio]. It was never an issue. We didn't know it. I didn't know any, any differently. Speaker 1: So it was, so it was actually what, what "Plessy v. Ferguson" said at that time, it was that inaction; it was separate, but equal, if you'd-- Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: --call it equal. Speaker 2: If, if, if, if you call it equal, but we made it equal. In fact, we, we had, we had our automobiles; we had the [unclear] on the Ford; we raced the automobiles, and-- Story_ID: 78777 Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE): Mr. Gibson, could you start that sentence over again for us? Speaker 2: Yeah. In Columbus [Ohio], I had a very activity social life within the strictures of the separate society. But there was a guy, Charlie Bryant, who owned filling stations. I worked for him, and I was friendly with his son. It was his nephew who was a great athlete, but passed for white, Ross Dalbey. But--and that was, that struck us as queer. Because in our club, we just had a good time-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --and we all had automobiles; and we all had the overhead valves and race 'em, and--but, you know, it's, it never occurred to us what the--the issue of segregation was really tempered by the fact that in Columbus there were two big department stores, the Union store and Larazus. The stores had clubs for boys that bought their suits there. They sponsored football teams. They sponsored on Saturdays all of the shows. Even though the shows were segregated, we got there through the Unico or the Lazarus clubs. But there are things, tantalizing things that, that tempered the force of segregation. Speaker 1: Yeah, so you--if, if there is such a thing as a milder form of segregation. Story_ID: 78778 Speaker 1: But you also had going for yourself, at least for your family, there was an, there was an economic base there. You weren't dirt poor nor living under conditions that-- Speaker 2: Well, yeah, we, we had salt pork for, for breakfast and salt pork gravy. My father [Truman K. Gibson, Sr.] struggled, but I never knew it, you know. Speaker 1: Yeah, you never felt-- Speaker 2: Never, no. Speaker 1: --the burden of it. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --never bur--did--have you ever thought about what that does to you psychologically, positively psychologically? Do you think that gave you the kind of, of impetus to say I can do anything? Speaker 2: Well, impetus-- Speaker 1: I don't know whether you've ever-- Speaker 2: --wanted to-- Speaker 1: --thought of it in that way. Speaker 2: Yes, yes, I did think of it--impetus, but then you develop into this fact that you can accept your position as a loner. In the war department I, I never had any friends. You know, when I go to post, I had to refrain from mingling with the black troops. White officers didn't accept me. But you know, it's, it's just not, it, it wasn't surprising to me because I'd lived under it all my life. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: But you, you develop into either a loner or being crushed by the situation. Story_ID: 78779 Speaker 1: Let's take you--now, you're getting ready to go off to college. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: You wanna go to school. University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] is still a difficult school to get into. Speaker 2: I didn't, I didn't even think, Warner. In fact, I'm, I'm amazed now at my father [Truman K. Gibson, Sr.] didn't take me to any schools. He fin--he finished Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. I think he felt that he couldn't afford Harvard, and (unclear) really pitched in the wind. I, I don't know why I selected Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois]. I think that Tom Verdell--there was a black college in--influenced me to go to Northwestern. They had this football scholarship, and then there when I went to Evanston, as I told you, Bill Pyant, who was the executive secretary in the Emerson "Streetwise," said, boy, if you thought Columbus [Ohio] was Jim Crow, wait until you see Evanston. Well, then I just went to Chica--University of Chicago. I'd, I didn't know where the University of Chicago was. Speaker 1: So, so you just said I don't want any part of this. Speaker 2: I don't want any part of Northwestern. Speaker 1: So you never even-- Speaker 2: I'd, I, I-- Speaker 1: --never experienced anything. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: It was just him telling you-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --that Evanston was so bad. Speaker 2: Then if it was as bad as Columbus, then I didn't want that, so I did--I, I knew Chicago wouldn't be--would be different, but it wasn't that different. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: But it was different. Speaker 1: So you go. Story_ID: 78780 Speaker 1: How'd you get in? How--I mean you must have had good grades, obviously. Speaker 2: Oh, I, I went to, yeah, I went--I had good grades. I don't think I took an examination. I don't know. I went out, applied, and I was there. And then, of course, in my second year I started working for [Howard Foote] Gosnell, who was in the political science department. And, and his study was "Negro in Chicago Politics". And then for the next four years life was easy. You know, I, I worked, and I, I made a dollar and a half an hour, and covered political meetings, and interviewed politicians, and-- Speaker 1: Did he know you were black? Speaker 2: Oh yes. Speaker 1: He knew you were black? Speaker 2: Oh yeah. See, I, I was, I was recommended by Horace Cayton. Horace and Sinclair Drake-- Speaker 1: Sen--Sinclair Drake, yeah. Speaker 2: --were, were--and then there was a woman from St. Louis [Missouri]--I've forgotten her name--but who had worked with Gosnell, and they recommended me to Gosnell. Speaker 1: Um hmm. Story_ID: 78781 Speaker 1: So you get into the University [University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois]. Well, there were several prominent--there were several who later on became prominent blacks. I know Earl B. Dickerson-- Speaker 2: Well, he was ahead of me. Speaker 1: He was ahead of you at the University of-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, but there were not many. There couldn't have been many black students-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinoi]. Speaker 2: Bob Ming [William Robert Ming] was two years ahead of me. Bob was Coif, and I don't--and before me, there, there weren't, weren't many. There is a doctor, who is a graduate of the University of Chicago, I think was on the tracks team--track team. Speaker 1: How were you treated by the student body? Speaker 2: Just the same as Atlanta [Georgia]. The students weren't receptive, you know. I, I, I made good friends in law school, but college, I--we, we had several girls, Alberta Starks from Detroit [Michigan] who married a prominent doctor; (unclear) her name is Scott, worked in the post office, was a student, but there were very few. And you can't--you couldn't stay in the dormitory. Speaker 1: Yeah, you didn't live on campus. Speaker 2: Oh, no. Speaker 1: Where did you live at? Speaker 2: On 60th Street, fir--first 4524 South Park, when Davis--on Dave--when Davis lived with us-- Speaker 1: General Benjamin O. Davis [Jr.] at that point. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: He, he was serving out his time when he was a resident at, of Depriest district. But no, we had, Bob Ming and I had--Bob was--had graduated from Crane Junior College, but he, he and I were friends, Davis. But it was not--now Ming was gregarious. He had--well, of course--[coughing]--most of the Jewish students had finished Crane Junior College, so Bob knew them, and knew them from Englewood High School. Speaker 1: Yeah, because he had gone to school--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: He'd gone to school, yeah. Speaker 1: --at that time. Story_ID: 78782 Speaker 1: Well, let, let's, let's go back to this, the bit when--now, I see this as kind of a turning point. And you have to ask me what I'm--tell me whether I'm correct or not. You get an opportunity while you're at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] as an undergraduate student to go out and interview every black important politician in Chicago. Well, you know what they say: contacts are everything. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Is that correct? Speaker 2: Well, yes. Finishing the University of Chicago, my classmates had, we had a clique in the university, very, very, very, very good friends in-- Speaker 1: Who were they? Speaker 2: --law school. Sid Zatsu (ph.) was second in his class; Levi [Edward H. Levi], who was then president, subsequently president of the university, several, as we studied together. Some of them saved my play--then we lived on 420--61st and--60th and King Drive. When it was snowy, the guys would come to my house. And my mother-- Speaker 1: Levi? Speaker 2: --oh yeah--made this, she made hot rolls and cake-- Speaker 1: Now, he's Jewish? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah. But when job time came, we had to cross the street when we asked--passed the Chicago Bar Association. No, nobody then, there were no blacks in big law firms. So I went to Dawson, whom I met inauspiciously when, when he had a meeting at the 8th Regiment Armory, when the, the game was to, for the politicians to answer the charges that other politicians made while they were speaking. So they would have, have couriers, and oh, this was a, a game, a theatrical game. So, one of the guys sitting next to me went to Dawson and said look, there's a spy under our midst. So I'm assiduously taking notes. Dawson [William L. Dawson] well, if there's a spy, let him come down. Let him sit at the table. So I, as against getting my tail whipped and getting embarrassed, I, I chose embarrassment, so I went down. Then when I got out of law school, I asked him for a job. Well, it's interesting. I didn't get a political job, but he went to Irvin Mollison, who was a Phi Beta Kappa, a graduate of University of Chicago. Speaker 1: Black? Speaker 2: Black. William Haynes--and I got a job with--he said you can use my office. My pay was three dollars a week. My el fare was two dollars and twenty five cents, so that was my start. But no, I-- Speaker 1: What, you were a law clerk or lawyer? Speaker 2: Oh no, full lawyer then. Speaker 1: Full lawyer at that time. Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: Where were your offices? Speaker 2: 180, 180 West Randolph. Speaker 1: Now-- Speaker 2: 180 West Washington. Speaker 1: Now, you're in downtown Chicago-- Speaker 2: Downtown Chicago. Speaker 1: --as a black lawyer-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --at 180 North--and what-- Speaker 2: No, West Washington. Speaker 1: West Washington in what, 1935? Speaker 2: Yeah, with J. Ernest Wilkins, fifth floor, J. Ernest Wilkins, Bill Haynes. Bill Haynes represented the Sewell estate; Herman Moore, who was a later judge in the Virgin Islands, and who was really my friend; and J. Ernest Wilkins. Story_ID: 78783 Speaker 1: But Herman Moore later became a member of the Commerce Commission. Then when Bob Ming [Robert William Ming] went to Washington [D.C.], Herman offered me the job as, that Bob had at in the Commerce Commission. So, not having any salary, I elected not to take the job because I, I, I figured what did the Commerce Commission have to offer me. So any event, Herman got incensed, but we stayed friends. But it was only a thing. We--but then fortunate things come to fortune (unclear) people. Irvin Mollison's best client was Julian Black. Julian Black came to the office. Speaker 2: Who is Julian Black? I mean I-- Speaker 1: Julian Black was the manager of Joe Louis. He brought a guy, gangly guy, eating apples. He said sit in there, you know, talk, talk to him. So Joe and I just talked, talked. Then things transpired when I was friendly with Julian--[clearing throat]. Charlie Farrell was my best client, who was in the numbers game. And when--[clearing throat]--Tony Horton was the bondsman. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA INTERRUPTION) Speaker 1: So you, so this is your--you're, you're practicing law. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And you're, you're downtown-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --which is in itself a wonder because there were no--I don't remember any black offices downtown because-- Speaker 2: Well, Wendell Green had one, and Henry Ferguson had the one opposite our building in, in, on, in-- Speaker 1: At one end-- Speaker 2: 180 West Washington. Speaker 1: But that was it, huh? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: It couldn't have been much more. Speaker 2: No, Chac-Chit-- [James] Cashin and--had the office on Wells Street, Wells, Wells and, about Wells and LaSalle. Speaker 1: And you were just general practicing at that time? Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: Anything? Speaker 2: Scraping, yes. Speaker 1: Yeah. You weren't making much money? Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely not. Any event-- Speaker 1: So Julian Black comes in. Speaker 2: Julian Black and [clearing throat]-- Speaker 1: He brings in Joe Louis. Speaker 2: Then I met Charlie Farrell. And (unclear) do something when Farrell (unclear) my momentous foray into practice was Charlie asked me to go to 48th Street police station when the assistant attorney district--states attorney, who was [Roy] Washington, Harold Washington's father, Big Wash, said son, you're new here, aren't you? I said yes, sir. Who you representing? And I says Jim Jones. He said well, son, I think you should file a motion for writ of slapadarius (ph.). Speaker 1: Slapadarius? Speaker 2: I said Mr. Washington, I don't know what slapa--he said that's ten dollars (laughter). And then, then he pulled the drawer out. I says sir, I don't have ten dollars. But he took me--but that--but that initiated me into the practicalities of the law practice. Story_ID: 78784 Speaker 1: Well, the 48th Street station--I just wanna go that--Kinzie Bluett was running that at that time, wasn't it? Speaker 2: No, there was a white captain, Carl Nelson, who--it was an incestuous relationship. Carl Nelson, a sergeant, was Joe Louis' bodyguard. Carl Nelson was the bull dick for the white captain of 48th Street. Well, the white captains of 48th Street all retired with a million plus, but the bull dick--and then there was no, no dope, all gambling. Speaker 1: It was all gambling. Speaker 2: All gambling. Speaker 1: All policy. Speaker 2: All polic--well, all gambling-- Speaker 1: Policy-- Speaker 2: --all crap games. Speaker 1: Policy at that point was pretty much the shadow-- Speaker 2: Oh-- Speaker 1: --economy of Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 2: Of business, oh, absolutely. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Not the shadowy; it was the economy of the South Side [Chicago, Illinois], with the Jones brothers. Jones brothers had hotels; they had the department store. Speaker 1: Yeah, I lived next door to the department store. Speaker 2: Yeah, sure. Yeah, it was--and the gradations, they had the writers; they had the pickup man; then they had the supervisors; then they had the drawings, and the drawings were held, you know, at midnight where all people could go, you know. Speaker 1: Yeah, we had a, we had a wheel right next, in the next apartment to us-- Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter). Speaker 1: --there was a wheel there. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 78785 Speaker 1: But any event, the--one day Jack Blackburn, who was Joe Louis' trainer, in a drunken fit shot at a guy in a card game and killed a girl, young girl, eleven-year-old girl. Well, I was elected to go to the coroner's inquest representing Blackburn. I didn't know what--where the inquest was. Everything went off. I was bewildered. (Laughter) (Unclear)--he (unclear)--he went, went off. I couldn't get the chance to practice law. But then there were two guys from Oklahoma who came up with--to Chicago, selling shares in an, in an oil field in Centralia, Illinois. Well, Charlie Farrell, Julian Black, and Charlie Jackson all invested. And we would go to Centralia [Illinois], and we had dinner and I rep--I met Charlie Farrell--Charlie Jackson--who was the dean of the numbers guys, who was in--were undertaker, diamond collector, poker player, shooting blind on the river near Momence. But I've, I've got--meld, melded with them. Speaker 2: So you were like, you were like starting to get in-- Speaker 1: That's-- Speaker 2: --with this crowd of guys. Speaker 1: With that crowd, with that crowd. Speaker 2: Yeah, and you're the youngest of-- Speaker 1: Oh, young, yeah. Speaker 2: --of the, the youngest-- Speaker 1: Callow-- Speaker 2: --of all of them. Speaker 1: --cal, a callow youth, yes. Speaker 2: Now let me ask you this: why'd let you in? Speaker 1: Well, I don't know. Story_ID: 78786 Speaker 1: But the--I liked Julian [Black], and I liked to listen to his tales, and he, he had them with--he was in partnership with Jack Johnson, and he was with, he went with one of the chorus girls in Ziegfeld Follies who was killed on the Outer Drive. And he regaled me with stories. He, he was from Wisconsin. Julian had heady in--infusion of Indian blood. And he said that he would drive Charlie Jackson's dead wagon, and he would look on the top of the dead wagon--hearst--people sitting and lit--he said damn, I'm, I'm gonna do that myself one of these days. But he was always close to Charlie Jackson. Then my father [Truman K. Gibson, Sr.] was an avid poker player, and he was, played poker with Charlie Jackson. Speaker 2: So your father was up here by that time? Speaker 1: Oh yes. Speaker 2: He had come to Chicago? Speaker 1: Well, no. If--he had come to Chicago concurrent with my going to college. Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: I never knew that he was working on the company, Harry Pace Company, whom he always had relations with, friendly and with Liberty Life. He arrange the merger in '29' [1929]. Speaker 2: Oh, really? Speaker 1: So that--I didn't even know. So when I said the University of Chicago, yes, I'm (unclear) at home, you know. So, but then we lived on the, at 55th and Michigan, and I could walk into, to the University of Chicago. Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. But no, it, it, it--I don't know what--and then I, I liked Joe [Louis] even though he was (unclear). Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But I was interested I him. I had never seen a prize fighter in my life. Speaker 2: Well, by that time, he was, Joe Louis was a pretty well-known fighter by then-- Speaker 1: Then-- Speaker 2: --'cause we're talking-- Speaker 1: --then he started--no Speaker 2: --thirty-seven [1937]. Speaker 1: No, '35' [1935]. Speaker 2: Thirty-five [1935]. Speaker 1: --thirty-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: We started in-- Speaker 2: Well, he hadn't won the championship by then. Speaker 1: --thirty-four [1934]. Oh no, when he went, he went to, when he went to the first Schmeling fight, I didn't, I--he did--they didn't take me. I--they took me to the second Schmeling fight. But then Joe had really begun to unwind with me, and he--I handled things for him we--wherever he, Joe's--my relations with Joe are interesting. Story_ID: 78787 Speaker 1: Julian [Black], when in '39' [1939], '40' [1940], he knew that Joe was gonna volunteer for the Army, so Julian--I went to the war department. Julian plied me. We went to New York together, and I met Mike Jacobs. And we wondered what is gonna happen with-- Speaker 2: Boxing promoter, Mike Jacobs. Speaker 1: Yeah, Mike Jacobs, Twentieth Century Sporting Club, Madison Square Garden. What was gonna happen to Joe? Well, I knew that be--things being equal, they wouldn't make--wouldn't commission Joe [Louis]. So we agreed on Joe was a tremendous horseman. In fact, we rode horses together in Washington Park. Speaker 2: Is that right? Speaker 1: Oh yeah, Joe was a tremendous horseman. But we decided to get him in the Calvary, and he had--he entered the last basic training hor--horse Calvary in the Army, but--in Fort Riley. And within--by that time, we had--Joe and I, I had established a relationship. Then when he got in the Army, called me every day, visited me frequently in Washington [D.C.], but we--I got a group of champions in the service, Ray Robinson, Sandy Saddler, Joe, the light heavyweight champion, not Archie and not--but he was a Moore, but he was a one-eyed guy. Speaker 2: Oh, I'll, I'll remember his name. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I know who you're talking about. Speaker 1: That one-eye. But we--Joe went to every camp post and station in this country, called me every day about conditions. For example, he called, and after he left Fort Bragg he said, man, it's a great place, not for us. I said, Joe, what do you mean? He said well, I, I heard of Jim Crow, but I'd never heard of exclusion crow. He said we can't ride on the same bus with white boys. So I went to the Undersecretary, who really ran the war department, Judge Patterson, Robert Patterson, who I, I relayed the story to him. He said oh, impossible. He called in two generals--impossible. I said well, general, Mr. Secretary, why don't you call the commander of Fort Bragg and ask him if what is impossible is possible? He called. It was as Joe cited. And they abolished all segregation on Army posts and camps, camps and stations on that--on Joe-- Speaker 2: On that, on Joe's-- Speaker 1: Oh yeah. Speaker 2: --recommendation. Speaker 1: Was, was he bright? Speaker 2: Absolutely bright. Speaker 1: You know-- Speaker 2: He had difficulty talking. He had a speech impediment. Speaker 1: 'Cause he was from Alabama, wasn't-- Speaker 2: Yes, he was from Alabama. Speaker 1: Yeah, Joe Barrow was his name. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 78788 Speaker 1: Joe Louis Barrow. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And his father was in an insane institutions. He only died about four or five years ago. Speaker 2: Oh, really? Speaker 1: Oh yeah. Speaker 2: The father did? Speaker 1: Father, yeah. But Joe was very--example, when--after the second Schmeling fight, they gave a big banquet for all the sporting crowd in New York. Jimmy Walker, the dapper-- Speaker 2: The (unclear)-- Speaker 1: --playboy mayor of New York. Speaker 2: --mayor of New York. Speaker 1: --said Duesenberg riding Jimmy Walker, Joe, you laid a rose on Abraham Lincoln's grave last night. Joe said, Mr. Mayor, I appreciate the compliment, but I'm gon' tell you, ain't nothing in this world that Hitler can cure in, in my world, they just--it was extemporaneous. And then he, then he, then he could--when one fighter said that he was gonna run, Joe said well, he can't--he can run, but he can't hide. Speaker 2: That was the, the Conn. Speaker 1: Yeah, Billy Conn, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, he, he can run, but, but, but, but, but he can't hide (laughter). Speaker 1: But he can't hide. He can't hide. But Joe was bright, you know. Speaker 2: He was, he was-- Speaker 1: Oh yes. Speaker 2: --very bright, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Because you know, you get that impression because he lost money in taxes, and he did-- Speaker 1: Well-- Speaker 2: --he had so much trouble. Speaker 1: You know, it's, it's mea culpa. Joe didn't lose the money in taxes, really. Story_ID: 78789 Speaker 1: At the second Schmeling, after, after selling--second Schmeling fight, after this, this fight, Mike Jacobs said, Joe, I've advanced you a quarter of a million dollars, which he had $300,000 dollars. Joe [Louis] entertained all of the soldiers at every camp that he, which he put on as, as exhibition, bought Lena Horne a diamond necklace, but that, that was the exception. Mike said well, I'll have my accountant, Leo Ellenbogen, take these advances off as business expense, one. Number two, when Joe divorced Marva [Trotter], Julian Black told--promised Joe $50,000 dollars to--Aaron Payne represented Joe in the (unclear), in the divorce thing, as the settlement for Marva. Julian had a place on, was in Wisconsin. He got drunk and (unclear)--and they have palsy when they come to reach in their pockets for money. He didn't (unclear) $50,000 dollars was not forthcoming. So Mike Jacobs sent his cousin, Saul Strauss, who succeeded him when Jacobs was ill, out to Chicago [Illinois]. And he and Aaron Payne developed a scheme where Joe was to give forty percent of his manager's purse to Marva, and they drew an agreement in lieu of alimony. Well, a second year law student would know that you don't draw an agreement in lieu of alimony, and drew--in, in view--in lieu of support. The support would be taxable, and Joe didn't know. So-- Speaker 2: Alimony is not taxable. Speaker 1: That's enough--no, not--taxable to him, you know. Speaker 2: Yeah, (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yeah, not--and no exemption. But, so those two were two big hits. Joe didn't realize those until, oh, not-it, without computers, six years later. Speaker 2: So that's how his tax thing-- Speaker 1: That's how-- Speaker 2: --started-- Speaker 1: That's how he-- Speaker 2: --and tumbled down. Speaker 1: That's how. Story_ID: 78790 Speaker 1: Now, now, let me ask you this: there's always been this story. I know Joe [Louis] was an avid--Joe, Joe Louis-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --the heavyweight champion, was a great, avid golfer. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: Now, I understand by some, from some people that Charlie Sifford, black golfer, and a number of other pretty good golfers used to take Joe for some pretty good money playing golf, and that he lost a lot of money playing golf. Speaker 2: Well, course he, he lost a lot of money at playing golf, but he won a lot of money playing golf. You see, if Sifford could beat Joe, Bob Hope couldn't. And Joe was a good golfer, but, but Joe was a good golf gambler. He would line a putt up and turn his back after the ball--after he hit the ball. And oh, he didn't--no, he--I don't think that was--his losses were that, were that immense. George Harrison, the late George Harrison, policy guy, would go to the golf course, course here that was named for Joe. He made a fortune on Joe's playing, but they would bet on Joe. But Joe would, he would, he would play in the California crowd, and he'd win as often as he would lose. Story_ID: 78791 Speaker 1: I don't think that, that was his problem. His problem was the ladies. Speaker 2: Women. Speaker 1: Yeah, that was-- Speaker 2: Is that why he and Marva [Trotter] split? Speaker 1: Yeah, Joe was inattentive. They were still very friendly, you know, aft--after they split. But she says she just couldn't take it. The fact Punchy, his son, tells a story that Joe went out to get a loaf of bread, and he came back a month later, you know. But he did--but he was impervious. Joe really had no feeling for any woman other than Marva, but, but he had developed a, a wall. He, Joe was a--had take--had a penchant for the physical pleasures of women, but he didn't--as a matter of fact, I never even, I never heard of Joe and Sonja Henie or-- Speaker 2: Now-- Speaker 1: --always thought--I, I never heard of that because-- Speaker 2: Okay, now you know that's a story-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: It's out there that Sonja Henie-- Speaker 1: But, but-- Speaker 2: --and Joe Louis had-- Speaker 1: But Leonard, Leonard-- Speaker 2: --romantic relationship. Speaker 1: Leonard Reed propagated that story. Leonard was his partner, vaudeville partner. Leonard's still living, incidentally, about ninety-four or five [95], in, in Los Angeles. But he was--he propagated that story. Speaker 2: So you're saying it's not a-- Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: --true story? Speaker 1: With Lena Horne, now Lena, Lena Horne was--he had took Lena to--we went to the, a little hotel where a guy from Chicago owned it. What the hell is--I've forgotten his name, but Joe was there with Lena, and he said I'm gonna play golf. She said no, Joe, stay with me. I'm gon' play golf. So she went to the door. I'm gon' play golf. And he opened the door, and Lena fell down the stairs and broke her leg. That's the end of that romance. But golf was Joe's passion. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And he, he was a good golfer. Story_ID: 78792 Speaker 1: Well, he got caught on drugs. He got caught up in drugs-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --when he went to Vegas [Las Vegas, Nevada], didn't he? Speaker 2: Well, yeah. I never knew that side of him. In fact, when Joe visited here, I took him, we went to a bar, Flukie's Bar, and Joe--I said, Joe, aren't you--no, man, brandy. I said brandy? Then started smoking a cigarette; then he said, you staying at (unclear)--Roberts Motel at 63rd. He said (unclear) got to, got to put something, 'cause these people gonna kill me, coming out of the, the--I said Joe. Then I knew he, he was gone. Speaker 1: Mental. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: So his son put him in the, in the-- Speaker 1: Yeah, now, now, Frank Sinatra looked out for him. I, I talked to Sinatra and Davis years ago, and they said they, they helped him out. They made him a greeter at one of the, one of the hotels. Speaker 2: Well, the guy that was a greeter--made him the greeter--was one of the owners of the Caesar's Palace. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: What is his name? He's a big gambler. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: But I don't think Sinatra did--they all luxuriated in his celebrity. But when his funeral, the people that knew Joe weren't present at the funeral. Speaker 1: Yeah, it was tragedy. Speaker 2: It was a tragedy. Speaker 1: In, in many ways it was a (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Well, it, it--and that was related--there was a girl, the mother of a boy that she said was Joe's son, Sapore (ph.), said you take this powder, and you'll be strong physically. That was when he--that--his law--his doctor in, in Detroit [Michigan], Bob--he was a colonel in the Air Force--Army. But he, he said that was the cause of Joe's thing. Speaker 1: Cocaine. Speaker 2: Cocaine. But I think they laced the cocaine with heroin, because cocaine wouldn't have affected him, anybody, like it affected him. Speaker 1: Yeah, so that was a deadly combination-- Speaker 2: Deadly, deadly. Speaker 1: --deadly combination-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --for him. I, I, I know you were only tangentially involved in--let, let's stay with boxing for a second. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 78793 Speaker 1: There's been all kinds of talk, Truman Gibson and boxing-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --boxing, of course, (unclear), Blinky Palermo. Speaker 2: I know. Speaker 1: You go down the list, the Dorfmans, the whole-- Speaker 2: Yeah, well, I'm gonna give my-- Speaker 1: How did you-- Speaker 2: I'm gonna give my-- Speaker 1: How did you maneuver your way-- Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: --through all of this-- Speaker 2: First place-- Speaker 1: --underworld, because it was underworld? Speaker 2: In the first place, we were in the television business, the Gillette fights, Friday night fights, Pabst fights, Wednesday night fights. Our masters were the persons who put up the money. In the Wednesday night fights our guy was a man who had really developed broadcasting from Chicago to the East. He pestered Wirtz, and Wirtz said, well, the office boy. He put him off on me. So we built a, a tower at Akron, Ohio. And the first transmission from west to east was a fight, so we had, we had $400 dollars for that. Then we escalated to $4,000 dollars. But I'm treating this in my forthcoming memoirs. Story_ID: 78794 Speaker 1: The story of the mob influence of boxing was tragically overreaching. The mob influence was [James] Norris and horseracing. Norris had a, had a stable at Spring Hill Farms. His closest friend in life was a guy by the name of Max Courtney. Max Courtney was a, started out as a whiskey runner for Dutch, Dutch Schultz, with Brothman, and Mr. Kennedy. He ran-- Speaker 2: President Kennedy's father-- Speaker 1: Father. Speaker 2: --Joseph Kennedy. Speaker 1: Joseph Kennedy. He ran--they ran-- Speaker 2: The original run runner. Speaker 1: Yes. They ran the whiskey to appointing on this offshores of New York. Then Max was progressed to the owner and front of the Cotton Club. That's a Dutch, Dutch Schultz operation. Speaker 2: In Harlem? Speaker 1: In Harlem [New York City, New York]. No blacks allowed. In fact, I had dinner frequently with Max after. I said, Max, why would you--he says no, that wasn't my call. That was Dutch Schultz. Then-- Speaker 2: Now, now, wait a minute. You mean in the middle of Harlem the Cotton Club, the famous Cotton Club that we've both-- Speaker 1: Well-- Speaker 2: --been to many times would not allow blacks inside of it? Speaker 1: I'd never went. Joe [Louis] never went. Joe was invited. But the club--the restaurant in Harlem on 125th Street, Italian restaurant, in 19--1940 was segregated har--in the heart of Harlem, 125th, whites on one side, blacks on the other. But to go back to Dorfman--I mean Courtney, Courtney progressed to running the gambling in the Bahamas. There was a Royal Commission. I've got my guys in BBC [British Broadcasting Corporation] looking at that Royal Commission report, developed the fact that Courtney was the front for Dutch Schultz and for a little guy in Florida. Courtney then progressed to a--he, he was run out of the Bahamas. He was a bookmaker for senior Kennedy, the bookmaker for Bing Crosby, the bookmaker for Bob Hope, and he had five guys. But he ran into Norris in the tracks. When the--before the pari-mutuel machines were on, the bookmakers took the bets. The bookmaker of choice was Albert Anastasia. Norris was--when he--I skipped through the IBC days. He said look, I'mma take you to St. Clair Hospital. I want to see a friend. The friend was Albert Anastasia. Albert Anasa--but the thing--his cousin, one of his, his cousin was sitting by this bedside. Well, his cousin was a woman by the name of Josephine DeFeo (ph.). When I first went to Martha's Vineyard, took my wife, we saw--met a girl on the beach, very dark, Sicilian, (unclear) eventually. But she always--she had married Jimmy Thomas, the black doctor. But she and my wife took a shine to each other. She was in the business of making invest--vestments for the Catholic priest (laughter). It, it was Anastasia's first cousin. So I said what the hell, but then you know. Any event, Norris used that. Story_ID: 78795 Speaker 1: He [James Norris] said you know, later, Bill [William] Hastie, Judge Hastie, is on the Second Circuit. I said yeah. He said well, Albert Anastasia is up for deportation. I said yes. He said, you see Hastie frequently? I said yes. I said if you think that I will talk to Hastie about Anastasia, you are out of your mind. Any event, fate is really interesting. Bill called me and asked me to come to lunch at, in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. We went, we talked, small talk. He says you know, when we were in the war department--Bill, Bill was a first civilian aide--we had trouble in Indiantown Gap. He said, interestingly, I've got a case involving a guy by the, Anastasia. He said, I can talk you about it because I rented--I've written the opinion for deportation. He said, I think that guys, any, any person who enters the country illegally and who volunteers for the Army and fights is entitled to the same law that other people. I never said anything to Hastie. A week later he said have you seen Hastie? I said yeah. He said, you know, that story, that the opinion he wrote has been published. He said, Anastasia would like to do something for him. I said you know, the best thing you could do is to do nothing and repeat nothing. Carbo, who was the messenger boy, came to me and said, would you like to have Bill Hastie have a place in the Virgin Islands? I said, he's the govern, was the governor of the Virgin Islands. He's a judge. What the hell are you talking about? I said, if you think--if you repeat this, you are really in deep trouble. What about you? I said forget me. Story_ID: 78796 Speaker 1: I have never taken and never took anything from those guys, but the problem with the mob influence is that [James] Norris, through Courtney, through the Dutch Schultz crew, entered into horserace fixing, the scale of which you would never imagine. For example, Norris called me one day to say meet me in Toronto [Ontario, Canada] tomorrow. I said, the song is meet me in St. Louis [Missouri]. He said, no, that's not--there, there's a running with the Queen's Plate, and I got a horse running. Well, through many trips to London, I was acquainted with Jack Solomons, who was the boxing promoter, but who was a license turf accountant in, in England. Speaker 2: 'Cause the two tied into each other. Speaker 1: Oh yeah, but was (unclear), but he, he had fifteen guys on the telephones. Horse race was, was run every day in the year in England. So, I digress. Norris didn't wanna meet Solomons. I think there was a latent anti-Semitism about him. But I said I, I don't wanna meet that Jew. But he went to--and then he went in the horse room, and he would bet against the tracks. And he would win a thousand dollars, lose a thousand dollars, but he was in action. But he was invet--an inveterate gambler. So he said look, Jack and I have a horse running in the Queen's Plate. I think the horse name, was named Isabella or something. The horse ran fourteen lengths ahead of the back, never ran a single race ever in life, and the betting coup. When--I'll fast forward. When Norris first wife committed suicide, he would always call every day. He said Betty committed suicide. I said oh, geez, that's terrible. You know, he said, terrible but, Sid, I got some shit in the deposit in her grave. So, no, I, I--you know, that's--this--everything is--you know, he never took a cent out of International Boxing Club. Speaker 2: Never did? Speaker 1: Never. Speaker 2: Never, not--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: But, but, of course, he owned--with Wirtz, Chicago Stadium. They was, they were the prime beneficiaries. Story_ID: 78797 Speaker 1: Were, were, were the boxing, were the boxing matches fixed? Speaker 2: Never, ever. Speaker 1: Never? You know they said that the Ali-Liston fight was fixed. Speaker 2: Well, I don't believe it, but that's our--after our time. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: But I don't believe it. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: [Sonny] Liston was a (unclear) peculiar individual. Speaker 1: Yeah, I knew him. I knew-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --how crazy he was. Speaker 2: Yeah, drunk, you know he-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: He, he--not a drink, a bottle drink, you know. Speaker 1: I know. Speaker 2: But I don't--the only thing, only, I was at the Garden one day, and there was a fight. Redtop Davis. I'll never forget, was supposed to throw the fight. I'd--after the start of the fight, I--they, they--that was whispered to me. Redtop Davis annihilated (laughter) the guy and [Frankie] Carbo was, he was the fixer. But Carbo's influence; in fact-- Speaker 1: Carbo was a mobster now? Speaker 2: Oh, he was-- Speaker 1: He, Blinky Palermo. Speaker 2: Yeah, he was. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: But, see, they--I think Carbo's influence was to go when--if, if a fight was a Graziano fight, he would whisper to the manager, boy, I got that fight (unclear)--he didn't have anything to do. But he got a piece of the manager's purse-- Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: --not a piece of the fighter's purse-- Speaker 1: Yeah, the manager's purse-- Speaker 2: --piece of the manager's purse. Speaker 1: --he got a piece of that. Speaker 2: But the, the influence was so deep, but the influence was fixing, horse race fixing. In fact, there's, there are pieces last week about fixing, hor--fixing races, betting. Speaker 1: I saw--we, we-- Speaker 2: --you know, it's-- Speaker 1: We saw that. Speaker 2: But it is--horse racing in those, in those days, fifty years ago, was big business. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And--but I, I think that was the influence. Story_ID: 78798 Speaker 1: I, I wanna take you back as we end this up. I don't wanna keep you all day. Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: I wanna take you back to the whole issue, the, the, what I call the shadow economy in Chicago-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and that is policy. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: The Jones brothers-- Speaker 2: Julian Black. Speaker 1: --Julian Black, Ted Roe-- Speaker 2: Charlie Farrell, Ted Roe. Speaker 1: Jim Knight. Speaker 2: Yeah, the West Side Martin, Big Jim Martin. Speaker 1: Big Jim Martin-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --all of these people. It, it is true that is it, or shall I ask you that, is it true that Jones goes to Indiana on a, on a-- Speaker 2: Tax charge. Speaker 1: --on a tax evasion charge? He's in jail with Sam Giancana. Speaker 2: Sam Giancana. It is absolutely true. Speaker 1: He brags to Giancana-- Speaker 2: Absolutely true. Speaker 1: --that--Giancana says to him, let's stop that nigger stuff that you all doing over there. Let's-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --get some black prostitutes and-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and gambling, and let's do that. And he reveals to him how much--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I think, conversely, Ed Jones bragged to Giancana: you think you're making money, shit, you, you don't know about money, and it's all legit. But in fact, they, the--no drawing--well, very few drawings were fixed. They--because they were public, you know. Everybody-- Speaker 1: Everybody stood around and-- Speaker 2: --everybody stood around-- Speaker 1: --watched 'em, yeah. Speaker 2: --sure. But, no, it was--see, I, I--Ed Jones was very friendly with Ned Beasley, doctor. Speaker 1: Dr. Beasley's brother. Speaker 2: Beasley's--yeah. No, Dr. Beasley, he was in-- Speaker 1: Oh, Dr. Beasley himself. Speaker 2: Beasley, yeah, Ned Beasley. But Ned married a woman who was my wife's best friend. And she went, before I married her, to Ed Jones parties and--but when I went to Mexico, Ned's wife had took my wife. You know, they were, they were constant visitors to Mexico. But I talked to Ed, and he said look, my big mouth got me in trouble. Speaker 1: So he admit it. Speaker 2: Oh yes, he admitted it. Speaker 1: Now they ran him out of town, right? Speaker 2: Absolutely, Mexico. Speaker 1: And the only one that wouldn't go was Ted Roe Speaker 2: Well, there are few, well, Julian Black and others, but the big infusion was after Giancana got out of jail because they fixed on Ted Roe. And what--the guy that they, they shot at and he killed one of 'em. Speaker 1: He killed--Ted Roe killed-- Speaker 2: Ted Roe killed-- Speaker 1: --Ted Roe killed one of the-- Speaker 2: Yeah, Ted, right, yeah. Speaker 1: --one of the hitmen. Speaker 2: Yeah, Ted Roe was a big violent--he, he resisted, but the others just melted away, just-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --got out of the-- Speaker 1: The, the, the story is that Ted Roe had stomach cancer-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and that he said he was gonna die with his boots on. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I, I knew-- Speaker 2: I never heard that (unclear). Speaker 1: I knew Mr. Roe. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Mr. Roe used to go to an astrologer in, in the building that we lived in-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --a woman by the name of Mrs. Simpson. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And so he used to come into our building all the time. I used to run errands for-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --for Mr. Roe. Did you know Charlie Craig and-- Speaker 2: Oh yes. Speaker 1: --and Speaker 2: I knew Charlie-- Speaker 1: --Mort Craig? Speaker 2: Yeah, Mort, Mort and Charlie very-- Speaker 1: Well, my mother and father were good friends of-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah, Mort, yeah. Speaker 1: --was good friends of theirs. Speaker 2: Well, Charlie was, was the, one of the key guys with the Jones brothers. Speaker 1: That's right, that's right. Speaker 2: The guy that, and the guy that ran the, that owned the hotel, oh, at forty--sev--46th Street was key-- Speaker 1: Oh yeah, in South Park. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --was a key guy with the-- Speaker 1: Yeah, but, but what- Story_ID: 78799 Speaker 1: --Explain what policy was in the black community at that point. Speaker 2: Well, you're talking to a non-player, but-- Speaker 1: Yeah, I know you-- Speaker 2: --people-- Speaker 1: --weren't directly involved in this. Speaker 2: No, no, but I, I, I--but there was a, it was a cult game. People would go to dream; they dreamed about anything; they took--get--got the dream book and played the numbers; and--but with Charlie Farrell and Henry Young, Henry Young had three drugstores, one in the Ritz building. And I figured because one of my law classmates was the brother of the owner of Goldenrod Ice Cream, and they financed all the, Henry Young's drugstores. Then Ed Jones had, oh, I think about five hotels, you know, on 55th Street, then the Vienna Bears. He took over that and--but it was--they--in fact, I, I was close to Ed. A guy came to Chicago with--Ted Jones, the accountant's first cousin, was the--he was a PhD for--in chemistry. He was a chemist for the police department. He said, you know, there's a strange guy coming from the Athabasca area that has sand and oil. He said, now I've developed just a crew to steal us the election process. Let's talk to Ed Jones. Ed says, man, are you crazy? Well, the crazy (laughter) (unclear)--Ed because that was, it's a multibillion dollar business on the Athabasca River. Speaker 1: Multibillion dollar business. Speaker 2: Multibillion dollar--but I knew Ed, and he said, man, you're coming (unclear)--some crack (unclear) dreams. What, what about, you know, some-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --(unclear). Speaker 1: And he just dismissed it? Speaker 2: Oh he dismissed it out of hand. Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 78800 Speaker 1: I wanna give you a list of names, just ask you-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: --for a comment about 'em: Two Gun Pete [Sylvester Washington]. Speaker 2: I passed his place yesterday, and my driver then was a guy from Sea--a guard at Seaway Bank. He's on, on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois]. He said, you know, I was in, in my--when I was first married, I was in Michael Reese Hospital, and Two Gun Pete came in on a stretcher. I said Two Gun Pete in my day was the most feared policeman and rightly so. He was handy with his fist, deadly with his gun, and when he got mad, his eyes got red. And in the South, we told--were told beware of the guy with red eyes. But Two Gun Pete would get a guy, then all the, all the, really, the gambling was the most serious thing in our area. Bootlegging was, that was white. But Two Gun Pete would get a guy--"meet me in 48th Street." How I'm gon' get to--"The Streetcar fool. If you don't get there, you won't get anywhere." He would get cut--rest, rest of the guys and send 'em on the streets around 48th Street. Speaker 1: He would arrest them-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: --he would arrest them on the streets-- Speaker 2: On the street. Speaker 1: --and tell them to meet him at the-- Speaker 2: Meet me at, meet me, and they would meet him. Speaker 1: Yeah. Now he was a, he was kind of an enforcer for the policy racket to keep things going on--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Well, I don't know, know. It's a difficult one. He was the enforcer for the police captains and gambling. See, they, they run, they ran crap games. They--and Two Gun Pete was an anathema to stickups and people and, and guys. No, he wasn't really, wasn't really--one sergeant who would, he would go to the, the Vienna baths. He drink beer. And Robert would say look, I'm, I'm, I'm not going. But the captains-- Speaker 1: Kinzie Bluett. Speaker 2: Kinzie Bluett. Speaker 1: That's who were, they were the bagmen in that time--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, they-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: They, they, they were the bagmen. Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 78801 Speaker 1: Bill Dawson [William L. Dawson]? Speaker 2: You know, I've read about him, and never to my knowledge did he do anything policy except that Bill Dawson had really a syndicate. He put Ed Jones, a certified public accountant, to run the syndicate. Bill was almost always interested in the taxi cab business, the jitneys, jitneys. But I can give you a story. Bill never, was never really open to me in that, in the sense of street things. One of the guys that ran--that, that owned Canadian East Brewery entered into a business relationship with Joe and Ray Robinson. And he said--no, before that. I don't know how I--I guess I met him through Joe. Any event, they had a deal with the Baldwin Locomotive Works in Turkey. And the split was Jake Arvey (ph.). Speaker 1: West Side [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: West Side. Speaker 1: West Side politician, he was. Speaker 2: West Side. And then the guy that was bookkeeper for Al Capone, his-- Speaker 1: Was that Abe Marovitz? Speaker 2: No, no, oh, you know, his name (unclear). He's a meek guy, never would take, take him for anything. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: He got killed and got me--he took 20 tickets, fight tickets from me at, at the Water Tower. I'll think of his name. But in any event, they said he would not have to put any money up, Bill. And he would get a fifth of the sales of Locomotive Works. Johnny Roberts, who was the front guy for KD and A's Brewery, retired with is $990,000 dollars. Bill Dawson said, I don't want any part of that. I said well, let me--no. So, but he was circumspect. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: He didn't-- Speaker 1: He was really interested in politics. Speaker 2: Yeah-- Speaker 1: That was his-- Speaker 2: --really. Speaker 1: That was his major (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: And I think he--and his--in the cab business with the jitneys, he had his men there, but it's really the--his point was political influence. Speaker 1: Was that the same with Oscar DePriest? Speaker 2: I don't, I don't know him. Speaker 1: You didn't know him. He was a Republican though, wasn't he? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Bill Dawson is-- Speaker 2: Was-- Speaker 1: Is this correct that Bill Dawson-- Speaker 2: He's a Republican. Speaker 1: --was the impetus of changing blacks from Republican to Democrat? Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely. He, he did it, and then, of course, he, he made Mayor [Richard J.] Daley, you know. He--but he was a very peculiar guy. I don't, I don't really--he--we went out to Evanston [Illinois] to represent the first alderman in Evanston, who was about to be unseated. When Bill--I, I had a chance to practice law, and Bill took, took me to a club, but that was difficult. And of course, he ran the old Midnight Club in the basement of his head, headquarters. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: But I never really associated him with anything except politics. Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 78802 Speaker 1: The black community, as we close up now, I, I heard you say, because the question was asked, what about the black community today. And your response was there really is no black community today. And that is true because-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --integration for the most part-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --has changed whatever that community was. It wasn't better or worst; it really is just a different-- Speaker 2: Different. Speaker 1: --community at this point. Speaker 2: Well, in the sense that it was better, better for black businesses. We had Victory Mutual, we had Binga Bank, we had Supreme Liberty, Golden State Insurance Company, Jackson--we had a plethora of businesses. But the question is, what is the greater good, you know? But it was, it's, it was different--and Morris Eat Shop. We didn't care about going downtown, good food. Speaker 1: 'Cause you had Morris Eat Shop right there. Speaker 2: Yeah, absolutely, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 78803 Speaker 1: The, the Rainer family was an, another family of--there were large families. Now, you all were considered, and, and I'm not saying this in any other way than just simply given. You all were really that group of people were the power elite. You were the black bourgeoisie. Speaker 2: Yeah, well-- Speaker 1: And, and I'm not saying in the a negative-- Speaker 2: And, and what--and, and that's interesting. Speaker 1: And I'm not saying it in a negative term. Speaker 2: Because [William L.] Dawson really resented the Dickerson crowd, me really, my background. Speaker 1: Why, because you all were educated? Speaker 2: Well, no, it was the difference, the crowd, Paramount Bridge, Bridge Club. And he didn't--he wasn't really at ease until--I saw him frequently in Washington, but the lines were drawn within the black community. Speaker 1: And that's what I wanna ask you about. There were social lines drawn, and still are to some extent. Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely. Speaker 1: But those social lines were well defined. You were well inside that, that, if I might use the term again, black bourgeoisie. Speaker 2: Yeah-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --born to it, but I never knew, you know, really. But we, in the Snake's Club, Fannie McConnell was blackballed for--by some doctor. She married Ralph Ellison. But you know, it's just a--and a beautiful girl. But you know, the lines were really rigidly drawn. But in any event-- Speaker 1: Are they still there, or are they--is there still that association going on? I know they--you know, like the people who are the board of directors at the DuSable Museum now. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: There's the Black Ex--the black--not the Black Expo, you know the one at the-- Speaker 2: I know, yeah. Speaker 1: --out, out there. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: There's still that--how can I call it? Social segregation. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I mean, I can't get into it 'cause I'm a-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --47th Street (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: --how much I make or whatever. Speaker 2: Well, and, and the fact is the lines--I, I was interested in the guy picking up a book in my office about the Boule. Well, the Boule was black bourgeoisie, and--but I don't, I don't get around much anymore, so-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --like Duke Ellington says, but-- Speaker 1: But you know what I mean. Speaker 2: Yeah, I know what you mean. Speaker 1: You know what I'm talking about. Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Would you say that still exists? Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely. Speaker 1: It still exists. Speaker 2: I, I, I was given a thing about--by the Art Institute. But I was impressed with the people that went to the gala. And they were there, you know, in this, that, the attorney, and--but you know, it, it's snooty. I was amazed, really, in this, this, this day, day and time. Speaker 1: That it would continue-- Speaker 2: Continue, yeah. Speaker 1: --to, to, to be such. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: If you might call it the Pill Hill crowd. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 78804 Speaker 1: You, you are indeed one of the last leaves on the tree. Did you expect to live this long? Speaker 2: No, I didn't really, but you live, you know--I've always--I don't think exercising or anything, but I've always been a member of a health club, and I've always exercised. But I think the genes are more important, or as important, as the exercise. As a matter of fact, in health club, when I was in Paris, Ray Robinson and with his manager, Killer Johnson, who started as my client on 61st Street, said, man, you always have, always been healthy. How about a health club in Paris? I said fine. So I went to, to--he said, meet us at de Lido. Well, de Lido is a bare bosom (unclear). He said the club is downstairs. Well, he went down--they went down, then they stood on the stairs, and--[clearing throat]--I was introduced, (unclear)--didn't speak English, and I didn't speak French. They motioned for me to disrobe. I says my goodness. They were bare bosomed and everything. So they said get up this wall. They put a high pressure hose on me with ice water (laughter), and I was no problem at all to the oil treatment. But no, I, I've always been a devotee of health clubs. Speaker 1: Did you drink, smoke, etc.? Speaker 2: Never, I never, never smoked. Yeah, I drink, but I don't think--my limit was a couple of drinks until on rare occasions. Story_ID: 78805 Speaker 1: Someone asked me this question. I was being interviewed, and I said well, I'll, I'll, you know, I'll ask Truman the same question. They asked me, they say, you got any regrets in life? And I said well, do you have about a hour to tell you about the-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yes. Speaker 1: --the regrets that I-- Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: Yeah, regrets. Speaker 2: Yeah, well--[clearing throat]--I regret that I got heady one night with Jerry Goldsmith, who was one of the leading characters in Grand Bahama, inviting me to his house. I was in New York over a holiday, and the guest was his shooting partner, Raufman (ph.). And I got so heady with free drinks, I don't know what the hell I--I didn't make an impression (laughter). That was one regret. Another regret is that in the Virgin Island Bill [William] Hastie's wife, who was a friend of my sister's at Howard, took me on a tour of the Virgin Islands. She said now, I can give you this, these two lots just for practically nothing. I said, do you think anybody's gonna come to St. Thomas with an area is Truman Airport, where the landing is a, a feet of luck? I said no, please. Then a guy in the naval properties offered me a lease on a house on a sub-base hill that look out to the Atlantic and Caribbean from submarines. I, I leased that for $70 dollars a month on a 15-year lease. And my wife, I took her grandly down there. No, she said you friends will--your drunken friends will go in the Atlantic and the Carib--and Pacific. So, I didn't--those are two my--two of my regrets, misjudging the--third is McDonald's. My kids went to Francis Parker. The president of Francis Parker [Francis W. Parker School, Chicago, Illinois] was the head of Falibon (ph.) and Katz (ph.). He called me one day in the war department--I mean in the stadium--and said look, you got--I got--I wanna get--talk to you about McDonald's. I grandly said, you know, board--seat on the board, no. He said two McDonald's, one at 35th Street and one in 58th. I said do it. Do you think I, I, I've entered into the (unclear)--hamburger turner position? No. That is my regret (laughter) (unclear). So in any event, other than that, I--a few things, small things I regret, but-- Story_ID: 78806 Speaker 1: You've had one wife. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: How many children? Speaker 2: One. Speaker 1: One child. And how many grandchildren? Speaker 2: Two grandchildren. Speaker 1: Two grandchildren. Speaker 2: And three great-grandchildren. Speaker 1: Three great-grandchildren. Speaker 2: Yeah. And I went to my daughter, who said, Karen, I put you through Sarah Lawrence [College, Bronxville, New York], I put you through Francis Parker [Francis W. Parker School, Chicago, Illinois], why do you live at 126th and 5th Ave--6th Avenue. Said, daddy, it be's like that. Well, she, she married a guy that, an author, who now is a tenured profession at Sarah Lawrence, Bill Kelley, who wrote "A Different Drummer--Drummer." But it's, you know, they had their trials and tribulations. Speaker 1: Has it been a good life? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, on the whole it's been a good life...