 Story_ID: 536216 Speaker 1: Good afternoon sir. I'm Shawn Wilson, I will be the interviewer with The HistoryMakers today. This is Neculai Burghelea; he will be the videographer today. I will have you state your full name and spell it out for me. Speaker 2: Good afternoon. My name is Jeff Leon Greenup [HistoryMaker Jeff Greenup]. First name spelled J-E-F-F, middle, middle name L-E-O-N, my last name is G-R-E-E-N-U-P, Greenup. Speaker 1: Your da- I'm sorry, good ahead (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Like Greenup time, Greenup, Kentucky; Greenup, Illinois. Speaker 1: Your date of birth? Speaker 2: March 24th, 1919. Speaker 1: Your place of birth? Speaker 2: East Baton Rouge Parish, Louisiana. Speaker 1: Today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date would be April the 5th I believe, 2007. Speaker 1: That's correct, sir. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And the location that we are recording this interview in? Speaker 2: You're recording it in my Harlem office, it's a brownstone located at 205 West 137th Street, in Manhattan, New York, New York, zip 10030. Speaker 1: Your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm a practicing lawyer. Been doing it for about fifty-four years, fifty-five years. Story_ID: 536217 Speaker 1: I'm gonna start by asking you five simple questions. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Short answers. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Your favorite food. Speaker 2: My favorite food, vegetables. I love collard greens. Speaker 1: Collard greens. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Your favorite color? Speaker 2: My favorite color, blue and--I assume you have reference to clothing. So well I like blue and brown colors. Speaker 1: Your favorite time of year? Speaker 2: My favorite time of year is the spring. Speaker 1: Which is coming up. Speaker 2: Yes. Good times for me. Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: My favorite vacation--? Speaker 1: Destination, vacation spot? Speaker 2: Oh yes, well believe it or not, I love, I love the islands of Bermuda, and I love the, I love the--to vacation in Ca- Northern California. Speaker 1: What is your favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: My favorite saying? Speaker 1: Yes sir. Speaker 2: Treat everybody else the way you wanna be treated, and don't worry about the outcome. Speaker 1: So is that how you try to live your life? Speaker 2: That's the way I've lived my life. My mama [Emmaline Jones Greenup] and dad [Wallace Greenup] taught me that long time ago. Story_ID: 536218 Speaker 1: What was your mother's name? Speaker 2: Emmaline Jones Greenup. Speaker 1: How do you spell Emmaline? Speaker 2: E-M-M-A-L-I-N-E. Speaker 1: Emmaline Jones Greenup. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: What was her date of birth? Speaker 2: I should remember, but my mind plays tricks on me now, but I have--I can't recall that date now. Speaker 1: Do you know her place of birth? Speaker 2: Yeah, she was born in Louisiana, and I think, I think the parish in Louisiana--as you may know they have parishes as distinguished from counties. So she was born in I think was the East Feliciana Parish [Louisiana], north of Baton Rouge [Louisiana]. Speaker 1: And she--so did she spend her entire time, her entire childhood growing up in Louisiana? Speaker 2: She--yes. Speaker 1: Do you know much about her life growing up in--did she ever talk about what it was like when she was a kid? Speaker 2: Not as much as I wish she had. Speaker 1: What did she tell you? Speaker 2: She talked about her experiences growing up, particularly with her brothers and-- Speaker 1: How many brothers, brothers did she have? Speaker 2: She had two brothers. Speaker 1: Did they live on a farm? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: What was on the farm? Did they have to grow their own food? Speaker 2: They, they grew their own food and one of her brothers was a blacksmith. He took care of the horseshoes for the horses, and--but she didn't talk a lot about them, other than the--I, I do distinctly remember her telling me, "I tell you like my mother used to tell your uncles. Be careful who you talk to and be careful who you associate with, and there may be times when you don't wanna say, 'Yes sir' or 'Yes ma'am,' but sometimes it's important that you do, especially when you're dealing with the other race, the white race." And I had an uncle--my namesake, Uncle Jeff [Jeff Greenup], and I--my daddy [Wallace Greenup] had several brothers and so my uncles would come and visit us on our farm down in Louisiana, down in--about five miles south of Baton Rouge at that time. All that area within the--had been incorporated into Baton Rouge, but my daddy's oldest brother was named Fred [Fred Greenup], and one of my brothers was named Fred [Fred Greenup]. My mother's oldest brother's named Henry [Henry Jones]; one of my brothers is named Henry [Henry Greenup]. And my daddy's youngest brother was named McKinley [McKinley Greenup] and they call him Mack. We called him Uncle Mack, and my youngest brother named David McKinley Greenup [David Greenup]. And of course-- Story_ID: 536219 Speaker 1: How many brothers and sisters do you have? Speaker 2: Well there were--my parents [Emmaline Jones Greenup and Wallace Greenup] had eleven children; ten of them were--grew to be adults. And I--six brothers and five sisters. Well, no, when I say six brothers and five sisters--I had five brothers, I make the sixth boy. And I was about to talk about how my various uncles would come and visit. Uncle Fred [Fred Greenup], my brother's named Fred [Fred Greenup]. Uncle Mack [McKinley Greenup], I had a brother named David McKinley [David Greenup]. Uncle Henry [Henry Jones], brother named Henry [Henry Greenup]. And I, let's see, I know my dad had a brother named Jeff [Jeff Greenup]. So one day I asked my dad, I said, "Why don't Uncle Jeff ever come to visit us?" And I noticed there was not a pleasant expression on his face. And he said, "Well when you're older son, I'll tell you about that," but I always wondered why Uncle Jeff didn't come to visit us. So finally one day my oldest brother [Lawrence Greenup], he had left home, he'd gone to work on a railroad. My oldest sister left home, and my next oldest brother Wallace [Wallace Greenup], named after my dad, he had left home, working in New Orleans [Louisiana]. I was the old (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, I'm-- Story_ID: 536220 Speaker 1: You were telling--you were going to tell me why Jeff, your Uncle Jeff [Jeff Greenup] never came to visit. Speaker 2: Oh, yes. I always wondered why my other uncles named--my other siblings were named after would come and visit and my namesake never showed up. So finally when I was the oldest boy at home, my oldest brother Lawrence [Lawrence Greenup] had gone to work on the railroad and my next oldest brother, he had left. So I was the oldest boy at home and working on the farm and I don't recall what precipitated the conversation, but there--I do--my recollection is Uncle Fred [Fred Greenup], my daddy's brother, he was sick and in the hospital. And my dad [Wallace Greenup] had to go and see him, and he said he was gone hook up with his other brothers, Uncle Mack [McKinley Greenup] was gonna go and visit him. Uncle Fred was in New Orleans [Louisiana] then in the hospital. My Uncle Mack was in Chicago [Illinois] and, and he was coming in. And Uncle Walter [Walter Greenup], my dad had a brother named Walter. He was in Iowa, and he was coming down. My dad was going. Uncle Fred was very sick. And I said, "Well what about, what about Uncle Jeff? Why isn't he coming?" So my dad said, "Well I, I, I been promising to tell you and I will." He said, "Uncle Jeff is not coming 'cause he can't come." I said, "Why?" I said, "Why he can't come?" He said, "Uncle Jeff is no longer with us." I said, "You mean he's dead?" "Yes." I said, "Well what happened to him?" He said, "Well, last thing I remember he had been taken by eleven white men. The only thing I can tell you son, he got four of them before they got him." I said, "Why did that happen?" He said my Uncle Jeff, although my mother [Emmaline Jones Greenup] used to tell us how to react or how to not react around white folks, but Uncle Jeff never followed that advice. And he frequently got into conflicts with young whites (unclear), white fellows, and he said one day about eleven, eleven jumped him. And I said, "Well, where were you?" He said, "Well, I was in the woodshop and, and I--he was supposed to come and help me, and I saw him coming, and then I saw all these men around him. And I, I could tell he wanted to leave and they wouldn't let him leave." And he said, "A fight started," and he said, "That's the last I saw your Uncle Jeff, last I saw my brother." And he said, "I know there were four white men killed who jumped him, and I assume the rest of 'em, they got him." So that was the story of my Uncle Jeff that stuck with me and I always wondered why Dad wouldn't talk about it. And that was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How old were you when you were told this story? Speaker 2: When I was told this story, I was--I never will forget it. I was just, I had just--around, I had just made fourteen. And I can remember that 'cause I was one year older than what I was when I got arrested. Speaker 1: So this is in the early, this is in like the 1930s. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Early '30s [1930s] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Definitely, oh yeah 'bout-- Story_ID: 536221 Speaker 1: My dad and I--my dad used to have a big farm, he used to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What was your father's name? Speaker 1: Wallace Jacob Greenup [Wallace Greenup] and he used to raise farm produce and he'd take samples of melons, corn and whatnot to the markets in town and if, the samp- he and the merchants would agree on the price, "Bring me a load. If it's like that sample, pay you so much." And I used to go with him. So this particular day he and I had taken a, a--well I was thirteen years old. We had taken a load of watermelons to town, and, and there was a chain store there. We unloaded the melons, sat them neatly in the store. By the time we got the wagon unloaded and whatnot, the young gentleman who's manning the store said, "Well, Wallace, I'm only going to give you so and so for those melons." No matter how old a black man was in those days, they always called him by his first name no matter how young the white person was. So my dad said, "Well, that's not what you agreed to." He said, "Well, I know what we agreed to, but I'm just telling you that's all I'm gonna give you." So my dad said, "Well why? Are you contending that it doesn't meet the sample?" He said, "Oh, yeah it meets the sample, but I'm just telling you that's all I'm gonna pay you for this load of melons." So my dad said, "Well son, I guess we gotta put 'em back on the wagon." So we started taking our melons out of the store to put back on the wagon. So the old man managing the store said, "Well, what are you niggers doing?" So my dad didn't answer him. So then he said, "Well Wallace, what are you doing?" So my dad said, "Well, I'm putting the melons back on the wagon 'cause you told me you not gone pay me for them." "No, I didn't tell you I wasn't gone pay you for 'em, told you I wasn't gone pay you what you looking for, and furthermore, you niggers can't take anything out of this store. Furthermore, you're trespassing." So make long story short, he called the cops and next thing I know, three, three police officers showed up and took my dad and me to jail. Story_ID: 536222 Speaker 1: In those days there was a black newspaper called the Pittsburgh Courier [New Pittsburgh Courier]. And I--it used to come out once a week. I used to save my pennies, and I liked to read the Pittsburgh Courier. I read it religiously so I read a lot about the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] in the Pittsburgh Courier. Speaker 2: And how old were you, thirteen? Speaker 1: Yeah, I was thirteen then. And so on our way to jail, my dad--we were talking about what we're gonna do. So I told my dad, I said, "There's an organization I been reading about called the NAACP. Maybe you could contact them." So as we were going in jail, there was a young black man coming out of jail. And so my dad stopped him and said, "Well son, do you know Reverend G.T. Carter?" So the young man said, "Well, I've heard of him." So my dad said, "Well that's my pastor. It's very important I get a message to him. Will you get a message to him?" So by that time the police said, "Come on, move along." So my dad said, "It's very important that you contact Reverend G.T. Carter." Said, "Mister--well actually what, what I'm gonna tell him?" "Tell him Deacon Greenup [Wallace Greenup] and his son are in jail; I need to see him." Lucky for me and my dad, that young man found Reverend G.T. Carter who was our pastor. Told him we were--gave him my daddy's message and he came to see us. So we were talking to the (unclear). Pastor Carter, he and my daddy were, daddy were discussing and agonizing over what they could do to get us out, you know. Left the wagon on the street and all that stuff. So my dad says, "Well my son was telling me about an organization called the NAA something, and I--he been reading about it and he think they may be able to help us." So Reverend Carter said, "Yes, NAACP." So my dad said, "You know anything about it?" He said, "Yeah, sure. I know Walter White when they, they meet at my church sometimes." So my dad said, "Well, where are they?" He said, "Well, they have a headquarters up in New York [New York]." So my dad sort of crestfallen, he said, "Boy, New York. I don't know anybody in New York gonna help us way down here." So Reverend Carter says, "Well I, I know Walter," Walter White was the national executive secretary, "and I'll call him." So as a result of that incident, the meeting the young man coming out of jail as we were going in, and he took my dad's message to Reverend Carter. Reverend Carter did call New York and he got Walter White and told him about our situation. And Walter White I'm told, called a lawyer named Thurgood [Thurgood Marshall], and Thurgood had lawyers around the country who would cover certain areas for him and the lawyer in Louisiana name was A.P. Tureaud. So as a result of that, they arranged for A.P. Tureaud to come get my dad and me out of jail, and he got us out of jail and he represented us. Incidentally, he was down in New Orleans [Louisiana], which is about eighty-five miles south of Baton Rouge [Louisiana]. And so we spent the night in jail. And I don't recall who took care of my dad's wagon and horses, but I do remember he told Reverend Carter he had left the horse, wagon and not long later Reverend Carter saw to it that somebody went and got the, the team. But as a result of that incident, A.P. Tureaud came and got us out of jail. That's the first and only lawyer I'd ever met, and it was as a result of that meeting and my experience with A.P. Tureaud that caused me to want to be a lawyer, and so I, I made up my mind that's what I was gonna be. Story_ID: 536223 Speaker 1: Do you have memories of your childhood before you were thirteen? Speaker 2: Yes. I have memories of my childhood when I was--it was my, my first day in school. I just read in The New York Times today where the great, legendary football coach Eddie Robinson died. Well, Eddie Robinson and I went to the same grade school in Baton Rouge [Louisiana]. He was in fifth grade; I was in sixth grade. We used to have (unclear) squad, football games and he, he married the only daughter of, of my first school teacher, first school teacher I ever met was a Mrs. Lillian Lamont [sic. Lillian Mott]. And I frequently laugh and sort of joke about it: that's the first and only teacher whose lap I ever sat on. So I distinctly remember my first day in school and my sister Rosa Lee [Rosa Lee Greenup Williams] took me, and Eddie Robinson eventually married her daughter Doris [Doris Mott Robinson]. And I had another experience here not too long ago. I have a friend, Dr. Curtis Patton [Curtis L. Patton] who taught at the medical school at Yale [Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut]. And I was up visiting him one weekend and he asked me, he said, "Would you like to go to the graduation?" I said, "Well, I didn't bring graduation clothes." All I brought was jeans. He said, "Well, there'll be people there in jeans." And he said, "Might be somebody there you know." I said, "Somebody I know?" "Yeah." I said, "Well I don't know anybody, any students at Yale." He said, "Yeah, but we, we giving out an honorary degree to a fellow from Louisiana." I said, "Is that right? What's his name?" He said, "His name is Eddie Robinson." I said, "You got to be kidding." So as a result of that, I went to the graduation and so Dr. Patton, my friend Curtis, was telling me he was on the selection committee to, to select people for honorary degrees and when he recommended Eddie Robinson, one of his colleagues, one of the professors who was on the commission, "Well wasn't that man in football?" He said, "Yeah, he's in football." He said, "Why in the world would we honor a football coach?" So Curtis he said to him, "Well, go back and do your research." "What research?" He said, "Go back and do the research where football originated, and then come talk to me." And I'm told as a result of that, he did his research, he found out what Curtis Patton my friend had already found, and said I didn't know football was originated at Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut]. And so I said his colleague went and did the research, came back, well he's leading the pack. Yeah we, we, need to honor him, and then he went and did some research on Eddie Robinson, saw he had won more games than as a coach than any other coach, including Bear Bryant of Alabama [University of Alabama, Tuscaloosa, Alabama] who was his friend, they got to be--they were friends. And I was there and witnessed him when he got his doctorate, honorary doctorate degree. And he remembered that although he was in fifth grade and I was in sixth grade, fifth grade used to beat sixth grade sometimes. So I--when I met Eddie Robinson, he was in fifth grade and I was in sixth grade. Story_ID: 536224 Speaker 1: But I remember my first teacher in first grade [at Cornucopia School, Louisiana] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What was that teacher's name? Speaker 1: Mrs. Lillian Lamont [sic. Lillian Mott]. Speaker 2: Mrs. Lamont was the teacher. Speaker 1: And she had a daughter named Doris Lamont [Doris Mott Robinson] who is now the widow of Eddie Robinson, the late, legendary coach who died this week and was on the front page of The New York Times today. Speaker 2: What type of a student were you in, in Ms. Lamont's class? Speaker 1: I'm told I was a inquisitive student, and she used give me my parents [Emmaline Jones Greenup and Wallace Greenup] good reports because in those days, you couldn't afford to get a bad report from a teacher because that meant possibly two whippings, one from the teacher and one from your parents. So I'm told I was a pretty good student, and that's all in connection with your question do I remember when I was a youngster. Definitely remember my first day going to school and I was taken by my sister [Rosa Lee Greenup Williams], and--'cause my mother was busy taking care of other kids. Story_ID: 536225 Speaker 1: Do you remember anything else? What were holidays like in, in your home? Speaker 2: Oh, holidays were celebrated. I distinctly remember the Christmas holidays. We always had a celebration on Christmas morning when the kids growing up. We go in my dad [Wallace Greenup] and mother's [Emmaline Jones Greenup] large bedroom and they had put out presents for--frequently included fruit, raisins, and nuts, and each one of our little stack of presents. And so I, I just very much remember that. I remember painting eggs at Eastertime and so-- Story_ID: 536226 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You were telling me about Easter and holidays. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: But before we could--we will pick that up. I wanna talk a little bit more about your mother [Emmaline Jones Greenup]. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: When she was--what did she do for a living? Speaker 2: She was basically a housewife. Speaker 1: So she didn't work. Speaker 2: No. Well, she had, she had ten kids, so that was work. Speaker 1: Yeah, domestic. I mean worked at home, she was always cooking and cleaning. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: What did your father do? Speaker 2: My father [Wallace Greenup] was a farmer, and later a Baptist minister. Speaker 1: Did he have a church? Speaker 2: No, my, my dad didn't have a church. His primary activity was farming, but he was active, always active with the church, deacon in the church, Sunday school teacher. Speaker 1: Did he continue to farm after that incident where (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yes, oh yes. Speaker 1: So how did that all end up? Speaker 2: That ended up-- Speaker 1: So it was A.P Thor-- Speaker 2: Tureaud. Speaker 1: Tureaud. Speaker 2: A.P. Tureaud. I have his name in here somewhere. Speaker 1: It's T-U-R-E-A [sic.]. Speaker 2: No, there's a street [A.P. Tureaud Avenue] in New Orleans [Louisiana] named after him. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Capital A, capital P, Tureaud, T-U-R-O-U-A [sic.]. But I, I will give you the correct spelling of it. Speaker 1: Okay, so A.P. Tureaud. How did that end? Speaker 2: That ended with him representing my dad and I, getting all the charges dismissed and he sued the merchant and he collected for the melons. And that was the measure of damages. And he--trying to think--did he sue--? No, he didn't sue the police, but he, he sued, he sued and collected for our melons after he got us, got the dis- the criminal charges dismissed. Story_ID: 536227 Speaker 1: How would you describe East Baton Rouge Parish [Louisiana] during that time? Speaker 2: In what respect? Speaker 1: I mean it's legally segregated so black people lived on one side of town and white people lived on another (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: With a main street downtown where you could or could not shop? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah. Well that--the capital of Louisiana for us was Baton Rouge [Louisiana], and the parish of Baton Rouge was larger than the city; it's called East Baton Rouge Parish. So our farm was in that parish, and we lived five miles outside of the city limits. And folks was segregated. There was the black section where people lived on south Baton Rouge. Then there was north Baton Rouge where no black folks lived. And of course the main street was called 3rd Street, where all--where the banks and the shopping stores were on. Speaker 1: Were they--were, was that a black district? Speaker 2: No, no, that was the main white district. Speaker 1: Main white district. Speaker 2: That was like the Broadway of Baton Rouge. Speaker 1: Okay, but was there a main black district in Baton Rouge? Speaker 2: Well south Baton Rouge. Speaker 1: Was there a street? Speaker 2: Just, yeah, yeah, I would say Washington Avenue. I had relatives who owned stores on Washington Avenue and my, my daddy's first cousins, Oscar Greenup and Samuel Greenup, they operated a, a mechanic shop and a filling station on the Highland Road right below Washington Avenue where it intersected with the Highland Road. That's the street where the University of LSU [Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] on Highland Road. Oldest part of Baton Rouge city now. And so I would say the main drag was Washington Avenue for black folks. Speaker 1: Now when you were growing up, did your, did your father [Wallace Greenup], mother [Emmaline Jones Greenup] and father talk to you about places you could and could not go? Speaker 2: They never talked to me about places I couldn't go, but my daddy used to always told me--I learned that especially from him about survival tactics. Speaker 1: Which were? Speaker 2: Which were how to and how not to deal with white folks. Speaker 1: And how early would you say you were when you started to learn those lessons? Speaker 2: Ten, eleven years old. And my mother--I remember when my mother was sick in the hospital before she died and she mentioned the fact that one of her prayers had been answered. And she, she never saw any of her sons either lynched or sent away a long time for prison, and she knew people and friends who were not so lucky. And so she--that weighed heavily on her. Speaker 1: Had she seen a lot in her childhood? Speaker 2: I got the impression as I grew older that she had, but she didn't talk about it much. Story_ID: 536228 Speaker 1: Now do you know much about your grandparents, your mother's parents (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, don't know a lot about my--no I don't and I was talking to one of my--my oldest niece. I said, "Dad [Wallace Greenup] never talked much about his parents." I didn't learn 'til long after my father was dead who his dad was, and--but the name Greenup was unusual. I, I had an aunt in New Orleans [Louisiana] after I had that incident, my dad and I. My dad sent me from Baton Rouge [Louisiana] to New Orleans to get away from the animosity there. So I grew real--after eighth grade, I grew up in--I, I grew up in New Orleans and went to high school [McDonogh No. 35 Senior High School], that was my--junior high [Albert Wicker Junior High School], high school there. And I went in the [U.S.] Army from New Orleans 'cause that's where I was living. Speaker 1: Right. But before we go that far, you were going to tell me about--you were just--you were telling me a story about you being a kid and you didn't know much about your grand- your, your, you know your father's parents (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My--I, I didn't know much about my father's parents, but I had an aunt who we used to call the oral historian, Aunt Lenore [ph.], and she used to kid me about my last name. I would visit her. I was a youngster. So one day I said to her, "I'm gonna find somebody else with that last name whose not related to me, that you won't be able to kid me so much." So she, "Yeah. Well if you find anybody with that funny, messed up name that's not in your family, I'll pay you for them." I never forgot that. So as a result of that challenge as I grew up, I would go different places, I'd look in the phone book see if I find any other Greenups, but whenever I found a Greenup, I could trace 'em back to my family. So eventually I went to the Army, and I was stationed in Camp Davis, North Carolina [Camp Davis Army Airfield; Camp Davis Marine Corps Outlying Field, North Carolina]. And my Army unit traveled by convoy from North Carolina to Northern California where we, we were closer to (unclear) and we were deployed to defend the coast out there 'cause after Pearl Harbor you know, there--a lot (unclear) thought the Japanese may come on in. So en route west I passed through two towns, one called Greenup, Kentucky; another was called Greenup, Illinois. So eventually when I was ready to go overseas, we was on a short break. I went to visit my folk, went to visit my aunt. So I went to see Aunt Lenore and I said, I said, "Guess what?" She said, "What?" I said, "You owe me a whole lot of money." "Oh, yes?" I said, "Yes, I said you got to remember now." "Remember what?" I said, "Remember a long time ago when you told me if I found another Greenup who is not in my family, you'd pay me for it?" "Yes." I said, "Well not only did I find another Greenup, I found two whole towns." "Yeah? Better not be in Kentucky or Illinois." I said, "What difference what state it's in? What difference does that make?" "Oh, god, boy, the old Cherokee tribe, they got lost up there trying to get from Kentucky to Illinois. So you haven't done anything but run across some of your roots, man. You, you haven't done--," she knew about it. She told me that's where my whole full--parents came from. Story_ID: 536229 Speaker 1: And another story about Greenup, Kentucky since I'm--after I became a lawyer and I was practicing law on 57th Street [New York, New York] in the Fitz building [ph.]. And I read the law journal, which is a legal publication, and I saw in there where in different towns were floating bonds. One of them was Green- Greenup, Kentucky. And the person to contact down on Wall Street, his last name was Greenup, and had a telephone number. So I picked up the phone and I called, and he picked up the phone on Wall Street. And so the mention--said who I was. He said, "Wait, don't tell me, don't tell me." I said, "Don't tell you what?" He said, "You say your name was Greenup [HistoryMaker Jeff Greenup]?" I said, "Yes." He said, "Well don't tell me now. Are you one of my black cousins or one of my white cousins?" I said, "I guess I'm one of your black ones since I'm black." He said, "Okay. Well don't tell me, don't tell me. If you one of my black cousins, you must be from around Louisiana or Illinois. Are you from one of those places?" I said, "I'm from Louisiana." He said, "Okay. I know about my black cousins--I, I know I had some black cousins in Louisiana." True story. So then he says well--I asked him, I said, "Well how long you'll be in town?" Well he's in town for three days I think he told me. So I invited, I said, "Let's have lunch." He said, "Yeah, said I always wanted to meet some of my black cousins." I said, "Okay." So we made an appointment to have lunch the next day at twelve o'clock. Lo and behold I'm in federal court the next day, court didn't let out. Normally let out at one, I didn't get out until 1:15. So I called, he wasn't in his office. They said he was out, and then I called my office. They said, "Well did you have a luncheon engagement with somebody named Greenup? (Unclear) in town?" I said, "Yeah," I said. "Well they called, said y'all supposed to get together at twelve o'clock for lunch. And you didn't show." I said, "I couldn't show because the judge--I was in court." But he left and left his number in Kentucky, and he knew, he knew he had black cousins, and he knew he had white cousins. Speaker 2: Did you know that you had white relatives in the family? Speaker 1: I learned that, I learned I may have some after I was a lawyer here. We got a invitation from some people in Ohio who had invited us, my daughter and me, to a family reunion. So I said to my daughter Carolann [Carolann Greenup], "Let's go." She said, "I--well I'll check it out, daddy." So then I, I said, "Okay but I really would like to go and see what--and meet them." So she told me, said, "I don't think we're going dad." I said, "Well why not?" Said, "I haven't heard from the people." I said, "What do you mean you haven't heard from them? You, you tried to contact 'em?" She said, "I wrote them." I said, "You wrote them?" She said, "Yeah." I said, "Well, what did you tell them?" She said, "I said '(Unclear).' So just somehow there was--she acknowledged the invitation. And she says in the letter, I don't--have it around here somewhere, I may be able to find it. "If you are descendants of the slaves, we'll be there, but if you're descendants of the slave masters, we're not ready yet." I said, "You shouldn't have done that. I wanted to go." She said, "Well, daddy, they must be, they must be descendants of the slave masters. They didn't answer my letter." I said, "What made you write a letter like that?" I never heard from them until after the, the family reunion was over, then they, they sent a copy of the family photo album, they're all white. Story_ID: 536230 Speaker 1: Were there any legends in your family of--did you know anyone in the family who'd been a slave who had a story that they passed on (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No. My daddy [Wallace Greenup] was born in 1988. Speaker 1: Eighteen eighty-eight [1888]. Speaker 2: Eighteen eighty-eight [1888], I mean, and he--I never heard them talk about, talk about slavery. Most of my--well they--and I know my mother [Emmaline Jones Greenup] knew about my daddy losing his brother, Jeff [Jeff Greenup], and how he lost him. So both my parents were always very, I would say, cautious in talking to us about how to operate. And I always attributed--after I got older and reflected on it, I think that it's--I concluded that incident must have weighed heavily on them, 'cause they always telling us how to be careful. And-- Speaker 1: Did you ever have any incidents outside of the one you had with your father when you were young? Speaker 2: I had some--yeah but no major, but I had some little incidents. Some, some I had some, some of my best friends from the South telling me--they white folks. I remember we had a white neighbor. Incidentally, by integration, integrating neighborhoods, I didn't know what that was 'til I came to New York [New York]. 'Cause I always--growing up we always had white neighbors. My dad's farm here, had a white farm over there, and in the fall, they help each other, you know, gather crops and whatnot. And so we had, we--but I remember my dad, he was a--considered to be a large, successful farmer. And he had bought some seed potatoes and he did not get the grade of seed potatoes he had paid for. So when he opened the, the sack that they came in, they were all dried and whatnot and he had spent most of his money for them and he was agonizing over it and so one day we went to the farm and he used to tell me--he, he used to tell me bible stories. I remember once he told me that I almost, I almost had a whipping of my life 'cause I, I told him Christ was a fool (unclear). And how I came to tell him that, he told me that Christ knew what was gonna happen to him before he went to Jerusalem and went anyway. And I was thinking, I said, "Well Christ was a fool." And he--but he, he, he reacted, but then he caught himself and he thought about it. So then he tried to explain to me about why Christ went to Jerusalem even though he knew what was gone happen to him. Some of it made sense to me, some of it didn't. So he was very upset 'cause potatoes was one of his major crops and he had paid all his money he had saved for seed potatoes, and they sold him these-- Speaker 1: Dry seeds. Speaker 2: Yeah, dry seeds, which wasn't what he paid for. So he couldn't farm. Story_ID: 536231 Speaker 1: So he [Greenup's father, Wallace Greenup], talking to me and farmer (unclear), I noticed he looked like he's just (unclear). And he said to me--well we got ready to break for lunch. He said, "Son, I have to go in town." And he said, "I want you to go home and talk to your mama [Emmaline Jones Greenup] and tell her I had to go to town. I will not be home for lunch. Don't know when I'll be back or if I'll be back." I said, "Well you want me--what else you want me to tell her?" He said, "Well tell her I'm, I'm going and meet my Jerusalem, she'll understand." So I went home and I told mama. My mother called a prayer meeting as we used to have. The rest of--I was the only boy home then; I think I was. And so I remember my mother saying, praying. I always thought nobody could sing like her. So my dad went on into town and he went where he had bought those seed potatoes, and then I remember looking in the drawer where he kept the Colt .38 pistol. It wasn't there and the reason why I looked there because I remember I thought I saw dad with the pistol, I wasn't sure. And so he went into town, he met our neighbor who was a very wealthy white farmer, and so they talked. They spoke. And my--he obviously must have seemed upset to Mr. Plyman [ph.], that's the fellow's name was Plyman, German fella. And so Mr. Plyman said to him, "Well come on back to the farm and I got some seed potatoes, top grade, and you can have 'em." So my dad said, "Well I don't have any money. I can't pay for 'em." And so Mr. Plyman said, "Well who said anything about money?" My dad said, "Well you had to pay for 'em." He said, "Come on, come on back to the farm. Come by my place and get the potatoes." Went back to the farm, went to see Mr. Plyman who had the big farm next door, gave him some top grade seed potatoes, and I know for a--remember distinctly just like I remember the first day I went to school, he had one of the best potato crops in (unclear). So my, my, my mother--I remember talking to her about this sometime later--and she said well, "Daddy," she said, "son, God does answer prayers." And she said, "When your daddy told you to tell me he was gonna meet his Jerusalem, he's made up his mind he was gonna die, and he wasn't gone let anybody take advantage of him anymore. And that was God's way of interceding and answering our prayers. Remember that prayer meeting we had?" I remember that just like I'm sitting here today. So-- Story_ID: 536232 Speaker 1: Tell me about--was it common for your mother [Emmaline Jones Greenup] to call a prayer meeting? Was it just the siblings or it was other neighbors also? Speaker 2: Oh, no, no, no, no. That, that family. Speaker 1: Just family. Speaker 2: Every Sunday, every Sunday morning my mother and dad [Wallace Greenup] would have--they would have prayer meeting. Speaker 1: And tell--and what was the prayer meeting? Speaker 2: (Unclear) sing, read a portion of the Bible and then pray. Thank God for the past week and pray for the next week. That was a ritual in my household. And I distinct--and I often thought about that (unclear) she said, "Well when your daddy told you he was going to meet his Jerusalem, he made up his mind he was gone get what was coming to him or die. And, and he was prepared for whatever happened, just like Christ was prepared," amazing. And then he ran into his neighbor, a wealthy white farmer, and observed him being upset, talked to him. As a result of talking, my daddy told him what had happened to him. So the white neighbor said, "Well come on, I got some grade A seed potatoes. Come on, come on by my place. Come on let's go, let's go back to the farm." My daddy said, "Well I don't have money; I spent all my money." He said, "Well who said anything about money?" Gave it to him. He had the best potato crop he--I remember him having. That's a true story. So experiences like that, they stick with me, you know. Story_ID: 536233 Speaker 1: Did your father [Wallace Greenup] join the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] himself? Speaker 2: My fa- you know, I'm not gonna say he did. He, he may have. I used to see him at the meetings that Reverend Carter would have later. Speaker 1: Reverend who? Speaker 2: Reverend G.T. Carter [G.T. Carter] was our pastor who my dad asked the young boy to go and tell him to come and see us. Would call New York [New York], got ahold of Walter White. Walter White made some calls and result A.P. Tureaud came and represented us. But I, I've been a member since I was thirteen years old. Speaker 1: Now what made you decide to become a member? When A.P. helped you? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: You became a member (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right. I was telling you, I distinctly--if he--get the records at the NAACP. They can document it; I been a member ever since. Even when I was in the [U.S.] Army. I almost got court martialed when I was in Burma [Myanmar] for writing up my--I was the first sergeant of my, of my unit. And I, I, I wrote up all of the men in my company. (Unclear) I used to have a letter from Walter White who wrote and acknowledged--but-- Speaker 1: So when you were at--go ahead, but-- Speaker 2: Well you, well you have to give your mail through the--had to pass through the censor. And I--when I wrote up the NAACP--had the fellow listed in, in NAACP and sent it in, you could bypass the censor if you had certain connections and send it through the chaplain. So me being the first sergeant in charge of the company, I just didn't send it through the censor, I sent it through the chaplain. And that was--published back here and whatnot. Speaker 1: What did the letter say? Speaker 2: The letter told 'em--the letter I wrote. That my fellow soldiers in my company had decided to join the NAACP, and I paid their dues. I would send them--I wanted them to all to be recorded as members. And that probably caused some eyebrows to raise because Thurgood Marshall had been sent to the South Pacific to investigate some complaints of black soldiers, and it was that incident that caused me to write--to get my--write to enlist all of my people in my company and send it back. Story_ID: 536234 Speaker 1: We are going to pick up with you telling me about the, the soldiers in the South Pacific. Thurgood Marshall was called to go down and, and give them some sort of legal counsel. Speaker 2: Right. According to what the press releases I read some--during war, this is during World War II [WWII] when the [U.S.] Army was completely segregated. All blacks, my outfit was all black outfit. We had white, white, we had white officers, and that was true throughout the Army. And that's a, that's another interesting story, too, about our white officers. Lot of them were form the South. My company commander that I went overseas with, name was Captain James B. Moore. He born and bred in Alabama, but he was a crackerjack soldier, and only one time I had problems with him. I didn't know about the rivalry between the University of Alabama [Tuscaloosa, Alabama] and Auburn [Auburn University, Auburn, Alabama]. So one--we were training at Camp Stewart, Georgia [Fort Stewart, Georgia], and this was before the Alabama-Auburn football game, and I made the mistake of saying something complimentary about Alabama and their coach. I don't--I think that was before--I don't think Bear Bryant was there then. Somebody--Bear Bryant predecessor. That's the only time my captain really got on my case. He didn't wanna hear anything about, good about Alabama. If I wanna talk football, I had to talk about Auburn (laughter). Otherwise, we went overseas, he born and reared in Alabama, and, and, and I used to tell my--I was the first sergeant, I was the top ranking non-commissioned officer. And I used to tell the guys, I said, "An officer can't be too tough as long as he knew he stuff." 'Cause that was your insurance policy going back home. And, and we got to be real friends (unclear) come back, of course. But--and but he was from Alabama. There was another crackerjack officer we had, Captain Hugh Miles [ph.] from Virginia. He had--he was our operations officer, but we had a crackerjack outfit. We, we got several citations. In fact we got a theater citation. A lot of it is not recorded publicly. But General Joseph W. Stilwell was the theater commander. And we liked him, we used to call him Vinegar Joe. And when he would come around to inspect, well he knew soldiers. He come around making formal inspection with the officers. Then he send the officers away and tell you his secretary. And he go around and he say to the enlisted men, "All right, no officers here other than me. Any gripe you have, I wanna hear it; any mistreatment you have, you know you think you have, I wanna know about it. Any complaints you have, I want you to understand it'll never get back to your officers. It stays with me, and if you tell me anything that needs correction, I'll see that it's corrected." General Joseph W. Stilwell. We used to call him Vinegar Joe. Men loved him. And-- Story_ID: 536235 Speaker 1: But so the press releases said what about the off--the soldiers in the South Pacific and why Thurgood Marshall got involved (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, they say that they had been, they had dis- been discriminated again, against in Australia. And that some of the enlisted men had, had conflict with their white officers, and in fact reached the stage where the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] had asked Thurgood Marshall to, to go to the South Pacific and investigate the black soldiers' complaints, and he made that trip. And it was a lot of publicity 'cause General Douglas MacArthur didn't want him to the troops one on one. But he, but he, but he insisted that he has, he has rights. That was the publicity I read about, and then I had another incident wherein we had served as artillery support for the infantry outfit known as Merrill's Marauders [5307th Composite Unit], very famous. They did a lot of hard fighting in Burma [Myanmar] and had some successes, and but it was an all-white outfit, but then they was supported by artillery by our all black artillery outfit. So after some of my men had come back from the front lines, they were sent back to Calcutta [India] for what they call R, R and R, rest and recreation, and I, I had to go back, go down and get them out of jail (background noise) because what happened, the American Red Cross, which is all white, where my men who had just left the front lines and went back for rest and recreation, went to the American Red Cross and told they couldn't come in 'cause them colored. And they turned the place out. And so on my rest and recreation, I had to go get 'em out of jail. But Joe Stilwell [Joseph W. Stilwell] was good about it and shortly after that, we had General Dwight D. Eisenhower [Dwight David "Ike" Eisenhower], he was supreme ally commander in Europe, General Douglas MacArthur was a supreme ally command in South Pacific. And Lord Mountbatten [Louis Mountbatten]-- Speaker 1: Lord, say that again. Speaker 2: Lord Mountbatten, a British aristocratic admiral, he was a supreme ally commander in the CBI, China Burma India Theater. And when the incident broke and, and it hit the papers in the Indian press, he personally called up and had the British Red Cross to entertain my troops, and they rolled out the red carpet for them. Story_ID: 536236 Speaker 1: So when you were growing up in East Baton Rouge [East Baton Rouge Parish, Louisiana] as a child-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --before you went to Cornucopia [Cornucopia School, East Baton Rouge Parish, Louisiana]-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --did your parents [Emmaline Jones Greenup and Wallace Greenup] have books in the home? Speaker 2: Yes, yes, books in the home. In fact, my--I, I remember my sister [Rosa Lee Greenup Williams] who's older than I was, the sister who had taken me to school to register, going over her first grade book with me before she took me to school. Speaker 1: Do you remember any black history lessons you were learning at the time? Who were the black history leaders when you were a child that your mother and father looked up to (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, that--as long as I can remember, I've heard of Frederick Douglass and Frederick Douglass was one of my daddy's heroes. And my mother was--talked a lot about Mary McLeod Bethune. In fact, I was elated when I got ready to ship out from Camp Stewart [Fort Stewart, Georgia] to go overseas, Camp Stewart, Georgia, and I was twenty-one or twenty-two. And Mary McLeod Bethune came to speak to us before we got on the troop ship, train. One thing I'll always remember she said, and if I told it to some of my clients once, I told it to them a hundred times. I remember after she, she finished her speech, she said, "I just may sound trite, easy for me to say, but one thing I want you to remember, whatever you do, don't worry. Worry is only interest on tomorrow's troubles." And that stuck with me. I thought about it and even when I was in Burma [Myanmar] in combat, I didn't worry about what's gonna--what was gonna happen 'cause you couldn't do anything about it. And I'm just as convinced as I'm sitting here now by hearing her and concentrating on that, "Whatever you do, don't worry. Worry's only interest on tomorrow's troubles." I firmly believe that's responsible for me coming back. 'Cause my foxhole brother got killed and I was taller than him. And but the, the point of it is I went out and did what I had to do and my attitude was gonna be--was what's gonna be is gonna be. But what Dr. Mary McLeod Bethune told us in that great speech she gave. Not all (unclear) that speech, but that one thing stuck with me. Story_ID: 536237 Speaker 1: So had there been any other of your brothers and sisters that had gone to school prior to you and off to college also (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Well, well no my, my oldest brother [Lawrence Greenup] had gone. They all went to school, but they only--I'm trying to think now, who was the first person to go to college? The first person to go--I may have been the first one to go--I think I, I was the first one to go to college. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: I think, I think I was the first one to go, to go to college. And then my, my younger sister Virgie, Dr. Virgie Madison [Virgie Greenup Madison], she's retired from the school system in Washington, D.C. She lives in Atlanta [Georgia] now. My youngest brother David [David Greenup], he graduated from Southern University [Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana]. He's a businessman in New Orleans [Louisiana]. And my brother Henry [Henry Greenup], he went two years Brooklyn College [Brooklyn, New York], but he got out, out then he decided he, he make some money, so he became businessman, and a successful one. He still here in New York [New York]. And, and then who else was there--Virgie, I think we were--may be the only ones that went, that went to college. But there was always books around and I always remember my dad [Wallace Greenup] talking about Frederick Douglass and telling us about Frederick Douglass. Story_ID: 536238 Speaker 1: Did your dad [Wallace Greenup] ever talk about voting and what it meant to vote? Speaker 2: Oh, yes, indeed (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Owning property. Speaker 2: Yeah, yes indeed. Speaker 1: Because back then I don't think you could vote unless you owned property. Speaker 2: Well and even if you, if you owned property, you ran the risk of getting killed if you went to try and register. I learned that when, when I was working with Dr. King in the South. I, I, I, I spent six weeks in St. Augustine, Florida with Dr. Martin Luther King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] movement, and in fact I just looked at something. Young lady in the book here, she mentions my parents and my representative. This young lady, Patricia Due [HistoryMaker Patricia Stephens Due] who wrote this book ['Freedom in the Family: A Mother-Daughter Memoir of the Fight for Civil Rights,' Tananarive Due and Patricia Stephens Due]. I think she was the first sit-in in Florida. And she write--and I had a picture--yeah, and my--and I had an aunt, I had an aunt, eighty-two years old, who--she was eighty-two years old in Louisiana when she got arrested for, for leading a voter registration drive. And they wrote about her in a book called 'Southern Justice' [ed. Leon Friedman] (unclear), and-- Speaker 1: Tell me the story about your aunt. Speaker 2: My Aunt Charlotte, Charlotte B. Greenup, she lived to be 101 years and ten months old. She born in Louisiana and she spent mo- a lot of her adult life in Chicago [Illinois]. She, she went to Chicago, she--when she married, she had two daughters there and one of her grandsons was a colonel in the [U.S.] Army. And her--another grandson, Johnny Griffin, the saxophone player, played with Lionel Hampton. But when Percy Sutton was president of the New York Branch NAACP [NAACP New York Branch, New York, New York] and I was chairperson of the Legal Redress Committee. We used to conduct, conduct meetings at the NAACP office on 125th Street next to the Apollo Theater [New York, New York]. And I was going to--I was chairperson of the Legal Redress Committee meeting. And I was going to conduct a meeting. As I walked past a, a door that was open to an office where some people were meeting, and it turned out to be New York CORE [Congress of Racial Equality] with Roy Innis was head of New York CORE and they used to sub- sublet space from us. And as I walked past the door, I heard somebody say Greenup. So I stopped and looked in the office, said, "Anybody call me?" And they said, "No." But as I turned to walk away, Roy Innis said, "Hey but Jeff, come here, come here, come here." So I said, "Well what do you want Roy? I gotta go in and conduct a meeting." He said, "Yeah, no, nobody called you," he said, "but, but Greenup, [HistoryMaker] Jeff Greenup." I said, "As long as you know me, you know my name." He said, "But that's not the point. The point is one of our voter registration people has been arrested in Louisiana, and the last name is Greenup. And our regional counsel, our lawyers who head that office down there represent her, and they been calling here trying to get a hold of you." I said, "Yeah," I say, "what's his name?" "It's not a he, it's a she." "She?" "Yeah, old lady." I said, "Not Charlotte." "Yeah, Charlotte B. Greenup." So it was my eighty-two year old aunt had gotten arrested in Louisiana for, for leading a voter registration drive. Story_ID: 536239 Speaker 1: I went down to participate in her [Greenup's paternal aunt, Charlotte B. Greenup] trial, and the lawyers, they'd been trying to get ahold of me and so I was able to talk to them from Roy Innis', CORE's [Congress of Racial Equality] office [in New York, New York]. I said, "Man, why you call me in this last minute?" He said, "Man, they just notified at the last minute. You know how they are down here. The farther the courthouse is--you are from the courthouse, the shorter notice they give you, hoping you won't show up so they can default you." And so, so we needed to be in Baton Rouge [Louisiana] Friday and we were hoping you could come down. So, because also with Charlotte, I ended up canceling what I was doing, got on a plane and I ended down--I went, I went to Baton Rouge. And I forget what parish it was, but anyway it tells you here in that article. And so the next day in the courtroom--a lot of white folks were milling around the courtroom. So the judge says, "Sheriff, how's that crowd out there?" So the sheriff says, "Well, they, they orderly, judge. They mad, but they orderly." So the judge say, "Come here, come here William [ph.]; I'm not gone let anything happen to you." So he pointed through the window. He said, "See that oak tree out there?" I said, "Yes." He said, "Well, that's where they hung the last nigger sheriff in this parish on that oak tree out there." I said, "Is that so?" "Yeah," he said, "well you don't worry, you don't worry. I'm not gonna let anything happen to you," (laughter). And I said, I told the lawyers. I said, "Don't let--don't let sundown catch us up here. I wanna get the hell out of here before it gets dark." And so when--and Fred Collins [ph.] was the lead counsel. So when they introduced me to the court, "Jeff L. Greenup [HistoryMaker Jeff Greenup], member of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], national legal committee [Legal Redress Committee]. He's down to participate in the trial in case there is an appeal to handle the appeal." So they said, "Greenup?" The prosecutor who had on a rebel tie. He stood, he say, "Greenup. Well that's the same last name as the lead nigger defendant." So my aunt who's all about--just about, maybe five feet tall, she jumped up, put her hands on her--and say, "That's right. He's my nephew and he's come down here to keep you straight." (Laughter) The fellow changed color so. He, he wasn't right anymore that day. But anyway, the trial proceeded when eventually they were convicted, and then it was reversed, and then it was dismissed. And on her one hundredth birthday. See she had spent fifty years in Chicago [Illinois], raised her family. She was Oscar de Priest's [Oscar Stanton De Priest] executive secretary when he was a congressman. And so at her one hundredth birthday, I went down and I took my youngest daughter [Melanie Greenup], and so they had her sitting in her high chair, TV cameras rolling like the camera rolling here. The press was there. The lieutenant governor was there. The chief assistant of the governor was there. And I was standing next to her, introducing her as people went through the line. So the judge who presided in the courtroom where she was tried, he was there, and he spoke. And he talked about the trial, and he stated that in those days there were no registered black voters. He said, "But now today I couldn't get elected without the black vote." He said that right there at her celebration, and then the governor's man spoke and, and she was sitting there like a queen on the throne. She lived to be a--101 years and ten months old, Charlotte B. Greenup. And they wrote about her in this book called 'Southern Justice' [ed. Leon Friedman]. And, and that's what this article here is about. I copied it from there. And then-- Speaker 2: What year did that take place, did you go defend her? What year was that? Speaker 1: When I went to defend her? Speaker 2: Yes, sir. Speaker 1: It had--let's see now. It was 19--what is it? Early '60s [1960s] or late '50s [1950s]. It might tell in here. Speaker 2: Well, I'll look it up, but it, but it was in the '50s [1950s] or '60s [1960s]. Speaker 1: It's somewhere in the--somewhere during, during the '60s [1960s]. Yes, because it may have been the late '50s [1950s] 'cause I was in St. Augustine, Florida with Dr. Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] in '64 [1964]. So it may have been '61 [1961] or '62 [1962]. Story_ID: 536240 Speaker 1: Let me ask you this-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and I never thought about this before now, but you said you flew down to Baton Rouge [Louisiana]. You took an airplane. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Were airplanes segregated like buses? Speaker 2: No, not then (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Not ever, never, ever. Speaker 2: Not to my knowledge. Speaker 1: Not to your knowledge, okay. Speaker 2: No, not to my knowledge. I never remember airplanes being segregated. I remember being on an airplane once and the, they hit some bumpy disturbance and the captain came on and gave us--and, and he gave some, remarks and everybody had to put on their seatbelts and so I was sitting next to a white lady, and so she turned and she, she stood up and said to everybody, "Well I think we ought to have a prayer meeting. Ask this gentleman to lead us in prayer." Talking about me. Yeah, that actually happened on an airplane, funny thing. I don't ever recall airplane being segregated. Buses were and trains were, of course. Speaker 1: So in Louisiana they had streetcars. Did they have streetcars in Baton Rouge (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah. In Baton Rouge, not in Baton Rouge. Streetcars in New Orleans [Louisiana]. But the buses, the buses they had the sign. If you got on the bus and, and you had to always move that sign that say colored only, and put it in front of you. Put that sign backwards. In fact they had a bus strike at Baton Rouge before the one in Montgomery [Alabama]. Speaker 1: Tell me about that one. What year was that? Speaker 2: That was, that was one or two years before the Montgomery Bus Boycott. Reason I know 'cause I have a first cousin, Johnnie Jones, who's still living in Baton Rouge, Louisiana. He was gonna lead these lawyers in that bus strike. Speaker 1: He's black? Johnnie Jones is black. Speaker 2: He's black, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And he was one of the--he was one of the first, one of the first graduates from Southern University Law School [Southern University Law Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], which is all black law school they still have down there. And incidentally, a few years ago the governor, the sitting governor of the State of Louisiana was a law student at that black--at Southern University. He's a Republican, too. Speaker 1: So tell me about Johnnie Jones and-- Speaker 2: Johnnie Jones is my first cousin. He was my--the son of my mother's oldest brother, Henry Jones. And he has a, he has a--he still lives in Baton Rouge. And he, he has two children who are lawyers. And-- Speaker 1: How did that bus boy- how did that bus strike come about in Louisiana? Speaker 2: That one, that bus strike came about because the bus was crowded as I recall, and had some, some Southern University [Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] students. And they would not move back or make room for the white people who were getting on, and as a result, some of them arrested. And then they boycotted the bus, and-- Speaker 1: Well who went to jail for Johnnie Jones to have to defend someone? Speaker 2: I forget how many of his clie- clients went to jail. But when I was--I should remember. I will have all that information 'cause I was down there when he argued the motion when they were having the hearing for the injunction. And I should have Elizabeth [Elizabeth Hall]--in fact I will have her go online and pull it off 'cause they had a celebration celebrating that boycott last year. And I, and I saw it. So I, I mention I have, have her pull it off. I will have her look it up. Speaker 1: So were your parents [Emmaline Jones Greenup and Wallace Greenup], did your parents participate in that boycott? Speaker 2: In, in--no, in that boycott, no. My--I'm trying to see was that before or after my mother passed? No, the answer is no they didn't, but I think that was mostly students from Southern University. Story_ID: 536241 Speaker 1: We're talking about boy--bus boycotts, and you said to me before Rosa Parks, you had your own story of a bus incident (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. I was in uniform. This must have been about 1940--1940--around 1942 I believe. And I was in uniform and traveling from Los Angeles [California] to New Orleans [Louisiana], and I was going home to see my folks [Emmaline Jones Greenup and Wallace Greenup] before I went overseas [during World War II, WWII]. So it was 1942 or 1943. And after we crossed over the line in Texas I think it was, the conductor come up and told me I had to get up and go back to the segregated car. And there was a black woman passenger on the car where I was, and she told me, "Don't move." Stood up and 'cause (unclear) I looked. She said, she stood up and she said, "That's right, I told him don't move, and he gonna sit there. Take him to jail, you gonna take me too." And so the conductor looked at her, he said, "But that's the law." She said, "I don't care what the law--." She said, "He's wearing the law. He's in uniform. Leave him alone." And just whipped out her NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] card. She's, "I'll mop the floor with you with this card." And she held it up so he could see it; told him what it was. I stayed in that car and I don't think she went all the way to New Orleans, but I know I didn't move out of that car 'til I got to New Orleans. That's a true story. And she was very much a black woman, and there wasn't no question 'bout her person. She says, "No, leave him alone." "Well," the guy told her, "that's the law. I'm just doing what the law--." She said, "No, he's wearing the law, his uniform. Leave him alone." Speaker 1: Had your (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The guy left; conductor left. Story_ID: 536242 Speaker 1: Had your--when you were--before you left Baton Rouge [Louisiana] to go to live in New Orleans [Louisiana]-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh? Speaker 1: --had there been any other incidents that had occurred with your family that said perhaps you should leave and live in New Orleans? Speaker 2: Yes, well word got around about the store being sued by black folks. And it was in the paper and whatnot. And then my--when my name showed up in the newspaper, my dad [Wallace Greenup] and mother [Emmaline Jones Greenup] decided it's time for me to leave, and they made me go to New Orleans. And I went there and that's where I, that's where I stayed until I went in the [U.S.] Army, went to school there. Speaker 1: Now where were you going to school before you went to New Orleans? Was that at Cornucopia [Cornucopia School, East Baton Rouge Parish, Louisiana]? Speaker 2: No, no. Cornucopia only went to sixth grade. Speaker 1: Well you never ex- you never described Cornucopia for me. Speaker 2: Cornucopia was a one room schoolhouse on the Perkins Road, about four or five miles outside of the city limits of Baton Rouge; had one teacher and she taught from first grade up, to my recollection, up to fifth grade. Speaker 1: And that was Mrs. Lamont? Ms. Lamont (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Mrs. Lillian Lamont [sic. Lillian Mott]. Speaker 1: Lamont. Speaker 2: Eddie Robinson's mother-in-law, Doris Lamont's [Doris Mott Robinson] mother. Speaker 1: And so she taught in that, at that one school, one room school. Speaker 2: One room--yeah, and that's the first teacher I ever met when I was in first grade when my sister [Rosa Lee Greenup Williams] took me to, to register me. And I say that's the only teacher who's lap I ever remember sitting on. I was five then. Let's see, my birthday's in March and I, I went to--I don't think I was six years old. Speaker 1: So when you arrived in New Orleans, where did you go to school? Speaker 2: I went to Albert Wicker Junior High School [New Orleans, Louisiana], and I went to McDonogh 35, I think, I thought--my diploma from McDonogh 35 High School [McDonogh No. 35 Senior High School, New Orleans, Louisiana]. Speaker 1: (Pause) Okay so when you arrived in New Orleans to go to Albert Wick Junior High School-- Speaker 2: Yeah, actually I didn't go there to actually go to school. I went there to get away from what my mother considered to be danger. And-- Speaker 1: And did you have a sense that you were in trouble or that you-- Speaker 2: I, I didn't--I don't recall having that sense. But I do remember when my name came--my name, my name came up. Speaker 1: In the paper. Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: How did you feel about seeing your father stand up to this white man who was a business owner? How did that make you feel (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, that was--quite frankly, didn't surprise me 'cause he, he and his take was, "Stand your ground, but don't stand your ground foolishly." I remember that's sort of stood me in good stead even when I was in the Army in combat. I, I can truthfully say I consider my dad to be fearless, and he protected his family. Story_ID: 536243 Speaker 1: You arrive in New Orleans [Louisiana]. What neighborhood do you--are you living in when you go to live with your aunt? Speaker 2: I, I went to live with--I didn't go, I didn't live with my aunt. Speaker 1: Who did you live with? Speaker 2: I lived with a lady who to me will always be a patron saint. Her name, last name was Ms. Fuller [ph.]. Ms. Fuller let this little boy, sweaty boy sleep on her couch in her living room, and I didn't have any money to pay her, and she helped me get a job. So-- Speaker 1: Where was your first job? Speaker 2: My first job was delivery at a Katz and Besthoff [K&B] drugstore. And-- Speaker 1: At a--say that again for me. Speaker 2: K-A-T-S [sic.], I think the last name was B-E-T-Z-O-F [sic.]. It was the name of a chain of drugstores and funny thing about it, I never had a bicycle so I never learned to ride one. But I had to ride a bike in order to get that job. So I would take the bike, put my package in the basket, and I would run the bike from in front of the store so I could run and jump on it. But then I pushed it where I had to go. I never learned to ride a bike. Had never had one. That was my first job. Then my next job I worked for a filling station called Marsalis' filling station. I later learned, much, much later, that the Marsalis were the grandparents of Wynton Marsalis who plays trumpet here [New York, New York]. And they own, they owned Esso filling station on South Claiborne Avenue, and I got a job there. Then my next job was working in a restaurant. I used to sell Cokes [Coca-Cola], and-- Speaker 1: Well who helped you get into junior high school? Who was guiding your education then when you were away from your family? Speaker 2: My oldest sister Carol [Carol Greenup] was in New Orleans, and she was instrumental in that. And then my mother's brother George Jones [ph.], lived in New Orleans. Speaker 1: Well I would imagine New Orleans was a kind of a different scene than having been in Baton Rouge [Louisiana]. Speaker 2: It was very--definitely different scene. New Orleans was like Broadway to me. And-- Speaker 1: Did you know Dutch Morial [Ernest Morial]? Speaker 2: Very well, very well, and his young son [HistoryMaker Marc H. Morial] who's now head of the Urban League [National Urban League]. Speaker 1: Did you know them during those early days in New Orleans (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yes, oh yes. Speaker 1: How did, how did you meet Dutch? Speaker 2: I met--well actually Dutch is younger than I was, much younger than I was. But I, I met him--that was at a Mardi Gras, at a, a social. And then eventually when he became a lawyer, he was one of the first blacks that graduated from LSU Law School [Louisiana State University Law School; Paul M. Hebert Law Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana]. And he became my brother's lawyer who's still in business in New Orleans. And then young Dutch, his son, I, I met him here in New York [New York] when he was a student I think at Georgetown [Georgetown University, Washington, D.C.]. And--but, but we go way back, and especially with my family who's still there. But-- Speaker 1: So you're in New Orleans and you're working as you go to school (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Right. And, and I worked--worked at a restaurant on (Unclear) Street. Speaker 1: And you said your sister was instrumental in helping you stay on target-- Speaker 2: My, my oldest sister Ca-. Speaker 1: --as far as your education. Speaker 2: Yes, of course she is the one that got me the place to stay with Ms. Fuller [ph.] on Cadia Street. Ms. Fuller had this nice, I guess you would call it a railroad apartment. My sister stayed there and she had another couple who stayed there. And when I hit New Orleans, I didn't have any place to stay and she took me in like I was--as though I was her long lost son. I never forgot that, and I think, I often think of how significant and magnificent that was. She let me sleep on her couch in her living room. Story_ID: 536244 Speaker 1: When did you become, or did you become involved in local politics or civil rights in New Orleans [Louisiana] as your family had? Speaker 2: No, because what happened--well before I--said no. After my encounter in Baton Rouge [Louisiana] with A.P. Tureaud who was from New Orleans, and, and he represented the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] down there. When I joined the NAACP, well, wherever there was NAACP meeting, I was a member of the youth council there, (unclear). And I say before every single year since I was thirteen years old, I've been a member of NAACP. Speaker 1: So you're probably (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Life--got two life members. Speaker 1: Two life members. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So you joined the NAACP. We never really talked about why, and you were only thirteen years old. Speaker 2: I joined because of A.P. Tureaud who, when I met him, told my dad [Wallace Greenup], told me that he came to see us at the request of the NAACP, and that was it for me. Speaker 1: At this time, did you start thinking about what you wanted to do with your life as far as maybe I should go to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yes. By the time I met A.P. Tureaud, I always knew I wanted to be a lawyer like him. Story_ID: 536245 Speaker 1: Another interesting thing happened. Since I been in New York, I was living in Westchester [Westchester County], Hastings-on-Hudson. In fact all the civil rights activity was not down south; some of it was here. So one of my most interesting cases, I represented a young sixteen year old high school student who was the first black student to attend a school in Westchester where it's all white, and she got arrested because one of her male class- students, fellow students, called her the N word and then spit on her. And she maybe should've turned the other cheek, but that crossed the line as far as she was, so she upped and slapped him. And lo she got arrested and was prosecuted for assault, and while she being prosecuted, she was represented by a white lawyer I didn't know but had been assigned to her. And she and her aunt who was her guardian, observed that the courtroom was full of people that were (unclear), but the only in there looking like them were those two. So the aunt went to the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] in White Plains [New York] and asked for some help. So they looked around and through the NAACP network, they knew I was trying cases, so they got me to try the case. And I was successful and got the charges dismissed and got her back in school. So I frequently talk about my favorite fee. So one day about a year after the case was--maybe longer, 'cause we--she and her aunt walked into my office and said to me, "Well, we still don't have any money, but we just wanna let you know we appreciate what you did for us." And they gave me a plaque that I call my favorite fee. And that's the plaque up there under that crowbar. I don't know if you can--the lighting--I don't know if you can read what it says or not. It's from Stephanie and Nannie, and Nannie was her aunt. So I frequently tell people that's my favorite fee. That's for a two week trial in Westchester County. Speaker 2: Were the--during that trial--this took place in 1960s, in the '63 [1963], '64 [1964]? Speaker 1: It was, it was--may have--yeah it was--I think it was--had to be in the late '60s [1960s], I think, and Elizabeth [Elizabeth Hall]-- Speaker 2: We can look up the dates of exactly when (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay well anyway, she found it online, I was shocked. She found it online the other day. Speaker 2: Yeah I found it and it said 1963, but I just wanted to clarify that. Speaker 1: Yeah, whatever, whatever it was there. Speaker 2: So do you vividly remember that trial? Is that something that stands out for you? Speaker 1: Oh, no doubt about it. That young lady kept in touch with me. She went to a historical black school [HBCU] in North Carolina, North Carolina, now North Carolina Central [North Carolina Central University, Durham, North Carolina], became a teacher and kept in--she kept in touch with me for years. Story_ID: 536246 Speaker 1: So at what--you said you--after you met A.P., you decided yourself that you wanted to be an attorney. Did you know you wanted to be a civil rights attorney? Speaker 2: No, but I think it came naturally, though, 'cause that's how I met the first lawyer I had ever met, and he was the one that impressed me. Speaker 1: Where did he go to school? Speaker 2: A.P. Tureaud went to Howard University law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.]. His undergraduate school I think was Xavier University [Xavier University of Louisiana] in New Orleans [Louisiana]. Speaker 1: Did he ever become a mentor to you? Did you have any more contact with him after that trial? Speaker 2: I, I had some contact with him, but not a lot 'cause, 'cause I was in Baton Rouge [Louisiana] and he was in New Orleans. He didn't communi- say, "What do you do now?" and whatnot. But I made myself known to him. I met his son. I met his son in Washington, D.C. That's an interesting story. I was, I was inducted into the hall of fame by the National Bar Association, and one year a classmate of mine was being inducted and Cora T. Walker who's a legendary New York [New York] lawyer, the late Cora T. Walker, was supposed to present him. She didn't make it 'cause she was sick and so the chairperson asked, "Well who else is here from New York?" So somebody said, "Well [HistoryMaker] Jeff Greenup is here," and named some other people. (Unclear) that sounds good. Said, "Jeff's already been inducted, we get him to present his classmate." So as we were all sitting, we the presenters, were sitting talking, A.P. Tureaud, Jr. was sitting on my right. I didn't know who he was. He was there because his father was being inducted into the hall of fame posthumously, and he was asked to present his dad. And he was talking to the man on his right, and I heard the conversation, saying, "That name Greenup intrigues me." I'm sitting right next to him, now. But he--but I'm on the podium 'cause I already been inducted. And he said, "I remember in Westchester [Westchester County, New York] where I lived watching a trial back during the civil rights days, or reading about a trial, and the lawyer's name in the paper was Greenup. And I remember my dad telling me about a famous client he had [Wallace Greenup] who was a preacher, and he had a son named Greenup, and I always wondered whether there was a connection." So I'm listening. So then the program moves along. I, I turn and I, I say, "Who are you presenting?" He said, "Well, I'm here to present my dad." I said, "What's your dad's name?" "My dad's name is A.P. Tureaud. He's now the late A.P. Tureaud." I said, "What's your name?" He said, "Well, I'm his son, I'm A.P. Tureaud." I said, "Is that right?" "Yeah." He said, "What's your name?" I said, "Well my name is Jeff Greenup." He said, "What?" I said, "Yeah." I said--he said, "Do you know my dad?" I said, "Of course I know your dad. Your dad is responsible for me being a lawyer today." He--to make a long story short, the speech he had to present his dad, he took that and put it back in his briefcase, and told that story, and presented his dad. His dad, his father used to talk about this minister had a little son who got arrested in Baton Rouge and Thurgood [Thurgood Marshall] had gotten him to go off and arrested and get them out of jail. And he heard his had speak about them. And when he saw that trial and saw my name, he wondered if there was any connection. I happened to be that guy. So we've talked several times since I been back. He still lives in Westchester. A.P. Tureaud, Jr., the man who's responsible for me being a lawyer who came and represented me and my dad. Story_ID: 536247 Speaker 1: So when you were in, and after you moved to New Orleans [Louisiana] and you continue your education, are you thinking after your--you get your high school diploma [from McDonogh No. 35 Senior High School, New Orleans, Louisiana] that you're going to continue and be able to go to college? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah I'll be--yeah. That was, that was a monumental thought because quite frankly, I had never heard of anything about a free college. That's why I was shocked when I came to New York [New York] and found out they had free, free colleges. My whole thing was, how was I gonna work a job and save my nickels and dimes and dollars and be able to go to college? But then I--and World War II [WWII] came along and I went in the [U.S.] Army. I spent four years, one month, twenty days and nine hours in the Army, twenty-six months in combat, and came back and that was the G.I. Bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944]. So then I wanted to go to law school in Louisiana 'cause my family was in business there and I wanted to practice there, but in those days if you looked like me, you couldn't go to law school in Louisiana. So I had to leave Louisiana and come to New York to go to law school. That's how I ended up in Brooklyn Law, and then after I finished law school I went back to Louisiana to see if I could get admitted the way the other Louisiana boys got admitted. In those days if you graduated from a Louisiana law school, you didn't have to take an exam. You just got waived in. Course everybody was white then. So I went to see the chairperson of the committee that processed people for the bar, and I say to him that I wanted to be waived in to the bar the same as the other Louisiana boys were. He said, "Where did you go to law school?" I said, "I went to Brooklyn Law School [Brooklyn, New York]." And he said, "Well did you study the Napoleonic Code?" I said, "No, that wasn't required, but I studied all the, the--." Incidentally in those days, Louisiana, California and I think Hawaii were the only three states that required you to study the Napoleonic Code because civil law is based on that. Back in New England, was based on the common law. So he said, "Well I think you got a problem." I said, "Why do I have a problem?" I said, "I didn't challenge your law that required me to leave my home state to go to law school." I said, "You said I couldn't go to local law school, so I went where I could go." And this was a Class A law school. He said, "Well yeah we know Brooklyn. It's a (unclear) law school," he said, "but that Napoleonic Code, you need that if you gone practice in Louisiana." I said, "Well, I did what the law required me to do, and I don't think I should be punished twice." He said, "Well let me get back to you," and I said, "Okay." Story_ID: 536248 Speaker 1: So I'm down there now. The guy told me, he said, "Well I'll call you in a day or two." So he called the next day. Said, "I've got some good news for you." I said, "Is that right?" "Yeah." He said, "How would you like to teach a course at the Southern Law School [Southern University Law School; Southern University Law Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana]?" I said, "Teach at Southern Law School?" "Yeah, I just spoke to Dr. Clark [Felton Grandison Clark]," who was president of the college then, "and he told me it was okay. He, he said he knows your family and he'd be glad to give you a job with you teaching in the law school for, for a semester and study the Napoleonic Code while you're there and then you'll be qualified to come into the bar." I said well I hadn't planned on teaching. I'm--I already consider myself behind. I spent four years, one month, twenty-nine hours in the [U.S.] Army and I lost time between leaving Baton Rouge [Louisiana] and coming to New Orleans [Louisiana] so I want to start practicing law. So he said, "Well think about it and Dr. Clark says he knows your family well. Dr. Clark's president of the university. They'd be happy to have you come there and teach for a semester or a year and then at the same time you have your qualifications within Napoleonic Code." So I, I said, "All right, I'll get back to you." So I hung up the phone and I called A.P. Tureaud. Speaker 2: And what did A.P. Tureaud have to say? Speaker 1: A.P. Tureaud said, told me, said, "Well, come on down." He gave me appointment for the next day. And then they--my mother [Emmaline Jones Greenup] called me and said, "Well you got a call here from New York [New York]. You probably need to return they call." And then she said, "Who is this? Somebody called, said it's very important, and said he sounded concerned 'cause he saw your name in the paper." "Saw my name in the paper?" So I called. What had happened when I finished the law, finished law school [Brooklyn Law School, Brooklyn, New York] here, before I went to Louisiana, I took the bar exam. So somebody's calling to tell me they saw my name in the paper; I had passed the bar. So I said, "You sure?" "Yeah, man." I said, I said, "Well read on, what else is there?" I was convinced that the article--I left New Orleans, headed back to New York and been here ever since. So that's right 'cause A.P. Tureaud wondered what happened to you 'cause he was looking forward to bringing that case. But I sometime wish I had just went through the challenge, you know, but in those days I just trying to become a lawyer. So that's, that's true story. Story_ID: 536249 Speaker 1: We kind of flew through law school [Brooklyn Law School, Brooklyn, New York] or, or college. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: You were accepted into Long Island University [Brooklyn, New York]. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Who helped you get into Long Island University and how did you find out that it was free? Speaker 2: Well Long Island University was not free. I, I was talking about the city colleges [City University of New York, New York, New York] that were free. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: What happened when I was overseas, I decided I wanted to go to college. Speaker 1: But you were drafted before you could go to college. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So you were drafted in what year? Speaker 2: Nineteen forty-one [1941]. Speaker 1: So you were drafted in 1941. You were still in high school then, or just getting out of high school [McDonogh No. 35 Senior High School, New Orleans, Louisiana]? Speaker 2: May have been--yeah, just getting out of high school, high school. Now I, I lost--when I left Baton Rouge [Louisiana]--New Orleans [Louisiana], I lost some time in there. And but I was just getting out of high school. I (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you received your diploma and was drafted about the same time. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay, go ahead. Speaker 2: And so when I was overseas, I decided wherever Uncle Sam put me out, that's where I would go to school. I was hoping he would put me out on the West Coast 'cause I wanted to go to school--I had been to Berkeley [California], had been stationed out there and I liked it, but instead he put me out in New York. So he put me out in New York and I applied to NYU [New York University, New York, New York] and Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York]. I think those were the only two schools I applied here. So Columbia sent me an acceptance letter. But what happened, my transcript got--didn't get there in time. So I showed up at Columbia, the dean of admissions said, "Well, we still don't have your transcript and to admit you without a transcript is a no-no." But I said, "But what I can do?" "You can do the first semester and then, then the first semester hopefully your transcript will be here and you can come back to us." He said, "I have a friend who's a dean of admissions over at Long Island University. Maybe you can do your first semester there." So he called the friend up while I'm sitting there, and so he said, "Well I happen to know they are taking in students that waiting on the transcripts," 'cause a lot of high schools are late getting the transcripts in, especially from southern parts of the country. So LSU--so LIU told him, said well send him over. And I went over and I was interviewed by the dean of the college, I'll never forget. Tristram Metcalfe [Tristram Walker Metcalfe], there's a building named after him, and he became so fascinated with me just talking about my experience and whatnot and without--sight unseen took me. And later, later on when my transcript came to Columbia, they contacted and told me my transcript was in, but I was having a good--I was liking what was going on at LIU. And time was of the essence and whatnot so I, so I decided I will stay at LIU. Story_ID: 536250 Speaker 1: What were you liking about what was going at LIU [Long Island University, Brooklyn, New York] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I--first I liked the way--my first encounter with LIU, I liked the dean. He-- Speaker 1: Tristam [Tristram Walker Metcalfe]. Speaker 2: Yeah, he, he was the dean of the college and, and he--they had a dean of admissions, but he was dean of the college. And, and I was just impressed with him and he told my--what we could do and I remember--and I never was ready. I ended up being president of the government class while at LIU, and that's the--and that was 1948 when Harry Truman [President Harry S. Truman] beat Tom Dewey [Thomas E. Dewey]. Well, as president of the government, the government class, I was required to have a leader for the Republicans, a leader for the Democrats, and that, and that was--the third party [Progressive Party] was headed by Henry Wallace [Henry A. Wallace]. So I had no problem getting somebody to lead the troops for Henry Wallace, extreme liberal. And I had no problem getting somebody to lead the troops for the Republicans; Tom Dewey was the candidate. But nobody wanted to take the, the president of the Democratic club where Harry Truman was the candidate. So as a result nobody wanted, I took it myself, and lo and behold, I got involved, became a block captain in Brooklyn [New York], and I ended up when President Truman spoke at the Brooklyn Academy of Music [New York, New York], I ended up introducing his daughter [Margaret Truman Daniel]. His daughter ended up introducing Senator Alben Barkley [Alben W. Barkley] who became the vice president, and Senator Barkley introduced the president. And Truman won. And I still have a copy of that picture of him holding up the headline of Chicago Tribune saying, that says Dewey won ["Dewey Defeats Truman"]. And so the fellow who was president of the Republican club at LIU, I saw two or three of his students, they say, "Well, Jay [ph.] is looking for you." His name was Jay. "What you mean?" He said, "I don't know, but he's really hard looking for you. You ought to check him out." Well, Jay was president of the Republican club. So I caught up with him, but he found me. And in those days, they had a club they called, I think they called the 52-20 club where for fifty-two weeks we got something, about a hundred dollars a month or something like that. And so Jay, I said, "You been looking--?" Said, "Yeah, I been looking for you." "Well, what you wanna tell me?" He said, "I wanna tell you, you're a damn fool." I say, "What do you mean?" He say, "Here's a hundred dollars." Back in those days a hundred dollars big money. I say, "What this for?" He say, "Any time the odds are twenty to one, fool, you supposed to bet." He said, "I bet five hundred dollars on Harry Truman, although I'm supporting Tom Dewey." So his five hundred dollars twenty to one, he was loaded. So he was looking for me to rub that in my face and give me a hundred dollars. True story. But a hundred dollars in those days been like a thousand, almost two thousand dollars now. Harry Truman won that bet, mean. And I was only president of Democratic so--'cause couldn't get anybody else to take it. That's the year when Strom Thurmond splits the Democratic Party and ran as a Dixiecrat and-- Speaker 1: How did you feel about that being the president of the Democrat club? Speaker 2: Oh, I mean, I, I, I, I enjoyed it because my being president of the Democratic club--and I got to meet some, meet some interesting people. And as part of my course study, I had to go out and see what the Democrats were doing. And as part of my class paper, I had to write a paper on the activities of the local Democrats working for the support of Harry Truman. So--and I got an A on that paper; I had lots to write. So--and that gave me my taste, but I never was a politician. I frequently say I am of politics but not in politics. I lo- I like, I like politics and I, I know the importance of them, and I work (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Who did you-- Story_ID: 536251 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Who did you meet when you came to New York [New York] for the first time to study at LIU [Long Island University, Brooklyn, New York]? Speaker 2: My first stop was at the YMCA [Harlem YMCA, New York, New York] here on 135th Street, every time I pass by. Ninety-six or 97 percent of the people there were students, veterans, and I made some interesting--I, I met some guys there who went on to become--to do great things. And I got, I was able to have that room because I met some people in Savannah, Georgia, the Walker family. Mrs., Mrs. Walker was a Christian Scientist and I used to have occasion to visit her home on weekends. Speaker 1: Why? Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: Why would you visit her home on weekends? Speaker 2: Well at the--have--had the service club called the USO [United Service Organizations], and at the USO club on the weekends, I had met her daughter who lived in Savannah. And she had a brother who was in the [U.S.] Army. And so I became friends with the Walker family and Mrs. Walker had a daughter named Cecile, and--Cecelia [ph.]. And her mother used to talk to me about that Christian Science stuff. She was interesting; I met some interesting people. In fact, one Sunday afternoon she had a tea at her house when I was stationed in Camp Stewart, Georgia [Fort Stewart, Georgia], and lo and behold, one of the people who was there was Dr. Mary McLeod Bethune. I didn't really know who she was then, but I--but I turned out when she gave that, what, to me, was a fantastic speech to the troops as we were assembled, getting ready to march onto the train, and she dropped that gem about, "Whatever you do, don't worry. Worry is only interest on tomorrow's troubles." And that stuck with me all, all my life. Every part of it. So when I wrote Cecelia 'cause I had been talking about going to Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California] 'cause I been in the South Pacific, and, and then the China Burma India Theater. I thought I would be coming to California. So but then when I found out after I got my papers I wrote Cecelia, Cecelia, tell her I wasn't going to California, coming to New York. And she got me a room at the Y before I ever got to the states, and that stood me in good stead. And I'm trying to think who was the first--I met some fellows--trying to see if it's anybody I remember I met at the Y. I met a fella, Harry Thom- Hal Thomas [ph.], he's older than me, good bridge player, and he helped me to hone my bridge skills. And Hal lived to be almost a hundred years old. He's in Washington, D.C. And then I met, I met Paul Robeson, I used to go to 125th Street and listen to him and-- Speaker 1: Did you go to the church down the street, on--Zion [Mother African Methodist Episcopal Zion Church, New York, New York]? Speaker 2: I went to the church several times, but I didn't join there 'cause I grew up Baptist, but I found a church I liked, which was the Congregational church [Grace Congregational Church of Harlem, New York, New York], which I'm going there this evening, 310 West 139th Street. But yes I did go there and I went to some programs there also, and in fact I heard Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.'s son speak at that church down there. And-- Speaker 1: So when you moved to New York-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --it was, it was in, it was after--it was in the late '40s [1940s] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. I moved, I came to New York and, and I think it was (unclear)--I came to New York I think it was October of 1945. I was out of the Army-- Speaker 1: So when-- Story_ID: 536252 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So when you were drafted into the [U.S.] Army-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh? Speaker 1: --were you worried about going to--were you worried about the war [World War II, WWII]? Were you worried about what would happen to you? Speaker 2: When I was drafted, I really didn't think about it much, truth, much different excitement. I don't remember really being worried, but then after (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you know the Tuskegee, the Tuskegee Airmen and what they were doing down in Alabama? Speaker 2: Oh, I, I read about them. They, they, they--I may have been overseas. In fact I saw where they were honored at the White House [Washington, D.C.] the other night. Percy Sutton is part of that group. Speaker 1: Were you aware of them when you were drafted into the Army? Were you-- Speaker 2: Oh, no, no they hadn't come into being then. Speaker 1: That--they came a little after you. Speaker 2: They came after me. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They came into being after me. I had met Jim, Jim--Benjamin O. Davis, Jr. who commanded them at Tuskegee [Tuskegee Army Airfield; Sharpe Field, Tuskegee, Alabama] and in combat when they went overseas. I had met his dad [Benjamin O. Davis, Sr.] who was brigadier general. In fact, when I first met Colin Powell [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell], I told him, I said, "Glad to meet you," 'cause the only one I saw was a one star general when I was in there. And I saw General B.O. Davis, he was a brigadier general and he came to Camp Stewart, Georgia [Fort Stewart, Georgia], to do an inspection after a riot. Speaker 1: What was the riot? Speaker 2: The riot had occurred as a result of some conflict with some of the black soldiers, all black outfit, and white officers. And something, and I was head, head of a cadre then, training so as to go overseas. And this outfit was all ready to go overseas and one night the soldiers, they just shot up the officers' quarters, and ended up having a riot. I stayed in a prone position under the bushes for almost an hour while gunfire was going on, and General Benj- Benjamin O. Davis came down to inspect. And after his inspection, his conclusion was we can't send this outfit overseas with these officers. So they broke up the outfit and took my outfit, which was a training outfit, and replaced it with that outfit. And that's how I ended up going overseas. 'Cause I had already been approved for OCS, Officers' Can- Candidate (unclear), but I was holding it as an ace in the hole. My thought was that once I became eligible to go overseas, then I go over to, I'd go off to Officer Candidate School. Shoot, boy after that riot, and had to replace that unit, they took my off- general orders came down. "All leaves are canceled. All officers' candidate applications are frozen, and this outfit is alerted for overseas duty." Story_ID: 536253 Speaker 1: Where did you arrive first when you were overseas? Speaker 2: My first stop was in--I remember being on the, being on the high seas for at least three weeks, not seeing any land. My first stop was a place called Perch--what's the name? Gosh, what (unclear) know? Australia [sic. Perth, Australia]. And then from there the next stop was Bo (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So how were you--go ahead, the next stop was. Speaker 2: Was Bombay, India. Speaker 1: Bombay, India. How were you treated on the ship? Speaker 2: On the ship I was treated fine. We had over six thousand men, men and equipment on there. Speaker 1: Black and white. Speaker 2: Yeah black and white. But most-- Speaker 1: And the ship was not segregated. Speaker 2: Well the units was segregated 'cause they had black units and they had white units, and there were segregated units on the ship, but they, but I was treated fine on the ship. I remember, I remember the, the cooks on the ship giving me steak dinners and whatnot. They knew I was headed for combat. I was treated fine on the ship and my men were, 'cause I always looked out for my men 'cause I knew they had my back covered. I frequently tell people I experienced fear when I was in combat, but I never experienced the type of fear, experienced the type of fear I experienced when I was down south with Dr. Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]. Because when I was in the [U.S.] Army, I knew the guys had my back covered, but when I was down south with Dr. King, the guys who was supposed to have my back covered, they were the enemy. The Ku Klux Klan [KKK] controlled the police and whatnot. That was, that was an experience. I--that's when I really experienced fear. Story_ID: 536254 Speaker 1: I remember in those days the Civil Liberties Union [American Civil Liberties Union]--or was the constitutional law committee would send down lawyers, teams of lawyers in groups of five. When I got ready to go down, we had run out of black lawyers, so all four of my teammates were white. I was the leader of the team and one of my teammates had been a classmate with the then attorney general at the Yale Law School [New Haven, Connecticut], Nicholas Katzenbach. So we were in St. Augustine [Florida] and they had a habit of intimidating and beating up the white folks. So they, they beat all four of the white folks, members of my team and called them nigger lovers. So one of my teammate members, he came to me and said, "Well what we gonna do about this?" Well he was the one who's the roommate of--excuse me. He was a roommate of Nicholas Katzenbach who had been the attorney general, who was then the attorney general of the United States. And I said, "Well call your roommate," and so he was a fellow with a big--after they whipped him, one fellow hit--struck at him with an iron pipe and missed him by this much (gesture) and hit the side of a car. Put a dent in the side of a car an inch deep. Had hit him, would have killed him. So he placed a call to the attorney general's office. He made it collect. So the young lady who answered the phone, said, "Well sorry, we can't take a collect call." He said, "Well you need to take this call." She said, "I can't." He said, "Yes, you can, and I want you to take it 'cause the attorney general will know that somebody tried to call him and you didn't put the call through. So I suggest you take the call." So she said, "Well you put it like that, I guess I'll check." So she apparently put him on hold and for a minute or two she came back on. She said, "All right, you're right, the attorney general will take your call." I'm standing there when he was talking to the attorney general, and told the attorney general, he said, "You need federal marshals down here like yesterday." Told him what happened to him and the other three members of my team, and within six days we had federal marshals in St. Augustine, Florida. And that's when things started turning around. And I lost--I don't know if those, some of those guys are, any of those guys are lives there now, but I kept in touch with them for a long time after I came back. And for my service down there, they gave me that little white plaque on the end over there if you ever read it. Story_ID: 536255 Speaker 1: One night we got a call from New York [New York], say they needed lawyers in Quincy, Florida. Well Quincy, Florida was a predominantly black area, two thirds of the people lived there were black; there were no registered voters. And so we got a call one night from New York that they needed a lawyer in Quincy, Florida that Friday, and this is Wednesday. Well that meant an overnight ride on the train from Jacksonville [Florida] to Tallahassee [Florida], and they had just had the railroads bombed 'bout two days earlier. They claimed it was a labor union disturbance, but people who were in a position to know told me it was a civil, anti-civil rights activity. So when we got ready to send somebody to Quincy, Florida, we always asked for a volunteer. So if nobody volunteers to go, then we had to vote. So we took a vote as to who would go. The vote was four to one that I would go and the one vote against me going was my vote (laughter). So I took the overnight ride train, and before you went on a mission like that, you were required to attend an institute at Columbia University Law School [Columbia Law School, New York, New York]. And, and one of the topics was how to stay out of jail when working as a civil rights lawyer, and they used to stress to us, "It may sound glamorous once it's over, but it's not glamorous when it happens and it's not glamorous when you're in there. And you need--a lawyer cannot rep- his client, represent his client if the lawyer is in jail." So they had--teaching tactics on how to stay out of jail, and one of the tactics they stressed was avoid interracial travel groups when in the South. So when I went to take that ride overnight from Jacksonville. I traveled by car from St. Augustine [Florida] to Jacksonville, and got the train in Jacksonville and traveled to Tallahassee, which is a long overnight ride. I said, "Well how will I know who the people are when I get there?" They said, "Well we'll--they'll have a committee to meet you." Said, "Okay." So when I got there, got off train, the committee that met me (laughter) had a cute little blonde girl hanging on the arm--she was a student--I don't want to lie now. Where was she a student from? One of these Ivy League schools. And a black male student that looked like you and me. She was hanging on his arm. Then they had a cute little black girl hanging on the arm of a sandy red hair, handsome red hair, sandy hair white boy who went to University of Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California], and they greeted me singing freedom songs. I said, "Well, shit. I'm gonna get killed before I get to my mission," (laughter). Really, I was very--and they could see I was frightened. So anyway, I overcome that and we went on to Quincy, Florida, where I was due in court that Friday. Story_ID: 536256 Speaker 1: So they put me up in a fellow's house who was a--worked as a bricklayer. He eventually lost his mortgage, because he let me sleep there; they canceled his mortgage. And so we go to court the next--that Friday. Courtroom was jam packed. So finally the judge comes in and he says to the clerk, "I thought you told me you only had one case on the calendar." So the clerk said, "Well that's all we have your honor." The judge said, "Well why are all these people here?" The clerk said, "Well they came to see the defendant's lawyer." Judge said, "They came to see the defendant's lawyer? Who is he? Where is he?" So the clerk said, "Guy named Greenup [HistoryMaker Jeff Greenup]." The judge said, "Greenup. Greenup in the house? Stand up. Approach the bench." So I stood up and started to approach the bench. As I started to go to the bench, he looked at me, at one point he said, "You mean that nigger is a lawyer?" (Laughter) So, so, "What is your name?" I--and so they taught us in the institute and Thurgood Marshall used to always say and Bob Carter [HistoryMaker Robert L. Carter] used to always tell us that protect the record. Put everything in the record you can get in the record. Make friends with everybody around the courthouse, including the guard, the guy who's sweeping the floor and anybody. Be friendly. You never know who's going--you gonna need for a witness. So me being cognizant of the fact that I needed to protect the record. I didn't see any court reporter; I didn't know of any recording system. So my response was, "Good morning, your honor. I'll be happy to note my appearance and tell you who I am as soon as I know we're making a record. I don't see anyb--" Story_ID: 536257 Speaker 1: Today is April 24th-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Six. Speaker 1: April 26th (laughter). Speaker 2: Twenty-six [April 26, 2007], yes. Speaker 1: Our completion interview with Mr. Greenup [HistoryMaker Jeff Greenup]. Story_ID: 536258 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) We left off talking about your Aunt Charlotte. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So if we can just talk about her a little more and sum up what we were saying about her and her life and her job and the work she'd done with Oscar De Priest [Oscar Stanton De Priest] and then we will move on talking about your professional career. Speaker 2: Okay, well my late aunt, Charlotte B. Greenup, indeed one of my favorite people. She was originally from Louisiana and as a young woman she married and she migrated to Chicago [Illinois], and she worked for Oscar De Priest, the first black congressman after Reconstruction, as his executive secretary. And of course her name was legendary in the family, and amongst friends because she was always helping people, and in those days it was strict segregation, even in some of the northern cities. You went into Chicago, you, you look like me and my aunt, you couldn't just regular, regularly check into any hotel. So a lot of people who would travel south, they would live with her, including the late Dr. Felton Clark [Felton Grandison Clark] who was the president of Southern University at Louisiana [Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] and his son who succeeded him as president, Felton Clark, Jr. [sic.]. And Lionel Hampton and his wife Gladys [Gladys Riddle Hampton], that was their mainstay when they were in Chicago. And Lionel used to even call her Aunt Charlotte. And so after she had spent fifty years in Chicago, and married, raised her kids. She had two daughters, and she went back to her home state of Louisiana in the northern part of the state, Clinton, Louisiana, where she worked at a voter registration drive. The organization she was affiliated with at that time, well there were two, but the main one was CORE, the Congress of Racial Equality, back in those days led by Jim Farmer [James Farmer], who was a peach of a guy himself. And during the course of her work in the voter registration drive, she took the approach of trying to bring about a meeting of the minds of the races and so as leader of the group in Clinton, Louisiana, under her leadership they decided to write a letter to the chief prosecutor in the parish--parish in Louisiana is the same as counties in most states--asking for a meeting and she--they stated in their letter the purpose of--one of the main purpose of the meeting was to seek to establish a committee of the local citizens, black and white, so that they could resolve some of the hard burning issues at that time, which all had to do about race. So the chief prosecutor, he took exception to that and as a result, he had her and all the members of her committee indicted and for (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) On what charges? Speaker 2: On the charges I want to--of violating the state segregation laws and he had one particular charge I'm looking for. If I can take a minute. In fact in his letter, he--may I read her--their letter, then his letter? All right (background noise). Story_ID: 536259 Speaker 1: There were twe- twelve, twelve, twelve, twelve Negroes, that's the way they were referred to in the article, were residents of the parish were-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): By whom? Speaker 1: The mayor--urging him, they were urging the mayor to settle the racial problems peacefully (background noise), and this was their letter. The letter's dated---will somebody get that? The letter was dated September the 19th, 1963 and addressed to Joseph S. Phelps [ph.], mayor, East Feliciana Parish [Louisiana]. "Dear Sir. We, the undersigned individuals and organizations of East Feliciana Parish, representing the Negroes of East Feliciana Parish, hereby submit this resolution to you as our elected public official and appeal to you to commence taking initial steps to establish a biracial committee on community relations in order to avoid civil domestic disturbances of racial tension. We further request that the committee be composed of any white citizens you desire. However, we reserve the right to submit the equal number of Negro citizens to serve on such committee. We respectfully suggest that the public officials who serve on the committee be composed of city council mem- council persons, school board members, (unclear) members, and other elected leaders of both races for a careful consideration of the many problems facing our community. Due to the pressing need of such a committee to establish meaningful, effective communications between all the citizens of our community, we urgently request action on this resolution before September 26th, 1963. Respectfully submitted." And the lead signature of that was Charlotte B. Greenup, my late [paternal] aunt. Story_ID: 536260 Speaker 1: In response the district attorney wrote and if I may, I'll read his response, and if I can--bear with me. "Dear Sirs and Madams (laughter): I have before me your resolution of September the 19th received by me on September 21st, in which you state that you represent the Negroes of East Feliciana Parish [Louisiana]. Fortunately, I am acquainted with all of you and with a great many of the Negro citizens of East Feliciana Parish, and I regard your statement that you represent the Negroes in East Feliciana Parish as an utter falsehood. You request that initial steps be taken by me to establish a biracial committee of community relations in order to avoid civil domestic disturbances of racial tension. At the outset, I point out that your request exhibits an inexcusable ignorance of the functions of my office under a republican form of government. So called biracial committees with semiofficial status in some communities represents nothing more than an effort on the part of spineless public officials to evade the plain legal responsibilities of their offices. I regard such committees as wholly illegal and unconstitutional, and the public officials who participate in them as being guilty of misconduct in office (laughter), subject to removal in appropriate proceedings. It is abundantly clear that there exists in the United States today a conscious and calculated movement to overthrow the government of the United States and that of all its political subdivisions by violence disguised as nonviolence. One of the several organizations dedicated to this end is the Congress of Racial Equality," that's CORE, organization my [paternal] aunt [Charlotte B. Greenup] worked with, "dedicated to the end--dedicated to this end is the Congress of Racial Equality with which each of you is apparently associated. I regard this organization and all of those who see fit to associate with it, as a criminal conspiracy." (Laughter) They say that. "One of the vehicles it uses to prey upon the ignorant, the unwary and the weak is the so called 'biracial committees.' Simply stated, such a group is designed to undermine, subvert and ultimately destroy constitutional government as we know it since they are never elected by the people, but attempts to exercise their influence upon the elected representatives of the people through intimidation, by threats of 'civil domestic disturbances of racial tensions.' My office has always been and will continue to be open to all persons whomever having business involving the district attorney's office. Known criminals and those who associate with them, will continue to be treated as such. Your resolution set a deadline of September the 26th for an answer. Whether this date means anything or not is of no particular moment to me. Henceforth, each of you will be held personally responsible by me for my civil do- for any civil domestic disturbance of racial tension which occured in East Feliciana Parish. Yours truly, Richard Kilbourne, District Attorney, Second District." It was sent by certified mail, return receipt requested. Story_ID: 536261 Speaker 1: As a result of that correspondence, they were eventually indicted for criminal conspiri- conspiracy and actions against the state and some charges I hadn't even heard of. But in any event, I learned about her [Greenup's paternal aunt, Charlotte B. Greenup] arrest--I was practicing law here in New York City [New York, New York]. I was chairperson of Legal Redress Committee for the New York City Branch NAACP [NAACP New York Branch, New York, New York], and at that time we were meeting in the office next to the Apollo Theater [New York, New York]. And my office was on the west side of the Apollo Theater in the building where the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] office, local office was on the east side. Percy Sutton happened to be president of the branch at that time. So as I passed by--and CORE [Congress of Racial Equality], New York City CORE at that time headed by Roy Innis, they sublet space from the NAACP in the same complex. And as I was walking past the office where they were having meetings on my way to my Legal Redress Committee meeting, I heard somebody say Greenup, and I thought they called me. So I turned around and I stuck my head in the door. I said, "Anybody call me?" So several voices said no. So as I turned around and walked away, Roy Innis said, "Hey but Jeff [HistoryMaker Jeff Greenup], Jeff, come here, come here, come here." So I said, "Well what is it Roy? You know my name." Said, "Yeah," he said, "We didn't call you, but your name." I said, "What about my name?" He said, "One of our voter registration workers down in Louisiana has been arrested and has to go to trial in a few days. And we were just discussing it now 'cause our regional counsel in Louisiana, they been trying to contact you through this office." I said, "Well I have, haven't heard from 'em." I said, "Well who is the person? What is his name?" He said, "It's not a he, it's a she." I said, "She. Greenup?" "Yes, an old lady." I said, "You don't mean Aunt Charlotte." "Yes, Charlotte B. Greenup, that's her name." (Laughter) So at that time they happened to have the lawyers from Louisiana on the phone. Law firm locally there that representing CORE was Collins, Douglas and Elie [New Orleans, Louisiana]. And so they said, "Well, they wanna speak to you now." I said, "Well I have to get to a meeting." So I spoke to--I took the phone and Bob Collins [Robert Collins], the leader of the firm was on the phone. Said, "Hey Jeff we been looking for you, man." I said, "Well I'm--my office is right there." I said, "What is it?" "Well, we have to be on trial." This happened to be a Tuesday. He said, "Well we need--we have to be on trial up in East Feliciana Parish [Louisiana] for your aunt and some other people this Friday." I said, "Yeah." I said, "Well why didn't somebody tell me?" He said, "Well, we just found out." What they do, they notify us at the last minute. Speaker 2: So that you won't have an opportunity to give it--we talked about this part of the story last time (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So, so, so he--you--we were hoping that we'd get there late and they would be able to default it. Speaker 2: To, to default you. Story_ID: 536262 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But to move back before that case, what do you consider to be your first professional job as a lawyer? Speaker 2: My first--what do I consider to be my first professional job as a lawyer now? What the law said to protect the interest of people and see that justice is done as the law specifies. That's one of the reasons why I went to law school [Brooklyn Law School, Brooklyn, New York], because I was a victim of an injustice when I was thirteen years old, and so was my dad [Wallace Greenup] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right. Well what was the first opportunity you had to practice law professionally? Speaker 2: The first opportunity I had to practice law professionally, I was admitted to the bar in New York City [New York, New York] in 1954 I believe. Speaker 1: Yes, sir. Speaker 2: And one of the first cases that stands out in my mind was a police brutality case that I was associate counsel with the late Lawrence R. Bailey who was then, he was then--the lawyer for the New York State Conference of branches [NAACP New York State Conference], and also the lawyer for the Jamaica NAACP branch [NAACP Jamaica Branch, Queens, New York]. He was lead counsel on that, and we tried that case out in Nassau County [New York] and I think it was one of the first police brutality cases ever had. That one stands out in my mind. Speaker 1: And do you remember the, the person you defended? His name? Speaker 2: It was a lady because her--I distinctly remember her. I'd be happy to go to the file and look her name up, but the--she was a widow of the, of a husband who had been killed by the police and we--that's why we were suing the county for police brutality on her behalf (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you win that case? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. After two week trial, it was settled and she was satisfied with the settlement and so were we. It was one of the first cases we had against the county, and then--something interesting about that case, tried before an all-male, white jury, and the wives of the jurors would come to court and sit in the courtroom and observe. So toward--round about the--after the first week of the trial, two or three wives came up to my colleague Lawrence Bailey, we called him Brick, and said to us, "Stick to your guns. They may not like you, but we can all tell you they respect you." Those were wives of the jurors who sitting in that case, and so I distinctly remember that. Story_ID: 536263 Speaker 1: Was this be- had you formed the law firm Mack, McFadden and Greenup [New York, New York] at this time, or did that happen later? Speaker 2: Now, yes, because the law firm Mack, McFadden and Greenup, Mack and--Ruben H. Mack and Malcolm C. Mc- from Little Rock, Arkansas and Malcolm C. McFadden from Louisburg, North Carolina, were my classmates at the Brooklyn Law School [Brooklyn, New York]. And after we--at the conclusion of the first year in law school and we all passed, well we decided well we over the big hump now. So then we agreed at the beginning of our second year that when we graduated, we would form a law firm, and we did. Story_ID: 536264 Speaker 1: And when did you meet Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] for the first time and how did that come by? Speaker 2: Now, I actually met--I, I saw Dr. King when he--I'm trying--he was in the city [New York, New York] at a mass meeting and incidentally I, I saw him the day he got stabbed, too. 'Cause I was--you know he was stabbed in a store on 125th Street, and my office was down the street, and somebody called me and I went down and I saw him as they brought him out in a ambulance. Actually saw the knife sticking in his chest as they brought him out. But I first got to know him when I went to St. Augustine, Florida with a group of lawyers sponsored by the then what was called the constitutional rights committee. It was an organization put together by the Civil Liberties Union [American Civil Liberties Union] and the NAACP Legal Defense Fund [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.], and there may have been another sponsor organization. But each--what they did, 'cause there's a great need for lawyers down south where the movement was, it would put together lawyers in groups of five and send them down. You had to sign up for at least-- Speaker 1: Six weeks. Speaker 2: --six weeks. And so when I went down in the early '60s [1960s], I know [President] Lyndon Baines Johnson was president, and Nicholas Katzenbach was United States attorney general. And I distinctly remember that--course we had run out of black lawyers and the--my four members of my team happened to be all white lawyers, and I was the only black. And one of the members of my team had been the, not only the classmate, but had been the roommate of the then sitting attorney general Nicholas Katzenbach. And all four of them were beaten by the Klan [Ku Klux Klan, KKK] and the organization called Horse (Unclear). And a couple of them were beaten in my presence 'cause it was to demonstrate to them as what they call nigger lovers, what happens to them when they try and associate with people like me. So after I, after the beating--I should--I have all their names, I just can't remember them now. Fellow who had been the roommate of the attorney general, he, he says to me, "What are we gonna do?" And I told him, I said, "Well, call your roommate." So he went and put in a collect call into the United States attorney, and I'm told by him, I was standing there, the young lady said, "Well they're--," I heard him say--he said, "She said they don't take collect calls." But he said to her, "You have to take this call. This call is for the attorney general, I know him, he was in law school [Yale Law School, New Haven, Connecticut] with me, I was in law school with him, and if you don't take the call, I'm gone tell him I tried to reach him, and you didn't put me through." So he said she said, "Well you put it like that, I'll try." So she put--tried to put the call through and it seemed like for half an hour, but after a few minutes, the attorney general of the United States came on the line. And so they greeted each other by their nicknames they did when they were roommates. And he said to the attorney general, it was pertinent to our cause there, "You need to send federal marshals here like yesterday." He explained how he'd been beaten and whatnot, and as a result of that conversation, within the next week, we had federal marshals down in St. Augustine, Florida and things began to turn around. Story_ID: 536265 Speaker 1: I met Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] during that session when he was in St. Augustine [Florida], and for security reasons, they would never let him sleep in the same place two nights in a row. So one night, he and I was supposed to sleep in a tent together, and I had a chance to meet him and greet him and we laughed and he talked about his tent. But tent, but I think he said--wasn't too sure what he was talking about, because the security apparatuses, very strict and only a limited number of people knew about it. So but in this particular day--so that's how--to answer your question--that's when I first remember meeting Dr. King and having a conversation with him. Speaker 2: But on that particular day, you were going to tell me-- Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, well not on that parti- on that, on that particular day when I was supposed to sleep in the tent with him, there was a young white boy with a southern accent; he couldn't have been more than ten, eleven years old. Our headquarters was in a dentist's office. Damn, I have his picture over there on the wall now, but his name will come to me, but it's on there. My mind play tricks on me now, since my eighty-eighth birthday. But anyway the young kid ran through the office and said, "Look out for twelve o'clock." We were having a conference and strategy meeting, what we're gonna do. Didn't pay much attention to him, at least I didn't. So then about twenty minutes to a half hour later, the same kid came back and ran through the office, said, "Dr. King shouldn't sleep in the tent tonight." Everybody's ears perked up then because where Dr. King slept was always top secret for security reasons. And the fact that this kid knew it, meant that there was a breach in security. So we deviated from the topic we were discussing and decided how we were gonna handle this apparent serious breach to security and won- we start looking at each other, wondering how did that kid get that information. We finally figured out that he probably heard it from somebody in his home talking about it. Somewhere he had heard adults talking about it what would happen if Dr. King sleeps in this tent. So sundown came and just before sundown, we all met out on the front of the office. Then he and I walked over to the tents. Anybody who wanted to see us, could see us going toward the tent. And after it became dark, we crawled in, went in the tent, crawled right out, crawled back to the office and they took him somewhere else and I stayed in the office. Story_ID: 536266 Speaker 1: You said you and Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] crawled into the tent. Speaker 2: No, we walked to the tent and, and, and in the broad daylight just before sundown so anybody who was watching would see that he was going in the tent 'cause the plan was to let whoever it was think he was in the tent when midnight came. So we walked to the tent, and he waved to folk who were out front and inclu- including Hosea Williams and other lawyers, said good night and he and I tucked in. But we only tucked, tucked in for a second, for a second. Went in and, and we didn't walk out, we crawled out of the tent all the way back to the office, and then they took him out the back of the office and took him to another location. And I stayed in the office along with a doctor, Dr. Hayling [Robert Hayling] was the dentist's name and the other members of my staff, the other four lawyers. And I think--let's see, Hosea Williams, he didn't stay; he went with Dr. King. He's one that took Dr. King wherever he took him. I don't even know where he stayed that night. And so at one, 'bout one minute after twelve [o'clock], somebody threw a stick of dynamite in the tent and blew it up. And we knew--we really became concerned then as to how that young kid knew that, and he had to hear it from somebody. And whoever he heard it from, had to be an adult and had to be--we concluded on the plan of what happened. And unfortunately the reporter said dynamite, dynamite in other tents--police, nothing happened. And I also wondered who that young kid was, where he was and I made that statement once before. I didn't know I was being covered and The New York Times picked it up and wrote it in a column. They asked me who my unsung heroes were. And I said that kid was one of them. And but I never found out who he was. Speaker 1: Well you have a picture of him, though. Speaker 2: That kid? Speaker 1: Yes. No Speaker 2: No, that picture is Dr. Hayling who's the dentist. Speaker 1: The dentist's office, okay. Speaker 2: Whose office we were--he allowed us to use that as our headquarters. And he had some awful type experiences also. Speaker 1: So that kid saved your life as well that night. Speaker 2: Oh yeah, my life and Dr. King's. We, we wondered how he knew we was gonna be sleeping in the tent. Which meant somebody had been talking out of school. I don't know how it happened, but I know the policy was that he would not sleep in the same place two nights in a row while he was there. Story_ID: 536267 Speaker 1: How would you describe the atmosphere at the time (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, I would--I guess I could best describe it by example. I've had a lot of what I called frightening and scary experiences in my life. One of 'em is when I was in combat in World War II [WWII] in Burma [Myanmar]. I was the senior first sergeant of my battal- of my company. And actually, to lead troops in battle, and some of my best buddies got killed in Burma and that was a scary experience, but I can truthfully say I never experienced the type of fear I experienced during my--that particular time in the South. It felt as though you could cut the tension with a knife and like I said, I know one of the main difference was when I was in combat, I knew my buddies had my back. But when I was down in St. Augustine, Florida and in Quincy, Florida where I eventually went to court, I knew that people who supposed to have my back was enemies, and that was a scary thing. And it just so happened, I think it was the same weekend when a black colonel driving back from--it may have been Fort Benning, Georgia, one of the camps in Georgia to Washington, D.C. and he was killed on his way back. And they des- they had a description of the car; I remember the color was red, whatnot, described the men they thought--I wonder how they knew that much and nobody was arrested. But later on after I'd gone to Quincy, Florida to, to appear in court and then from there we went to Tampa [Florida], and we had a caravan of about four cars driving from Quincy, Florida to Tampa for a civil--for a rally on the Sunday. And then we looked back, we, we missed one of our cars. So we turned around and we went and didn't see any sign of an accident. So we had been instructed to always call the justice department [U.S. Department of Justice]. So we called the justice department in Washington, D.C. and they told us to go back to the nearest police precinct and see if they were there and then call 'em back. So we went to the nearest police precinct and there they were. And they claim they had stopped them and arrested them for driving across the white line. So then we called back to the justice department and reported that we had found them, whatnot. And we told 'em where we were going and then they mapped out a route for us to take different from the route that we planned to take. And then they mapped out another route 'cause the instructions were, you never come back the same route you traveled. And that was all during that six week period when I was down in Florida. Speaker 1: Who would you, who would you talk to when you called the justice department? Speaker 2: They had--it was an arrangements of the Civil Liberties Union [American Civil Liberties Union] and the constitutional law committee. Some arrangement they had worked out with the--they had a hotline, and, and we was given that number for the hotline. Speaker 1: Because that sounds exactly like what happened to the three students in, in Mississippi. Speaker 2: In Mississippi. Speaker 1: Schwerner [Michael Schwerner], Chaney [James Chaney]-- Speaker 2: Yeah, Schwerner, Chaney, and, and Goodman [Andrew Goodman]. Speaker 1: And Goodman. Speaker 2: And Goodman. Yeah well that, that, that, that was hotline to me seemed like the only line we had to any possible protection. Speaker 1: And what they would do is redirect you to go in a different direction that what you had been (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, that was, they get, they get--they find out why you calling. You give them the--tell them what the problem is. Of course, our problem is we lost one of our carload of people. We didn't know what had happened to them. And then during the conver- the course of the conversation, we told her where we were going, where we left from. And then after we told 'em our destination and told 'em how we planned on--what route we planned on taking, they mapped out a different route for us to take and then still another route for us to take coming back. And that's the way it worked. Story_ID: 536268 Speaker 1: Were you ever afraid for your life during that time? Speaker 2: Oh, more--no question. And the scary part of it was, if anybody decided to do you in, who was you gonna turn to? I remember a program, a long running program called--by a professor from Rutgers University [The State University of New Jersey, Newark, New Jersey]--what was the name of that program? Interview, it was an interview news program. And that's when somebody wanted to know what to do about Malcolm X, and so they invited Thurgood Marshall on the program. And then I remember everybody was watching and one of the first questions they put to Thurgood, he gave a litany of the things that Malcolm X had said and wanted to know what should be done about Malcolm X. So they were terribly upset when Thurgood in his nonchalant, relaxed way said, "Well, take his facts away from him." Said, "What?" "Yeah," he said, "didn't he say--?" He said, "Yes, I heard you the first time." "Well what you gonna do 'bout that?" He said, "Take his facts away from him." They go, "What do you mean?" He said, "When Malcolm X tells you that if Malcolm X or Thurgood Marshall or any other black man walks through the State of Mississippi or Alabama or Georgia or Florida, he would be shot down like a dog and if he's white (unclear), nothing would happen to him." He said, "That's a fact. So if you wanna shut Malcolm X up, take those facts away from him." That was the whole program. And I always thought how masterful that was, the way Thurgood handled that. Speaker 1: How did he handle it? Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: How-- Speaker 2: Yeah I thought it was so mas- I thought it was masterful. He was relaxed, and he thought--he, he had the answers for them. He said if you don't want him talking like that, take his facts away from him. Speaker 1: It was Thurgood who said that to them. It was Thurgood Marshall-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --who said to the interviewer-- Speaker 2: He said it to the interviewer. If you want to change--they wanna know how--what was they gonna do about Malcolm X for what they deemed to be threatening statements he was making. Said, "So what we gonna do? Mr. Marshall?" He said, "Take his facts away from him." "What?" "Take his facts away from him." "What do you mean?" He said, "Well Malcolm X tells you that Malcolm X or Thurgood Marshall or any other man that looks like us walks through one of those states, especially Mississippi and Alabama and Georgia, he could be shot down like a mad dog and killed. And if the person who shoots him is white, he can reasonably expect that nothing would happen to him for that shooting." He said, "That's a fact. If you wanna shut Malcolm X up, take those facts away from him." Boy for him it's all plus and for the interviewer it was all downhill then. Story_ID: 536269 Speaker 1: Did you have any dealings with Thurgood Marshall? Speaker 2: Oh, y- yes. I--he used to call me his young whippersnapper. I was a member of the youth, NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] youth group. And in those days, Thur- Thurgood Marshall was head of the NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.], which was a separate and distinct organization from the line organization, NAACP. We'd always meet at our conventions and lay out legal strategies and whatnot and he used to meet with the youth group and I was a member of the youth group. So we used to vie to see who would get to carry his briefcase. So one day we supposed to meet, the weather was bad and I was the first one there and I won the right to carry his briefcase. And so that incident had even more significance when he argued Brown versus Board of Ed [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954]. So there were lines of people trying to get into the [U.S.] Supreme Court to hear the arguments, and I was one of those people. Although I was, I was admitted 1954. But I--mayo- mayor had just been--when they, when they argued the case. I know if I was a lawyer, I was a brand new lawyer. I didn't have any cause to get in the courtroom. So he saw me, so, so he--, "Bring me, bring me don't lose my suit- my suitcase boy." He gave me his suitcase and then when he went in the courtroom, I went behind him and the guard stopped me. And he turned around and said, "I want my suitcase boy." The guard said, "Oh, he--Mr. Marshall." "Oh sure, he's got my suitcase, he has my briefcase." That's how I got in the courtroom to hear the arguments, and so I frequently tell people my claim to fame is that I used to carry Thurgood Marshall's briefcase. But I won the right to do it by showing up on a bad day when some of the people didn't show up at all, the rest of them were late; I was the first one that got there. I always remember the speech he made to the group, he always give us talk, you know. At one point he made--with respect to the work he was doing and how he needed to support different people. His point was I don't need any sunshine soldiers. If you can't be with me when it's raining, cold and wet and the weather is tough, I don't need you when the sun is shining. I never forgot that. Don't need any sunshine soldiers, need--regardless of what your situation was. Story_ID: 536270 Speaker 1: What do you remember about him [Thurgood Marshall] arguing the Brown versus Board of Ed case [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954]? Speaker 2: Oh, I just, I was just fascinated. Speaker 1: How--what was his style? Speaker 2: Oh, his style was almost like he's have--you and I having a conversation, but he's louder; he was addressing his points to where he knew the bench. And he was--they had a justice on the bench then, Justice Frankfurter [Felix Frankfurter], former Harvard Law [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] professor. And he--he used to love to question Thurgood to see just how difficult a question he could answer, handle. And I was always impressed that no matter what point he was making, in front of any judge, justice would ask a question, he would stop and listen to the question. "Excuse me, judge," and then answer that question. He was masterful, he was masterful at it. And I remember John W. Davis, his adversary who made a presidential candidate, who was arguing for South Carolina and for segregation and whatnot. But he got beautiful arguments but was considered that time the most--the leading constitutional lawyer to argue before the court until Thurgood came along, and Thurgood took him down. So I have a lot of memories about that. And I loved the way I was able to get into the court [U.S. Supreme Court] 'cause there were people line--there was just as many people around trying to get in the courtroom as got in the courtroom to hear that argument. I was one of those that got in, and I got in by carrying his briefcase. Speaker 1: So do you remember the day the ruling came down? Speaker 2: Oh, I could, how could I forget that day in May? We celebrate it every, every year, May 17th, and that's a, that's a big day throughout the Civil Rights Movement. Yes, I remember that day (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And the signi- okay--and the significance of that day being celebrated, is that-- Speaker 2: That's the day when, through the legal system, we commenced to bury legal enforced segregation, still have segregation but it's no longer legal. And that was, that was the death knell. And so that's very significant, very important. I have a lot of kids, I worked with kids a lot, and I tell 'em the stories about how there's a different drinking fountain for people that look like me and them. And another one for people who look like white folks and they seem fascinated. Well why was that? What was that? They can't even, can't even understand it. I, I get upset at times. I talk to youngsters, some of 'em don't know, don't know anything about Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]. But well they know the name though, from what they read but--and I talk with them, they haven't really been indoctrinated with what his life was all about. And that to me is very important. But now his work and the sacrifice he made with his life, that's world renowned now. Speaker 1: That's what now? Speaker 2: World renowned. Speaker 1: World renowned. Speaker 2: Yes, um-hm. Story_ID: 536271 Speaker 1: We'll go back to your professional career-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and some of the cases that were important during the time you were at Mack, McFadden and Greenup [New York, New York]. Speaker 2: Oh, okay. During that time, I've always worked with the NAACP, National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, as well as other organizations, Urban League [National Urban League]. I've been a member of the Civil, American Civil Liberties Union for a long time; the National Bar Association, which came into being as a result of black lawyers not being able to join the American Bar Association, which was all white. And but my, but the NAACP is sort of like my church, 'cause that was the organization that rescued me when my daddy [Wallace Greenup] and me--when I was a youngster, when we got mar- when we got arrested down in Louisiana. And I think I told you-- Speaker 1: Yes sir. Speaker 2: --about when A.P. Tureaud came and bailed us out. Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: So the cases you were taking on were similar to the-- Speaker 1: Those--most of those cases I did were pro bono cases. I did--there were a lot of criminal cases I handled. People would come to the NAACP for legal assistance. Speaker 2: Where was your office located when you were Mack, McFadden and--? Speaker 1: 261 West 125th Street. And what I liked about it, it was right next to the Apollo Theater [New York, New York]. I used to see Lena Horne, Burt Horne [ph.], all the stars coming and going. And then when I take a, when I take a break, one time Lena Horne and I don't know if it was her brother or what, his name was Burt Horne. And he would see me when I'd come in, we got a good show today. And he would hold a ticket for me. And that's how I saw Count Basie and Duke Ellington and a lot of 'em. That would be my break, kept me able to survive. And I went to--in those days we used to get a lot of mail from prisoners and-- Speaker 2: Saying that they were wrongly con- convicted. Speaker 1: Wrongly convicted. Speaker 2: Did you ever handle any of those cases? Speaker 1: I handled, I handled (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And would have decisions reversed? Speaker 1: Oh, yeah. Story_ID: 536272 Speaker 1: There were three that stand out in my mind, but one. I guess the premier criminal case I had was the--you remember there was a young boy named Clifford Glover, you remember him? He was killed when he was ten years old out in Queens [New York], shot in the back by an officer, officer named--what was his name--Frank Shea [sic. Thomas Shea] I think it was. I know his last name was Shea, S-H-E-A. And I represented that fam- represented that family, him and his mother (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now when that happened, did the same sort of media attention surround those cases as in Amadou Diallo? Speaker 1: Oh, yes, yes, indeed yes. Speaker 2: So, so when he was killed, it was the early '70s [1970s]. Speaker 1: Yes. And, and then-- Speaker 2: And so the media circus would swarm onto the-- Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: And it would be, it became an, an event, sort of. Speaker 1: Became an event and, of course, the media tide became a two edged sword. Some of the more conservative papers, they were--they wrote as though they were advocates for the officer Shea who had killed the young man. Speaker 2: And he shot him in the back. Speaker 1: Shot him in the back, ten years old, and there was a 911 tape played in court at his murder trial. They were not going indict--had it not been for the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], they would not have indicted him for murder. Speaker 2: So who in the NAACP worked with you to help get the indictment to begin with? Speaker 1: Oh, no, actually I can't take credit for what I didn't do. It happened in Queens, the Jamaica Branch [NAACP Jamaica Branch]-- Speaker 2: Put enough pressure on the Queens district attorney. Speaker 1: But, but one of my--I came to represent the family--to answer your question--the, the, the Jamaica Branch NAACP supported by other branches, my branch, the New York Branch [NAACP New York Branch, New York, New York], the Brooklyn branch [Brooklyn NAACP, Brooklyn, New York] and other branches in the area, all demanded a thorough investigation. As a result, he was indicted for murder and he was tried for murder, although he was acquitted. And he was acquitted in spite of the fact that there was a tape, 911 tape played at the trial where you can hear the young kid crying, "I don't wanna die, I don't wanna die. Please don't kill me." And you can hear the officer say, "Die you little black fuck, die." And shot him. In spite of that, the jury acquitted him. I knew the lawyer who represented him, the lawyer, very prominent, prominent--he had been--I knew him when he was assistant district attorney, then became a prominent defense lawyer, and he actually apologized to me when the jury acquitted him. "Just doing my job, I just want you to know that, but I know how you feel." And--but those days were rough, rough. Speaker 2: Did you ever in cases like that get the opposite verdict? Did the jury ever convict a police officer for police brutality during your, your career? Speaker 1: There were, there were a few convictions, but I don't recall a criminal trial where a police officer was the defendant that I tried, and he, and he got acquitted. But after, I recall several even though they were acquitted where we won the civil suit. Speaker 2: The civil suit, right (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, and got-- Speaker 2: You were able to get money for the family. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: And in the Shea, I mean in the Shea case with the little boy, you were able to get money from the city also. Speaker 1: Oh, oh, oh yeah. That case, that case--oh yes, yes. Speaker 2: So which case was it where it was the, the high school dropout had been convicted of-- Speaker 1: Oh, oh yes. Speaker 2: And then you went on to help him become-- Speaker 1: Right. A young man he--my office was on West 125th Street, right next to the Apollo Theater between 7th [7th Avenue; Adam Clayton Powell Jr. Boulevard] and 8th Avenues [Frederick Douglass Boulevard]. He lived in the projects [St. Nicholas Houses, New York, New York] between 7th and 8th Avenue and 127th Street. And he and his friend are out one warm night and-- Story_ID: 536273 Speaker 1: There was a youngster who lived in the projects [St. Nicholas Houses, New York, New York] on West 127th Street between 7th [7th Avenue; Adam Clayton Powell Jr. Boulevard] and 8th Avenue [Frederick Douglass Boulevard], and he was arrested along with two other youngsters one night June, may have been July. And he was--they were charged with, with murder. And I interviewed my kid and talked to him, and I was convinced he was telling me the truth. So then I hired my own investigator who had been a--he was retired homicide detective. He had done some other jobs for me that I was very pleased with, and I hired him to investigate this case. And he brought me his report, and he--like me he said, "I'm convinced he didn't do it." Wrote up the report and I took the report. I don't wanna mis-say now. I think Frank Hogan was the district attorney. Took that report, and I showed it to the prosecutor. And it was very--the case went to trial; they didn't dismiss it. But afterwards, the prosecutor spoke to me and told me, "Congratulations, keep it up. He deserves what you did for him." And, and that youngster, he was a drop out and I got him back in school, and I found out in working with him that he was bright. And I wanted to know why he had dropped out of school, and he said, "Well they wasn't teaching me anything; I was bored. All they want--and they were--I was spending as much time in the principal's office as I was in the classroom." So I figured--got him back in school. He went back, and I had him report to me on Saturdays and I explained to him that when I go to court, I may encounter some judg- I will encounter some judges I don't know, and I can't control what they think of me, but I have to do my job, know my material. So he may have some teachers like that, but it's up to him to get his way and whatever he got up here, they couldn't take it away from him. That must have, to a certain extent, must have sunk in. Story_ID: 536274 Speaker 1: He finished high school and he liked to play basketball. He got a basketball scholarship to one of the Big Ten [Big Ten Conference] schools, but in his second year there, they put him on a schola- scholastic scholarship, graduated from there. So I'd forgotten about him. So I got an invitation in my office one day, invited me to the graduation ceremony. I didn't remember. So then my secretary, Margaret [ph.], who had been with me for a long time, and sure enough she said, "That name sounds familiar." So she went to the files and came up, she said, "That's So and So." "Is that right?" And it turned out it was he. So his mother was still in the project, still having problems. She couldn't afford to go to the graduation. And I had something, well I did. I wrote him send me--and we sent his mother to the graduation, and she never forgot it. And, and, and after he graduated, came back, he taught science in a high school for a couple of years. So one day--at that time I had moved--I was living in Hastings-on-Hudson [New York]. And I was parking my car, somebody come running across the street yelling, "Mr. Greenup [HistoryMaker Jeff Greenup], Mr. Greenup." I didn't know what had happened. Turned out it was he. And what he wanted to tell me that he had just been accepted in the medical, in the Columbia University school of physicians and surgeons [Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons, New York, New York], in the, in the dental school. Went there and graduated, became a dentist. And then he was living out on--got his, his mother--wasn't too long after that his mother passed, but he managed to get her a home. And he would come back and treat youngsters in the project who couldn't afford a dentist. He would stop by and see me. He didn't tell me he was doing that, but the youngsters told me. He--so I, I, I'm very proud of that one. Story_ID: 536275 Speaker 1: And you talked about moving to Hastings [Hastings-on-Hudson, New York], and you lived in Hastings for a while. And while you were there, you had to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yes, I both--I have two daughters, Carolann [Carolann Greenup] and Melanie [Melanie Greenup]. Melanie is a (unclear) assistant principal of the Fieldston High School [Ethical Culture Fieldston School] in Riverdale [Bronx, New York] and Carolann works with the board of ed [New York City Board of Education; New York City Department of Education] down here. And when they were youngsters, my wife [Anne Taylor Greenup], their mother, wanted to put them in private school. And they had been in school (unclear). So I took the position, I say well they can't live in a private world. I'd rather spend the money for a house and find a good public school, 'cause I'd like for them to have--support the public school. So that's how I ended up in Hastings. I had a friend of mine, and I ended up as a neighbor of Dr. Kenneth Clark. That's him up there (gesture). And the lady in the flowered dress, that's Mamie Clark his wife. And, and the gentleman with the papers, that's Professor Kenny Clark, and I ended up as their neighbors. And his neighbor, that's the one who took me around to look at the schools, and that's how I ended up in Hastings-on-the-Hudson. Speaker 1: Was it the schools that your daughters went to where the, the black student, the female student, the kid called her a nigger and she--okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, that was not, that was not. Hastings was a nice little town, I liked it. My oldest daughter would take some exception to me saying that. But no, that was another--because I can't remember exactly the town, I don't wanna misspeak, but I know it was north of where we were. Story_ID: 536276 Speaker 1: That was not, that was another school where that youngster was, and she was one of the first blacks there and, and where the young student had called her names and they spat on her. I mean they spat on her, she slapped 'em and they arrested her and charged her with assault. That's how I ended up on the case. No, that was a different school. Speaker 2: But how did that play out, because I know that there was an all-white jury. They convict her (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, well what happened there, she was living with her aunt, she called Nannie. And they were concerned because as the trial went on for several days, the courtroom was always full of people. But the only people they saw in the courtroom, including their lawyer, that looked like her, was she and her aunt. So the aunt was concerned and she went to the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] in White Plains [New York], 'cause they were afraid of what the results might be. And they didn't like the idea of the friendship between their lawyer, court appointed, and the district attorney. So then the NAACP in White Plains, they looked around for somebody, and so they were told to check with me. And that's how I ended up interviewing them and agreed to represent them. And so then the case was ongoing, which meant the judge had to declare a mistrial to let me in. And he did not, he didn't wanna do that. Speaker 2: Did he do it? Speaker 1: Yeah, he eventually did it. And I--Judge George Bundy Smith. Let me see where is--he did it and one of the lawyers for the NAACP Legal De Fund [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.], that's his name there, Conrad Harper [Conrad K. Harper]. He's a member of a big firm downtown. He was Legal Defense Fund. When I called the Legal Defense Fund to talk with him so I could get together on a strategy and see how I want to intervene, then he was the one, he said well go back--I told the judge that denied my motion to let me intervene. So he said, "Well go back in the courtroom, talk to your client first, make sure she understands that she retained you and she understand what retain means, and then you start screaming 'bout she had a constitutional right to a lawyer of her own choice." And-- Speaker 2: Did you do that? Speaker 1: Oh, yeah. Went back in there and exactly what Harper anticipated, 'cause he was working for the Legal Defense Fund, so he assumed (unclear). The judge interviewed her and asked her if she had retained me. And my--you could hear a pin drop and she said, "Yes." And judge went on--, "You agreed to pay him? " She--, "Yes, my aunt and I agreed to pay him when we can." "And he took it on that basis?" She said, "Yes." So he declared a mistrial and let me in. That's how I happened to get on that case. And got tried, it got dismissed, got her back in school. And then one day when she, she and her aunt came by and gave me that plaque, which what I call my favorite fee and said, "We still don't have any money." I didn't charge 'em any money anyway. She said, "But we do want you to always remember we appreciate what you done," and they gave me that plaque up there. And I tell people that's my favorite fee. Speaker 2: So that girl went on to become a teacher herself (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) She went on now--she went to one of the historical black colleges [HBCUs] in North Carolina. I can't--if it was North Carolina or Central which is now, which is now called North Carolina Central University [Durham, North Carolina], became a teacher and did well. And she--and she then stayed in touch with me for a long time. Story_ID: 536277 Speaker 1: How did you get involved with the United Nations law firm? Speaker 2: With, with what? Speaker 1: The United Nations law firm. Speaker 2: Oh, no. Actually, that w- that name was given to the law firm that I had put together, because the nature, the makeup of the partners. Speaker 1: Well talk to me about the makeup. It was Greenup-- Speaker 2: Yeah, the name of the firm was Greenup, Golar, Schimmel, Schimmel and Levister [Greenup, Schimmel, Golar and Levister, New York, New York]. We were the founding partners. Greenup [HistoryMaker Jeff Greenup] was black, Schimmel was white, and Simeon Golar recently retired as supreme court judge in Queens [New York], and Wendell Levister whose now the late Wen- deceased. When he died, he was a judge. So we put that firm together and then we had about twenty-two associates. And the reason why it was called the UN law firm 'cause we had just about every nationality. We had a lawyer, Chinese background, we had lawyer with a Japanese background, we had a WASP [White Anglo-Saxon Protestant], we had the Irish fella who was the secret- he was the assistant to one of our prominent congresspersons. And we had an Italian fella, a story about him, Joe [Joe Fertillo (ph.)]. Speaker 1: Tell me the story about Joe. Speaker 2: One day the Reverend Dr. Gardner Taylor [HistoryMaker Reverend Gardner Taylor], you may have heard of him, he was a prominent pastor of Concord Baptist Church [Concord Baptist Church of Christ, Brooklyn, New York] for a long time, and he contacted our firm on behalf of a family in his church. Well, this young son had been accused of robbery and was facing a lot of time. And Dr. Taylor felt strongly that the young man was telling him the truth, and if he was telling him the truth, he was--didn't commit the crime. So I interviewed him; I was the senior partner, and he told me a convincing story. And his story was that he and some of his friends they had a, they had a, a restaurant--I think it's similar to what the White Castle used to be. One side was white family lived and not too far away was blacks. And so when the blacks were over there, they were off bounds in the sense of people who lived there. And so they went there to buy some hamburgers and so on. And they were jumped by a group of white fellows, and they got the best of the fight. And then one--when the white boys were running and a cab driver drove to the block, saw what was happening, called the police and told 'em there was a fight going on and may end up in a riot. So the police came and they, they arrested the young man, was our client, couple of others. And his story was that the police told him, he said the police were all white, "I'm gonna see that you do a lot of time for this." And he claimed that the police officer took a dollar bill out of his pocket and threw it underneath the car and made him go and get it. And when he went underneath the car and got the dollar bill, the officer took the dollar bill away from him and said to him, "You little black fucks, this gone put you away for a long time. This is the dollar you robbed the young boys of." So with that story, we were wondering how we're gonna overcome that. Story_ID: 536278 Speaker 1: So one of the young lawyers in my office was an Italian boy and his name was Joe Fertillo [ph.], something like that, and when we found out where the incident actually happened, he said, "Well I live in that neighborhood. I live on that block." "For real?" "Yeah." So we assigned him to investigate the case. He would start at one end of the block and went down and interviewed every family on that side and started back. And when he got to the house in the area where the incident happened, there was a white family had seen and heard everything. It just so happened it's a building like this, similar to this, and the couple, the man was married and the young girl, the young lady he was with was not married. So they were standing like right underneath my stairways there. And it happened out there (gesture). They saw everything that happened and heard everything that happened. And so when he went to talk to them, he said yeah, we remember that, and told him what actually happened and gave him a statement. But when it came time to use the statement, because the boyfriend was married, they didn't wanna go forward. And he wrote it up and the judge just so happened he was Italian, the young lawyer Joe, the young lady who lived in the block, she was out with her boyfriend who happened to be married, she was Italian, he was, was not Italian, but forgive me (unclear) was. And so when we took our report, asked for a conference with the judge, and we drew legendary judge, Judge Titone [Vito Titone] who ended up sitting on the New York City highest court of appeals. He was a trial judge then. And he conferenced the case, and I showed him a report and he called the prosecutor in. He said, "What about this?" And so in the course of the conference, the district attorney said, "Yes, we talked to 'em," 'cause the judge asked if they talked to them. Said, "But they don't wanna come forward." He said, "Well why don't they wanna come forward?" "Because that boyfriend is married." Judge said, "I tell you what, it's now--," I think it was, looked at his watch and 11:15 or something like that. He said, "At two o'clock, I'll come back in here. If you are not ready with permission from your supervisor, at 2:15, to make a motion to dismiss these charges, I'm gonna do it on my own." That's what he told him. So then he said, well, make a long story short, judge say, "Well--and furthermore, I wanna talk to those witnesses." Story_ID: 536279 Speaker 1: But he did, he put the case on, had them bring the couple in, and they told the judge the same thing they told my man Joe [Joe Fertillo (ph.)]. And so the judge says to them, "Well we're not interested in getting into your love affair. We're certainly not interested in making any trouble for your family." He said, "But if you were in a similar situation and this young man had information that would stand between you and freedom, what would you want him to do?" And so (unclear) thought, he said, judge, "You would want him to come forward, wouldn't you?" "Yes, your honor." He said, "Well doesn't he deserve the same thing from you?" He said, "Furthermore, that's why our country's great, 'cause we as citizens supposed to protect each other, especially when we have truthful information." He said, "We are not interested in your family affairs, as far as making trouble for you," he said, "but I want you to put on record what you just told me and what you told these lawyers. I'm gonna dismiss these charges and we gone seal the record. You don't have to worry about what going back to your family. Do you understand that?" He said, "Now that's honorable," he said, "but--and you are doing the honorable thing. And furthermore, I wanna thank you and the young lady for coming in. However, we can't send an innocent man to jail, especially if we got information that proves his innocence." So that kid always (unclear). But that judge, Judge Titone [Vito Titone], he went to the state's highest court and he wrote some, I thought, brilliant opinions there. And he became--and the person who is chairman of the trustee board at my church [Grace Congregational Church of Harlem, New York, New York], Judge George Bundy Smith, and he's on this picture here. There he is. He--Judge Titone became one--he's also on that court, Judge Titone, and they became the best of friends. And when I went up to Albany [New York], stopped by court and saw Judge Titone, he recognized me before I recognized him. So, so that one stands out in my mind. Story_ID: 536280 Speaker 1: But the idea of the U, UN law firm [Greenup, Schimmel, Golar and Levister, New York, New York] in the course variety and the backgrounds of the people who made up the firm. I didn't think about it until somebody said, "Oh, you got that UN law firm over there." Speaker 2: And that--you started that firm in the mid-'60s [1960s]? Speaker 1: Oh, yes. That's after--that firm was started a little before John Lindsay was elected, because John Lindsay ran for mayor. That's him up there in that middle picture up top there. When he ran for mayor of New York City [New York, New York] as a Republican, nobody expected him to win. It's strongly a Democratic city. But I was Republican 'cause down south where I came, the Democrats were people like Bill Bull [ph.], Eastland [James Eastland], Rankin [John E. Rankin], Cotton Ed Smith [Ellison D. Smith] from, from Tennessee [sic. South Carolina]. And all he had to do to get reelected, was to get a--make a speech, "Keep the niggas down." Those were the people who controlled the Democratic Party in the South. And Strom Thurmond was one of 'em. Speaker 2: I thought you were a member of the Democratic club, though. Speaker 1: Where? No, I'm a registered--I call myself a Rockefeller Republican. No, my, my late Aunt Charlotte [Charlotte B. Greenup] who I told you about earlier, she was a staunch Republican, and if she thought I was a Democrat, she'd turn over in her grave. But I voted for more Democrats that I have voted for Republicans, but when I came to New York to go to school [Long Island University, Brooklyn, New York] after I got out of the [U.S.] Army, and I joined the Democratic Party when Adlai Stevenson [Adlai Stevenson II] was running. Well then when somebody asked me to work for Nelson A. Rockefeller [Nelson Rockefeller], my attitude, well how can I get along working for Rockefeller when I--? Speaker 2: Who asked you to work for Rockefeller? Speaker 1: One of his young staff people who went on and became a prominent person. He--I can't think of his name now, but one of his proteges was Parsons [HistoryMaker Richard Parsons] who head, now heads Time Warner [Time Warner Inc.]. What the hell was his name? I should remember his name. I don't really have him written down somewhere, but he was a young lawyer working on Rockefeller's campaign when Rockefeller first ran, and he recruited me. We became to be friends. He went on and he became commissioner of banks when Rockefeller was governor. And when he--when Rockefeller went to become vice president, he became head of the Dime Savings Bank [Dime Savings Bank of New York, New York, New York]. And then Parsons who is now head of Times Warner, succeeded him as president of the, of the bank. And I worked for Rockefeller. I, I did work for him up until he died. Story_ID: 536281 Speaker 1: And then I used to tell my colleagues and other people too, said, "Well, listen, I probably was the only black lawyer who had turned down the offer of a judgeship on the local level, on the supreme--state level, and on a federal level." So somebody told me they said, you need to stop telling that. You probably one of the few lawyers black or white who done that. But John Lindsay wanted to make me a judge on the civil court, but at that time, I didn't have any independent and I had two young kids [Carolann Greenup and Melanie Greenup] to educate. I had a wife [Anne Taylor Greenburg] with expensive tastes. So by the time I sat down and figured up what my take home salary would be, I couldn't pay my current expenses then. So I had to tell Lindsay, "Thank, thank you but no thank you." So then when Rockefeller [Nelson Rockefeller] became governor, he offered to put me on the state court of claims judge. At that time, I (unclear) and liked my freedom. I liked the work I was doing NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and whatnot. So I turned it down. So then he sent one of his representatives Larry Peirce [Lawrence W. Pierce], who was his first (unclear). Went on to become a member of the, of the federal court and the federal court of appeals in the Second Circuit [U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit] to see what I want. Speaker 2: Well, we're gonna pick it up with the Rockefeller story. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 536282 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You can just back up a little bit with the Rockefeller [Nelson Rockefeller] story. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: And you were telling me that he offered you a judgeship at the state [New York] level. Speaker 2: Oh, yes. He offered me to appoint me to the court of claims, as in court of claims judge to the supreme bench, and I wasn't ready to accept it. Anyway, I was involved in so many different things and I said I started making money then. And so he, he sent Larry Pierce [Lawrence W. Pierce] to talk to me, see whether I would--was there a problem, what did I want? And I told, and I asked Larry, I said, "Well, tell the governor I appreciate the offer, and I, I respect him very much, but everybody can't be a judge. He needs some eyes and ears in the street, and I wanted to be the eyes and ears in the street." Sent him back. So right after that, he called somebody and had them give me some legal work. And I did that legal--I don't wanna name the agency, but--and I did legal work for them until Rockefeller died. But--and I used to enjoy campaigning with him up here in Harlem [New York, New York] and whatnot. Learned a, learned a lot from him. I got to know three of the brothers, but two better than the other. I knew Nelson, the governor best, and I knew his brother Winthrop [Winthrop Rockefeller] who was eventually the governor of Arkansas and who was president of the New York City Urban League [New York Urban League] and whatnot. And, but then the next offer was to the federal bench which I would have taken. It came from President Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] the recommendation of Governor Rockefeller, but I didn't accept that offer 'cause at that time I was, how should I put it? Well I, I'll be--the, the--Internal Revenue [Internal Revenue Service] was looking at my tax returns and whatnot. And I wasn't gonna embarrass the governor, nor the president. It turned out all right. I just said thank you but no thank you 'cause I didn't see going before the congressional committee you know and whatnot, and but-- Speaker 1: Do you think the IRS was-- Speaker 2: No, it was a legitimate inquiry. Speaker 1: It was legitimate? Speaker 2: Yeah. 'Cause I, I had got busy and I, quite frankly, I was down, had been down south doing something. And I, obviously I--it was a legitimate inquiry as I recall. Story_ID: 536283 Speaker 1: So I wanna talk about some of the other Republicans that, that were in New York [New York] at the time. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Gloria Toote. Speaker 2: Yes. I know Gloria, Gloria's my--long time my neighbor, still my neighbor, lives in my block. She-- Speaker 1: How would you describe her? Speaker 2: A dy- dynamic, very persistent young lady, and I certainly characterize her as a good lawyer. And my experience with Gloria, if she told you something, you can put your money on it. So I, I, I respect her. She, she, she works--she--I'm trying to think somebody appointed her to a position with HUD [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development] for a while I believe. And I don't know what she--I forget what president it was (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I think it was Ronald Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] maybe. Speaker 2: Hm? Speaker 1: I think it was Reagan. Speaker 2: May have been Ronald Reagan. May have been President Ronald Reagan. Yeah, I got his picture there. Speaker 1: So, [HistoryMaker] Evelyn Cunningham. Speaker 2: Evelyn Cunningham, we go way back. When I first start practicing law, Evelyn Cunningham was writing for the Pittsburgh Courier [New Pittsburgh Courier]. She and--what was the editor's name? Albert? Anyway, they had offices on 125th Street, on 7th [7th Avenue; Adam Clayton Powell Jr. Boulevard] and 125th Street, and I was able to get my first law office was on the same floor next to the Pittsburgh Courier. And Evelyn Cunningham told me about the space. We go that far back. And when we--I've always greatly admired her and respected her. We've done some things together. But she, she's top notch. That's, that's, that's my lady. That's--Evelyn Cunningham is terrific. I know she's helped a lot of people. Story_ID: 536284 Speaker 1: Let's talk about the Harlem Urban Development Corporation. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: What, what was the purpose of that corporation? Speaker 2: All right. The purpose, the Harlem Urban Development Corporation was one of the many subsidiaries of the state urban development corporation [New York State Urban Development Corporation], and significantly, from my point of view, when Governor Rockefeller [Nelson Rockefeller] recommended the establishment of the Urban Development Corporation, he did it in honor of the life of Dr. Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]. He wanted to improve conditions in the area and whatnot, and he set up that organization and in various areas of the state that are subsidiaries. And the subsidiary in the Harlem area [New York, New York], was HUDC, the Harlem Urban Development Corporation. And I was instrumental in that subsidiary having the powers that it has, some powers that other subsidiaries didn't have. For instance, we were one of the few, may have been one of the only subsidiaries that used to go to, to Albany [New York] and get our own budget and funding, and we had our own board of directors. And I was asked to be a member of the board. And the--Ed Logue [Edward J. Logue] who was the head of the state urban development corporation, he wanted me to be on the board, but I didn't wanna be what I considered to be a rubber--part of a rubber stamp. And I said, "But since we have, we are responsible for our own operation, we're responsible for going off and getting our own budget and whatnot, I think we should have voted--I think the Harlem Urban Development Corporation should have voting rights, voting power." Ed, the kingfish--a lot about him I like. He wasn't for that, and majority of the fellows on the board went along with him. So I refused to go on the board because I said, "I don't wanna be a part of an organization where I'm gonna work and use my talents and efforts in a cause and I can--we can be put out of business overnight. He has 100 percent of the voting stock, and you have none." So I think they should have a stock arrangement wherein HUDC would have some stock and the power or the voting rights for that stock should be so structured so that we wouldn't be a rubber stamp. It wouldn't be just a question of even if he have a majority stock or two thirds of it, we need a structure wherein we should have some stock where we could not be automatically put out of business. He didn't go for that and they didn't go for that and so I refused to go on the board. Story_ID: 536285 Speaker 1: So what do you say to the people who say that the organization spent over $100 million in twenty years and had nothing to show for it? Speaker 2: Oh, I just say that's a, that was a fabulous falsehood and proof of the pudding is after Governor Pataki [George Pataki] became governor, and had the state department [U.S. Department of State] investigation do a thorough and what I characterize as an excruciating examination of the HUDC, the final report came out and was written in The New York Times, a small little column, there was no wrongdoing found on the part of HUDC in spite of all the headlines they got and whatnot. And the Gladys Hampton Houses on St. Nicholas Avenue [New York, New York]--there's a lot of development of HUDC. My complaint was as much with my own colleagues and people, as I was with that because at one time my idea was the Harlem Urban Development Corporation should have developed Harlem [New York, New York] the way it's being developed now. And my position was and I talked--and I run into some of the fellows now, and they say, well, we talk about it and that let's do an in depth survey of all of Harlem, and they did the survey. There are a lot of property owners who are on the margin and so many of 'em on the verge of losing their property, because of their inability to pay taxes. I said, "Set up an account of all of those people who on the verge of losing their property for inability to pay taxes, you pay the taxes. And instead of letting the city be the (unclear) of the property, you take back the (unclear). Charge them reasonable interest rates, and that's part of the mission." I say, "Don't forget Governor Rockefeller [Nelson Rockefeller] set up the whole shebang, in order to say urban development corporation, in memory and in honor of Dr. Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]. So I say we should step in the shoes and rescue those people about to lose their property and pay the taxes for them. Take back a mortgage, it's legal, and give them terms that they can meet. And if eventually they can or don't pay, instead of the property going to the city, (unclear), and then you can develop it." But that sound too radical for a lot of them, especially for, for Ed Logue [sic. Edward J. Logue]. Now, what a lot of people don't realize, the Urban, Urban Development Corporation [New York State Urban Development Corporation] still the paramount organization, it went bankrupt. Harlem Urban Development never did. When UDC was in bankrupt, HUDC was still functioning. Never went bankrupt, because of the structure we put in place there. So I, I'm proud of the work we did, could have done more. I think we'd be much better off if they had followed my suggestion about-- Speaker 1: Developing Harlem. Speaker 2: Developing Harlem. Speaker 1: Who's developing Harlem now? Speaker 2: Well the powerbrokers. Speaker 1: And who are they? Speaker 2: The, the big multimillion dollar landlords and the people who were in, in--who have connections with the political system. Story_ID: 536286 Speaker 1: I don't criticize it, you know, but-- Speaker 2: What is the fate of Harlem [New York, New York]? What do you think will happen? Speaker 1: What is the fate of Harlem? I think it's a mixed bag. Speaker 2: Of? Speaker 1: In the sense that, if you wanna just place a lot of people who look upon Harlem as their home. I had a woman in this office from West 136th Street, and she came over and talked to me, I had her come in. And she asked me, "What's going on?" I said, "What do you mean?" She said, "I been living in Harlem all my life. I live one block from 136th Street. I can't afford to live in Harlem anymore." Said, "What do you mean you can't live in Harlem anymore?" She said, "Well I been paying what I thought was a pretty reasonable rent and in terms of what was happening," she's paying close to $700 a month. She said, "But now my landlord tells me unless I can pay him $2,100 a month, I'm out; he needs the space. I can't afford to pay him $2,100 a month." So that's one of the things that's going on. Other things that's going on, there are some houses around, going down 8th Avenue [Frederick Douglass Boulevard] between 139th [Street] and 140th Street. I wrote--I--incidentally, my church is the Grace Congregational Church of the United Church of Christ [Grace Congregational Church of Harlem, New York, New York] located at 310 West 159th Street between 8th Avenue, Edgecombe Avenue. And I used to write the city and trying to intercede to get them to fix up that building because ad- addicts used to hang out there, and it was a hazard for the neighborhood, especially to my church members. Now, that building has been fixed up and the average person be hard pressed to get an apartment in there. And my position is if they found the money to fix it up now for people who don't look like me, why couldn't they find the money? And let's do it. And I said--used to say to the people on my board of HUDC that I refused to join the board and I told them why and it's in the record. Said I'm not gone be rubber stamp in order to put myself out of business. I said but a lot of people took sides when Booker T. Washington used to debate with Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois] and Booker T. Washington said, "Put your bucket down where you are." Use what you have. I say, "I will carry that one step further and utilize intellectual powers of the board, but we can't wait around, especially," and I said, "especially since we put together our organization known as the Harlem Urban Development Corporation. I know my input and one of the reasons we had the organization and the power there because my relationship with the governor [Nelson Rockefeller]." Everyone knows that I worked for him from the time he come in. I saw the governor and spoke to the governor in Atlanta [Georgia] at Martin Luther King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] funeral. Not about this, but that's just a point of reference that how far back the relationship goes, and I--at one time HUDC used to have signs on a lot of these abandoned buildings up here. And I came and asked, "Say, when we gonna move on this?" But it didn't work out to where I thought it should have worked out. And to answer your question, it's a long way of answering as to what going to happen to Harlem. I like what's happening because I'm sure a lot of these buildings that were abandoned and where the addicts would go and sleep and start fires, I'd much rather see them fixed up now and have people living there and the neighborhood improvement now. My own (laughter)--the same type of taxpayer's money, and a lot of it is taxpayer's monies, that went to fix it up for the people who control it now, could have gone to fix it up for us. I say but I don't blame other people for that. We should have seen to that happen ourselves. Story_ID: 536287 Speaker 1: Classic example of that is the Lenox Terrace [New York, New York] where I live. That's that high rise development between West 132nd Street and West 135th Street and 5th Avenue. I did the original survey for that site, and the people who built it--the head of the syndicate that built it was Robert S. Olnick, O-L-N-E-C-K [sic.]. I worked for Robert S. Olnick when he and another young lawyer named Allen Ruben [ph.] had an entity known as Allen Roberts [ph.], both their first names, and they manage--owned, and managed a little professional building at 1082 Park Avenue. And while I was in school, I managed the building for them at night and was at school during the day. And so when--and I met Robert S. Olnick's mother. She used to come in the building, and she said to me one day, "My son wants to borrow five thousand dollars and I'm wondering if I should let him have it." I didn't say anything. So then she asked me again. I said, "Well what does he wanna do with it?" She said, "He says he wants to build housing in Harlem [New York, New York]." I said, "Well we need housing in Harlem." She said, "Well I guess I'll give it to him." So when Olnick--when he got ready to take over the site which is now Lenox Terrace, the site plans were developed by a black doctor named Dr. Godfrey Nurse who owned the red brick building right next to the Y [Harlem YMCA] on 135th Street, between the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] and 7th Avenue [Adam Clayton Powell Jr. Boulevard]. And Dr. Nurse was a very prominent doctor, patron of the arts, patron of the opera, became the head of surgery at Harlem Hospital [Harlem Hospital Center, New York, New York]. And he had a lot of his patients coming to see him who was suffering from asthma and he wondered what caused that and he decided to make an investigation. So he visited some of their homes, and he come--which was slum--their home was slum property on the area where Harlem, where Lenox Terrace is now. And he concluded that the asthmatic problems was a result of their living conditions, and as a result of that, he wrote up the proposal utilizing the HUD [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development], the federal guidelines, for that project. Dotted every I, crossed every T, but when it came time to transfer the land by the city to his corporation, they balked. They transferred the land to Metropolitan Life [Metropolitan Life Insurance Company] for the development of the Riverton [Riverton Houses, New York, New York]. They transferred land for the development that is now Delano Village [Savoy Park, New York, New York]. They transferred the land for what's now Morningside Heights [New York, New York], the co-op that Columbia University [New York, New York] owns. And they transferred the land to the group that developed Central Park West, which is a twin organization with Harlem [Harlem Urban Development Corporation]. And Dr. Godfrey Nurse told me, he eventually became a client, the only reason why he didn't get it was because of the color of his skin. And the only outfit that had the authority to transfer the land was the board of estimate. And at that time on the board of estimate, there was nobody looked liked us, and they refused. So when they balked the transfer of the land to Dr. Godfrey Nurse, there was a gentleman named Robert Moses, you probably heard of him, they used to call him the power broker. He came on the scene and he put together a group that eventually developed it. It was headed by Robert S. Olnick and the corporation that built what is now Lenox Terrace, was named Godfrey Nurse Houses, Inc., after Dr. Godfrey Nurse. And then after they had built it and, and they--the hard feelings had been somewhat pacified, then they changed it to Lenox Terrace. That's not what somebody told me. That's the true story I lived and experienced. Story_ID: 536288 Speaker 1: So when Olnick, Robert S. Olnick, got ready to come uptown to take over the site, I was working for him at 1082 Park Avenue. He says one day, "I'm taking over a site in Harlem [New York, New York], I'd like for you to work there." So I came and I hired the first staff for what is now Lenox Terrace [New York, New York]. And of course I saw some of the paperwork before I even became a lawyer from putting together the the corporation and whatnot. And I don't have the figures in front of me. I know there was seventeen, I call 'em seventeen white fellas, who took over the site from Dr. Godfrey Nurse. They paid him for the use of his name and whatnot and I don't know the intricacies of it. They kept, they kept me out of that. But I do know (unclear) I know, but the information I was exposed to enabled me to conclude with conviction that between the seventeen of 'em, they put in all seventeen of 'em together didn't put in a million dollars. The site now is worth at least 300 million [dollars] if a nickel, probably more. And I, I represent some of the tenants now who was original tenants and senior citizens. They trying to get 'em out to get more money. And I, I was talking with one of the fellas and he wanted to know what am I doing so hard on that. I said, "Well I hear a lot of talk about affirmative action." I said, "This development was taken from a black man that I knew and I represented by an affirmative act of racism." I said, "Affirmative action cuts both ways, and so the tenants who are now senior citizens, a lot of 'em been here since the project was developed, they shouldn't be harassed by the landlord." Plus the fact the landlord has reached the benefit of them being tenants because before you got your HUD [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development] mortgage, you had to have a certain number of tenants. And by them agreeing to be tenants, and qualifying as tenants, enabled the builders to have this development. And you, you stepped in their shoes. I said, "Don't tell me about affirmative action now. This is affirmative act of racism against the distinguished citizens I knew and had the privilege to represent, Dr. Godfrey Nurse and the corporation that built the building, they named it after him to soothe the public." A lot of people thought it was Dr. Godfrey's building, but they take away the building. True story. Story_ID: 536289 Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty [1960]? Speaker 2: Fifty [1950]. Speaker 1: Well, I became (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think you're, I think you were president from 1950 to 1960. Speaker 1: Oh, maybe, maybe--'cause when I went with, that's right. When I went with, who was it? Damn. I was, let me see now, trying to think, 1950, 1960. What year--? Speaker 2: I have, I have that you served as president of the New York [New York] branch of the NAACP [NAACP New York Branch] from 1950 to 1960, and that later you served as chairman of the Legal Redress Committee of the New York branch, and that you've had other offices in the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]. Speaker 1: I was trying to get--reason I'm not quite sure that the year that I was president of that, because I'm relating it to an incident. I do believe when I went south with Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], I may have--trying to think was I--no, no, no. I think, I think what triggers my mind--how did that happen? Speaker 2: So were you president before you went south? Speaker 1: I thought I was, but maybe I wasn't (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's the impression I get from the summary that my office sent me. Speaker 1: May have been, may have. I don't know why I thought became president when I came back. I got stuff around-- Speaker 2: Is he going? Can, can we just start talking about that? Speaker 1: All right well we, we start talking about it. Speaker 2: I mean you can tell me about it without necessarily knowing the specific dates. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah, day. 'Cause, let me see I was--what's on--some award here. Speaker 2: I'm gonna ask you about your awards also. Speaker 1: Okay, but I need to get those dates together. All right, go ahead. Speaker 2: Yeah? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Well I can talk about it as long as they was the dates I, the dates are--the dates playing tricks on my mind. So what, what's your kickoff question again (simultaneous)? Story_ID: 536290 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So my question is how did you become elected to--or how did you become the president of the New York [New York] chapter of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]? Speaker 2: Yeah, we call 'em branch, New York Branch [NAACP New York Branch, New York, New York] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) New York Branch. And how-- Speaker 2: Don't call them chapter. New York City Branch is the correct--when I--I first became president of the New York City Branch NAACP when--what committee was I chair of then? I think I may have been chairperson of the legal-- Speaker 1: The Legal Redress Committee (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Redress Committee, and then when the then-president, [HistoryMaker] Basil Paterson, decided to run for New York state senator and was the--and because of the national policy of the NAACP, that you cannot run for, for partisan--and a non-partisan policy of the NAACP, you couldn't be an elected official of the NAACP and run for political partisan position. So Basil Paterson had to resign if he wanted to run for New York City senator, and he did. And then the board of directors of the New York City Branch had to fill the vacancy until the next election, and so the board of elections of the New York City Branch, the board of directors of the New York City Branch of the NAACP elected me to replace Basil, and at that time I was chairperson of the Legal Redress Committee. That's how I came to be president, and then thereafter I ran for every election. I was--I served two one year terms, maybe three one year terms and then three two year terms. 'Cause I served 'bout nine or te- ten years. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: As, as--so that you--answer your question is how did I become of the president of the New York City Branch of the NAACP? Speaker 1: Yes, sir. Speaker 2: I was chairperson of the Legal Redress Committee. And when the then, the then-president Basil Paterson decided to run for the New York State Senate, due to the national policy of that if you gone run for a partisan political office, you couldn't serve as an officer and he had to resign. And when he resigned so that he would--in order he could qualify to run for the New York State Senate, then the board of directors of the New York City Branch of NAACP elected me to replace him. I served out the balance of his term, which is a matter of several months. And then ran for reelection and I--that how, tenure--almost ten years. And then ran for reelection. So I was reelected, what, what five times I guess, two three year terms and three--two one--three one year terms, two one--no. Basil's two one year terms on my own, and three two year terms. So that's two, four, six, seven, eight, ni- yeah so I served about ten years. Story_ID: 536291 Speaker 1: Can you tell us about any significant events or programs that you worked on while you were president (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. When I was president of the New York City Branch [NAACP New York Branch, New York, New York] and first elected, we had a lot of construction going on in the Manhattan [New York] area. The Lenox Terrace [New York, New York], the five square block or hereafter where our president lived, that was being built. And the Esplanade Gardens [New York, New York], a large co-op development north of 135th Street, that was being built, and we had a problem trying to get black construction workers jobs on those sites, and the--and to get them in the construction union. So one of my first major programs were to devise a lawsuit and sue the construction unions to integrate them. And we successfully did that and so we were able to get a lot of black construction workers to work on the various sites that being development. So that was my first major project I remember. Another one had to do with the education in the area and I distinctly recall there was a public elementary school on St. Nicholas Avenue and West 127th Street. The building is still there; it's been converted to co-ops, and the school was segregated. And I distinctly remember City College [City College of New York, New York, New York], which is right up on the hill from where we sitting now, the student body was--appeared to be almost 100 percent white. So I raised the question why was it that Columbia University [New York, New York], City College, and in particular based right here in Harlem [New York, New York] and the elementary schools was in walking distance of those two universities, never seemed to graduate any black children that qualified to go to those. And I probably still have the letter around here that the then president of City College wrote me, Dr. Buell G. Gallagher, who had come to City College from Talladega College [Talladega, Alabama] which is a historical black college [HBCU] in Alabama and he wrote and told me 'bout the efforts he were making, he was making. And asked to meet with me, and I met with him. And that started the educational program where I was planning on getting at least the public school, university that was fully supported by the taxpayers, integrated. And that led to what was known as open enrollment. Story_ID: 536292 Speaker 1: I was delighted and fascinated with the assistance I got from at least two white professors at City College [City College of New York, New York, New York], and they gave me some insights and I wanna be careful, but one 'em told me that whenever the non-white populations, student body, approached two percent, that the powers that be would change the rules. I never forgot that. And that bold, white female professor who happened to member of the, member of the faculty senate, I think, she was instrumental in helping us break that case. Recently, about three or four years ago, I had a young lady working in my office who graduated from City College, young black woman, and I went to her graduation. And I was--that's the same--that, that same graduation Dr. Calvin Butts [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Calvin O. Butts] who pastors the historical black Abyssinian church [Abyssinian Baptist Church, New York, New York] here, received an honorary doctorate degree. And I remember saying to the young lady who graduated and her parents, I took them to lunch afterwards. It had been a long time since I'd gone to a graduation up at City College, and the last, I was impressed with the fact that this graduation class looks more like a flower garden. They had people of different colors, backgrounds. That's now as distinguished from the first one I went when I had to sue City College; that was all white. And that's a program I'm particularly proud of. And so I've seen pendulum swing one way and then swing back. Speaker 2: Both ways. Speaker 1: So the activities of the labor and industry committee that I helped to revitalize and the educational committee, those and the results we were able to get stand out in my mind as things that happened when I was president of the New York City Branch [NAACP New York Branch, New York, New York] that I'm still proud of. Speaker 2: Excellent. Speaker 1: I don't know if that answers your question or not, but-- Speaker 2: That answers the question. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: Thank you very much. Speaker 1: You're welcome. Story_ID: 536293 Speaker 1: I have another question. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: And that's about being--your being a founding member of the Metropolitan Black Bar Association-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --which joined the Harlem Lawyers Association and the Bedford Stuyvesant Lawyers Association. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So I was wondering why those two associations merged, and if those two communities had a lot in common. Speaker 2: The answer, to answer the second question first. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I would say indeed yes, they did have a lot in common. Speaker 1: How so? Speaker 2: The Bedford Stuyvesant Lawyers Association based in Bedford-Stuyvesant in Brooklyn [New York] and the Harlem Lawyers Association based in Harlem in Manhattan [New York], both organizations were founded and organized by black lawyers. One of the reasons why they both were founded and organized is because, they were not regularly admitted and accepted in the established white bar associations. That has since changed. I have lived to see the associations of the bars of the City of New York [New York], which I deem to be one of the premier associations in the world-- Speaker 1: The world? Speaker 2: --headed by a black. First black president of the associate bar of the City of New York, Conrad Harper [Conrad K. Harper], was a friend of mine, used to be my neighbor. (Unclear). And the two organizations decided to merge because they concluded that in numbers there was strength, and since the policies were quite similar and the principles that each organization espoused was the same, that it would probably be more effective if they merged. And so I was a very active member of the Harlem Lawyers Association, and I had friends, all of the people in Bedford Stuyvesant organization were--I knew and a lot, lot of them were friends of mine. I having lived in Brooklyn, having gone to school in Brooklyn. I went to Long Island University, the Brooklyn branch campus [Long Island University, Brooklyn, New York] and the Brooklyn Law School [Brooklyn, New York]. And of course the, the (Unclear), the first chairperson of the Metropolitan Black Bar Association, the Honorable George Bundy Smith who eventually--who served on just about all of the courts. He served on the civil court, housing division. He served on the criminal court bench; he served on the trial court level of the supreme court, and on the appellate division, which is the second highest court in the state, and he served on the state's highest court. And, and in each instance he served with distinction. And (unclear) he was also a member of my church, the Grace Congregational Church of the United Church of Christ [Grace Congregational Church of Harlem, New York, New York]. Speaker 1: Could you just repeat that name again? What was your church? Speaker 2: The Grace Congregational Church-- Speaker 1: Thank you. Speaker 2: --of the United Church of Christ, located at 310 West 139th Street. And he is still a member, he's still chairperson of the trustee board. He was the founding--we had two chairpersons, the chairperson of the--from Harlem was the Honorable George Bundy Smith, and the chairperson from Brooklyn was Judge Jackson [Randolph Jackson], was--I know Judge Jackson's first name. Just had lunch with him yesterday. He was the chairperson from Bed-Stuy. And I was a member of the Harlem Lawyers Association, and I became one of the first board members and served under Judge Smith of the Metropolitan Black Bar Association, and I guess this answers the questions how did I, how did I become a member (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes. Story_ID: 536294 Speaker 1: Who were some of the other prominent Brooklyn [New York] lawyers? Maybe if you could just state their names for someone who might be interested in doing research. Speaker 2: Yes. You have to bear with me now 'cause at my young age (laughter), my mind plays tricks, tricks on me when it comes to remembering names. But there was a judge, the late Judge Albert Murray [Albert R. Murray, Sr.] was a member of the--who also attended Brooklyn Law School [Brooklyn, New York] and served on the civil court in Brooklyn and on the criminal court in Brooklyn and on the supreme court in Brooklyn, he was a member. Some other names that come to me, but-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --I knew most of them. Speaker 1: We can-- Speaker 2: And Judge George, the late Judge George (Unclear) [ph.] and as I said before, I can see all their faces, but their names escape me now. Speaker 1: Well, you've given us quite a few-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and so we can go-- Speaker 2: And then, and the so those were from Brooklyn. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: And then of course in Manhattan [New York] we had Wallace Ford [Wallace L. Ford, II] who eventually became--who had served as president of the Harlem Lawyers Association [Metropolitan Black Bar Association]. Wallace, Wallace Ford who was one of our scholarly lawyers. He graduated from Dartmouth College [Hanover, New Hampshire] with honors and also from the Harvard Law School [Cambridge Massachusetts] with honors. And then there was Judge Howard Bell, the late Judge Howard Bell who as the presiding judge of the supreme court, presided over, presided over many famous cases. You probably recall the, the preppie murder case that took place in Central Park [New York, New York]. Judge, Judge Bell distinguished himself in presiding over that case, and the, course, brilliant, legendary Cora T. Walker. She was the first woman president of the Harlem Lawyers Association. She was a member when it merged. And Shirley Stewart Farmer who is a very able lawyer as well as a concert artist, she was a member of the Harlem Lawyers Association and became the first president of the Metropolitan Black Bar Association. And she still practices, and she still performs. And, oh and then there were many others. Speaker 1: That's, that's fantastic. Speaker 2: Right. Story_ID: 536295 Speaker 1: May I ask you another? I know, we know that in 1980s you did some international travel-- Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Speaker 1: --to South Africa and to Russia to study international legal systems. So we would love to hear about both of those trips. Which, which did you take first? Speaker 2: The trip to Russia-- Speaker 1: Was first. Speaker 2: --was the first trip I made, and that was interesting because it was a plane load of lawyers, judges, law professors, and that's when the Soviet Union was still in existence, and I was the only black member-- Speaker 1: Really? Speaker 2: --of that group. Speaker 1: And I joined the-- Speaker 2: What did you do there? Speaker 1: Huh? Speaker 2: What did you do there? Speaker 1: Actually, our primary purpose of the trip, I was--I can't remember exactly what the state department [U.S. Department of State] said, so I won't try and quote them, but we were--our, our--one of our aims was to establish goodwill between the Soviet Union, Russia and the United States, to study the legal system there and, and make a comparative analysis of the legal system in Russia and legal system in the United States and I was privileged to meet some of the leaders of the Russian legal system, including law professors, judges, prosecutors, defense lawyers, and I was fascinated too. As the only black member of the group (laughter), I had occasion to tell a federal judge that I met on the trip from the Midwest, and he was very kind to me and we got to know each other. So what happened as we were going through customs, there about three lines, and there was a stage judge, I believe he may have been from Texas. He went through the line and the federal judge was right behind him, and they went through the state judge's bags, checked every piece that was in there, quite a detailed, extensive search. So they did the same thing to the judge that was in front of me. Then as I approached, the gentleman looked at my passport and looked at the visa and he smiled and he waved me through. So the federal judge was on the other line got on the line I was to come behind me. But when he got there instead of smiling and waving him through, he put him through the same type of de- tedious, detailed search. So when the judge came through, he said, "Who do you know?" I said, "I don't know, judge," I said, "but sometime this (gesture) helps." And he laughed. My color--but the only reason I can figure out why he did that. He's trying to send some type of message. (Background noise) But that was one of the asides of the trip. Story_ID: 536296 Speaker 1: And then (background noise) I was able to visit various parts of Russia and a place they call White Russia [Belarus]. And we were given a briefing before we went and advised to be careful especially (unclear) of course everybody who spoke Russian that was not necessarily the only language they spoke and understood. And so we were out in what they call White Russia, sitting in a lounge, myself and three male lawyers, a white female judge and myself. And I was impressed with the place 'cause it looked just like a lounge you see on the East Side of New York [New York]. And so we were drinking brandy. And I say--and some of the people drinking vodka. So I just happened to say, "Gee, it be wonderful if we had some music." Nothing, I didn't--so when I said that and a couple--in a few seconds, I just happen to see the bartender hit a button and music came on, which say to me he understood what I said. Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Speaker 1: And what do you think he played? Speaker 2: Jazz music. Speaker 1: No, it was one of Nat King Cole's legendary numbers. And I remembered what they told us be careful what you say and where you say it, because you never know who understand what you're saying and that was a classic example. Speaker 2: Can I (simultaneous)--? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That was--so that trip--we were in Russia for about how long? About two weeks I think, it was two weeks or maybe a little longer. Story_ID: 536297 Speaker 1: Will you tell us about your trip to South Africa to prepare for the first democratic election there? Speaker 2: Oh, yes, that was quite exciting, and to me quite an honor and quite historic. I'm an active member of the National Bar Association. The National Bar Association is a national organization of lawyers and judges. Thurgood Marshall I, I know served as secretary one time. I don't know if he was one of the founding members or not, but, but the National Bar Association came into being 'cause at that time black lawyers were not permitted to join the American Bar Association, which was all white. And so when I became a lawyer in 1954, I joined, and I've been an active member ever since. And I was fortunate enough to be inducted into the hall of fame for work I did in the Civil Rights Movement. And the National Bar Association has several committees of course, and one of them is the international committee that interacts with lawyers throughout the world and part of that interaction is to take trips to various countries. So on the eve of Nelson Mandela's run for the presidency the year before, the National Bar Association international law committee scheduled its international trip in South Africa so that we could help in any way we could with the preparation for the election, and that's how I happened to go on that trip. And it was my good fortune to meet Nelson Mandela and Bishop Tutu [Desmond Tutu] and members of the South African Supreme Court [Supreme Court of South Africa] and the then chairperson of the judicial council. The judicial council is a branch of the National Bar Association made up of all judges, and our, a member of our judicial council, Judge Strong [HistoryMaker Craig Strong] from Michigan, was travelling with us, and the South Africa Supreme Court when we visited it, invited him to sit and listen to a case. And that was historic and I was there to witness that. And so then we were given what I felt was a very interesting and enlightening three hour lecture, talk at the American embassy in South Africa on the events that led up to the election and the preparations that were being done for election and whatnot. And we met South African lawyers, black and white, and they were interested in talking to us about the elections in the United States and having been involved in elections, members of our committee was able to respond, and I was one of those members. And then the next year when Nelson Mandela was elected, the first woman president [HistoryMaker Arnette Hubbard] of the National Bar Association, who is now a superior court judge in Chicago [Illinois], she was then the, for lack of the exact term, but was tantamount to the commissioner of jurors in Chicago, the head of elections. And so she--a group of us went with her to help prepare the people who would be voting for the first time for the election. And I found that very rewarding and, and, and that was the highlight of my trip to South Africa. Story_ID: 536298 Speaker 1: I been there, let's say I went the first trip the year I first met Mandela [Nelson Mandela], then the year of the election. So I made about three, three or four trips to South Africa, and I was fascinated with the terrain and the beauty of the country. And I remember commenting, commenting to someone that just watching the news media and it's version of what Africa is like, you can get a distorted picture. Speaker 2: The news media here or the news media there (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, in, in the United States. Well one because I, I expect to see a lot of jungle. Speaker 2: And what did you see? Speaker 1: Well I saw super highways where I thought the lawyer was not telling me the truth who had been there and came back and told me the speed limit was ninety miles an hour. So when I was on a bus traveling in South Africa and I looked at the speedometer, and I asked the bus driver how fast were we going because in kilometers, you know convert 'em out. He said, "Well we doing about seventy miles an hour." I said, "Seventy miles an hour?" He say, "Yes." I said, "Well some of those cars passing us seem to be going so fast it seem as though we standing still. What's the speed limit here?" And he said, "Ninety miles an hour," (laughter). And they had super highways, beautiful, beautiful terrain. So I say well with that type of speed limit, you must have a lot of automobile accident cases here. He say we don't have a lot of accident cases, but we have a lot of death cases (laughter). So point being you drive ninety miles an hour and have an accident-- Speaker 2: You're gonna die. Speaker 1: Yeah, you looking for the death case. And speaking of that, one of my good friends, Haywood Burns [W. Haywood Burns] who was the founding dean of CUNY law school [City University of New York School of Law, New York, New York]-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --he had suffered an unfortunate accident in South Africa and he and one of the professors of the law school were killed in South Africa in an automobile accident. Speaker 2: Wow. Speaker 1: That was more recent after I was there. And I, and Pretoria [South Africa] I think was the capital there, beautiful flower gardens and they had public toilets on the streets; they were clean, imagine. And I was shocked. So I happened to comment to one of the South African natives how clean and beautiful the city was. He said to me, "Well if New York City [New York, New York] had all free labor, didn't have to pay and had the type of system we've had here for years, New York City probably be clean too." 'Cause here, the people who did that, didn't get paid for it, but they maintained it. So now the flipside of that beauty I was looking at, looking out it took a native who pointed out to me. But I enjoyed it and I, Cape Town [South Africa] and Johannesburg [South Africa] and Soweto [South Africa]. I went to various places I read about. And each time I went there, I thoroughly enjoyed the trip. I had the good fortune of meeting Nelson Mandela when he visited the United States and he made a talk on 125th Street and 7th Avenue [Adam Clayton Powell Jr. Boulevard]. And through security and whatnot I was able to get to him and introduce myself. Speaker 2: You got to see him in a little bit of a closer location. Speaker 1: Yes. Story_ID: 536299 Speaker 1: We finally wanted to ask you about some of the awards that you've won. Can you tell us about winning the Ming Advocacy Award [William Robert Ming Advocacy Award] from the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]? Speaker 2: Oh. The late, great, famous Robert Ming [William Robert Ming] was a lawyer from Chicago [Illinois]. He was a law professor. He taught at Howard University law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.]; he taught at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], and he was a lifelong member of NAACP. And I first met him when I would attend the NAACP national conventions, usually he was one of the presiding officers at the national conventions, and invariably, he was a parliamentarian. And so he did a lot of good work, rendered a lot of services through the NAACP, and he tried some legendary cases in Mississippi and long before the Civil Rights Movement and other parts of the country wherein he's defended people who were charged with crimes that carried the death penalty. And so he's highly thought of and he was revered and still is revered, and the NAACP established an award in his name, and it's given to various lawyers who in the judgment of the people who were doing the judging, services had merited the Robert Ming Award. And it was my good fortune for my branch [NAACP New York Branch, New York, New York] to be recommended for that award and the long and short of it is, that's the Robert Ming Award. But I, I, I remember him, many pleasant memories of him just by observing him, I learned so much from him. And one thing that impressed me with him: he was considerate and as patient as he was brilliant. And that made him an even greater-- Speaker 1: Individual. Speaker 2: --individual in my sight. And that's what--that's the story behind the Robert Ming Award. I've won a lot of awards, but that one I-- Speaker 1: We're just gonna ask you about a couple, can we ask (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, but I cherish that one. Story_ID: 536300 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Can we ask you about the Valor Award [NAACP Men of Valor]? Speaker 2: Oh. Let me see now. Yes, I'm trying to think. Was that the New York--who the presenter was--well I had--you not old enough to remember, but there was a famous case out of Queens [New York], a young chap, ten year old chap, Clifford Blackman [sic. Clifford Glover]. He was murdered when he was shot in the back by a police officer named Shea [Thomas Shea], and that police officer was indicted and was charged for murder in Queens, and was acquitted. However, as usually happens, that youngster, his dad [Glover's stepfather, Add Armstead] and whole family, they were arrested and accused of various crimes. And so I'm trying to think of who asked me to represent them. I think it was one of my neighbors who knew about (unclear). Anyway, I ended up being their lawyer for the family. Speaker 1: You told us about this. Speaker 2: Hm? Speaker 1: You told us about this case. Speaker 2: Yes, and the result of that case, couple of--I was given the-- Speaker 1: The Valor Award. Speaker 2: --the Valor Award for that representation. Speaker 1: Fantastic. Story_ID: 536301 Speaker 1: And then the last one was the Wiley Branton Award [Wiley A. Branton Award]. Do you remember that one (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yes, the late Wiley Branton [Wiley A. Branton, Sr.]. Wiley Branton was a figure similar to, similar to, to Robert Ming [William Robert Ming]. He was a lawyer for the Little Rock Nine in the Little Rock, Arkansas school integration case. And he did a lot of work in the civil rights era. He successfully argued the murder cases before the United States Supreme Court and won them, and one in particular I remember being present when he argued the case. And there was a member of the court, Justice Felix Frankfurter, I think he had been the dean of the Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts] before President Franklin Delano Roosevelt appointed him to the bench. And he was a brilliant at questioning lawyers. And he--believe stories that I believe to be accurate go, he enjoyed questioning people like Thurgood Marshall, of course just to see what kind of response he get, and he usually got excellent response. And Wiley Branton. So in this particular case, Wiley Branton was telling the court why there was sufficient cruel and inhuman treatment toward reversing this murder. And he told about how it was in the dead of winter, it was either in January--I think it was in January--and how they--the person who was represented, had him walk back and forth to the vehicle where he was transported to the jail with bare feet and how cold it was. And so Justice Frankfurter asked him something about the weather and were there other folks who were barefooted (unclear). And Wiley Branton's response was, "No, your honor, that time of year all of us will put our shoes back on." And so the whole court, had jury laughing, the whole court. But in any event he developed a--he was, he was a--became a towering figure in the legal world of Washington, D.C. He was--did a lot of work in the voting rights and voter registration area. And he was a legendary figure, member--was a member of the National Bar Association. So when he died because of the many things he had done and the many leadership roles he had taken, the National Bar Association established an award in honor known as the Wiley Branton Award that each year is given to a member or members of the National Bar Association whose work, particularly pro bono and volunteer work, has been in what the award and committee of the bar association deem to be in the spirit of Wiley Branton. And so I was fortunate enough to get one of those awards for work that I had done in the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and the Civil Rights Movement. Story_ID: 536302 Speaker 1: So could I just ask what you, what you would like lawyers today and lawyers in the future to learn from the work that you've done in your life? Speaker 2: Oh, boy, that's a terrific question. Well one of my disappointments today is a lot of the young lawyers who didn't experience the hardships that some of us experienced in order to just become a lawyer, and all after we became a lawyer--this is just my own personal opinion. They don't seem to, to be willing to give back, and in that the tremendous need for skillful, dedicated lawyers to help pick people who have been victimized, and especially those who have been wrongfully convicted and serving a long sentences, and I know, it's just, it's awesome when you read where people done five, ten, fifteen, twenty years and then they found that they should not have never been jailed in the first place. I think there should be more of that. That's why I admire the Innocence Project. That was founded and still run by a professor, he was one of O.C.--O.J. Simpson's lawyers [Barry Scheck]. What was his name? Speaker 1: Johnnie Cochran? Speaker 2: Who? Speaker 1: Johnnie Cochran. Speaker 2: What's the last name? Speaker 1: Cochran. Speaker 2: Oh, no. Johnnie Cochran was the lead legendary lawyer. But one of the-- Speaker 1: On O.J., but not the founder of the Innocence Project? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Well I knew Johnnie, Johnnie, I have to use the vernacular, Johnnie was my man (laughter). I happen to know him personally and he's from Louisiana, incidentally, my home state. Speaker 1: Oh, yeah? Speaker 2: Yeah. He's from Shreveport, Louisiana and I, I have pictures of him around here. Speaker 1: I don't know the name of the person who started the Innocence Project that you were telling us about. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Yeah, well he teaches up at Cardozo Law School [Benjamin N. Cardozo School of Law, New York, New York]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And but it will come to me. But he and one of his partners [Peter Neufeld], founded that and they've gotten a lot of people off of death row. And I still--I made three trips in the past year to prisons upstate. I still get a lot of mail from prisoners who read about me or something asking for my help. And some of those you just, you just have to go and talk to them. So I have--in fact one of the transcripts just came in a box 'bout the size of that box there or bigger, where I went to visit a person who's been in jail a long time. He swears he didn't do the crime. Only way I can tell to reach (unclear) so he sent me the transcript, and I wish we had more lawyers who had time to do that type of work. 'Cause I--and just the idea in a place like Chicago [Illinois] where the professor and some of his students at Northwestern University [Northwestern Pritzker School of Law, Chicago, Illinois], they got people off of death row there who-- Speaker 1: I've seen, I've read about that. Speaker 2: Some of 'em came within days of being executed. So I, I would like to see more of that type of commitment and dedication and work, because I frequently say to the young lawyers I come in contact, but for the grace of God, there go you and I. Story_ID: 536303 Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Who's in the picture? Speaker 2: Oh, well that's me of course at a social function of the Kappa Omicron chapter of the Omega Psi Phi Fraternity. I was basileus or president at the time and the other people in the picture: the gentleman standing next to me, that's Magra Belafon- Marguerite Belafonte's second husband, Dr. Mazique [Edward C. Mazique]. He was my fraternity brother from D.C. [Washington, D.C.] was in town for the affair. That's Marguerite in the white dress sitting. And the lady in the black dress next to me, she was the head of either the real estate board or the Uptown Chamber of Commerce [The Greater Harlem Chamber of Commerce], I don't recall which. But that's a social gathering that was hosted by the Omega Psi Phi Fraternity, Kappa Omicron chapter when I was basileus. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): What year? Speaker 2: Wow. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Circa, please. Speaker 2: That was in, that, that had to be in the--sometime in the '70s [1970s] I believe. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Go ahead. Speaker 2: For your understanding, devotion and diligence in helping-- Speaker 1: Our beleaguered cause, I believe. Speaker 2: Go ahead, read it. Speaker 1: This is to [HistoryMaker] Jeff Greenup, esquire, for your unswerving devotion in diligence in helping our beleaguered cause. Our heartfelt thanks, and it says Stephanie and Nannie. So Stephanie was a young high school kid I represented here in north, in Upstate New York, believe it or not, and Nannie was her aunt and her guardian. What had happened there, Stephanie had attended high school, I think she was in tenth grade, and believe it or not, it was here in New York State, Westchester County. And that was--it previously had been all white. So she was harassed and a young, a white male student spit on her and she slapped him. And of course although they didn't do anything to the young male who had been harassing her, they arrested her for assault. And she was charged for assault and was prosecuted. And during the course of her trial where she had an assigned counselor, the courtroom, according to Stephanie and her aunt, was always full of people, but they were the only two black people in there. And they didn't like the way things apparently were going and they were concerned about their--what they described as the friendly camaraderie relationship between their appointed white lawyer and the prosecutor. So they went to the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] in White Plains, New York one evening after court, told 'em, described to them what was happening and expressed what their concerns were and they asked for help. So then the White Plains chapter of the NAACP decided that they should try and get them a lawyer that they felt would be more helpful to them. Speaker 2: Okay we gotta-- Speaker 1: So they called around and they ended up--I forgot who told 'em I was in the city, but I was living in Hastings-on-the-Hudson [Hastings-on-Hudson, New York] then. And so I was asked to talk to them and I talked to them, agreed to take the case. And eventually ended up rep- the judge declared a mistrial, let me come in. Story_ID: 536304 Speaker 1: When I was-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Take it from the top. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): As you look at it from the top left. Speaker 1: From the top left. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Yeah. Speaker 1: When I was president of the New York Branch of the NAACP [NAACP New York Branch, New York, New York], in this photo are some of my board members, New York City branch board members. The young lady standing at the top in the white top is Phoebe LeSesne, who the great Delta [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority] lady. She at one time was a national treasure- national treasurer of the Delta's sorority. And standing next to her the gentleman is William Johnson [William H. Johnson, Jr.] who at the time was president of the Guardians Association. That was a police organization made up of black police officers. And standing next to Bill on my right was Ernestine Welch; she was a member of the education committee in the New York Branch of the NAACP. And then sitting on my right I'm pointing to, that was the late, great Anna Arnold Hedgeman, you may have heard of her. She was great orator, great writer, great educator, and she did work for the late Eleanor Roosevelt. And then on my left is Adrena Cook [ph.] who still lives up here on the hill. Adrena was a leader in the AKA Sorority [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority], and she retired from the city university [City College of New York, New York, New York] up here on the hill. And sitting in, in the middle, that's me as president. Those were my, some of my board members. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. What about right here. Where were you here? Speaker 1: Right there, that's at the Pierre Hotel [The Pierre, New York, New York] when I was again president or basileus of my chapter of the Omega Psi Phi Fraternity. And we were having one of our annual achievement week programs at the Pierre Hotel. And sitting right in my left, the gentleman with the eyeglasses on, that was Brother Bill Hastie [William H. Hastie]. He became the governor of one of the islands [U.S. Virgin Islands] appointed by President Truman [President Harry S. Truman]. He eventually became the presiding judge of the Third Circuit federal court of appeals [U.S. Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit] in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and a historic figure in his own right. He was one time dean of the law school at Howard University [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.]. Sitting next to him, the light skinned bald head fellow was Brother Robert Weaver [Robert C. Weaver], they were both my fraternity brothers, who was a cabinet member in Lyndon Baines, President Lyndon Baines Johnson's cabinet. He was the first secretary of HUD [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development], and you can't them in the picture, this is on the other side, you would see Thurgood Marshall, but he's not shown there, and Adam Clayton Powell [Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.]. Thurgood Marshall, Brother Hastie, the judge, and brother Bob Weaver, they were Omega men. And on the other side were Thurgood Marshall and Adam Clayton Powell, who were members of the Alpha Psi Phi Fraternity [sic. Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity]. Speaker 2: Right here, that's when the conclave, the national convention of the Omega Psi Phi Fraternity met in New York [New York]. I was the host basileus on the right there. Standing in the center is a young man who had a brokerage on Wall Street and we're giving him an achievement award. His name escapes me, but it'll come back. And on the left the gentleman in glasses, he was the national leader of the Omega Psi Phi Fraternity, know as our grand basileus, Dr. I. Gregory Newton. At that time he was part of the administration of North Carolina Central University [Durham, North Carolina]. And I wish I could think of the gentleman's name now there. I know it, but he was active on Wall Street, he had achieve something there, and he had--and his company bought a seat on Wall Street. So we were presenting him that certificate for achievement award. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Go ahead. Speaker 2: Okay in that photo you're looking at me with the late Supreme Court Justice Tom Clark [Tom C. Clark], who also served as attorney general in the Truman administration and the Lyndon Baines Johnson administration, and he went from attorney general to United States Supreme Court. This picture, it's a picture of the two of us at a reception for the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], sponsored by the NAACP Legal Defense Fund [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.]. Justice Tom C. Clark from Texas. Fine gentleman, great lawyer and a member--and he was a member of the United States Supreme Court when it unanimously, unanimously decided Brown against the Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954]. Speaker 1: There you see me with two legendary figures. That's Dr. Kenneth Clark and his wife Mamie. Dr. Kenny Clark gave testimony in the Brown versus Board of Ed lawsuit and when the Supreme Court decision was written by the late Justice, Chief Justice Earl Warren who was chief justice at the time, he cited testimony from Dr. Kenny Clark for the basis of pardon, basis of the decision, and that's his wife, Dr. Mamie Clark. Dr. Mamie Clark used to run the--an organization for youth here. And they were my neighbors when I lived in Hastings-on-the-Hudson [Hastings-on-Hudson, New York]. Speaker 2: Right there, that was a gentleman I was privileged to meet and get to know and admire. That's me with the special prosecutor, what was, what was--Solicitor General Cox. He was the solicitor general appointed by President Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] and served under Lyndon Baines Johnson, and he was the first special prosecutor that was removed from office by the late President Richard Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] and was known as the--Archibald Cox is his name, in what is known as the Saturday Night Massacre. So I was pleased to be greeted by him that night and he called the camera over and he responsible for the cameraman making that picture of the two of us together. Speaker 1: All right, there I am. That's the, again that's me with one of my classmates, the late international court of claims judge James Lopez Watson. He became the senior judge in that court and if you go down to Foley Square [New York, New York] now, you see the international court of trade is known as the James L. Watson Court of International Justice [sic. James L. Watson Court of International Trade, New York, New York]. And we are together there and some occasion, but we were, we were classmates at the Brooklyn Law School [Brooklyn, New York]. Story_ID: 536305 Speaker 1: I'm right there. I'm delighted to be in the picture with the late, great Dr. Anna Arnold Hedgeman. She and Eleanor Roosevelt were great colleagues and did a lot of things together, and the gentleman standing next to her is the late Supreme Court Justice Tom C. Clark, who I admire and I got to know Justice Tom C. Clark's son Ramsey Clark, who succeeded him as an attorney general when President Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] appointed Tom Clark to the Supreme Court. And an interest- the note on Ramsey Clark, just about all the attorney generals usually would like to argue at least one case before the United States Supreme Court, and they invariably pick the cases they want to argue and they usually not necessarily controversial. But Ramsey Clark when he picked the case that he argued before the United States Supreme Court, he picked a case that I was affiliated with out of St. Louis, Missouri wherein an interracial couple who was denied an apartment in a federally funded complex simply because they were an interracial couple. And of all the various cases that Ramsey, Attorney General Ramsey Clark could have selected, he selected that case. And I was very pleased about that and I will always remember we had times that was known as a hot bench. That's where the appellate judges ask you a lot of questions of the lawyers who were arguing before them. Indeed that was a hot bench that day, and I'll always be appreciative and grateful to Ramsey Clark for that, and that was his dad in that picture. Speaker 2: Here, that's me with one of my good friends from Chicago [Illinois], should be--remember his name, but he, he was chairman of the board and chief executive officer of one of the largest black insurance companies in the world, in the country. That was back before integration, and I know his name well, but I won't call him 'cause I don't wanna miscall it. But we were at a, at a convention together there sponsored by businessmen. Speaker 1: There you see me on the right with three of my fraternity brothers. The one right next to me is the late, great Bill Jason [William Jason], a very prominent lawyer out of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], did a lot of public service work there. And standing next to him another one of my fraternity brothers from Pennsylvania, and the gentleman sitting I'm proud to say was my fraternity brother, the late great Dr. Benjamin E. Mays [Benjamin Mays], president of Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia], and he's there autographing one of his books that we had purchased. Speaker 2: There is my dear friend it was my good fortune to be honored with her three different occasions. This is one of those occasions. That's the late, great, Connie Motley [Constance Baker Motley] who was Thurgood's [Thurgood Marshall] right hand with the Legal Defense Fund [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.], argued and won many cases before the United States Supreme Court. She was a lawyer for James Meredith when he integrated the University of Mississippi [Oxford, Mississippi]. She was the first black woman to be a member of the New York State Senate. She was the first black woman to be board president of the Borough of Manhattan [New York], and she was the first black woman to be chief judge of one of the most important courts in the world, that's the Southern District federal court [U.S. District Court for the Southern District of New York] in Lower Manhattan [New York]. Connie Motley, my dear friend, and it was my privilege to be with her when she received the Spingarn Medal, which is the highest medal that the national NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] awards in Florida several years ago. Speaker 1: And I was looking for the--I have the names of those people on the picture you have if I can find them. That's my family, that's my daughter. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Go ahead. Speaker 1: This picture here, this is a gathering of civil rights workers who were with Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] in St. Augustine [Florida] and Quincy, Florida, and our headquarters in St. Augustine was in the dental office of Dr. Hayling [Robert Hayling] who's the gentleman here with the white shirt. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): So it's on the right. Speaker 1: On the, on the far right top. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Yeah, back row. Speaker 1: Back row, standing right next to him is a young lady who was in Quincy, Florida when I--during the Civil Rights Movement, the constitutional law committee, the Civil Liberties Union [American Civil Liberties Union] and the NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund put together an umbrella group that recruited lawyers and sent them to--south to work for Dr. King and give him legal support in his efforts there. And by the time that each--before you could go, you had to go to Columbia University [New York, New York]. You had to take a, a four or six week course there on how to stay out of jail because it was the philosophy of the group that a lawyer could not represent his client if he was in jail. So in that course it taught them dos and don'ts to avoid getting arrested while you're representing Dr. King in the South. And one of 'em was to avoid traveling with interracial groups. So when I--the internat- the constitutional law committee, which is what the sponsoring committee was known as that recruited the lawyers and sent us down in groups of five. Well when by the time they got--I got ready to go, we had run out of black lawyers. So I recruited four white lawyers. My, my group of lawyers was made up of myself and four white lawyers. And one of those lawyers it turned out had been not only a classmate, but the roommate of the then attorney general of the United States, Nicholas Katzenbach, who was the attorney general of the United States at the time Dr. King was in St. Augustine with his movement. And the segregationist made it a point to beat the four white lawyers who were members of my team and called them nigger lovers and wanted to demonstrate to them what happens to white people who work with black folks for civil rights. So one day they whipped the attorney general's former roommate at the Yale Law School [New Haven, Connecticut], and he asked me, say, "Well what are we gonna do?" So I say to him, "Well call your roommate." So he went to the phone and he called the justice department [U.S. Department of Justice]. The young lady answered and told him, "Well we can't take collect calls here." He said, "Well you must take this call." Speaker 2: We wanna get to a couple more pictures. Speaker 1: All right, okay. Speaker 2: And you talked--you have also told us this story too. Speaker 1: I told you. Speaker 2: We're not gonna miss it. Speaker 1: All right, okay, so let me--now, now so I'm supposed to talk about well in any event, one of the cases I handled in Quincy, Florida, the woman standing next to the gentleman on the top with the white shirt was there. She was one of the civil rights workers, voter registration workers, and when this photograph we're looking at now was made some thirty odd years later, she was one of the civil rights workers that showed up. And she was--had become the--she had become the commissioner of voters in Quincy, Florida. The young lady [Tananarive Due] standing next to her is the daughter of the young lady sitting there with the black dark glasses on. And she's a writer in her own right. And she co-authored a book 'Freedom in our Family' [sic. 'Freedom in the Family: A Mother-Daughter Memoir of the Fight for Civil Rights,' Tananarive Due and Patricia Stephens Due] with her mother, Patricia Due [HistoryMaker Patricia Stephens Due]. And the gentleman standing between her daughter and her husband, the daughter's father, he is the husband of the daughter. What's her name? It'll come to me. Anyway, that's Attorney John Due, D-U-E. He is the husband of Patricia Due and the father of that young lady, and right here would be---that's Pat's aunt [sic. Due's mother, Lottie Powell Stephens Hamilton]. And the gentleman standing back there, he was one of the, one of the people who was arrested at the time, and the gentleman with the blue top on his shirt, that's Mr. Edwards [Clarence Edwards] who was a very active worker in Florida. He was--he campaigned direct in Florida when Jimmy Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] ran and got elected president and Jimmy Carter accredited him for helping him carry Florida. He's standing next to me and he's the one that drove me there. And another one of Pat Due's daughters [Johnita Due] is the young lady standing next to me. And the gentleman [Miles McCray] down here kneeling, well he was a high school youngster in Quincy, Florida when I went there to represent the voter registration people that had gotten arrested. He left, became a police officer in Los Angeles, California and retired and he was back for the reunion, and that's the grandmother in the white top there. But the significant thing about Pat Due with the dark glasses on, she appeared at my church when she was nineteen years old at the first sit-in in Florida. And she and her husband Attorney John Due there, John Due was one of my bodyguards when I was down in Florida. They hosted this affair. And they called the get together of foot soldiers of the Civil Rights Movement and that's the significance of this picture. A lot more history there, but that's when she was a sit-in-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): I'm sorry, why does she wear glasses, Pat did? Speaker 1: Her eyes were damaged when she was working as a civil rights worker in Florida. And when she was a--and the mob threw something in her face, damaged her eyes. Story_ID: 536306 Speaker 1: We're looking at a picture of the lawyers who participated in the Civil Rights Movement. Standing at my far right is the Honorable George Bundy Smith, at the time he was the senior judge below the chief judge on the New York City Court of Appeals [sic. New York Court of Appeals], New York State's highest judge. Standing next to him with the glasses on is [HistoryMaker] Julius Chambers. Julius Chambers was the legendary figure. He argued cases before the United States Supreme Court. One of the famous cases out of North Carolina he handled. He was, he was former counselor, director and president of the NAACP Legal Defense Fund [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.]. He succeeded Jack Greenberg, and he also left as president of the NAACP Legal Defense Fund to become chancellor of North Carolina Central University [Durham, North Carolina]. And the gentleman next him, I better--I need to get my glasses. (Unclear), little further. Oh, that's Judge--I wanna make sure now. That gentleman is a federal judge in Pennsylvania who at one time served as the dean of the AL law school [University of Alabama School of Law, Tuscaloosa, Alabama], and he argued one of the cases before the United States Supreme Court on behalf of Judge George Bundy Smith who had been arrested as a Freedom Rider on the buses. Go the other way, go the other way. That gentleman, that's Jack Greenberg. Jack Greenberg was a long time member of the NAACP Legal Defense Fund. He succeeded Thurgood Marshall as director counsel of the NAACP Legal Defense Fund, and he successfully argued many civil rights cases before the United States Supreme Court. And that, that, that was me. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): That was you. Speaker 1: Yeah, right standing between Jack Greenberg and the, and, and Conrad Harper [Conrad K. Harper]. Conrad Harper was a member of the NAACP Legal Defense Fund back in those heavy days, and he was the first African American to be president of the association of bar, City of New York [New York City Bar Association]. And he was I think he's the first African American lawyer to serve as legal counsel to the state department [U.S. Department of State], and he was a partner with--in the firm former Secretary of State Cy Vance [Cyrus Vance] was a partner. And that gentleman there, I cannot think of his name. But in any event, he was a member then part of the NAACP Legal Defense Fund, and everybody on there because the cases they either tried or argued before the public courts during the Civil Rights Movement. And then that's--yeah that's--they call him the scholar. I can't recall his name now, but he was a close associate of Thurgood Marshall, Jack Greenberg, and the other legendary figures at the NAACP Legal Defense Fund. And at the bottom there, that gentleman is the president of the--he's one of the, one of the few black presidents of the New York State Bar Association. And, and that gentleman [HistoryMaker Kenneth Standard] is the president of the American Bar Association. And that's the legendary warhorse, Federal Judge Jack Weinstein [Jack B. Weinstein] of Brooklyn [New York]. He had written and made some great decisions, and he was former constitutional law professor at Columbia Law School [New York, New York], and he worked very closely with the NAACP Legal Defense Fund, and was a great contributor. That's, and used to be my boy, that's the late, great Judge Jawn Sandifer [Jawn A. Sandifer]. When I was, when I was treasurer of the New York Branch NAACP [NAACP New York Branch, New York, New York], Jawn Sandifer was the chairperson of the Legal Redress Committee. I succeeded him, and then he became--and he was going for the state treasurer also. He became a supreme court judge, appellate judge. That's Mrs. Thurgood Marshall [Cecilia Suyat Marshall] there, the late Thurgood Marshall's widow. And right there, I really should be able to say who that gentleman is. Name escapes me. Oh, this is Judge Nate Jones [HistoryMaker Nathaniel R. Jones]. He was a member of the Sixth Circuit federal court of appeals out in Ohio [U.S. Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit]. He's a former general counsel of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] on many cases, argued cases for the United States Supreme Court and tried civil rights cases. I believe--and that, and that-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Unclear). Speaker 1: Yeah, we talked about those. So that's the picture. I hope I got most of 'em right. Speaker 2: And that was a ceremony we had recently at the--down at the Hilton Hotel with the New York State Bar Association. Story_ID: 536307 Speaker 1: That's me again with one of the Metropolitan Black Bar Association functions. My oldest daughter Carolann [Carolann Greenup] is on my, on the right. Standing in the middle is the president, the very dynamic--the current president of the Metropolitan Black Bar Association, the Honorable Nadine Johnson, and of course the gentleman who had the good fortune to be standing next door to her, happens to be me. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Standing next to her. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Next please. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: Who's this? Speaker 1: Wow, you went and found some of my family photographs. The gentleman on the extreme right, that's my dear, longtime friend and fraternity brother, Eddie Mims [ph.] and his wife Jackie [ph.]. They are the godparents of my daughter, the youngest daughter Melanie [Melanie Greenup]. And of course they're stand--Jackie's standing next to me and also on my right is my youngest daughter Melanie, and my brother Henry [Henry Greenup], her uncle. And with the--and that's my oldest daughter Carolann. Then there's my youngest niece Valencia [Valencia Sherman Greenup]. Valencia graduated cum laude and summa cum laude from Florida A and M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida], got a--one of her degrees was in Spanish, and next to her is--that's, that's Annie Greenup [Anne Taylor Greenup], that's my mother of my two daughters and my former wife. And that's just Jackie right there with, with the sunglasses on and her husband Eddie standing next to her, my longtime friend and neighbors (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What's the occasion? Speaker 1: The occasion, the occasion. Now what--that--we usually have get-togethers. That may have been Annie's birth- it was either Annie's birth- I think that was Annie's birthday. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: Who's that? Speaker 2: Well, that looks like me, in my--when I-- Speaker 1: About when? Speaker 2: That--I had been a lawyer about maybe nine or ten years then. My office was down on 125th Street, 261, next to the Apollo Theater [New York, New York], and I used to see Burt Horne [ph.], Lena Horne's relative and other famous people going out of the Apollo Theater and I liked being there 'cause I could come downtown, stare and-- Speaker 1: You couldn't ask for a better location. Speaker 2: Couldn't ask for a better location. And then Burt knew me and he, and he let me go in there and see I had a choice seat. And I saw so many greats there. Duke Ellington, Jimmie Lunceford, Count Basie, Sammy Davis, Jr., [HistoryMaker] Lloyd Price, Lena Horne, Pearl Bailey; you name them, I saw them at the Apollo Theater. Speaker 1: Well you're looking pretty dapper there. Speaker 2: Yes, well that picture--the gentleman who made that picture is the late Mr. Hansen [Austin Hansen]. Well, he, he photographed some of the most important occurrences in my life. When I graduated from college [Long Island University, Brooklyn, New York], he made the pictures. When I graduated from law school [Brooklyn Law School, Brooklyn, New York], he made the pictures. When I opened up my office, he made the pictures, and when I relocated my office on 125th Street next to the Apollo Theater as here, he made that picture. And Brother Hansen, he, he has me spread all over the place and I'm very thankful and grateful to him for that...