 Story_ID: 68737 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe and I'm the interviewer for The HistoryMakers today. Our videographer is Paul Bieschke. Sir, can you please state your name and spell it for us, please. Speaker 2: It's "W" period, Wilson, W-I-L-S-O-N, Goode, G-O-O-D-E, Senior. Speaker 1: Okay, can you give us your date of birth? Speaker 2: August 19th, 1938. Speaker 1: And your place of birth? Speaker 2: Seaboard, S-E-A-B-O-A-R-D, North Carolina. Speaker 1: Okay, and what's your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm currently a minister and I run a ministry program. I am an adviser to a public agency working with children of prisoners. Speaker 1: Okay, and you are--you were--you are a retired-- Speaker 2: I am the former mayor of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], formerly city manager and formerly chairman of the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission for Pennsylvania. Story_ID: 68738 Speaker 1: Okay, now, before we get into depth, there are five "People Magazine-ish" kind of questions that we always ask and the first one is, and they just require a short answer. The first one is, what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: My favorite food is fish. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: My favorite color is blue. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: My favorite time of the year is the Fall. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: My favorite vacation destination is the State of North Carolina, anywhere. Speaker 1: Okay, and do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Yes, "If it's been done before, I can do it." Story_ID: 68739 Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Well let's talk about your beginnings and can you give us the--please give us the names of your parents and spell them for us, please. Speaker 2: My father's name is Albert, A-L-B-E-R-T. Last name is Goode. My mother's name is Rozelar Goode, R-O-Z-E-L-A-R, Goode. And they both are now deceased. Speaker 1: Okay, and, can you give us their birth dates and where they were born? Speaker 2: My father was born December 25th, 1903 and he was born in Northampton County, North Carolina. My mother was born August 28th, 1903 and she was born as well in Northampton County, North Carolina. Speaker 1: Okay, now, did either one of them have stories about their ancestors and where their ancestors came from? Speaker 2: Both my mother and father have stories. My father, who was born in Northampton County [North Carolina], as I said, was really the product of an incest rape. His mother, at age thirteen-- thirteen, was raped by her brother-in-law and out of that rape came my father. My grandmother was 14 years older than my father. So that's how--and--and the--his father--his actual father name was Henry Valentine from Northampton County. And my father never went to school. And he never went to school because when my grandmother married, his stepfather really did not like him and therefore made him work all the time and kept him working all the time and sent him out to work all the time and then finally, sent him to stay with my great-aunt and uncle and he stayed there but never went to school and primarily because the condition in the South at that time, I'm talking now around 1915, 1916, 1917, in that area, the condition at that time, that lend themselves to a man actually going to school. And so he never went to school and never learned how to read or write. And he did not tell me very much about his background, about his ancestral background but that's the most that I know. Story_ID: 68740 Speaker 1: My mother remembers her father talking about slavery, he having been born into slavery and then became a--a freed man along with his other siblings. My maternal grandmother was actually a half Indian, Native American, and so she was a part of--at one point a part of a tribe in North Carolina. Speaker 2: Cherokee? Speaker 1: Cherokee, yes. So, so, essentially, my mother often talked about the early years when there would be night riders who would come in the neighborhood if someone had done something and administering, what she called at that point, "white man's justice" to people, which was taking someone out and hanging them in the woods. And they were always very, very careful to know what their place was and know where they belonged. Many of her stories were about the early years in 1915, 1916, 1917 when there was a heavy Jim Crow presence in the South. And she and her siblings were part of a sharecropping group of people that lived very close to the same farms that--that her grandfather and her father had been as slaves and many of them just continued to work the farmland that was once owned by the slave owners and the descendants of slave owners now owned the land at this point. So the early years were very difficult years as she would explain them to us. Speaker 2: Did she ever talk about any ways that--did she talk about any resistance that the people offered in any way, not just physical but did she talk about that 'cause there had to be quite a bit of resentment, I think, for that kind of treatment. Speaker 1: Well, she talked about resentment but she never talked about resistance and I want to make a distinction between that. There was absolute resentment but she--she explained that they were passive because they learned early on that outright resistance would bring about sure death, jail, some other type of punishment and therefore she decided early on, along with her other siblings, that they basically was going to live and therefore toed the line and--and kind of bear down and take it so that there was a lot of passivity during that time in terms of what the white man was doing to them at that time. Speaker 2: This is basically, terror, we are talking about with the people living in--in a state of being terrorized by the--the ruling group, basically. Speaker 1: Well, well, my--as my mother described it, it was a--a form of servitude that the landlord, white landlord, owned the land and on the land were the sharecroppers, African Americans, descendants of slaves, working for descendants of slave owners and the attitude of the descendants of slave owners were not dissimilar to the attitude of the slave owners towards them in terms of what the expectations were. Story_ID: 68741 Speaker 1: I remember in my early childhood, of our moving every year, and literally every single year in ten years I was in school, I went to ten different schools in the South. And that was primarily because my father, although he could not resist what was being done, he made a decision to move on to another farm somewhere else to try and get a better deal for the family. And the interesting thing about that was that it all turned out the same. There was this constant moving in order to try and find justice, equality, some humanity in the treatment. And the sad conclusion of all that is that we found none. And, therefore, there was this constant searching, not resisting, being passive in our attitude towards the landlord and the land owner, but kind of speaking with our feet and with our movement from one place to another. My--my father, therefore, did not want in any way, shape or form to ever place his children, his family, in any danger by what he would do because the--it was known that not only would they come and take the father away, sometime they would take the mother and sometime children and do damage to them. If you go back and just look at the chronicle of the number of black men that were hanged in the South, in this period of time, you will see that there were considerable number and that stuff they knew about--those that just simply disappeared, you never saw again. There was, in fact, terror and, in fact, we grew up in that environment in the South and we knew our places. We just literally knew our places at that time. Speaker 2: In--were you instructed about how to act and how to deal with that kind of thing (unclear)? Speaker 1: It was not instructed, per se, but we knew. We knew how to act. We knew what not to do. We knew who was in charge and we knew our position and we knew our state in life. We knew that in terms of the white man, that we were regarded as inferior and in a different category and everything was reinforced in that way, from the separate schools, with hand-me-down books, to separate water fountains, to having to buy food out of the rear of a restaurant, to having go to a balcony in a movie theatre, to having to get off of the sidewalk, in the gutter, when a white person approached. Having to get out of line in a grocery store when you're buying--when someone white came in, you went to the back of the line and you could stay there for hours a time as people came in to buy food. Unless you were there buying your food, if someone white came in, they had the right to bump you and get in front of you in line. So those were the rules and we fundamentally understood the rule. We understood that you could not--could not look at a white woman and so we practiced when a white woman came by, of looking down, of looking away. And we practiced simply not ever saying anything back to someone who was white. That was--those were the rules that you lived by and that you understood, that you lived by, and anything to the contrary could have brought a whipping, a beating, jail, or worse, could have brought death to you and other siblings and your father or mother, at that time. And so those were the rules and so we learned early on what the rules were and complied with them and survived, successfully, which was a main object, was survival. Story_ID: 68742 Speaker 1: Okay, I just want to ask one question before--about your mother's--how far does she go in school? Does she go--learn how to write? Speaker 2: My mother--my mother learned how to read and write and my mother went to the eighth grade and finished eighth grade. And my mother did all of the family business and, in fact, my early remembrance of my mother was her simply--my father making an "X" and my mother signing my father's name alongside of the "X". So, for as long as I can remember, my father made the "X", my mother signed the name. My mother could write. Had a very keen mind, as did my father. And I always explain that my mother and father, though they had inadequate education, raised seven children, five boys and two girls, all of them remain alive at this time, successful--successful people in their own right. And so I think that--that is essentially that--that despite the lack of education, they understood some basic things about family structure and that was the key in my view. Speaker 1: Okay, now did your parents ever tell you about how they met and how they got together? Speaker 2: My--my mother and father met through other relatives and that is that my father was living down there in, with his aunt and uncle, and my mother had relatives also in that same area and so they met through their relatives and they got married. They had a short courtship and eventually got married and eventually raised children there. Speaker 1: Okay, now this is at Seaboard? Speaker 2: This is all in the Seaboard [North Carolina] area. All in the--the Seaboard--now Seaboard is--was at that time probably a metropolis--about 100 people and I always explain that it has one traffic light which blinks in terms of the thing itself. And the history of Seaboard is, Seaboard became a town only because it was a water stop for the Seaboard rail line that ran through there and they stopped to get water there. And, therefore, a small community grew up around there in order to service the train that stopped there but it remained a very small and very rural town, very much so. Speaker 1: Okay, so the one blinking light? Speaker 2: One--no it blinks yellow, not red. It blinks yellow. It's not even a caution-- Speaker 1: Slow down, right? Speaker 2: Slow. Speaker 1: It's not even a full caution? Speaker 2: Not even a full caution, yeah, slow down when you go through the town. And by the time you say, here is Seaboard, you're through it, you know. If you're talking and if you talk slow and you say, here is Seaboard, and someone would say, where? And you're through the town. So I'm gonna explain what Seaboard is. So--so it's not a metropolis. Story_ID: 68743 Speaker 1: Okay, can you, you know, this is a good time, I guess, to reflect back on some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up in that area, you know, when you were young, you know. What did it look like and what, you know, what--what was--what was it really like to grow up around there? Speaker 2: Well, we grew up on a farm and--and having moved so much, the typical house. The typical house on the farm was a wooden house and my memories is with--with just boards, just a piece of--boards made and a tin roof and probably three--three bedrooms. There was normally a room for myself and my four brothers, my two sisters and my mother and father. There was probably a--there was a dining room and a--a stove, either in the dining room or on, like a little porch. There was often a--a type of enclosure with--with--that we could have a porch outside. And we grew up there. No electric, kerosene lamps provided light at night. There was a--either a fire place in the house that heated the entire house, normally in the center of the house. And either there was a potbelly stove that was purchased, that you burn wood in, that could keep the house--keep part of the house warm and there was an outdoor toilet. And we raised most of what we ate, chicken and livestock. And we raised tobacco, peanuts and cotton. And the house, as you would see it, was not insulated. We--the five of us slept together. We always slept in long johns in the winter time and with a--just a mountain of quilts on top of us to keep warm during the winter. And during the day in the winter time, of course, we would sit around the potbelly stove and keep warm that way. But essentially at night, we all were relegated to our rooms and there was no heat in the house. No way to heat the rooms during that period of time. And we had in the house pots that we could do things during the night if we needed to do it during the night rather than going outside and they would be emptied in the morning. And then we had our Saturday bath rituals and I explained to people that we took a bath once a week. It was a Saturday night bath ritual and often in the same water, you know, and I was number six in the family, of seven. And so by the time it got to me, the water was not very, not very clean at all and the reason was that there was so--there was this whole ritual of washing and--and bathing and having to heat the water on a potbelly stove and having to get water and to do that. So if you contrast that with what you have now, there's just such a tremendous difference in terms of what kids have now as they grow up and what I had as I grew up. Story_ID: 68744 Speaker 1: We normally live a ways from the road. We had a mailbox out front. And we were farm and we would work often--I started to work when I was about five years of age. And I recall plowing the field. I'd walk behind a plow and a mule and, being so short, I had to look between the mule legs in order to see what was going on. And so all I could see was up ahead but not looking over but looking through the legs of the mule and I--I can feel right now that the tail of the mule just hitting me in my face because I was so short as the mule went through. But we worked--all of us worked in the farm. We all worked on the farm. We had to take the tobacco and pull it off of the stalk and wrap it and put it into a house to cure it in and then send it into Rocky Mount, North Carolina to be sold. We all picked cotton. We all took peanuts and shook the peanuts and then stacked them in little stacks that--so they could dry out and then they would come along and pick them up and then sell them as well. But--and the basic economy called for the landlord getting eighty percent of everything that was grown and then twenty percent coming back. And life being what it was, that in order to live throughout the year, money would be borrowed against what was to be grown in the coming years so there was always this debt situation that was there and--and constantly working, trying to pay back what you had borrowed and then that was year after year of working through that, trying to get that done because of the huge amount of the proportion that was given to the--the tenant at that time. Speaker 2: So, there were times when you--you seemed to be working, I guess, for nothing, I guess, on some level. I mean--or times when you didn't get--your family didn't get back what it was putting out? Speaker 1: Well--well, that--the whole issue of working--working for--for what seemed to be nothing, you know, actually, if you go and do all the work and provide all the labor, provide everything else, other than the land, and if someone is coming along and taking eighty percent of that, it doesn't leave very much for a family of nine, which is what we had. It didn't leave very much for us to live off and so we were able to grow, like in the yard, a garden and--and we were able to raise some livestock. So, from chickens, to the livestock and to the veggies that we were able to grow, my mother would take them and would--would actually can them and put them in jars and kept them throughout the winter so, in terms of eating, we grew most of what we ate at that time. But in terms of anything else that we needed, it was tough. It was real, real tough. Speaker 2: There was very little cash? Speaker 1: Very little cash because--because in order to operate the farm--and my father always would say that even the twenty percent was never really given. That--that the landlord had an attitude that because he could not read, and he would say often, he would say, you know, I know I can't read but I can count and I know when someone is cheating me and so often the basis of his getting up and moving was based upon the fact he did not think that they had treated him fairly. And so we moved on to another farm, again, in search of justice. In search of some sense of fair play by the landlord. Story_ID: 68745 Speaker 1: Were you present in any of the negotiations between the landlords and your father? Speaker 2: No, no, I was not. I was not present between any of those and I wish I had been, but I was not. And, you know, there was an attitude on the part of adults at that time that children had their places. And so, there would never be, based upon the culture at that time, any invitation to come into a situation and participate as a child. We were always sent in a different room when company came. We were always told to go eat at the kitchen table, not the dining room table when, when company came. So, there was this generational division in the South, at least in the era that I grew up that did not permit--that definitely did not permit, in any way shape or form for children to participate in quote adult affairs at all. Speaker 1: Okay, did you--did you witness interaction between the landlords and your father? Speaker 2: Oh, I witnessed, at a distance, many times of my father arguing with the landlord about the money that we're being given, not being the right amount of money and I recall in numerous occasion of them saying to him, "Albert, what do you know, you can't read, you know, so just take this and be happy or either go somewhere else." And there was such disrespect that I saw and that I know that my father felt and that I felt for my father at that time that somehow because of his educational attainment, that he was regarded as less than the average black man, which was less than a man and so he was put down even one rung lower in this process because of his illiteracy and I--and I felt his pain throughout. Speaker 1: Did it--how did it make you feel about--about your future? Speaker 2: Well, I--well I became determined early on in life not to--not to ever be unable to read and write my name. Early on, I became determined to be able to read and write my name and I became determined to get as much learning and education as I could get and I just had a thirst to learn as much as I could learn early on in life. In response, I think primarily to the fact the way my father was being treated because of his lack of education and I saw education as a key to getting me out of that situation and I was determined not to let people talk with me that way, treat me that way, deal with me that way and--and really to--to try and do what my father could not do, which is attain a level of education that would take me to a different level of dealing with people and I saw that he was unable to do so. Story_ID: 68746 Speaker 1: --Started school, what--can you tell us about, you know, what school you went to and how--and what you--well, what that was like? Where was the school and what kind of school was it and-- Speaker 2: And--and even with this thirst for knowledge, my--my starting to--started out to school was not the best. I--I found in--I found, number one, the separation of having to go to school, not to be one that I was initially very fond of. The first four or five days, I remember not wanting to go but we walked to school. And we walked to school through the woods to what was normally a one-room schoolhouse and I know the first five schools I went to were all one-room schoolhouses. And that was a one-room, with normally six grades in the school and where, maybe two or three teachers, and they would take turns teaching different grades at different times, different subjects. And we were able to learn how to read and write through that process. I had difficulty, number one, writing, initially. Writing my name. I can--I--I used to always get my W's and M's mixed up. And I had a severe stuttering problem at that time and so could not count to ten and became very self-conscious early on and developed a, kind of, a self-esteem problem early on that grew as I went on. But the thing which I think that made that possible was the loving, caring teachers that we had in those schools at that time. They never gave up, they never tried to put me in a special ed [education] class or put me into a class for slow learners, that could see the basic intellect that was there and work with me and carried me on through the process. The interesting thing about the schoolhouse was that it was literally one room and without partitions that you could divide the room up. It was one room, a one-room schoolhouse and made of wood similar to what the house was made of and it had all of the issues. And we went to school in the summertime because we farmed. And so the fall was harvest time and so we went to school in the summertime and in the fall we were off in order to harvest the crops, in order to get that done. So, life was altogether different at that time and we were able to--to learn in spite of all of the things against us at that time and as I grew older, in like the third, fourth and fifth grade, I really--really started to enjoy school. Story_ID: 68747 Speaker 1: Started to have a thirst of reading and writing and getting things done and so the rest of it is kind of history, as they would say. Speaker 2: Yeah, did you have access to very many books outside of school? Speaker 1: I had access to very few books outside of school. Very, very few books outside of school. There were very few books in the home. Books that my older siblings had were there but very few books beyond that. And so everything I could find, I read, and that included books that my older sisters had for school that they brought, including any kind of mail that came in the mail, anything I could read. I don't recall even knowing about a word called, "library" at that time. I don't recall even knowing about a word called, "bookstore" at that time. We were just simply--we had a Bible. We had a few other books there and early on my mother bought for the house this books of facts. It was about so thick with something about everything in it and I started reading that and that was of great help and just in turn of learning things that were limited. And we didn't have--we just had a radio and so in terms of information and that had limited amount of stations that you could learn things as well. So my exposure was limited in terms of outside things. And we went to church once per month on the second Sunday and other than that, we're kind of contained in this--in this house and in this school and then on Saturday, now and then, we went into town. I went to see a movie and normally was a western, you know, Tom Mix and Roy Rogers and Lash LaRue and the Lone Ranger and all those folks that we kind of grew up on. Story_ID: 68748 Speaker 1: Okay, did you have to travel a long way to get to school? Speaker 2: School distances varied from what I regard as one mile to about four miles and it was not until I reached the age of fifteen years of age, that we started to get buses, that was in 1954. But between roughly 1944 and when I started school in 1954, when the Supreme Court ruled on "Brown v. Board of Education", we walked--we walked to school and walked long distances to school. And would walk sometime five, you know, five miles, three miles, two miles, a mile, in order to get to school. And to receive books that other students had used in other schools, hand-me-down books, and we had African American teachers that taught us and that was, I think, the saving grace for all of us because we knew that they cared. That they loved us, that they cared about us, they wanted us to be educated and they wanted us to learn to read and write. They wanted us to do things that really--like went out of their way to give us all that they could give us because they understood, too, the circumstances under which we were living at that time. And, therefore, they did not make any unreasonable demands on us. They tried to bring as many resources as they could into the equation to help us get where we needed to get during that time. Speaker 1: Did--did they ever talk about another way of life? Or an alternative to, you know, sharecropping? Speaker 2: Well, they--we read in school about cities, you know, about cities that were, as I thought at that time, far, far away, and that I always regarded as heaven because certainly where I was living was hell so what was somewhere far away was heaven, as I saw it. And so we always longed to go to heaven. And the big city, to us, would become heaven because it would have, you know, running water, and heat and houses and telephones, and all those things that we had nothing of that and indoor toilet and all those things. So for us, living in that rural area, going to a big city would be like heaven. And we had just a real small glimpse of what it might be like because in 1948, '49 [1949], my sister got married when I was about ten years--about ten years of age and she lived in a small town called Weldon [North Carolina] and we would walk there and she had indoor toilet and running water. So we saw--we had a glimpse of heaven through what it could be like living in the city and we would just long to go there and be a part of that. Story_ID: 68749 Speaker 1: Okay, what kind of a youngster were you? How would you describe yourself in those days and did you--did you find anything that was actually enjoyable to do in that--in that city? Speaker 2: Well, I think my mother would describe me as mischievous and I think that we probably would, at this point, describe myself in modern day terms as a young person with a good intellect that was unchallenged by the environment around him and so the mind needed to be active. I would--I was always into something and always asking the wrong questions that children should not have been asking at that time given the culture and tradition of the times. And so I stayed in trouble. I stayed in trouble from asking questions, from throwing rocks at my sisters, from hitting my brothers, from saying things that should not--haven't been said. So I was an active, mischievous young person that was obviously bored with his surrounding at that time and unchallenged by mere farm life and the mere things that were going on at the time. But I developed at that time also a deep sense of God's hand in my life. I developed a deep sense that somehow that--that God was there. That God was in some way moving my life and I recall early on of my going to church and coming home and standing on a stump and preaching the sermon that was preached there by the pastors and of having developed a sense of what God wanted me to do something important. I felt early on, you know, talking around eight, nine, ten, eleven years of age, that there was something bigger for me in life than what I could see, that what I could feel, that what I could touch and that I was being surrounded with it. I didn't know what it was-- Speaker 1: Yes, sir--your mother had a tremendous influence on you in this regard, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. My mother always--my mother and father always encouraged us to read, to learn as much as we could learn, to go to school and have just simply--my mother believed in prayer and would pray often for us and pray often for our success. But I recall one day that while I was in the field, just kind of working with my father plowing, and recall him walking up to me and saying to me, very, very directly, "Boy, I did not want you to spend your time here on this farm." "You're smart, you go off and get yourself an education and I don't want you to be like I am stuck here on the farm." And so even this man who had not been to school in a day in his life, early on had this kind of desire to see me do something that he was not able to do and even with limited exposure to what that was, he knew that there was something out there that was an improvement on what it was that he had experienced in life. And he wanted me to experience that and that made a tremendous impact on my life at that time. And I remember that conversation today as if it was yesterday and I remember my mother's conversation with me, always urging, always encouraging, always believing that I could be something that they had not been able to become in terms of educational attainment and so the words rang out in my ear as if they happened yesterday. That you can be something that we were not able to become in life through your own achievement. And that's--that was important to me. Story_ID: 68750 Speaker 1: Yes, that's interesting. Now, you--I know you write in your book that your father was like a--had a--had developed a drinking problem as a result of, I guess, maybe the resentment he felt and the condition he was in and didn't come out all the time but periodically. Speaker 2: Well, well, we talked earlier about terror and we talked about terror of the environment in which we lived in the South and we talked about terror of the white landlord and living in this atmosphere of terror. And as much as my father meant to me in terms of the week days and, you know, five days a week in the fields, as much as he exhibited love and as much as he exhibited all kinds of support for what I was doing, Friday night and Saturday, it was like a Doctor Jekyll and Mr. Hyde. It was direct opposite. He would often, on Friday, take part of the money that we had gotten, would drink. Would sometimes lose much of the money that we'd gotten for the week and would, in fact, come home and just have a very violent, violent response to alcohol. Alcohol caused him to act like a crazed man. As if he had literally lost his mind and he would often seek to do violent acts against my mother, against other folks in the family. And so we spent the week working and living out of terror by the landlord and all of the inhumanity that came with that and we spent a fair number of Friday nights during the year, living under the terror from our father because he literally went out and got drunk and came back and we hid. We spent a fair amount of time hiding and sometime, in order to protect my mother from him, we knew how he was acting, we would just take the wagon and the horse and take my mother over to her sister's to stay overnight until he came home and kind of slept it off. He was not as near violent toward his children as he was towards--towards my mother and subsequently ended up hurting her with a hoe and ended up, when the landlord came, really knocking--punching the landlord and ended up going to jail for a period of time. So we ended up leaving the South-- Story_ID: 68751 Speaker 1: Now this is pivotal, here--this is a--this incident like changes your life--yeah-- Speaker 2: Yeah, in leaving the South and moving North while he was incarcerated at that time and it was a turning point in my life because I would suspect that we probably would have somehow ended up somewhere in the North sooner or later, after we finished high school, but not at that point in time. So, that kind of violent behavior on the part of my father, kind of violent outbreak on the part of my father, really did change my life. It really did--it really did bring me to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. Bring me to a community in Philadelphia that helped to shape and develop my life in a significant way. Speaker 1: Okay, now, I think the family left you there, initially, right? Speaker 2: Yeah-- Speaker 1: Seaboard [North Carolina], right? Speaker 2: Well, in Seaboard, living with my Uncle Frank and Aunt Lonnie. Lonnie is spelled L-O-N-N-I-E, living there and with my cousin, Joseph Brown, Bunky, as we would call him. And Bunky was a character, rest his soul and peace, he is now deceased, but Bunky was a little violent and so we spent some time there and I'm not so sure that in hindsight that my mischievous attitude did not contribute to that a little bit. And so, Bunky and I was like oil and fire. We could not--we could not make it. We could not get it done. And I was left behind because I was doing so well in school and my parents did not want to interrupt that, you know, interrupt my learning, and my educational process at the school. And--but life became unbearable with my cousin, Bunky, and I think that the thing that really convinced me that I should leave and go there, when he threatened to shoot me in the field with the rifle, and I believe that he would shoot me. I literally believe that he would have shot me and so it was that type of thing that also brought me here. Story_ID: 68752 Speaker 1: And I remember taking that train to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and coming to Philadelphia and arriving there and looking around and looking at all these tall buildings and saying, "This is heaven." "This is really heaven." Speaker 2: Finally. Speaker 1: Finally I'm in heaven. And, but you know, it only took me about twenty-four hours to discover it was not heaven after all. That we were taken by car, I was taken by car, to this house on Upland Street, in Philadelphia, and in the house, a man by the name of Pop Fisher owned it. My sister and her husband was living there along with her newborn baby, Ramona, and then here come the six of us moving in there as well and, you know, in the house and had heat, had indoor plumbing, had all those things, but it was just severely overcrowded and the first, second day I was there, I go and sit outside and was introduced immediately to life in the big city. Along comes this guy named Kenny Williams who said, "Oh, you're new, huh." I said, "Yes, I'm new in town." Well, I like to whip everyone that comes to town and so on my second day there, we're in the middle of the street tussling and I think that having plowed more than he had plowed, and having put a lot more time lifting things, I was a bit stronger than he anticipated and therefore I got the best of him. And you should know that Kenny was never a problem to us again after that. So I was introduced to that situation but life did not improve that much for me. I was in the tenth grade so I transferred over to John Bartram High School in Philadelphia and while I was being transferred, I went to see the counselor in school. And for the first time was going to school with whites. For the first time was in school with whites and that was very new and very different and very sudden and a tremendous cultural shock to me, I have to admit. But I was able to get through that and, but my counselor took me and looked at me and basically said to me that you are--you're from the farm, aren't you? I said, yeah, I'm from the farm. She said, well, because you're from the farm, I want to put you in an industrial arts course and so--because you ought to be good with your hands. And not to prolong the story, but to make a long story short, what they discovered early on was I was not good with my hands, that my brain was far better than my hands. And so I think after I had cost the school a considerable amount of money in metal and wood, that they transferred me to the academic course. I think with some degree of pleasure and a sense of avoiding further economic loss for the school, they were able to do so. Story_ID: 68753 Speaker 1: We were talking about high school and your high school counselor and advising you to take industrial arts, you know, and do things with your hands, that's one thing. Now this counselor seems to have been a road block throughout your high school career, right? Speaker 2: The--the counselor--a counselor, her name was Hannigan the counselor can be either good for you, a counselor can be bad for you. And the purpose of a counselor is to help you to try and shape your career. Clearly, this counselor saw me in a menial role of some kind of life and then not feel that I had the innate ability to achieve. And when I was about to finish high school and go on to college, the same counselor, even after she had taken me out of the industrial course, put me in the academic course. And even after I made the honor roll at the John Bartram High School, she looked at me and clearly said to me, "You're not college material, don't embarrass your parents and try and go to college." "Get yourself a job and go to work." "And go to work and try and get it done." And that's basically is the way that things normally worked and--with people that don't want you to end up going to college. And, you know, and so as life would have it, I left the tobacco farm to come to Philadelphia [Philadelphia] to escape the farm. Ended up leaving high school, going to work at the American Tobacco Company, working in tobacco, pushing a cart to help people make cigars, believing at that point in my life that was to be my state in life because a counselor had said to me, you're not college material, don't even try it, you're not--you're not college material. Don't try to get it done. So I really--I really just want to--I wanted really to try and be something and I can't tell you now how devastating that was to me because I felt that my state in life was to go to college. But this--this woman said, "Don't embarrass your people." And I felt for a long time that I couldn't do it. And even when my pastor at my local church and his wife said to me, you are college material, you can go to college, Mrs. Hannigan's words rang loud in my ear, you're not college material. Don't embarrass your parents. And now, don't embarrass your pastor, don't embarrass his wife and--and even when I quit and applied for college and got accepted to college and went to Morgan State University, for the first semester, ringing in my ear, the words of Mrs. Hannigan, "Don't embarrass your parents, you can't make it, you can't do this, you're not college material, you just can't make it." And it was not until I was in college and got to my first examination, in World History, and took that and--and achieve at a level better than 80 percent of the people in the class, that I started to say, "I think I can do this." I think maybe I can make this and having then finished the first semester, on the Dean's list, I knew then that Mrs. Hannigan was wrong and I could make it. Story_ID: 68754 Speaker 1: --And went on through the rest of my college career, graduated number eighth out of a class of 242 in my class and was just my last semester was a straight "A" student in college. And it was probably at that point that I decided, I have to go back to this school and see this woman and tell her that she was wrong. And tell her that what she had given to me caused me to have severe doubts about myself, a severe problem of self-esteem and I really just don't know how else to work it and how else to achieve it other than--other than telling her what she did to me and kind of really pleading with her, don't do it to anyone else, in that sense. Speaker 2: How did she respond to that? Speaker 1: She--she actually apologized so that was--I was actually pleased with her response. She apologized, she said that she was wrong. So that gave me some hope that when I showed her the kind of record which I established at college which exceeded, by the way, by far what I achieved at John Bartram High School, then she was able to, I think, see that she was wrong and I think able to--to repent a little bit for what she had done. Speaker 2: I wonder, do you know if she lived long enough to see you become mayor of Philadelphia? Speaker 1: She did, in fact, live long enough to see me become mayor. I kept track of her. I think that she died in the late 1980s so she did, in fact, achieve--she did in fact live long enough to see that. And I'm not sure she recognized was the same Wilson Goode in the class-- Speaker 2: I bet she did. I bet she did-- Speaker 1: --but she definitely--but she was--she became a decided motivating force in my life because I wanted to prove that Mrs. Hannigan was wrong and so I--I did everything I could over and over and over again to prove that Mrs. Hannigan was wrong. Story_ID: 68755 Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous)--Now, sir, let me back track a little bit to the neighborhood you grew up in, just to be--the Pascal neighborhood, was sort of an island of black people and a majority white neighborhood, right, from what I read the way you described it? You all had very little resources in your little island and the resources were around you in other places. You didn't have playgrounds and other things and I guess you didn't even have the benefit of growing up on a--on a side of Philadelphia where there was a large black population. Speaker 2: When--when we moved to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], we moved to this community called, Pascal, on the 7000 block of Upland Street, in southwest Philadelphia. And Pascal is a small black enclave that date back to about 1880, probably at the most two or three hundred families in that community over that period of time, surrounded on all sides by a white, strong blue collar white community, but sandwiched right in here is this community called, Pascal. And Pascal had, when we moved there in 1954, lots of stores, shopping center-type of grocery store there, a drug store and cleaners, barber shop, beauty shop. It was a vibrant community and that we moved into because in addition to it being a small area but there was--it was located on a major thoroughfare that ran straight through the community. So we moved there, but want to just to connect one part of the story back again, and that is that we moved into this house with Pop Fisher and it became--it was small and we stayed there for a short period of time and then we moved to another section of the same community. And in that section our family had to live in two houses. And that is my--two of my oldest brothers lived across the street and got rooms from a house and we lived in that house and they came across to ate but they slept across--across the way. And I remember the first TV we got and--and the first television we got was one where you had to put quarters in it in order to watch TV shows and so-- Speaker 1: How much did you watch for a quarter? Speaker 2: An hour--an hour for a quarter and so we put a quarter in and quarters in and we're all trying to get a quarter because a quarter was a lot of money then and--back in 1954, '55 [1955] was a lot of money and we tried to get quarters to put in there and then lo and behold you would get the quarter in there and--and it may be two minutes off and just when you're watching the TV and the finality was about to happen, the quarter would run out and no one else had a quarter in the room and so that was just the kind of an interesting--very, very interesting kind of side note that I wanted to just give about living in Pascal-- Story_ID: 68756 Speaker 1: --But Pascal was a community that is a small black enclave and I--in that time, I--living there, I became associated with because my mother took myself and three of my other brothers to the church and said, we're joining church. Took us--marched us down front and all of us joined church. That was five of us joined church on the same morning. And the church had a absolute--an absolute impact on my life. The pastor of the church, but especially the pastor's wife, Reverend Muriel Lemon Johnson now, had a absolute impact on my life and I--I became involved in activity there with the Baptist Training Union in that church and she kind of took a hold of a group of us and kind of taught us and gave us self-confidence, gave us self-esteem and--and had us started to believe that, you know, that maybe we could do something despite what these counselors were saying and despite the fact that the counselor words were still ringing in my ear. She gave us enough confidence, at least enable us to move to take some action step to do something about our lives. And so the church became a critical part of my foundation in that community. And I think I can--I can say categorically that without that church and without their urging and without their pushing me, I would not have gone to college and probably would have ended up staying at that American Tobacco Company and probably would have believed forever that I was not meant to go to college at all. Speaker 2: Now, they raised money for you (simultaneous) (unclear) Speaker 1: They-- Speaker 2: --the day that you left, I mean, just before you went to college-- Speaker 1: --they raised money for me, not only when I went to college, but every time I came back home, they took up an offering for me and sent me back with some money for school itself. And--but that became a critical part of my own development of my family, of my working together at that time. Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)- Speaker 1: Yes. Story_ID: 68757 Speaker 1: Yes-- Speaker 2: --(Simultaneous)-Now you were, when you finally applied to school, when you were encouraged by Ms. Lemon-- Speaker 1: Yes-- Speaker 2: Yeah, when you finally planned, you were accepted by Temple [University], Penn [University of Pennsylvania], Lincoln [University] and Morgan State [University], right? Speaker 1: Yeah, and West Chester [University]. Speaker 2: West Chester. Speaker 1: Yeah, yes-- Speaker 2: Right-- Speaker 1: --and Morgan State [Baltimore, Maryland] where I decided to go. Speaker 2: Now how did you feel about that after, you know, you sent the letters out and here you get like--you get accepted by all the schools? Speaker 1: Well, I felt good but Mrs. Hannigan's words were still ringing in my ear, "Don't embarrass your folks, don't go to college" and I, you know, you do things because you want to see what the end will be but--but those words still rang in my ear over and over again. I felt good about that because--because at least there was some--some reasonable expectation that her words were not accurate at that time. And so I grew up in this community and went off to college from this community and as I explained earlier, college was just good for me. It really brought me to realization that I could compete with the big boys, with other boys. Speaker 2: You wanted to be a history teacher, right? Speaker 1: I wanted to be--I want to be a history teacher. Speaker 2: Okay. You still want to be a history teacher-- Speaker 1: I still want- Speaker 2: And you had two professors that comment and there may be more but I know there are two, August Meier, who was a white German professor who was--is known now as one of the top African American historians in the country. I mean I think he's passed now, but he--he was one of the top and organized a bunch of anthologies and meetings and was a member of the Association for the Study of Negro Life and History along with Benjamin Quarles, a black professor there at Morgan State [University] who wrote a biography on Frederick Douglass and history and the abolitionist movement and what was it like being in school with those--those two professors? Speaker 1: Well, they were my teachers, I mean August Meier's was my World History teacher. The first--the first class I had at Morgan State College, then it was called, was with August Meier's and he taught World History to me at that time. And I was able to get a "A" out of his class. I felt real good about that because he didn't give many A's. And then Benjamin Quarles was just a legend in his own time at Morgan and I had black history under him and I remember being so determined to--to learn everything I can learn but also to get an "A" in his course and I stayed up all night studying for his course and went and wrote and I remember his--his saying to me, this is probably very good but I can't read it. So I had to go to his office, sat down with him, and read my answers to him. I got an "A" out of him and out of all the A's I got at Morgan State University, I have to--I mean even now, of all the A's that I've got in my life, that having got an "A" out of Dr. Benjamin Quarles give me more satisfaction than anything else that I've done in terms of achievement in academic work because I think that he's--he was a superb teacher-- Speaker 2: That's right-- Speaker 1: --and just a superb individual with a great--with high standards and I know that if I was able to do that with him, that I was able to--to compete, you know, when someone tells you early on in life that you probably can't make it, you go through life for a long time wondering whether or not you can make it. And then that these things that comes along like August Meier's, "A", and Benjamin Quarles', "A", that gives you the sense that you maybe can run with the horses and can get some things done. Story_ID: 68758 Speaker 1: Now, you met--when you were in college, you met a young lady that you eventually married. Can you tell us about that? Speaker 2: Well, I actually did not meet my wife [Velma Goode] in college. I met my wife while I was in college--my wife, in Darby, Pennsylvania. And between my junior, I'm sorry, between my freshman and sophomore year, and went to see her and I'd known her sisters before. She was from North Carolina when I met her, and wanted to talk with her so I called her on the phone, which was a new enterprise for me, a phone, having not had one, and started to talk with her and she hung up on me twice. So I kept calling back. I don't know why I kept calling back. I kept calling back and-- Speaker 1: Had you ever--had you experienced any success with female company before? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Did it kind of baffle you that she hung up on you? Speaker 2: Well, yes, and she hung up on me twice and then I convinced her to--for us to go to the movie and I went over and we went to the movie and it was from that point on, you know, it worked and then two years we were married, between my junior and senior year, we got married and, yes. Speaker 1: Now you stated, I think in the book, the difference between Southern woman and Northern women (unclear). Speaker 2: There is, in fact, a difference in my view between Southern women and Northern women. I think Southern women are basically more honest, are more sincere, can really, you know, get some stuff done. Southern women tend to be better cooks, tend to be better--better wives and, you know, understand a sense of commitment to family and to tradition, to the whole institution of marriage, which is far different than--that I found with Northern women. I'm not going to say too much more about that. Speaker 1: You'll get in a lot of trouble. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, you're probably in enough trouble already now but I guess not because you're-- Speaker 2: Give me a Southern woman every day over Northern woman and I'll take the Southern woman. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I can categorically say that but I was pleased to find a Southern woman, a North Carolinian that lives twenty miles from where I was born and that I think had the same kind of values, the same kind of traditions that I have. The same kind of custom that I have and so it's a pleasure. I don't think that Northern women have that, frankly. Speaker 1: Okay, one quality that you wrote that she had was that she could help you plan the future. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Well, she not only could help me plan the future but she believed that we could make a future together, which is important. Story_ID: 68759 Speaker 1: Okay, so, upon graduation from--oh, well, let me just back track a bit--before we get to graduation, Baltimore [Maryland] itself was like--was different from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], in some respects, right? You write about going to (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Well, well, it-- Speaker 1: (Unclear) Speaker 2: --yes, yes, having left the South and moved to the North and even if it was only three years, I had come with some expectations and so when I went--when I decided to go to college, I picked Baltimore believing that Baltimore [Maryland] would have the same kind of basic practices as Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. And I get off the train in Baltimore and I'm hungry 'cause I'd not eaten and it was a Sunday and I was hungry and I went to try and get a hamburger at a White Tower Restaurant and they had me go--they wouldn't serve me rather, that they would not serve me and said we don't serve, you know, your kind here. This was Baltimore, Maryland in 1957, September of 1957, it was Baltimore, Maryland, September, 1957. Would not serve me and I remember going then to the campus and then going to movie theatres and going to restaurants near the campus and we had the same basic practices there in 1957. They would not serve African Americans as well. So I'd--really had gone smack back to the South, again, in going to college but all of the segregation things which I'd seen in the South before going North, reappeared in my life to my great consternation at that time. Story_ID: 68760 Speaker 1: Yeah, I think 'cause you write that demanding--that students started to resist, you know, they started to mirror the activity of freedom riders and sit-ins (simultaneous) (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Well, yes, Clarence Mitchell the Third led a movement in Baltimore against segregation. Ended up going to jail a few times there because we marched, we demonstrated, we stood in front of the theatre, we went to the restaurant, we sat in at the counters of the restaurant, we did everything that we could do in order to break down the walls and break down the barriers of segregation in, you know, in Baltimore [Maryland] and we succeeded. I mean, in a period of a couple of years we succeeded in bringing down the walls of segregation in Baltimore, in the Northwoods Shopping Center, near the campus. And I think what struck me hard was the fact that I had experienced a difference for a short period of time and then to have it reappear, it really made me understand how totally illogical it was but the difference between my attitude--my attitude in Baltimore [Maryland], my attitude in Seaboard, North Carolina was, I was not passive. There was not a passive bone in my body. I was ready to fight. I was mad. I wanted to be confrontational. I wanted to take what was mine. I did not believe we ought to have a policy like that because I've seen in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] that it could work differently and--and that--and I think I demonstrated that I could go to a school with white students and I could achieve at their level and, therefore, I did not see any reason, any longer, why I should be treated any differently since I was as smart as they were, if not more so in some areas, and could do anything that they could do. I did not see any reason why--why we ought to not have the same basic fundamental rights, the public accommodation, to be able to go to a movie, to eat in a restaurant and shop in stores in Baltimore. And I did so with a great deal of emotion and excitement and passion because I wanted to bring the walls of segregation down in Baltimore [Maryland] as I'd seen fall down in other parts of the South. Story_ID: 68761 Speaker 1: When you graduated from Morgan State [University], you graduated Cum Laude, right? Speaker 2: Yes, yes, I graduated Cum Laude and number seven or eighth in my class of 242. Kind of celebrated--commission, a Second Lieutenant in the United States Army and this is to think that four years earlier, I was being told by a counselor, you're not college material and four years later here I am, you know, not just a graduate of college, but a graduate with high honors, commission of Second Lieutenant in the Army. Speaker 1: You were in the ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] in school-- Speaker 2: ROTC program and was able to go on and to be commissioned in the Army and then September went into the Army of that year and-- Speaker 1: September of '60 [1960]-- Speaker 2: September of 1961 I was--and there's a story about that because we decided, a group of us, rather than to fly down to Augusta, Georgia, to take the train down. And so we put our uniforms on, our brand new gold bars and brand new Lieutenants in the Army and on the train and we know that we are somebody important, you know, three black Lieutenants in the United States Army and we get to Sumter, South Carolina. And the conductor came back and said, "All right, all blacks move to the rear car, including three Lieutenants in the United States Army." And I really wanted to--at that time, you know, I told you I'd gone from this passive mode to one of being really active. I really wanted to fight and my--and my friend of some forty years years or so now, a personal (unclear) was with me said, it's not worth it. So we went to the back car and that was probably one of the last indications of a real segregation that I experienced except when I got to Fort Gordon [Augusta, Georgia], we wanted to get a haircut and could not find any barbers to cut our hair and so we went to someone who did not look like us to cut our hair and they couldn't cut it. But you know what, I found good was the fact that they tried. They did not say to us, we can't cut your hair but they demonstrated they couldn't but they never said that we will not cut your hair. They tried to do it and it was just a very, very interesting thing and I spent about two months there in Fort Gordon and was shipped out to Fort Carson, Colorado, became the Executive Officer of the 19th Military Police Company there. Been a year and a half there that I found to be tremendous growth in terms of managing 220 men. Was responsible for the motor operation, responsible for taking care of all of the details of supplies and all of those things for the company, for inspection and when I left the Army after two years, I received the [U.S.] Army Commendation medal. Again, Mrs. Hannigan name is ringing in my ear. I can do it, I can do it, I can in fact get it done without any question whatsoever, I can do it, I can get it done. Story_ID: 68762 Speaker 1: And then I came back to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and decided that what I really wanted to do was to either teach, to work in a job in government. And I applied for, and took the exam, and became a Probation Officer. It lasted all--anywhere--all the way to two months I was Probation Officer for two months. I did not like the job because I did not--I accepted the job to help the kids and I found that there was really no interest I could see in helping the kids but interested in fulfilling the court mandate of seeing the kids and the caseload was so heavy you couldn't do anything other than simply go and say, I saw you, all right, and that was not something I wanted to do. So I went to work for an African American cleaning company as the operating officers--operating officer for this cleaning company and spent two and a half years there working for the cleaning company as an operation manager for them, responsible for assigning all of these men to these jobs to do floors and clean windows. And after two and a half years there, I applied for and got a job as the Allstate Insurance Company claims adjuster for Montgomery County, becoming the first African American to work in Montgomery County in claims. This was back in 1965. And I actually spent two years with them. Story_ID: 68763 Speaker 1: Nothing exciting about working for Allstate Insurance Company in claims, but I worked for them and left there and went to work for an organization called, The Philadelphia Council for Community Advancement and actually ended up spending the next twelve years there, from 1966 to 1978. My first year or so there was really spent as a kind of inventory--as a kind of person that inventoried all of the social service agencies in the city. So I got to know every social service agency in the city that was involved. And then I was asked to become involved with housing and so I developed--became one of the city's experts in housing at that time. And then after two years, in 1968, everybody left, like all the folks that I was working for left and took other jobs and we had about $2 million left in a grant from Ford Foundation and so the board said to me, "We're going to close this agency down, so take the money, figure out how to spend the money, how to give it away in small grants, 'cause we're going to close it down because Ford is never again going to fund us." And then I said to myself now--I'm--this is my first executive job, I'm twenty-eight years of age and they want me to put this agency out of business. So I, with my bold self, went and applied again to Ford Foundation for additional money, this time to work in helping non-profit housing groups, really to do housing development. And lo and behold, I was funded for a period of some five years to assist non-profit housing groups and I developed an agency within the agencies of assisting non-profit agency--agencies in development of housing. And over a period of some twelve years, was able to do some 2,000 housing units with fifty different non-profit groups that became probably one of the top three or four non-profit groups in the country at that time and it was just amazing. And long before there was this whole issue of faith based initiative, I ran a program from 1968 to 1978, really, which was a faith based initiative program where churches with a non-profit corporation, literally, received money and built houses. And it was a great success. Story_ID: 68764 Speaker 1: And while working at this agency, I received a call one day while I was there from the governor of Pennsylvania, from his office, Terry Dullmuth, one of his staff that I known here and said the governor would like to consider appointing you as a member of the Public Utility Commission for Pennsylvania, so are you interested? I said let me think about it over the weekend and I'll get back to you on Monday. Truth be told, I did not know what the Public Utility Commission was and what it did. And so I went to a funeral of one of my friends that Saturday and I saw one of my other friends, name Judge Lawrence Paradis and I just mentioned to him what had happened and so he kind of hit me on my shoulder real hard and put his hand back as though, what are you, I'm gonna slap you because you didn't say no right--you didn't say yes right away. Do you know what the PUC [Public Utility Commission] is, he said to me? I says no I don't. Well, they regulate, he says, $7 billion in utility and you have to think about that over the weekend. I said I didn't know what it was, Larry. He said, well, he says, there's nothing more important that you can do at this point in your life and then be a member of that commission. So I called Terry back first thing Monday morning and said I am--I'm ready to do this. And so lo and behold, the governor invited me that evening over to his house. He had a house in Marion, near Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], and I talked with him, he said, be in my office tomorrow morning and I'd like to talk with you more in Harrisburg [Pennsylvania]. So I go to Harrisburg the next morning, I talked with the governor for a little bit and he said, well, come with me. Walked me out to the Press Room and introduced me as his appointee to the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission. So I went from running this little housing agency to the spotlight, becoming the first African American ever in the history of Pennsylvania to be so nominated to the commission and the odds of my winning confirmation were slim to none. And I simply went around and talked to every single member of the Senate that to confirm me. I went to all of them, asked them for their vote, asked them for their support and at the end of the day when they voted for my confirmation I--it was forty-eight to nothing. And there was a lot of things in between that had happened but the fact of the matter is that I was able to get confirmed, forty-eight to nothing. Speaker 2: That was the governor? What was the governor, a Democrat or Republican? Speaker 1: The governor was Democrat. Speaker 2: And what was the Senate? Speaker 1: Senate was at that point also Democrat. Speaker 2: Yeah, okay. That hadn't been as far fetched thing as you think 'cause (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Well-- Speaker 2: You know 'cause-- Speaker 1: -well, they tried unsuccessfully-- Speaker 2: Um-hum-- Speaker 1: --to confirm--to confirm three other people to that same position, none of them African American and--but I came with the novelty of not having had a track record with any of them. Of them not knowing actually who I was and--and this came into the spotlight out of nowhere and was able to get confirmed by them at that time. But within six months after I was there, I was in Philadelphia doing a tour of some sights here with Bell of Pennsylvania, the governor calls me and said, I'm going to remove the current chairman of the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission and I want you to be the chairman. I said, okay, I will accept that. Having learned from Lawrence Paradis, I should always say, yes to something important. So I became then, after six months on Friday, October 13th, 1978, I became the chairman of the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission, becoming again the first African American chairman, naturally, in Pennsylvania and probably one of--probably one of only about two or three in the entire country at that time. So I'd gone from running this non-profit group building houses with churches and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (unclear) not-for-profit (unclear)-- Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, oh yeah-- Speaker 2: It's a full-time job? Speaker 1: Full-time job. So I left and here I am, full-time member of the commission. Now I'm the full-time chairman of the commission and probably six months into my tenure as chairman, Three Mile Island happens. (Simultaneous)-- Story_ID: 68765 Speaker 1: Now, explain what that is for everyone 'cause we see this in the future coming. Speaker 2: Yeah, the Three Mile Island is a nuclear plant near Harrisburg, Pennsylvania and there was, literally, what we refer to as a meltdown where there was some serious issue with the plant and they--there was emission of nuclear gases in the air around the Harrisburg area at that time. And the irony about this was that the members of the operating unit of Three Mile Island, Greater, GPU they call themselves, General Public Utilities at that time, were essentially in our offices, behind closed doors, talking with us about the future of General Public Utilities at that time and never told us that this was going on. The whole world knew that there was an accident at Three Mile Island. Speaker 1: They knew, too, but they didn't say anything. Speaker 2: They knew, they didn't tell us. They said, simply, we have a little problem with the plant over here but nothing to worry about. And so when we came out and we learned that there was a literally a meltdown, everybody started headed for home and headed for cover. I had to stay there, of course, and to sort all of it out. And so I was able to sort it out and on June the 11th, Flag Day, of 1979, I issued an order--an order that I issued simply said that--that rate payers for General Public Utilities and other rate payers in other utilities around Pennsylvania, should be no better off on--no worse off than before the accident happened because the accident had the ability to make some people far worse off and some other folks far better off because of the way the rate making could have taken place because companies that in fact could have sold electric--electricity to GPU, could have done so at exorbitant rate which would have had the--had the benefit for their customers of lowering their rates but also could have had the opposite impact on the rate payers of GPU, that could have increased their rates. So the idea that I had was level the field, level the playing field. That became a strong rate-making decision I made at that time. The second decision which I made at that time was I issued, what I called, an order to show cause as to why the General Public Utilities Commission should not have their license to operate a nuclear plant revoked. First time in the history of the country that any chair of any commission ever do that because it was always this unwritten rule that you don't challenge those who operate these plants and we did that and so life is now moving, like, very rapidly for me. I'm really in tall cotton now, you know. I'm really picking cotton in (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: This is big time stuff 'cause there's the whole mystique about nuclear (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah-- Speaker 1: --power and all of that-- Speaker 2: --yeah, yeah-- Speaker 1: --in the-- Speaker 2: --big time-- Speaker 1: --now the Cold War and all that, I mean look at the-- Speaker 2: --yeah, yeah-- Speaker 1: --that's a--that's a big time stuff-- Story_ID: 68766 Speaker 1: We're dealing with big time stuff, really, in tall cotton and then this, by the way, is in like June, May, April then, I'm sorry, March and then June the rate makin' is taking place and then in September, I'm at home, reading the newspaper and read the paper that the new mayor has me on his list as the number one choice to become the city's first African American managing director and not talk with me but I'm--I'm definitely in the headlines of the newspaper. And within two months, I am interviewed and have accepted the job to become the city's first African American managing director responsible for supervision of the police department, of the fire department, all of these departments and all the operating units within government, I become responsible for. And so I resigned my job as chairman of the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission and become the city's first African American managing director of the city. And if you just look at the time sequence of this in 1978, I'm running this non-profit group, two years later I've become a member of the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission, I've become the chairman of the Public Utility Commission and now within actually a two-year time frame, I'm the city's first African American managing director. And I spent three years there and then three years from then--and then if you go back and look at 1978 to 1982, within a matter of less than--less than five years, I am a candidate for mayor of Philadelphia, having served three years successfully in the managing director job and then within a matter of five years, I'm the first African American elected mayor of Philadelphia. So, life for me changed like overnight and changed very rapidly but it all went back to that decision which I made really to become the city's, I'm sorry, the state's first African American member of the PUC. Without that, there would not have been the chairmanship, without the chairmanship, I would not have been the managing director job, without managing director job, I would not have been the mayorship, so all of these decisions somehow got tied together and that brought me to a point where rather than teaching history, I became really a history maker at that point which I often tell children that you can either teach it or you can make it and I prefer to be on the right side of history in terms of the history which I make. Story_ID: 68767 Speaker 1: Now, that's true. I mean, you were placed in pivotal positions at critical times, you know. Some of this is--I mean it's just phenomenal how all this happens in a short span of time. Tell me about the mayoral election and, I mean, how--what was that--how did--what happened? I mean how were you drafted as a candidate for mayor and what was your constituency? Who was--who, you know--what people in the community were in favor of you as a candidate and what the situation was at the time you were in the city of Philadelphia? I think some of the big things that started to experience some decline around that time and-- Speaker 2: Let me (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --Philadelphia is no exception. Speaker 2: --let me just talk for a minute, if I could, about my tenure as managing director. One of the things that I learned and that I've talked about to people a great deal about is that if you ever have the opportunity to get in a position, make sure that you make yourself invaluable. And that is that you do everything you can while you're in that position that people will say that the standard was set for the job of managing director. And I was just so appreciative of what God had done in my life by giving me all these opportunities that when I became managing director, I covenanted to do everything I could to develop into a topnotch managing director. And the very first thing I did when I became managing director was I took all--no one could tell me how many cars we had in the city. And one of my-- Speaker 1: City of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] owned? Speaker 2: City of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. How many cars we had owned by the city of Philadelphia. No one could say we have--they drove all these cars but no one could tell me how many cars we had owned by the city. So I simply took all the cars off the street, had everyone bring their cars in for one day and had them park at that stadium, which is a football stadium here in the city. I had someone count them. I had someone count them and then give them back out again to people and then with all the paperwork, everything attached to all of those cars. So we knew at least who had the cars at that point. Now, well, that set a standard for the fact that people were going to be accountable in my administration for what was going on and the same thing with credit cards, same thing with the size of cars. There were just things that you did. And then I said the job of the managing director is to be visible so everything that happened in the city, I was there. Water main break, police officer shot, four alarm fire, you know, anyone injured, I was there, houses collapse. My job was to be there to coordinate all of the various service departments. And then I developed something called a "Saturday Cleanup Program" where every Saturday I went out in the neighborhoods, with what I called a cleanup team. And we went from neighborhood to neighborhood urging people to clean their streets, to clean in front of their houses and would develop a magnitude of some ten thousand block captains around the city, you know, to mobilize this kind of cleaning up the city. And became very visible and very well-known as a result of the fact. I did not simply take my position and kind of stay in my office and preside in my office but took it seriously and went out and did something. Story_ID: 68768 Speaker 1: And every time someone mentioned at that point, a successor to the current mayor, my name was in the top two or three on that list. And after three years, the mayor that hired me and appointed me, came to me and said to me, I'm not running for mayor again, what are you going to do? I said, "I'm going to run for mayor." So he laughed at me and said, "Well, how're you going to run for mayor." I said, "Well, I'm going to run for mayor." "If you're not running, I'm running for the office of mayor." I did not have any organization and I didn't have any money. I did not have a job. All I had was a belief that this was an opportunity that was there for me to take advantage of-- Story_ID: 68769 Speaker 1: So you were talking about the various activities in the neighborhood that you're engaged in. Speaker 2: I was engaged in activities in the neighborhood as managing director and then after the mayor came to me and said was not going to run again, I said I was going to run and he laughed at me and said-- Speaker 1: Who was the mayor at this point? Speaker 2: The mayor was William Green, William Green the Third, was the mayor of Philadelphia at that time. Said that I'm not going to run again and so I decided I was going to run with no organization, no resources. And started off the campaign really with me and a man by the name of Peter Clark. He had a Ford LTD and he and I started going around the city, talking to anyone who would listen to us in late December of 1982 and early January of 1983. And I had felt comfortable with that, somewhat, because back in 1968, we had organized in Philadelphia, a group called, "The Black Political Forum" and the purpose of The Black Political Forum really was to try and rescue--liberate the black elected officials from the party endorsement structure. We wanted people to be able to run independent of the party structure in the city. And, consequently, we organized this group and--of just normal everyday folk to work to try and get people elected and in 1970, we elected the first African American in the history of the city. I was the campaign manager. The first African American ever in the history of the city as an independent without the benefit of party support. His name was Hardy Williams. Went on to become my state senator. And then a year later, he ran for mayor against Frank Rizzo in 1971 in the city and then ran for Congress. And so I had experience in the campaign for the state house, the campaign for the Congress and then campaign for mayor in being the campaign manager for Hardy Williams, in those three races. So I knew something about that and I knew something about the fact that there was a spirit of independent emerging in the city because since 1968, we elected, not only Hardy Williams but Ethel Allen, as a Republican in the Democratic ward independently of the party support. We elected John F. White, Jr. we elected Dave [David] Richardson, all of these people were names of people that we elected to office in that time. And in 1975, Charles Bowser, a black lawyer in the city, had run for mayor as an independent, on something called, a "Philadelphia Party." And I trained all of his workers for him and worked with him to train all of his workers and he came in second in that race and beat the Republican Party in a race against Frank Rizzo. And in 1978, he ran again against--1979, I'm sorry, ran again against William Green, the mayor that appointed me and came within, you know, six, seven points of winning that race. So, there was not only here this history of them mergers of independent politics of blacks having pursued offices and won and then those who had not won had come close to winning. Story_ID: 68770 Speaker 1: So I felt that there was some real opportunity here for me to do something, but I was handicapped. I didn't have any organization. I didn't have any money and I did not--I was not a part of the political structure here in the city. And so we just organized a structure. We just went out and talked to people and by January, we had a half million dollars--end of January, we had a half million dollars in the bank. Had an organization ready to go and had a campaign manager hired. We had not only the campaign manager hired, but we had done a poll and the poll showed that I could win--that I was thirty points in front of Frank Rizzo. I was fifty-eight percent, he was twenty-eight percent, at that time. And that just--that poll that was taken, this gave everyone the absolute opportunity to--to give money and to work and before I knew it, by--when weeks after that--after those poll numbers got out and after people started giving money, the campaign became a crusade, literally a crusade. People from all--everywhere saw an opportunity to make history, something--to do something that had not been done before. And at the same time there is Harold Washington running in Chicago [Illinois] in the same time frame. And so all of this publicity about African Americans running for the office of mayor started to take hold. Speaker 2: You kind of started a snowball effect 'cause Jesse Jackson runs for President in '84 [1984]-- Speaker 1: Um-hum, um-hum. Speaker 2: --on the heels of your-- Speaker 1: Yes, yes (simultaneous). Speaker 2: Harold Washington and Jesse run-- Speaker 1: Yes, and this was really like the third wave of black mayors. The first wave came in 1968 with [Richard G.] Hatcher from Gary, Indiana-- Speaker 2: Carl Stokes-- Speaker 1: --and Carl Stokes from Cleveland, Ohio and then there came the second wave in the early 1970s and that was Tom Bradley and Ken Gibson. Tom Bradley of Los Angeles [California]; Ken Gibson of Newark, New Jersey. Then, you know, and we had-- Speaker 2: Maynard Jackson-- Speaker 1: --Maynard Jackson in Georgia. Coleman Young in Detroit [Michigan], were people that started really to emerge at that time and then this was a third wave of black mayors that were running for office and they were different than the first group. The first group were mayors are predominantly African American cities with the exception of [Tom] Bradley and Bradley and Cleveland [Ohio], with exception of Los Angeles and Cleveland were not predominantly black cities but Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and Chicago [Illinois] were not predominantly black cities and, therefore, we had to approach the job a little differently than others had approached the job in those cities. Story_ID: 68771 Speaker 1: What's the black population of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]? What's the proportions there in terms of race? Speaker 2: At that time it was forty percent African American, a little less than forty percent and in 1982, it was about the same. It has not changed that much. There's been no significant change in the last twenty years in that ratio of blacks to white, it's still about sixty percent others and which include whites and forty percent African American in the city. Speaker 1: Is there a significant Hispanic population in the city? Speaker 2: The population of Hispanic is less than ten percent in the city. The voting strength is probably somewhere around five or six percent in the city. So, the dominant populations in the city in terms of voting strengths are African Americans and whites and with the whites having a clearer majority over African Americans in that area. So, in order to win, I knew that I had to get white support. In fact, I--the formula which I have is that--that I had was this, that I had to get ninety-five percent of the black vote with there being equal voter turnout in the black community as well as in the white community. And I needed twenty percent of the white support in order to win. And that's the formula for winning not only then but it was a formula for winning now. That African American in order to win in a comfortable manner must have ninety-five percent of the black vote turnout and must have equal voter turnout to whites because many times what happened is that there is a depressed black vote turnout in elections and therefore although there are more people who want a given person to become mayor of a city, if the--if there is not equal turnout among all supporters, then the voting strength of one ethnic group over another can carry today. And, in fact, one of my opponents in the primary, Frank Rizzo, who was mayor for eight years, always won every race based upon superior voter turnout in his races and the thing which I was determined not to let happen to me, I was determined not to let there be a superior voter turnout in the white community than there was in the black community. And we achieved that. We worked at it--we worked at it, we registered people to vote and we made strong efforts to convince people to turn out and for the first time, I think almost ever, we had a superior turnout of black voters over white voters in the city. And were able to carry the day and to win, both the primary election and the general election in a very, very significant way. Story_ID: 68772 Speaker 1: Yeah, I know the--in Chicago [Illinois], the voter registration was a huge part of the [Mayor] Harold Washington election--was there and he had a lot of black business support in launching that campaign. Did you have that similar support in terms of voter registration? Speaker 2: The biggest support which I received in terms of voter registration was from the black church. The black church literally--literally gave me a half million dollars in money from among its congregation members. And gave me probably 100,000 registrants, new registrants in the city that--that we ended up actually having like 430,000 black registrants in the city and I will just say this to you that the census showed there were only 410,000 blacks in the city. So we ended up eligible to be registered. So we ended up registering more people in the city than there were listed on the rolls. Some people had become confused by that but I said, well, there are a number of folks in the city who never talked to census people because of their status. But that this campaign was so important to them that they risked registering to vote in order to vote for me--in order to do so believing that they would not be discovered--disclosed through this process so it worked very, very well in terms of turnout. So the crusade was, I was able to go on and win the primary election, beating Frank Rizzo, the legend, by--really by 50,000--close to 50,000 votes which is a large amount of votes in the city and not only won the general election by 130,000 votes, beating two opponents, John Egan and Tom Leonard in the process. And the result of all that was that I became the first African American mayor of the City of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. Story_ID: 68773 Speaker 1: Now, tell me about--how did--I mean the people really--how did they feel? I mean, how did they, you know, how was the mood of the city when you won? Speaker 2: I think that when you go back and look at the crusade of the campaign and look at the result of this race--just--people were a part of a history making event and when you think about the election itself, that people stood in line, sometime for three or four hours, sometime lines stretched a block long, and the voting on that night didn't end until midnight in some precincts because people was--were determined to vote and when I went to voting places all across the city that day, I saw, at 7:00 a.m. in the morning, people standing in line like hundred fold to vote and that continued throughout the day and it was just an incredible response to a historic moment in the history of our city. And people did not celebrate like dancing in the streets and turning over cars and--people just were very thankful and very, very pleased to just be a part of this history making event in the city. There aren't many times in our lifetime that we have a chance to do something that will so significantly change what is happening in the past and what this event did was it just--it just said to us, all of us, all the black folks, that it can be done, that the barriers are down, that the mountain has been climbed, that the valley is low enough, that there's a level of playing field that we all can participate on and that if whites can become mayors, blacks can become mayors as well. And, therefore, children have hope and people have hope and people would just walk up to me and would just look at me and grab me and hug me and just start to cry and say I never thought I would see this day come in my lifetime. And what was striking about the vote was--was the enormous turnout of people over fifty, that although there was good turnout across the board, that people over fifty, especially those between sixty and seventy-five years of age, voted at a eighty-five percentile rate in the city, which is an incredible number of people--the number to vote in the city because they knew the history. The younger people were not aware of this history and, I mean you look at my story, and look at the fact that I was, you know, literally some thirty years before then, living on a farm in Seaboard, North Carolina, was a sharecropper and then even ten years after that was involved in the process of trying to break down barriers, going in the military, and those things. And then twenty years later, here I am the mayor of the fourth largest city in the country, like Hallelujah, you know, this is something to celebrate for. And it shows what we can do--what the human spirit can do in terms of overcoming--overcoming challenges that we have. Story_ID: 68774 Speaker 1: Yeah, just--I have two questions. One question is, what was the key issue or issues in the campaign? I mean, what were the issues that the black community were really, I mean, the things that black folks really wanted to change 'cause I know black folks would vote for change 'cause we all--we dream of change, just like we dreamt of change in coming to the North. We--we want change 'cause we don't want things to stay the same. Speaker 2: Well, I think that I can safely say that there was not one dominant issue, I think, that dominated the campaign. There were a lot of little issues out there and the primary thing was people simply said in their own hearts and soul, it's time. It's time to end, it's time to end the fact that no black can be elected mayor, it's just time to bring it to an end and people decided to do that. And so I think that my race drove them but I also think that their basic knowledge of me and my visibility as a managing director, gave them confidence that I could do the job but what drove--I think the whites who voted for me and the blacks who voted for me, was the fact it was time. Time had come for a black to be elected mayor-- Speaker 1: Now, did whites--what characterized your white constituents? I mean what ideology or attitude (unclear)? Speaker 2: They were basically white liberals from my liberal wards in the city. They were Jewish. So it was white liberals and Jewish voters voted for me in the city in large numbers and real large numbers. I ended up with twenty plus percent of the white vote but it came primarily from geographic areas that were characterized as liberal whites and Jewish. The blue collar white wards, I was virtually shut out in those wards. By shut out I mean, fifty to one in terms of votes. I mean if Rizzo, Egan got fifty votes, I got one vote too in a division where they may have 400 votes that voted. Rizzo would get 400, I would get four or five, six or seven in that ward. In the other wards, I won. I literally ended up getting more votes than Rizzo got in those white wards. So, there was strong, strong support in those white wards for what it was that I was doing. The other groups that voted for me were others and by others I mean Hispanics, people who were characterized simply as others of various ethnic groups from all around the world were here. And people had not paid attention to them so I went to them and I met with all their groups and I said to them, "I'm your mayor as well." "I'm not just a mayor of blacks, I'm the mayor of everybody in the city." So I got good strong support from those folks as well. But the black voters gave me ninety-seven percent of their support and there was the equal voter turnout. That was the turning key and the religious crusade type fervor is what really brought about, I think, the clear victory in both 1983 and 1987, as well. Speaker 1: It's ironic 'cause Philadelphia, home of the founding of the black church, was also the home of the founding of the first black convention, right after Mother Bethel Henry was founded, they had the first convention of free negro, free men of color, here in the city-- Speaker 2: Um-hum-- Speaker 1: --you know. This is all real significant that it should work like that, you know. Speaker 2: Well, I think that Philadelphia has enough ingredients of people who were objective that is possible to achieve those things in the city, whereas other cities it's not that possible to achieve those things. Story_ID: 68775 Speaker 1: Okay, now, another factor was the election. I think it would be the personality of Frank Rizzo who had been mayor for eight years prior to him running, just that time, right, in '83 [1983]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: He was mayor for eight years prior to running in 1983. Speaker 1: Yeah, Frank Rizzo, his name reverberates around the nation as one that's associated with racism and bigotry and hardheadedness and, you know, urban white ignorance, basically. I mean that--any city--I mean his name had been popularized and songs and poems by Gil Scott-Heron and other people, you know. People had written about him all over the city and been on "60 Minutes." I think every black person who follows politics at all, you know, knows something about Frank Rizzo. I think--you think people would just--many of the people in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] were just kind of tired of Frank Rizzo? Speaker 2: Well, I think a couple of things. I think number one that--that Frank Rizzo always had the same number of people opposed to him. I don't think that--I don't think that there were any fewer people--he had more people opposed to him in 1983 than there were in 1975. And I think that Frank Rizzo always has--always have had those folk who simply, strongly and favor him and passionately favor him. I don't believe that changed at all. What changed, in my view in 1983, was the fact that there was an alternative who could mobilize the black support as well as passionately as Rizzo mobilized his support. That there was nothing different about this other than the fact that blacks decided that they were going to come out and vote as whites had been coming out to vote for Frank Rizzo in the past. And--and I think it's that simple, frankly. I don't think that there was anything that said, we don't want Frank Rizzo but Frank Rizzo may have been the galvanizing force in some sense but--but victory has always been there for any candidate since Rizzo first ran for office who could mobilize the black and liberal community to vote in an equal fashion to the Frank Rizzo base of support. No one ever did that. No one ever came close to doing that until I ran for the office of mayor. Speaker 1: Okay, so it was an organizational challenge issue? Speaker 2: It was absolutely, an organizational challenge issue. It was an organizational issue. It was not a philosophical issue, it's not an issue anything else other than an organization. And that is you organize to get your vote out the same way Rizzo organized to get his vote out. And he always felt he could win because he always felt that his people "who supported him" were more passionate than those who supported others but what he ran up against was a group of people who was--who were as passionate about me as they were about him--as his folks were about him. Speaker 1: Now, okay, now one of the--one of the keys to your story and your morality is [Frank] Rizzo becoming a Police Commissioner, right? Or he's become a Chief of Police? Speaker 2: Well, [Frank] Rizzo was Chief of Police back in the 1970s--back in 1960s, rather, and ran for mayor in 1970. So Rizzo--Rizzo had a history here that people knew. But again, people who--there were people who liked Frank Rizzo being who he was and I always said that thirty-five percent of the people in this city who liked Frank Rizzo being the way he was. And the problem that we had in the past was that thirty-five percent in terms of voting strengths on election day became fifty-five percent because although they were only thirty-five percent in number, they voted as if they had--the vote was fifty-five percent of the vote because of the depressed vote in the black community and the white liberal community and other communities and the difference was now there was equal vote turnout in that regard. So Frank Rizzo's history of Police Commissioner, all those things, were a way of defining him but it also brought to him a group of people who were passionate about who he was and what he represented and therefore voted for him. Story_ID: 68776 Speaker 1: --Now tell me about your mayoralty and, you know, what were the highlights and issues, you know, when you were mayor of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]? Speaker 2: Well, I think that definite highlight was level of playing field, the appointment of an incredible number of African American men and women to key position of authority and we simply broke the barrier. We broke the barrier down, we removed the glass ceiling. There was no position that was too high for black to be in, from Police Commissioner to Fire Commissioner to Recreation Commissioner, all of those positions that we just felt very, very strongly about in terms of achievement. So we--out of the twenty-five top jobs in government, fifteen of them were held by African American men and women during my administration. And that's a high water mark for administration. Keep in mind that up until I ran for the office of mayor, there was no black in the mayor's cabinet and there was no women in the mayor's cabinet. So we broke down a barrier for both blacks and women in terms of the mayor's cabinet and we went on to have black men and women serve in every cabinet position there was in government. 06:02:11:09 The second thing that I felt was important was that we leveled the playing field in terms of minority involvement in contracting. The city spends a billion dollars a year in contracting out and African Americans, prior to 1982, got less than a million dollars. Out of one billion, African American got less than one million. After my first five years in the office, African Americans had received $250 million in contracts. Speaker 1: They're still just scratching the surface? Speaker 2: Still--while still scratching the surface. Speaker 1: It was much, much more than before? Speaker 2: Well, $250 million is a lot better than what was going on before. That represents about twenty-five percent of the contract and authority of the city which is what I found to be incredibly--incredibly productive at that time to get that done. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's 200 also--250 times more than what they got before? Speaker 2: $250 million, I'm saying. Speaker 1: Yeah, 250 times more (simultaneous) than one million. Speaker 2: Absolutely, (simultaneous) more than what they got before. And the third thing was to begin to change the economic structure of downtown, from building tall buildings, to a convention center, new hotels, to a new center city district, all of those things took place as a result of leadership on my part in terms of changing the scene here and changing things around here in the city. And the fourth thing is, believe it or not, that one of the top priorities was graffiti. So I organized something called, The Philadelphia Anti-Graffiti Network and we took and offered an opportunity for young people who were writing on walls to paint murals. So we're the city now of murals. We have murals all across the city, many of them are people of note from Julius Irving to Debbie Wilson Goode, Sr. to Patti LaBelle, all of those are places that we have mural--the people of things, of events here in the city, about 2,000 of them at the time. And people who--young people who once wrote on walls, now are painting murals all across the city. The fifth thing that people, was a top priority, was cable television. When I came into office, there was no cable in the city. And so we were able to give out cable franchises and give one to a minority--a minority franchise. Speaker 1: Cable again, just for the sake of history, cable started coming out in the mid '70s [1970s] in most places, right? Speaker 2: Yes, yes (simultaneous) (unclear) and this was 1985, we had no cable in the city here, '84 [1984], '85 [1985] they had no cable in the city. And by 1986, we had cable all across the city which, again, is a significant thing to achieve. Story_ID: 68777 Speaker 1: The highlight was the fact that I was able to, I think, just change the basic way people view government. That we were able to have people see government as theirs, not something that was downtown somewhere. So the same face of visibility which I had back as managing director I had as mayor. I was in all the neighborhoods, all over--in all the churches, in all the banquets and all the events of all the churches, I just stayed out there as a part of this. And that was--that was without question, I think, a major achievement. Keeping the Eagle [Philadelphia Eagles] franchise in the city, the Philadelphia Eagles franchise in the city, was an achievement. At the end of 1984, my first year in the office, Eagles had threatened to move to Phoenix and we negotiated them staying here in the city. We started a transformation process in the city when I was mayor that it resulted in a complete transformation of downtown Philadelphia and there's been no other mayor in the history of this city that has done more to transform the face of the city than I've done. And that's before and since and that's based upon a number of building, a number of square footage of buildings, number of innovative thing. If you look at all the things now that makes the city what people call great, had their beginning and sometime the end in my administration, not someone else's. So I'm proud of my achievement as mayor of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. And I think people look back fondly upon that time and feel good about it. Story_ID: 68778 Speaker 1: Perhaps the thing that I regret was the MOVE incident which happened when I was mayor. It happened on my watch. As I've said, over and over again, leadership means taking responsibility for things that happen on your watch. If I had to do it-- Speaker 2: Okay-- Speaker 1: --if I had to do it over again, I would not send police officers out to resolve an issue of that nature because police officer only know one way to solve a problem, that is to shoot. They're not, at least in this town-- Speaker 2: Especially in those days too-- Speaker 1: --they were not negotiators, they were basically people who knew how to go in and use force. And what was needed there was not force. What was needed there was a sense of negotiation at that time. I think that in terms of that incident, that anytime you have lives lost, anytime you have building destroyed, and especially if you are a person that--that so much value life and so much have built so many houses and work in so many ways on housing units in this city, that you know how that pained me to have seen that happen and happen on my watch. There are folks around who want to--who want to blame one particular person or another person for what happened. There's enough blame to go around for everybody in this incident. There's certainly is blame for me as the leader of the city. I could have made a different decision. One thing I did not do, I did not drop a bomb on the house. I did not let the houses burn. If I were there at the scene in charge, neither of those would have happened. But people who work for me did those things and made those decisions and therefore because they work for me and made those decisions, I am accountable for what they--what they did. I did not order them to do it nor would I ever order someone to do something as illogical as that. But I picked the people who made those decisions. I selected them. I appointed them and therefore as a manager, as a mayor, as a CEO in charge, I've become responsible for the actions which they took. Having said that, I think that the key thing that happened on that day--we had the Police Commissioner, who was out of control. Speaker 2: Who was that? Speaker 1: Sambor, Gregor Sambor, who was out of control, who simply had, for whatever reason, I think, decided he was going to do what he wanted to do which was to show them who was in charge. That to me is not the way I would have done it had I known what was going on at the scene, nor would I have done it in that way, but he did it in that way. The key thing was that he lost control in terms of the use of weapons by his people. And he also made, I think, a fundamental decision when he asked the Fire Commissioner to let the fire burn on the houses. The key thing--the key decision in all of this was a decision to let the fire burn on the houses rather than putting the fire out when it could be put out at the houses out there. Story_ID: 68779 Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous)--Can you just for the sake of those who are going to be watching this many, many years from now, don't know even what MOVE was or what even the situation was. Can you maybe describe what was MOVE and what was that situation? Speaker 2: I'm not sure I can describe what MOVE was or is but MOVE was a back to nature group that simply said it was not going to be involved at all in anyway with anything to do with any organized structure in society. The MOVE was simply not going to be a part of-- Speaker 1: Black organization (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Well, it was not a black organization. There were--there certainly is a predominant black organization but it was by no mean a black organization. There are definitely white members of the MOVE Organization, so it is not an all black organization. Speaker 1: Tell me if I'm wrong, I mean, just to speed it up, MOVE from what I understand is you said back to nature thing. For some reason everybody took the last name of Africa, well a lot of people did. They believed in public nudity, on some level, they believed children, sort of, ran through the neighborhood and kind of living off the land so (simultaneous) neighbors were finally insisted on a bullhorn they had installed on the top of the building, you know, given their philosophy which was filled with profanity and other things that angered the neighbors, that's why there was a crisis in the first place, am I right? Speaker 2: Well, the crisis evolved, goes back to 1978. The crisis was not something in that neighborhood at that time. The crisis goes back to 1978 when Frank Rizzo was mayor and there was a standoff between the MOVE organization and police and fire fighters. The fire fighters wanted them to move out of the neighborhood where they were, which was in Powelton Village in Philadelphia, which is a upscale white, mostly white neighborhood in the city here. And the people became--and so Frank Rizzo decided that he was gonna move in and demolish the house. In the process of doing so, a police officer, by the name of James Ramp, was shot and killed. And members of the MOVE Organization were arrested and charged with murder. The MOVE Organization say that the police officer was shot by other police officers, not by MOVE members. The MOVE members did not have guns and therefore did not shoot at that time. Rizzo then stripped the men down, naked, searched them at that time and indeed they were--they were sentenced to jail, some for long terms, in jail, and the house was torn down, demolished, simply torn down. In the intervening years, I had regular conversation with the MOVE Organization, talked with them, met with them in my office. The issue which they had was an issue of the injustice of putting those people in jail for twenty, thirty, forty years for murder. That was, in fact, their issue. The issue was putting these folks in jail for murder. And what they wanted from me, when I was managing director, when I was mayor, and what they wanted with the bullhorns in the neighborhood, was to get people to help them to make a case to get the people out of jail who were in jail as a result of the 1978 confrontation in which a police officer were killed and they believe members of the organization were wrongly in prison. So they were trying to leverage--the community leverage, the mayor leverage it, the managing director, leverage the people of the city to help them to go and fight to get these people out of jail. Story_ID: 68780 Speaker 1: So, the MOVE incident of 1970, 1985, was a direct outgrowth of the MOVE incident of 1978 and therefore I don't think that we ought to see it as an isolated incident but rather as one that is tied together with--with that one. What we wanted to do was simply--was to make an arrest of people who were wanted in the house for violations. There's no law against what they were doing. There's a law against the noise, the sound, the way they live. As much as we don't approve of that, it does not call for arrest and it definitely does not call for people firing rounds into houses. It definitely does not call for anyone dropping a--a device on their roof that will burn their house. It definitely does not call for them--letting the fire burn. None of that calls for those actions to have been taken against them. People were wanted for violation of the law and they should have been arrested but we should have gone and approached it differently, in my view, hindsight says that to me. That what we should have done was send in expert negotiators, negotiate the people out of their houses and then how much time they should have taken, we should have taken the time in order to get that done because once you send police in, you're sending in someone that's going to go in to try and show you how much power they have to overcome their foe, that's the way they're trained, that's the way they're taught. They're not trained to negotiate. They're trained to use power, to overcome a foe that may be stronger but they want to render them to be weaker than what they are, in that sense. I think that there's enough blame, as I said, to go around. I think that the former D.A. [District Attorney], Ed Rendell, who's currently running for governor, the MOVE Organization itself, the community itself, all those people, I think, ought to share the blame for the MOVE Organization. I readily and willingly accept my role in this and will accept the fact that I made a decision to ask the police to do this rather than have other folks do it. I will accept that as my decision and as a bad decision, given the hindsight. I do not accept the fact that I was responsible for the dropping of a device on those houses nor do I accept the fact that I am responsible for letting the houses burn. Those decisions were made by the Police Commissioner, the Fire Commissioner, without the approval of either the managing director, that report to me, or myself, nor would we have approved of that had we been asked to approve of those two things, as well, because they are illogical in the way that they came about. Speaker 2: I--I think that most people- Speaker 1: Ten minutes left on the tape. Speaker 2: Yeah, that most people wouldn't blame you for those things and the sense that you--you're personally responsible but I think it raises the issue in the black community around--not just you but other political leadership that we have about whether they are--leadership really has the power that we think they have when they're installed in the office and, do you understand what I'm saying? Speaker 1: Well, well, there is a sense of what do you do with the power that you have when you're in office and you have the power to do what you think that you can do while you're in the office but-- Speaker 2: As people, I think people think that, you know, we've elected a-- Speaker 1: Well-- Speaker 2: --mayor now he has the power to do all these things that we didn't have the power to do before-- Speaker 1: Well-- Speaker 2: (Unclear), you know-- Speaker 1: The fact of the matter is that the police department is like the military. You simply cannot go up there and get engaged in how they make decision and combat--in decision and decide to do something. Just as Bush [George H. W. Bush] never went to--Bush Senior never went to help fight the Desert Storm. No, I was not there at the scene to help to fight that but in the context of things that went right and things that went wrong, that went very wrong and what I found interesting is that people tend to let that tail wag the whole dog of a life of service and I just refuse to let it happen--to let it happen because my life has meant so much. I've contributed too much. I've overcome too many things to let this one incident, one day, a few hours in my life, to define my career or define who I am and define what I can contribute to society. Story_ID: 68781 Speaker 1: And in fact you did overcome that by the fact that you were re-elected (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I was re-elected and I think that I continue to--to work towards that. I went back to seminary, got a degree. I now have a Doctorate of Ministry from Eastern Baptist Seminary [Eastern Baptist Theological Seminary] and not only that but I've given my life over to helping children whose parents are incarcerated. There are 20 million children in the country who have one or both parents in jail, or who have been in jail, and that nothing is done with these children. 70 million of them will end up in, I'm sorry, 70 percent of them will end up in jail themselves. And--or 14 million will end up in jail. 20 million children, 70 percent, going to jail themselves. 14 million children going to jail, themselves. 30 percent of the population under age eighteen have had, or have, one or both parents in jail. And we can change that. And it's my life work at this point, is about changing that, by finding loving, caring mentors who are members of congregations across the country to mentor children of incarcerated parents. One adult mentoring one child for one hour, once a week, for one year, can change direction of children's lives. We need two million children in this country mentored by loving, caring adults. We need two million adults to mentor them out of these congregations across the city. And I believe that we can do that. So, my life did not end with the mayor's office. God called me to a higher calling. And he called me to a ministry to his children and so in Africa, when people meet you in certain villages, they don't ask you how you are. They ask the question, so how are the children? So, how are the children? And so the question is, so how are the children that we have in our city, children of prisoners, children who are hungry, children who are homeless, children who are ill-educated and I think that God has called me to a ministry to simply help to rescue these children. Now I intend to spend the rest of my productive life working to rescue children. And so my life that started out on a farm in Seaboard, North Carolina, hopefully will end up in the urban area of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and urban areas across this country, trying to rescue as many children as I can from a life in jail, of being killed, cutting their lives short because they're not able to have a loving, caring adult in their lives. We want to try and change that. Story_ID: 68782 Speaker 1: Sir, what do you see as your legacy? Speaker 2: My legacy, I think, is one of overcoming odds, overcoming handicaps, of giving hope to people and my legacy, I think, is a city that is better off, a group of people who are better off and children who will be better off in the end because I lived. Speaker 1: And how would you like to be remembered (unclear)? Speaker 2: I would like to be remembered as someone who cared and loved people and did everything that he could do to help people reach the next level in their own success ladder. Speaker 1: Okay, thank you sir. Speaker 2: Thank you...