 Story_ID: 662295 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Ma'am, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Carolyn Jernigan Glenn, C-A-R-O-L-Y-N, J-E-R-N-I-G-A-N, Glenn, G-L-E-N-N [HistoryMaker Carolyn Glenn]. Speaker 1: And ma'am, what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Six, twenty-eight, nineteen forty-seven [June 28, 1947], Greensboro, Georgia. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is your occupation and title? Speaker 2: I am publisher and owner of ACE, of the Champ- of (makes sound). Speaker 1: You can continue. Speaker 2: I'm sorry. I am the president of ACE III Communications [ACE III Communications, Inc.] and the publisher of The Champion newspaper. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is today's date? Speaker 2: February 20, 19--2014 (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) That's okay. Speaker 2: (Laughter) I'm sorry. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're at my offices in Decatur, Georgia. Story_ID: 662296 Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we always ask as sort of a warm up and-- Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) they only require a short answer. The first question is do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Fried chicken. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Green. Speaker 1: Okay. A favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Spring. Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Jamaica. Speaker 1: And the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: This little light of mine, I'm going to let it shine ['This Little Light of Mine']. Story_ID: 662297 Speaker 1: I'm going to ask about your family history. I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side [Albert Jernigan, Sr.] but separately and then we'll put them together. So can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please? You want me to--I'll ask that again. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Flossie Mae Etchison Jernigan Hill [Flossie Etchison Hill]. Speaker 1: Okay. Now how do you spell it? Speaker 2: F-L-O-S-S-I-E, M-A-E, E-T-C-H-I-S-O-N, J-E-R-N-I-G-A-N, H-I-L-L. Speaker 1: All right. And what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: She was born in Walton County, Georgia, September 16, 1925. Speaker 1: Now what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family? How far back can you trace them, and what are the stories about their activities? Speaker 2: I can trace my grandfather [Memory Etchison] back to his, to my great-great-grandfather [Robert Etchison], who was the son of the slave master [John Etchison], about in the 1920s. I'm sorry, the 1820s. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The 1820s, of course. My grandfather married Mollie Jackson [Mollie Jackson Etchison]. Speaker 1: Now this is your great-great-grandfather you're talking about? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I just traced them back to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, back to the-- Speaker 2: --my great-great-grandfather. Speaker 1: Do you have the name of that ancestor, or can you tell us about what they were doing? Speaker 2: I can't. They were, they were just farmers and slaves back then. And then the--I did--there's a family story that the slave master gave my great-great-grandfather land when emancipation came. And that's how they got started. Speaker 1: Now was it because--now I'm asking this just because there are so many stories that are like this. Was your great-great-grandfather actually related to the master? Speaker 2: Related to the-- Speaker 1: Related to him, blood re- relation to the master. Speaker 2: To the slave master? Speaker 1: Yes, uh-huh. Speaker 2: The story is that he was the son of the slave master. Speaker 1: That's why I asked because you hadn't said it, and I wanted to make sure. Speaker 2: That's the story. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I'm not sure. Speaker 1: Because that's--that comes up so much, you know. And that seems to be a major way to get land, I mean, the black folks acquire land-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --in those days. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Because otherwise it's hard to get, you know. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: You're not going to get it, or it's going to be really tough to get it so (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't know much about my great-grandfather [Thomas Etchison]. I understand from stories that he was very prosperous. There is one story that he was the first black or African American in the community to own a car. And the whites were so enraged that they took his car. Speaker 1: Do you have-- Speaker 2: And that's just one of the stories. Not much oral history about him. My grandfather-- Speaker 1: Do you have your great-grandfather's name for us? Speaker 2: I don't. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I don't. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I do have it, I do have it. I just-- Speaker 1: You don't remember it (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was just doing the ancestry. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I have it in--I'm doing ancestry.com, the family. And I do have it, but I just don't know it-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --because it's so new to me, so fresh. I can, I can get that. Speaker 1: Now was he a Jernigan? Speaker 2: No. This is my mother's family (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, your mother--Etchison. Speaker 2: Etchison. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Etchison. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My mother's family. Speaker 1: All right. It almost sounds like Atchison but it's with an E (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know, I think it's a derivation of Atchison--several names. I've seen them all together. But very few Etchisons. You very seldom see it spelled that way. Speaker 1: Right, that's-- Speaker 2: But I think it's a derivative--one of the other-- Speaker 1: Okay, all right. I'll share something with you when we have a break (laughter). Speaker 2: Okay, okay. Speaker 1: But, okay. So this is the Etchison, this is your great-grandfather, Etchison, who had this land, which made him, you know-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --I guess ahead of the-- Speaker 2: Right. But in the end--I mean, he--I understand he was quite a character, quite a ladies' man. I understand he lost it all, me, that my great-grandfather didn't know anything about, haven't heard anything about my great-great-grandfather, don't know any stories. But this was my great-grandfather. Speaker 1: He lost all of his--well, do you think it was due to racism around jealousy and that sort of thing? If he was going (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No one has ever said that. They just said he was a, he was quite the man around town. He--it appeared to me--my interpre- my--what I'm understanding is maybe he just lost it, he just spent it all. Speaker 1: Well, I'm thinking if they took his car, then why not take his land (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't know. Speaker 1: You know-- Speaker 2: You know-- Speaker 1: You know, I don't know. Speaker 2: Possibly. I don't, but I have no idea. That was just the-- Speaker 1: But it's something to speculate about, I guess. Speaker 2: It is. Speaker 1: The possibility his benefactors were--had gone by this time. Speaker 2: I don't know. Speaker 1: They don't know--nobody ever looked it up. Speaker 2: Because in terms of white Jernigans in the area, we don't know of any. So they either moved away or, but don't know of any in Walton County (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, those would be the protectors of the black ones, I would guess. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Yeah, so anyway, so we don't really know how he lost it all. But he did, you know. Speaker 2: (Shakes head) The story is that he lost it. Story_ID: 662298 Speaker 1: Now what about your grandfather? Now we haven't mentioned any grandmothers along here so-- Speaker 2: Yes. My grandfather married Mollie Jackson [Mollie Jackson Etchison]. I don't really know much about her family. I know some of her relatives, you know, who lived in the county, but don't know much about--I met some of her sisters when I was a little girl. You see, my gr- my grandparents were--had thirteen children. My mother [Flossie Etchison Hill] was near the youngest. So she was almost like a great-grandmother to me because, you know, of the time span. And, you know, when I met her sisters--my mother was named after one of her sisters, Flossie [Flossie Jackson White]. My--another aunt [Luvenia Etchison Clifton] was named after my grandfather's sister [Luvenia Etchison Stone]. But they were really old when I met them or when I knew them as a young child. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: (TAPE INTERRUPTION) Speaker 1: So your grandmother had thirteen children. Speaker 2: Thirteen children. Speaker 1: And your mother was one of thirteen. What was your grandmother's name? Speaker 2: Mollie Jackson-- Speaker 1: Mollie Jackson. Speaker 2: --Etchison. Speaker 1: And your grandfather? Speaker 2: Artee, A-R-T-E-E. No, his first name was Memory [Memory Etchison]. Memory, just like it sounds, Artee Etchison. Speaker 1: Now you know what the next question is. Is there a story behind the name (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I have, I've asked the question. I have no answers for that one. Speaker 1: Memory Artee-- Speaker 2: Artee. Speaker 1: --Jackson. Speaker 2: Etchison. Speaker 1: Etchison, okay, Etchison. Okay, all right. And what did he do for a living? Speaker 2: He was quite a person. He was a successful farmer. He had--I saw in the records where he bought, he and my grandmother bought their first 100 acres of land. He eventually owned 468 acres of land. He was a farmer. He was also a builder. In the winter when there were no crops, he and sons cut the timber on the property. He had a sawmill. He owned a sawmill, and he processed the wood. He went to town, he built rental houses. He had a syrup mill. Of course, he was in real estate because he rented houses. And he was a minister. Speaker 1: Okay. And a reverend, too, huh? He was busy. Did he (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, absolutely. Worked all the time. Speaker 1: Did he have to employ other people outside of the home or was it, or did his children-- Speaker 2: Well, he grew (laughter), he grew his help (laughter). But he had, he had sharecroppers. And for the most part, he and his children worked the farm. They grew everything they ate. His cash crop was cotton. He also went to Atlanta Bible Seminary [Atlanta Baptist College], which is the forerunner of Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia]. He was trained there. Speaker 1: Trained--I didn't know that, trained at Atlanta Bible Seminary? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: That's the forerunner to Morehouse. Speaker 2: Morehouse College. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And my grandmother and grand- my grandmother was a homemaker. But my grandmother and grandfather felt very strongly about family and education. And when the board of education in our town, in our county refused to build a school in his community, he built a, he built the school. He donated the school to the board of education. They named the school after him, after, after the family, Etchison School. And in return, the school board provided a teacher. And my grandfather and his sons maintained and cleaned the building. That was their part in the deal. Speaker 1: Now this is a man that we would have interviewed back in the day. I mean, this is-- Speaker 2: He was quite a gentleman. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: He would--my grand- my grandmother and grandfather came to town. Now they owned a farm. They lived out, what was then, the back woods. Speaker 1: Now this is still in Walton? Speaker 2: Walton County [Georgia], um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was in the backwoods. I mean, when you drove out there, the dirt roads. You didn't want to get behind anybody because, you know, the dust would be in your face, the big ditches on the side of the road. But when you got to his house--big beautiful brick house that he and his sons built themselves. I was born in '47 [1947]. My grandfather had indoor plumbing, porcelain fixtures. Of course, there was no county water, but he just put a pump in his well, and he had the modern conveniences. There were folks in town who had outdoor toilets back then. But he just, they just--it was--I loved the farm. It was just a place that I loved to go. And I remember everything about it. Story_ID: 662299 Speaker 1: So about when was your grandfather [Memory Etchison] born? What (clears throat)-- Speaker 2: Oh, he was born eight--it's on--1860s [sic.]. I don't know the exact date. It's on the paperwork that you have. Speaker 1: Okay. So he was born in 19--right after the Civil War, around then (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Gee, okay, yeah. Speaker 2: My grandmother [Mollie Jackson Etchison] was a little younger. But it's in the paperwork. Speaker 1: Yeah. Well, this is something, this is remarkable. So-- Speaker 2: But he was a man determined to succeed. Speaker 1: How long did he live? Speaker 2: He died young, he died in his sixties. I think he was about sixty-seven, sixty-eight years old. Speaker 1: Um-hm, okay. It says in the literature here he was born in 1886. Speaker 2: Eighteen eighty-six [1886], okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, so this is-- Speaker 2: And my grandmother was born in 1890-something. Speaker 1: Eighteen ninety-four [1894]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. He would have been born about, you know, well, twenty-one years after the Civil War. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But, you know, came along during Re- you know-- Speaker 2: Reconstruction. Speaker 1: End of--well, Reconstruction was over by the time he came along (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Over by then, um-hm. Speaker 1: But he was--so that's even more remarkable that he was able to--after his relative had lost the land, he was able to then buy land and-- Speaker 2: But I remember asking my mother [Flossie Etchison Hill] how did he start to get his land and because I thought maybe there was some residual, maybe from his father or someplace. She said, "Oh, no. My mother and my father worked for everything they got." And when I went to the county records, I found the deed in the records where he bought, initially bought one-hundred acres of land. Speaker 1: Wow, okay. Yeah, so he,he reconstructed the family wealth the hard way, yeah. Speaker 2: (Nods head). Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 662300 Speaker 1: So your mother [Flossie Etchison Hill] grew up and she was in a fairly well to do situation. Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: For those days (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, if you look at the entire community, yeah, they, they--people always came to them. As a matter, matter of fact, I was talking with my mother last night, and we were talking about sharecroppers. I thought for a long time he had white sharecroppers. And I said, so I asked my mother, because I wanted to be sure. She said, "No, I don't think so." She said, "Let me think." Because she's eighty-nine. She said, "Let me--," she said, "No, I don't think so." She said, "Oh, I know who you're talking about. That was that Avery [ph.] gentleman. He was--you--anybody would have mistaken him for a Caucasian." So as a little girl, I'm seeing this couple, you know, living in the house. But my mother said she was always the one that would have to go--when the, when the season was over, and the white owner taken everything that they made--the sharecropper had made, they had nowhere to go. They still owed the white owner. My mother said they would just come to my grandfather [Memory Etchison]. And she would have to go out--they had nothing. And she said, "I was the one that would have to go out to the smokehouse and cut them off some ham and get them some food. And then my brothers would help to get them settled." Matter of fact, there was a gentleman who used to live in my grandparents' home. And we called him Uncle, I think it was Uncle Ben [ph.]. But he was always in the bed. He had a, you know, separate bedroom. He was always in the bed. So I asked one day, "Well, who was he? I don't see him on the family tree?" My mother said, "Oh, he was not a member of the family, he was just down," he was, he didn't have any family members. He had an acre or two of land, and he came to my grandfather and said, "If you will take care of me, I'm old and I'm sick. But if you will take care of me, I will deed my land over to you." And my--that was because my grandfather was considered to be honest and giving. And people came to him all the time from what I hear. Speaker 1: So, what you were saying before, just to make it so I understand it. When people settled up with white owners, land owners, who were sharecroppers--and I know they're all from the family--they owed something anyway. No matter how hard they worked, they always owed something (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Absolutely, they always owed. Speaker 1: Yeah. And if they were turned off the land, that's when they would come to your-- Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: --your father, your grandfather (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Maybe. I don't know that they were turned off, but they had no food, they nothing to eat. Speaker 1: So, they had nothing left. Speaker 2: They had nothing left. Speaker 1: So what you're saying is the owner took everything they had. Speaker 2: Everything, everything. Speaker 1: Then they survived--the only way they survived was because of your grandfather. Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: Or charity or something, yeah. Speaker 2: My mother said there were many, many, of those folks who would come. And my grandfather would always provide something for them. Speaker 1: I guess a deeper--I mean even what could be the worse of it is that they couldn't leave the land because they owed money. And that was, you know, almost like trying to be a fugitive slave or something to get out of the South. Speaker 2: It could have been. Speaker 1: I've heard those stories. Speaker 2: Could have been. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: But how are you going to stay if you can't eat. You can't, you know, everything's gone. She said they would be just tattered and ragged and--and just totally depressed, you know. Story_ID: 662301 Speaker 1: Did she [Glenn's mother, Flossie Etchison Hill] go to Etchison School [Walton County, Georgia]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: As a matter of fact, four of my six--there were seven girls. Four of them were teachers. And I know at least two of them taught at Etchison School. Speaker 1: Okay. So this is appropriate. So you had three Etchison girls teaching at Etchison School. All right, how many (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, and then I had--go ahead, I'm sorry. Speaker 1: Now she had like thirteen brothers and sisters. Speaker 2: She had twelve. Speaker 1: Twelve. Speaker 2: Twelve brothers and sisters. Speaker 1: Twelve, all right. Speaker 2: She was ninth of thirteen. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So did your mother have a chance to go to college? Speaker 2: She chose not to go college. She went to beauty school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And she became a business owner. And she had possibly at that time the most successful shop in town. She worked all the time, a really hard worker. Everybody in town, for the most part, the majority of people came to her. She had her own shop. Her father [Memory Etchison] built her beauty shop. So the shop was right next door to our house. Speaker 1: So do you know if she studied Madam Walker or Annie Malone's me- method or-- Speaker 2: Well, I've heard her mention Madam C.J. Walker because she's one of my favorite characters--historical figures. And I guess because she was in the same profession though, you know, growing up in the beauty shop, I didn't want to be a hair sty- I didn't want to be a beautician. I wanted to follow the path of my aunts, I wanted to be a teacher. Story_ID: 662302 Speaker 1: I'm going to stop your mother's story here, and then go over to your father's side. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Albert Collier Jernigan [Albert Jernigan, Sr.], A-L-B-E-R-T, C-O-L-L-I-E-R, Jernigan. Speaker 1: All right. And what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: He was born October--I forget the date, but 1922 [sic. 1924]. I had it, I do have it. But 1922. Speaker 1: Okay and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And I'll give it to you in the records. I just didn't have it when I turned in my paperwork. Speaker 1: Okay. And where was he born? Speaker 2: He was born in Greene County, Georgia. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He was the el- eldest of four children born to Roy [Roy Jernigan, Sr.] and Mamie Jernigan. Speaker 1: Okay. Now where is Greene County in relation to Atlanta [Georgia] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Greene County is about sixty miles east of Atlanta. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Well, more than sixty--about sixty miles east of DeKalb [DeKalb County, Georgia]. So about seventy miles east of Atlanta. Speaker 1: Okay. Now what are the--how far back can you trace his side, and what are the stories? Speaker 2: I haven't. I do think some work has been done. My father and moth- my mother [Flossie Etchison Hill] and father divorced when I was seven years old, and he was not a part of my life. We did visit our grand- I never knew my grandfather. He was deceased when I was born, before I was born. But we visited my grandmother, paternal grandmother, a couple of times a year in Greensboro [Georgia]. But not much visiting or association with that side of the family. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Do you, do you know what your father's parents did for a living? Speaker 2: Do I know-- Speaker 1: What your grandparents on that side did for a living? Speaker 2: My grandfather was a--he worked in construction. And my grandmother was a domestic, having worked for the same family her entire life until she retired. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now, so there are no stories about that side of the family that come down about, you know, that go very far back? Do you--well, were they--now, well, what did your father say about growing up? Speaker 2: What did he say about-- Speaker 1: About growing up. Speaker 2: See, I was so young, I was seven. Speaker 1: So you only, you ever, you just saw him every now and then, you'd say? Speaker 2: No. I--he was not (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He wasn't around at all. Speaker 2: I never, he was not in my life until after I graduated college [Albany State College; Albany State University, Albany, Georgia]. So all that I knew was my grandmother, my aunts--he had a sister [sic.] and a brother [Roy Jernigan, Jr.]. And my grandmother and the cousins that we would visit, but didn't know much about him at all. Everybody, what everybody said--and he was, he was, he was very popular, very intelligent, very smart. He went to Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia], didn't graduate, but he did go to Morehouse on scholarship. But I'm not sure if he went there first and then he went to the [U.S.] Army. He spent four years in the Army. And then he became--when I was a child--and my first remembrance was that he was a district manager for the Pilgrim Health and Life Insurance Company in the Macon, Georgia district. Now I do remember a story. One thing about my father, he was a very good salesman. He could, he could talk to anybody. He was the life of the party. He--very engaging. And when he had an agent maybe that quit his job and my father then had to take that route--either--it was debit insurance, so my father had to take that route. And I can remember going back in the backwoods--and you know where the policy was on the back--on the nail on the back of a door--and people paid a few pennies. And sometimes when they couldn't pay--and I remember one time he came out to the car, and he had all these collard greens and sweet potatoes (laughter). And, you know, I don't know if that was in lieu of payment, but a lot of that went on. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So he served in World War II [WWII], I guess, right? Speaker 2: Uh-huh, yes. Speaker 1: And was he stationed outside of the country? Speaker 2: I'm not, I think so. But I'm not sure, I'm not sure. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I believe so, though. Speaker 1: So you did know your grand- his mother and-- Speaker 2: His mother. Speaker 1: --some of the others. Speaker 2: And his-- Speaker 1: Sisters. Speaker 2: Two brothers and a sister [sic. two sisters and a brother]. One brother passed away early, but I did know him. I did know all of them. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I knew their children, my cousins and, you know, we kept in touch and, but just didn't know much about the family. Speaker 1: Now did he stay in insurance the rest of his life? Speaker 2: No, no. He eventually went into construction. He--when we talked after I graduated from college, he was living here in Atlanta. And he died early. He died in, he died in the '70s [1970s], early '70s [sic. 1994]. Story_ID: 662303 Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your parents [Flossie Etchison Hill and Albert Jernigan, Sr.] met? Speaker 2: I don't know exactly how they met. My mother's eldest sister [Azalie Etchison Richardson], who was the oldest of thirteen children, so she was like a mother to my aunt [sic.] and like a grandmother to me. She moved to Greensboro, Georgia as a, as an insurance agent. And when my mother finished beauty school, she moved there with my aunt. So that's what, that's the location, Greensboro, Georgia, because my aunt moved there-- Speaker 1: Okay. So they met in (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) or a few years, yeah. But I don't know exactly how they met. I know that I remember hearing my aunts talking about how taken my mother was of this handsome young man when he came home from the [U.S.] Army. And, but don't know any details. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So they got married but were sep- separated when you were seven, you said they-- Speaker 2: I was about, I was about seven. I was in fourth grade, about seven years old. Story_ID: 662304 Speaker 1: I know you weren't raised around your father [Albert Jernigan, Sr.]. But when you think about his--he and your mother's personalities and disposition, their sense of humor, the way they walk and talk and their talents, their dispositions--who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: Probably my mother [Flossie Etchison Hill]. My father was, like I said, the life of the party. He had a gift for speaking, you know, public speaking. I can remember on our front porch when he was there, just people would gather around just to hear him talk and tell stories. And he used to, he was very good in math. He tried to, he would always try to stump people with mathematical equations. And everybody just, you know, from listening to people talk, you know, adults--they were just amazed at his intellect. And he always, he always had trick questions, too. He tried to--I think, I think it was in--his desire to make people think. He loved an argument or a dialogue or conversation, just loved it. And I can remember those things about him. Just, whatever anybody said, he could one up you. Speaker 1: Okay. Now what was your mother like? Speaker 2: My mother is quiet, a little shy, a lot shy. And as a little girl, I was painfully shy. So I think I take after my mother. And the older--I never, I didn't look like her at all when I was growing up. Today people look at me, and I look just like my mother. So I look like her, I'm built like her. She's--she was very hardworking because she was the sole provider for a long time. And she loved her church. She--as a matter of fact when I talked to her last night, I said, "Mama, I know you've been the church clerk for over forty years, over fifty years." She said, "No, no, no, not quite fifty." She says, "Forty. And I'm being honored Sunday for being the clerk." She never missed her chur- it was a fam- it was the family church--five families who started the church and the Etchisons were one of the families. And she was--my mother and father both were very stylish. They--I remember them loving, you know, to dress. They had lots of friends, and they partied a lot. Because I remember the babysitters (laughter), while they were going to the parties. And with him being the district manager [for Pilgrim Health and Life Insurance Company], he would entertain his agents and that kind of thing. What else about my mother? Quiet but determined. She doesn't part with her money easily. But you can put your feet under her table any day and eat. Very thrifty, loves flowers, just like my grandmother [Mollie Jackson Etchison]. We al- she always had a vegetable garden, to this day. She'll be eighty-nine this year, and she still has--works her vegetable garden. And she still does a few of her old, her frien- her customers that she's had forever--she still does their hair at eighty-nine. Story_ID: 662305 Speaker 1: Can you tell us about your siblings? Speaker 2: My siblings? Speaker 1: Yeah. How many brothers and sisters do you have? Speaker 2: There were, there were three. I have a sister, I had a, I have a sister. My brother passed away at twenty-one--from my father [Albert Jernigan, Sr.]. And then when my mother [Flossie Etchison Hill] remarried, she had three additional children. So I have five sisters and brothers, one being deceased. Speaker 1: Okay. Can you name them from the oldest to the youngest? Speaker 2: Um-hm, Dorcas, D-O- Dorcas Jernigan. Speaker 1: And just kind of tell us something about what they, what they did or what they're like. Speaker 2: Dorcas had, has four, had four children, four boys. There was a--I'm not sure what the, what it, what the disease was or what the--but two of them died with liver problems. She always worked as--in office situations. And, now she works as a tax preparer. She lives in Monroe [Georgia]. All of my sisters and brothers still live in the county, Walton County [Georgia], except me. Speaker 1: And, so do you come next? Speaker 2: No, I was the oldest. Speaker 1: You were, you were the oldest. Oh, so you're first. Speaker 2: I'm first, then Dorcas (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Then your sister, then your brother. Speaker 2: Then Albert Jernigan, Jr. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He died about, he died at age twenty-two, twenty-one. He was a student at DeKalb Technical school [DeKalb Technical College; Georgia Piedmont Technical College, Clarkston, Georgia]. He was living with me at the time, going to school. And again some kind of rare liver disease, and he passed away. My sister, Victoria Hill [Victoria Hill Ramey], she's an office worker. She's worked for years at--in Monroe. She and her husband--she's married to a, to a--her childhood sweetheart. They work for the same company. He also is a minister and pastors a church. They have, they had two children. Their daughter is a teacher, their son is deceased. Harold Hill, Jr. [Julius Hill, Jr.] went to University of Georgia [Athens, Georgia]. He now works for the county, in the--Walton County. I think he's in the recycling department. And then my youngest brother [Darryl Hill], who was born the year that I went to college [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] (laughter) in 1963, he lives in Monroe, as well. And he works--I'm not sure what his job title is, but he works in a hotel. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My mother sent every one of her children to college. I'm the only one that finished. Story_ID: 662306 Speaker 1: Now do you have a--is--well, do you have any ideas on why you're the only one that finished? Speaker 2: Yeah, I do. I'm a product of segregation. I went to segregated high school, elementary school [George Washington Carver Elementary and High School, Monroe, Georgia], high school, college. My sister [Dorcas Jernigan] was the first person in our county [Walton County, Georgia] to integrate the schools. She integrated the schools. She was the only black student in the white school. She was chosen because she was very smart. And unlike me, she had an inner strength. She was not shy, and she was hand picked to segregate the schools. Back-- Speaker 1: Desegregate, yeah. Speaker 2: To deseg- yeah, to desegregate, in the county. Speaker 1: What school did she desegregate? Speaker 2: Monroe Area High School [Monroe, Georgia]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And it was very, very difficult. I came when, you know, my time in high school was with teachers, a principal, very nurturing, very caring. Everybody knew everybody, very small school. My high school, my high school graduating class had forty students. So everybody knew everybody. My teachers visited--they did, they visited my home to talk about my progress with my parents [Flossie Etchison Hill and Glenn's stepfather, Julius Hill, Sr.], you know. So my sister desegregating the school--they didn't have that experience and (sighs), I think, to their detriment. I think that, you know, they missed the nurturing, the caring, the--that, you know, of course should come from home, and it was there. But going into that situation in our little town was very, very difficult. When, you know, rather than be nice about it (laughter), in my home town when the desegreg- when it was court ordered they had to do it, they chose to fill in the community swimming pool that we could never use. They chose to close the movie theater. They chose to close the library that we could never use. So it was very, very difficult. Story_ID: 662307 Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: You know, that was one of your questions. I thought about it, and I tried to, I remember my great-grandmother on my father's side, who used to babysit me. Because I told you my parents [Flossie Etchison Hill and Albert Jernigan, Sr.] were gone a lot. She used to babysit me. And I just remember her being so loving and letting me eat all the cookies that I wanted to eat. I had asthma as a child, and I can remember how she cared for me. That's--and I think maybe I remember my first birthday party, about three years old, which was exciting. Story_ID: 662308 Speaker 1: Can you describe the home you grew up in and the neighborhood? Did the neighborhood have a name and, or was it just a--because you're in, you're in Walton County [Georgia] still, right? Speaker 2: Well, no, I grew up in Monroe, Georgia (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You grew up--okay. Speaker 2: --the city-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --a little city. I'm not sure that it had a--yeah, I think they called the area--my street was Maple Street. And I think the whole little area was called Maple Heights [Monroe, Georgia]. Speaker 1: Okay. Maple Heights, all right. And, so what-- Speaker 2: We were all poor (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This is the African American part of the city? Was it-- Speaker 2: Well, in my hometown, African Americans didn't just live in one area. You know, it's not like across the railroad track. They lived everywhere. But wherever they lived, I mean that--there were, they were segregated communities. But we lived all over town, all over the county. Speaker 1: So what part of town was Maple Heights? Was it north, south or east or west or Speaker 2: It was, I guess you would say northeast. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: More east--northeast part of the county, part of the city, eastern part of the county. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: It was just a poor, black neighborhood--dirt roa- dirt streets. It did have a streetlight, though. Speaker 1: Any black businesses on that-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: This was not a business area, except my mother [Flossie Etchison Hill] had her beauty shop there. But no other businesses. Story_ID: 662309 Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Smells. When it rained, we couldn't go outside and play. And the smell of the rain on the dirt, it was just--I remember that smell. It smelled good. Flowers and I guess that comes from my grandmother [Mollie Jackson Etchison], my mother [Flossie Etchison Hill] and I, we all love flowers. Smells. My grandma- my grandmother's tea cakes, peaches, Georgia peaches, honeysuckles. I liked, and I loved the smell of books and barbecue on the pit on Saturday mornings. Sights? I guess it's just the farm. Every Monday, my mother, my grandmother had seven daughters. I think there were four that still lived in the, in the area. So each of her daughters took a day to visit her mother. And since my mother was a beat- had a beauty shop that was closed on Mondays, after school every Monday, we'd go to the farm. So I loved everything about the farm, the baby chickens, the vegetables in the garden, the fruit orchards, the cows, the--everything about the farm. I loved the water, the stream that used to run down near the pasture, rainbows when it rained. Sounds? Back in those days and to this day, I love rock and roll music, music of the '50s [1950s] and '60s [1960s]. Speaker 1: So did you have a radio that played a lot of the-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --record player? Speaker 2: Yes, I had a record player. I'm trying to think of that singer that I used to play all the time that I loved. Oh, gosh, I can't remember. But anyway, I had a record player. And you know, we used to play 45s [45 rpm record]. If my mother or my--if someone bought the records, fine. I remember one day my mother and I were downtown [Monroe, Georgia]. And she asked me, "What would you, if you, if I bought you something, what would you like?" And I said, "I want a piece of material to make a dress." I sewed. And she said, "Don't you want to buy a record? Don't you want to go the record shop and buy a record?" I said, "No, I just want a Simplicity pattern and a piece of fabric," (laughter). So I've always been real pragmatic. I've always, I've always been an adult, even when I was a child having to take care of five sisters and brothers. I'm the oldest, my mother's working. I was very practical. Story_ID: 662310 Speaker 1: I take it you were an avid reader, from what-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --you just said, yeah. Speaker 2: I used to go to school with my [maternal] aunts. You know, when I was two, three years old, they'd take me with them. I was reading at three and a half, four years old. I went to first grade, I was five. I finished first grade in the first semester and second grade in the second semester. So when I went to third grade, I was six years old. So I was always behind. I was always two or three years be-- Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) younger than everybody else in my class. So I was, socially I was a little bit behind, in terms of friendships and that kind of thing. Speaker 1: Everybody else in third grade was eight, and you were-- Speaker 2: Everybody else-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --eight and nine, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, but academically I could hold my own. So that kind of followed me all the way through. Because, you know, back in the day, you couldn't date until you were sixteen. So I wasn't sixteen in high school, so I couldn't (laughter), so everything that happened at school was sanctioned by my mother [Flossie Etchison Hill]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I could do anything that was happening at school or at church. It was a no brainer, "Yes, you can do it." But anything in the community--the student center, the teen center, the--whatever, was off limits. Speaker 1: Okay. Now did--was Etchison a school that went from-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --kindergarten to twelve? Speaker 2: No, no, no (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Or-- Speaker 2: We only had one school in the county, Carver Elementary and High School [George Washington Carver Elementary and High School, Monroe, Georgia]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: From grade one through twelve. These--Etchison School [Walton County, Georgia] was one of those--talked about two room schools. We had a lot of those around the county, which were eventually phased out. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And everybody at some point came to Carver. Speaker 1: All right, so-- Speaker 2: And those schools were closed. Speaker 1: Okay. So were you at Etchison until, what, seventh grade or-- Speaker 2: I didn't attend--see, I didn't live (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You didn't even go to Etchison, okay. Speaker 2: No, no, no, no. I didn't live in the-- Speaker 1: You went to Carver. Okay, all right. Speaker 2: --county. Speaker 1: That's right, that's right. All right, so you were at Carver, which went from-- Speaker 2: I went to-- Speaker 1: --first to-- Speaker 2: Right. Well, there was a little two room school that I did go to, called Pine Park [Pine Park School (ph.)]. I went one year, for first and second grade. And all of the people in the communit- parents in the community who could afford a cab, or who could afford to send their cabs cross town to Pine Park--it was like a, it was a little public school that was real poor. But it had the best teacher in town. And, so everybody wanted their children to go to Miss Hillman's [ph.] class. And whatever it took, you know, you--so my mother was able to afford a cab to take us to school, or she could take us to school. And that's--we went to Pine Park. And then third grade, I started Carver. Story_ID: 662311 Speaker 1: Was Miss Hillman [ph.] worth it? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes. I can remember her techniques to this day. Speaker 1: So how would she, you know, why was she considered the best (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I mean, she was an artist of sorts. And when she taught you the word can, she drew a can on the board. It was just unique, the way she did it. And she taught two classes, in two different rooms. And everybody that left her school, Pine Park School [ph.], and came to Carver [George Washington Carver Elementary and High School, Monroe, Georgia], we were considered smart (laughter). Everybody else thought we were smart. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because we were, we were accelerated. She taught us much, much more than most of the kids got. Speaker 1: Okay. So, Carver, at Carver School, elementary school, were there any special teachers or mentors there? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. As a matter of fact, I kept up with three of my teachers until they passed away. I had a huge sixtieth birthday party down in Florida, 189 people came. Two of my high school teachers came to my birthday. I've taken one of my teachers to--on a cruise, she and her husband. Just had a real special relationship. Even when I married, my high school principal, who is deceased, he directed my wedding and gave me my rehearsal dinner. So we were just a close knit, but just kept real close to my teachers. They were all mentors, they all cared about us. They all, you know, it was never a question as to whether I was going to college, or if I was going to be successful or, you know, just when I went to college, I went to Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] my first year. My second year, I went to Albany State [Albany State College; Albany State University, Albany, Georgia]. My mother [Flossie Etchison Hill] really couldn't afford tuition so-- Speaker 1: At Spelman, yeah. Speaker 2: At Spelman. Story_ID: 662312 Speaker 1: Well, let's talk about high school [George Washington Carver Elementary and High School, Monroe, Georgia] for a minute. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Now you haven't--now were you engaged in activities in high school? Did you ever (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Everything. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Whatever was going on, I was in it. Because that's the only way I got out of the house (laughter). So I did, I couldn't sing, but I was in the chorus. Can't sing to this day. My favorite though, was the band. I was, I--the band was my life, and I remember--started band in fifth grade. And when I moved into the big, to the, to the larger band in sixth grade, I was playing like fourth clarinet. Well, fourth clarinet didn't have any melody. You know, you just played notes. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And, so my goal was, I've got to play first clarinet. So that was the goal, and I loved the band. Then I loved basketball. Wasn't good at it, but I--it was happening. I could play, I could get out of the house. My mother [Flossie Etchison Hill] sanctioned it, so I played basketball. And when I didn't play basketball, I was a cheerleader. We didn't have a football team until my senior year in high school. So I was part of the homecoming court. As a matter of fact, for my class, all the way through high school, I was usually the organizer. You know, when it was time, our time to do the prom, I was the organizer. When--whatever decision--if--to decide on--class dresses, what we were going to wear--I decided what the class dress would be. So I was kind of, I was the youngest, but I was kind of like the organizer. Speaker 1: Now how did you manage to come out of your shell? Because you said you were very shy, painfully shy, when you were-- Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: --younger? Speaker 2: --by doing things. You know, I was shy. But if I worked hard over here and organized and planned and--see that didn't take speaking in front of a group or what have you. If I organized and planned it and put it on paper, I could present it. And, but the other thing, I had aunts who taught. My favorite aunt, who was my mother's oldest sister, that was kind of like, she was like, kind of like my grandmother. She was, she was fan- she was fantastic. And she could talk to anybody, anywhere, any time. She was very highly regarded in the town. As a matter of fact, back in the old days when the, you know, there were no, there was no housing for teachers who came to the town to teach. So they stayed with other people. She always housed the principal of the school. You know, she was that caliber of person. And she just always said to me, "You can do anything you want to do, you can be anything you want to be." But she showed me by example. And I always said if my aunt Azalie [Azalie Etchison Richardson] can talk to people and not be shy and, you know, and I can do it, too. So it just took time. I just kept chipping away at it. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So did you have a favorite teacher in the high school phase of-- Speaker 2: Favorite teacher. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Favorite teacher. I guess my band teacher was my favorite teacher because I loved the music. And my home economics teacher because, because I liked to sew. So my band teacher and my home economics teacher. Story_ID: 662313 Speaker 1: You're at Monroe, Georgia? Speaker 2: Monroe, Georgia. Speaker 1: Okay. Is that close to Albany [Georgia]? Is that-- Speaker 2: Oh, no. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Monroe is about forty miles east of Atlanta [Georgia]. Speaker 1: Okay. So that's (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Between Atlanta and Athens [Georgia], where the University of Georgia is. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right. So, but when you were--okay, when you were a teenager, though, there's civil rights activity going on in Albany and other parts of Georgia. Did your family, you know, pay attention to that and kind of track that? Speaker 2: To be honest, no. My par- my mother [Flossie Etchison Hill] wanted us to stay as far away from it as possible. She, you know, and they, even when they marched or did some demonstrations in my hometown, I was not allowed to even get near. So, no, I have to admit, no. I'm not that way today but, no. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Now I was, and I was not in Albany when those things were going on. As a matter of fact, the year before I went to Albany--the year before I went to Albany State [Albany State College; Albany State University, Albany, Georgia], some of my home girls were expelled for demonstrating. And as a matter of fact, I think it was about three years ago, that whole group of students that were expelled were given honorary degrees at Albany State. Speaker 1: Okay. Yeah, similar to the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But I was not there, I missed it. Speaker 1: --those at Southern University [Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] that got expelled around the same time. Story_ID: 662314 Speaker 1: When you were on the verge of graduating from Carver [George Washington Carver Elementary and High School, Monroe, Georgia], what were your thoughts of college? Did you know you were going to Al- Albany State [Albany State College; Albany State University, Albany, Georgia]-- Speaker 2: No, I was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) at that point. Speaker 2: --going to Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 1: Okay, Spelman. Speaker 2: That-- Speaker 1: That's right. Because you went to Spelman first. Speaker 2: That was my, that was my mother's dream. That was my principal's dream, that I was the one to go to Spelman. Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: What happened with that, I loved Spelman-- Speaker 1: Now wait a minute now. Before you get there-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --I just wanted to-- Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: Now did you graduate with any special honors from high school? Speaker 2: Yeah, I graduated with honors. I was a good student. Could have done better but, you know, I liked to do other things. And sometimes I didn't focus as much as I should have. But I was a good student and made good grades. Speaker 1: Okay. And let's see, what did, what did you do over the summer? Speaker 2: Over the summer I can remember checking out books and reading books and, but remember I was always there, you know, taking care of my sisters and brothers and take--doing the household chores. And I always wanted to do everything I could to help my mother [Flossie Etchison Hill]. So I was cooking, cleaning, washing and ironing, you name it. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, tell us about going to Spelman. Did Spel- Spelman, did your family drive you, I mean did your parents drive you to-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --Spelman, to-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --Atlanta [Georgia] here, okay. Speaker 2: Right, you're talking forty-five minutes (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So, and you had other friends over at Spelman, right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes. My be- one of my best friends today, when I got to Spelman, she was a senior. But she had grown up in my hometown, so she was older. And she heard I was there, and she went to three dormitories trying to find me. And we became best buddies, and we're buddies to this day. Matter of fact, she works for me right now [at Ace III Communications, Inc., Decatur, Georgia] in this office. Story_ID: 662315 Speaker 1: Who were some of the personalities at Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia]? Students, teachers? Speaker 2: Well, just having been--only spent a--in that I only spent a year there, you know, I was just trying to find my way around. Not--I don't think I had any favorite teachers at the time. You know, I enjoyed the camaraderie of staying in the dormitory. And the dormitory life, I loved it, I just loved everything about it. Alice Walker was a student there. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She was a, I think she was a sophomore when I was a, she was either a sophomore or a junior. And I just remember her working in the--her job was working in the cafeteria. And she was just really, really nice. And, you know, you kind of considered, you know, yourself a--well, a home girl. Because I was from Monroe [Georgia] and she was from Eatonton [Georgia], which is, you know, close. But I do remember her. And I have a couple of friends, you know, from that year. Story_ID: 662316 Speaker 1: When I went home for the summer, after the first year, I was--a letter came from Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia]. So, you know, now in my house you don't open other folk's mail. But in that it was from Spelman, I just figured it was okay. So I opened it, and I saw where my mother [Flossie Etchison Hill] had paid on the tuition, but she had not completed the first year's tuition. So, now it's, you know, time for me to get ready to go back for the second year. And I'm looking--I've got five sisters and brothers. And, you know, she's working really hard. So I decided my--this aunt, my favorite aunt [Azalie Etchison Richardson] that I was telling you about--she was a--are you familiar, familiar with Jeanes curriculum directors? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: She was one (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She was a Jeanes supervisor-- Speaker 1: She was a Jeanes super- she was just real special. Speaker 2: James Jeanes funds [sic. Anna T. Jeanes Foundation], right? Speaker 1: Yes, Anna Jeanes [Anna T. Jeanes], she was really special. So she was a Jeanes supervisor down in South Georgia. And, you know, I went to stay with her during the summer or something, a week or two. And we were just very close. Speaker 2: They worked on a special grant to improve the teaching in the South in small, rural schools, right? Speaker 1: Absolutely. Speaker 2: So they were sent down into-- Speaker 1: They were almost like the black superintendent. They were called supervisors, but they were like regarded on the level of a--the black superintendent, even over the principals, in most cases. So she, and she was one, she and my aunt were one of the first to get their master's degrees way back, you know, in my hometown [Monroe, Georgia]. So I guess that was a part of her acceleration, in that she had her master's degree. But she was a Jeanes curriculum director down in Cordele, Georgia then in Sylvester [Georgia], which is thirty miles from Albany [Georgia]. And I called her, and I told her what I saw. And, so she and I strategized. And I went--she took me over--I went to visit, went out secretly, clandestinely, went to Albany State [Albany State College; Albany State University, Albany, Georgia]. The dean of students, she and the dean of students had been in, had gone to co- had gone to college together, so she knew everybody. And she just walked me through, and I'm now enrolled, you know, in two hours. And, so the dean said, "Well, you know, if this is your niece, I know what stock she comes from. So she's--she has a job in my office." And that was the plum job of the campus. I worked for him the whole time I was there. And, so I told my mother and my stepfather [Julius Hill, Sr.], I'm going to Albany State. My father cursed the whole way to Albany State. "I don't know why you want to go to the country, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah." And my mother cried. And it was only about, I think it was about five years ago that I told her why I did that. And she said, "I'm so glad you told me because I have never understood why you changed from Spelman to Albany State." Speaker 2: That was certainly a sign of maturity, I guess and-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --to be that considerate. Speaker 1: Well, again, it was--I always, I loved my mother. Story_ID: 662317 Speaker 1: Now this is 19--is this '64 [1964] now, Albany State [Albany State College; Albany State University, Albany, Georgia] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sixty-four [1964]. Speaker 1: Okay. Now was the--had--was the Albany Movement still going on when you were there? Speaker 2: Unh-uh, no. Speaker 1: Okay. It wasn't-- Speaker 2: No, it was all done-- Speaker 1: It was done by then. Speaker 2: --when I got there. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's what I thought because Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] had gone to Birmingham [Alabama] after Albany, I think. And then-- Speaker 2: He couldn't make any headway in Albany. Speaker 1: Yeah, and that was-- Speaker 2: And DeKalb County [Georgia]. Those were the two places, right here in Albany, Georgia. Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: It was mean. Speaker 1: These are tough nuts to crack because of (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Tough nuts. Speaker 1: --of the--what was it, what was your analysis at the time? Did you have any sense at the time-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --at the time. Well, why? Speaker 2: No, no, not really. Well, I was just coming into that. And I think somewhere else down in your questions, we can probably get to that. But you ask about what incident was happening--that something was happ- you know, in your life--a national event--or, and then something was happening in your life at the same time. I have a story about that. Speaker 1: Okay. Go ahead, go ahead and tell it. Speaker 2: I went to Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] in 1963. We heard that President Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] was in town. He was visiting up in Duluth, Georgia, out here in this county. No, Duluth is in Gwinnett County [Georgia]. He was visiting, and somebody said, "His motorcade is going to come right by Spelman, right at the back of the campus. And if we go out through the back gate, we can get to see him." So we all went out and we staked our spaces, you know, so we could see President Kennedy. Sure enough, his motorcade came through. And I think he even stopped and got out of the car. And I mean that was a highlight. Two months later, he was assassinated. Speaker 1: Someone else, you know, someone re- else recently told this story too that was at Spelman at the time. And I can't think of who it was now because we do so many of these. So, but it was either somebody in Chicago [Illinois] or D.C. [Washington, D.C.] or last week in Cleveland [Ohio] who told this story--had the same story. And I'd never heard it before. This is something--yeah, (unclear). Speaker 2: But at that moment, that's when I realized that, you know, here I am a college student. I'm an a- I'm, you know, I'm becoming an adult. I'm going to be a college graduate, I'm going to be a, soon be a voter. And I'm going to be a contributing member of society. I've got to grow up. I can't hide behind being a child anymore. And that was the impetus that made me join the movement in Atlanta [Georgia] in my freshman year, and we did demonstrations in downtown Atlanta. But that was the event that woke me up-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and said I need to be a part. Story_ID: 662318 Speaker 1: Did you pay much attention to the March on Washington in '63 [1963], the summer before you went to Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia]? Speaker 2: Not really. Like I said, my family just did not pay attention. Nobody--my aunts, my grandparents--nobody paid attention to civil rights that I knew about. The only thing that I knew is when they did demonstrations in town [Monroe, Georgia], I knew that my parents did not want me involved. And I was always a dutiful daughter--it would never even faze me. But when that happened, I knew my mother [Flossie Etchison Hill] didn't want me marching in downtown Atlanta [Georgia] but now it's on me. So (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So-- Speaker 2: --I participated. Speaker 1: So when was this? Was--when--was this like-- Speaker 2: This was in like (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In '63 [1963]. Speaker 2: --fall of '63 [1963], um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Fall of '63 [1963]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: There was a department store here called Rich's [Rich's Department Store, Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Do you remember Rich's? That's where black-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --black folks shopped. And we marched around Rich's. Speaker 1: Yeah, it was Rich's up until about maybe seven or eight years ago, when Macy's [Macy's, Inc.] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, longer than that. Speaker 1: --took it over. Speaker 2: Longer than that. But, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Macy's took over. Speaker 1: Yeah, all of the hometown shopping--I mean the department stores, are now Macy's now, in almost every city. Speaker 2: That's right. Federated Stores [Federated Department Stores, Inc.; Macy's, Inc.] and-- Speaker 1: Right. People hate it, but Rich's, yeah, it was a flagship store here and then-- Speaker 2: Right. Oh, I didn't know there were Rich's in other places. Speaker 1: No, no, but that was the one here in Atlanta, the flagship store and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, um-hm. Speaker 1: --other cities have different stores. Speaker 2: And Rich's was closer to the camp- to the AU Center [Atlanta University Center; Atlanta University Center Consortium, Atlanta, Georgia] than the other part of town. So one of my joys as a child was shopping with my mother in Atlanta twice a year. And, so she shopped--my fa- my stepfather [Julius Hill, Sr.], worked--he was a maitre d' in one of the top restaurants on Peachtree Street. And, so we come up with him, and we'd shop. We didn't have Macy's, we had a sister store called Davison's. And, so we shopped Davison's in that upper part of Peachtree. So when I went to Spelman, everybody was talking about Rich's. I said, "Well, I don't shop at Rich's, I shop at--," so I soon learned Rich's was the place (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. So Rich's probably did not have any black personnel working cash registers or doing sales (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They ran the elevator. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The lady who ran the elevator--remember you had to have an attendant and, yeah, so-- Speaker 1: Porters and such. Could you eat at the lunch counter at Rich's? Speaker 2: No, no, no, no, no. Speaker 1: So that was--those are some of the issues that-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: So did Rich's capitu- capitulate or did they (unclear)-- Speaker 2: You know, Rich's--the owner of Rich's and Mayor Hartsfield [William B. Hartsfield] in Atlanta, it wasn't ugly here in Atlanta. It was, you know, they got together and they talked. And it wasn't as ugly. It was just until Lester Maddox came along (laughter). But there has always been a--they've always had the ability to dialogue and to work things out. And, you know, Atlanta had that slogan, the city too busy to hate. So it wasn't as ugly here as it was in some other places. Speaker 1: Right. I think even in Memphis [Tennessee], it wasn't as bad as it was in some of the other, the smaller places. So I think, I think it's an economic interest. Would you think that's, I mean, the-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yes. Speaker 1: Yeah, the city fathers-- Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: --understand the economy (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, they understood the economics. Speaker 1: Um-hm, okay, so-- Speaker 2: Because, you know, at that time, they were trying to position Atlanta, you know, to be this hub, and Birmingham [Alabama] was supposed to be it. You remember? Birmingham was supposed to be the hub of the South. And the foresight of the Atlanta city fathers, you know, they did the airport [Atlanta Municipal Airport; Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport, Atlanta, Georgia] and that just took Birmingham out. Story_ID: 662319 Speaker 1: At Albany State [Albany State College; Albany State University, Albany, Georgia], were you involved in any civil rights activities? Speaker 2: There were none happening at the time when I went there. You know, Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was--he had no luck in Albany [Georgia] at all. They--as I said, these were the two places, DeKalb County [Georgia] and Albany. And, so there was nothing going on when I was there. Speaker 1: Okay. So was the city basically still segregated, like, you know, hardcore segregated? Speaker 2: Today? Speaker 1: No, no, in those days. Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Speaker 1: Albany? So you had like-- Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Speaker 1: --white and black fountains and restrooms and that sort of thing? Speaker 2: I'm trying to remember. I'm not sure about the restrooms and the fountains. I don't think I ever encountered that at that time. We, you know, back--initially before I got a car, I used to take the Trailways bus. And I don't remember the separate waiting rooms. I think if they had had it, I would remember it. Story_ID: 662320 Speaker 1: In terms of your, your studies, now you're an education major, right? Speaker 2: Yes, business education. Speaker 1: Business education and, now you became a Delta [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority] there-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --too, okay. Any stories about that or-- Speaker 2: Nineteen eighty-five, [1985]--2015 will be my fiftieth year. I went to Albany State [Albany State College; Albany State University, Albany, Georgia] to be a--in high school [George Washington Carver Elementary and High School, Monroe, Georgia], one of my favorite memories was having been a--selected to be a debutante. And the debutantes, the year long activities were sponsored by Alpha Phi Alpha [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity]. So it was expected of me to be an AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority] when I went to Albany State. But, you know, it depends on the campus. And I identified with the Deltas when I got to campus. It didn't hurt that the Omegas--as soon as I got there, you know, I was the Omega [Omega Psi Phi Fraternity] queen. And I--nobody has ever broken this record. I was a queen for all the three years I was there. So, you know, that was kind of a natural--to go Delta. And, but we're all sisters and just had a great time with the sorority and the activities and just, college was just--when I think of happy, good times and satisfying relationships, I think of college-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and the dormitory. And, you know, we tell kids today it's nothing like the dormitory experience, if it's just your freshman year. But, you know, because kids now want to get, you know, their parents are buying them townhouses and, you know. We're saying, just go and get that experience of being in a dorm, I guess. It may be different, (laughter) but it may be totally different. But that was, that was a joyful time for me. Story_ID: 662321 Speaker 1: Now I asked you about teachers. Did I ask you about the teachers at Albany State [Albany State College; Albany State University, Albany, Georgia], the--who was there? Speaker 2: No, you haven't yet but-- Speaker 1: Okay, all right, yeah. Well, who were some of your teachers and advisors and, you know, in the education department? Speaker 2: I had very good teachers. But two that stand out to me were two peo- teachers in my department, Willie Pike [ph.] and Helen Foster [ph.]. As a matter of fact, and in--let me back up. My Aunt Azalie [Azalie Etchison Richardson], that I keep talking about, back in the day when she went to high school, blacks could only go through eleventh grade in the South. There was no twelfth grade. So my mother [Flossie Etchison Hill] went to private school in Athens [Georgia]. My aunt went to Albany, which was Albany Normal [The Georgia Normal and Agricultural College]. At the time, it was like a high school. She finished high school in Albany [Georgia]. So, you know, she has roots there. But my Aunt Azalie that was the love of my life and my teacher, Helen Foster--I have endowed a scho- perpetual scholarship at Albany State in their honor. And the first award will begin this year. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's how I feel about my teacher at Albany State. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then of course, the dean of students, Dean J.C. Reese. He was a fantastic mentor. If he, if he thought I was getting off track, he'd, you know, pull me in and just really cared about me. And I know it started because of my aunt. But it was, you know, just like from high school [George Washington Carver Elementary and High School, Monroe, Georgia] to college, tiny college, the nurturing, you know, everybody wanted everybody to do well. The dean of students caught my girlfriend and I one day thumbing a ride across the bridge to go to town, called us in. And, you know, I sat there and said, we sat there and said, "We know that you know," (laughter), you know, "that" (laughter)--and she said, "You're right." And, so we thought we're going to get expelled or what have you. But everybody wanted everybody to do well. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Great, great, environment. Speaker 1: (Unclear) the administration of a college--black colleges [HBCUs], in those days was different than it is today in terms of the strictness of, I guess, the rules and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Because you had like different-- Speaker 2: Oh, gosh (laughter), it was like night and day. Your curfew was what, seven o'clock? Speaker 1: So this is, this is for the women, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Pretty much. Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yeah. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: I remember even at Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia], you know, your curfew was--after dinner, you know, you were in. But what did everybody do? They signed out to go to the library (laughter). So that's how you got out. So I think if you signed out to go to the library, you might be able to stay out 'til 8:30, right. And you had to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But you had to be in by 8:30 at night? Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And if you, even if--wherever you, you know, kids now can just sign out for the weekend and go. But you had to have permission, written permission from your parents. And everything was very strict, very strict. Speaker 1: Yeah, I can't imagine that now. But-- Speaker 2: These kids would go crazy (laughter). They don't, they can't understand, yeah. Speaker 1: Different time, different time to be in school. So who was the president of Albany State then? Speaker 2: Thomas Miller Jenkins. Speaker 1: Okay. And did-- Speaker 2: He had come up from FAMU [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida]. He had been a vice president, I think, at FA- at Florida A and M. And he was the president when I was there. Speaker 1: Yeah, did he make an impact on you as the president? Speaker 2: Oh, god, I thought he was just so handsome and so intellectual and, but he would, to me he was just so down to earth. The students--he was just beloved by the students. It wasn't a fear, it wasn't--I mean, there was respect, but he was just a dearly loved president. Everybody spoke very highly of him. Story_ID: 662322 Speaker 1: Well, when you were on your, on the verge of graduating, were you, did you have a job lined up or did you want to go to graduate school at that point? Speaker 2: You know, I wanted to work awhile. I wanted to get out and get some experience. And my mother [Flossie Etchison Hill] had a cousin that was a principal in Dalton, Georgia. And actually my mother wanted me to come back home to work. And that was just something that I was not going to do. So I went to Dalton, Georgia as a secretary to the principal and a teacher at (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now this is--okay, I don't want to cut you off but-- Speaker 2: Go ahead. Speaker 1: --I want to point out, you're twenty years old? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And you're graduating from college [Albany State College; Albany State University, Albany, Georgia]. So you're a little young really and you're, and you're going to--this is 1967? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And, so some of the students--you're two years older than the seniors [at Dalton High School, Dalton, Georgia]. So I'm just--did that present an issue (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It didn't present a problem-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --in Dalton because, you know, small town. But two years later, when I moved to Atlanta city schools [Atlanta Public Schools], it was a world of difference. It was, you know, I had to really be creative and really figure out how to get that respect. Because not--I was young, but I looked even younger. And, so they would try you. But it worked out. It was great experience. Story_ID: 662323 Speaker 1: So you were there for two years at Dalton, Georgia. Did you like living in Dalton, Georgia? Now this is the first time you're on your own, actually, really. Speaker 2: First time on my own. Speaker 1: Really on your own because college, you were supervised. Speaker 2: The first impression of Dalton, Georgia that I had never known--there were no black folks. The few black folks that lived there, they lived on about two streets, two or three streets. Everybody lived on two or three streets. Whereas from my hometown [Monroe, Georgia], everybody lived all over the place. That was--but they were--so most of the blacks there were either teachers or domestics. But at that time, Dalton was the carpet capital of the world. It was one of the, it was the richest, one of the richest cities in Georgia, may have been the richest. So you had that caliber of, you know, executive and that kind, you know, there. And, so these blacks, who were domestics, they were, they were highly social. You know, they knew (laughter), they learned, you know, the etiquette and the manners and those kinds of things. Speaker 1: Because they worked in the homes of the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Because they worked in the homes. You know, their employers, when their cars were three years old, their employers gave them their car. They, I mean, they were--these domestics lived in beautiful homes. And it was, it was just a different culture that I didn't know. And, so I learned a lot from--I lived--there was no place to live. I lived with this lady, this teacher. And, so I'm learning all of these things that I never knew about, you know, etiquette and manners and what have you that I'd never seen. And all the silver and the china and the, you know, it was just amazing to me that these people only--it was hand me downs, but it was beautiful. So that was the first impression. Story_ID: 662324 Speaker 1: I worked, you know, in the, in the, in the South when they desegregated the schools. They would generally close the black school, and everybody would go to the white school. In this town, they made the black school a junior high. And I think they eventually closed it. But my principal [at Dalton High School, Dalton, Georgia]--and he was the principal and later to become the assistant superintendent. But my principal was a very smart man, very intellectual. And he--my--his wife was my mother's [Flossie Etchison Hill] cousin and that's how we're related. But he saw, he was very kind to me, and he somehow thought I was a good teacher. And I taught his daughter, I was teaching junior high students. His daughter was in the class. And I had these junior high students typing eighty and ninety words a minute. And because I had good teachers at Albany State [Albany State College; Albany State University, Albany, Georgia] who, you know, my teacher, my teacher's teacher wrote the book. You know, so we just knew how to do that. And he would go to the county office, and he would brag about Miss Jernigan [HistoryMaker Carolyn Glenn] and what a great job she was doing. The next thing I knew, I had an in service class for the entire county [Whitfield County, Georgia], to teach them typing. I had no typing books. I didn't even have typing books to teach my students. So what I did, I drew up my own typing course from the book, the author of the book that my teacher gave me, which was different from the regular, the way you teach typing. And I drew up my course and I put it on transparencies, and I taught from transparencies. And these little old teachers, you know, they would come in after school for in service. And, you know, they were so amazed at how, of the progress that they made so quickly. So when the state super- the state superintendent for business education, you know, they'd visit all around the state. And when they came to Dalton [Georgia], of course, my principal had to bring them over to our school and introduce them to Miss Jernigan. Well, as fate would have it, when I moved to Atlanta [Georgia] and I got more involved in, you know, I was promoted to a different job--they knew the work that I had done. So it was great for me, because I got to participate on a lot of, in a lot of events and panels, and what have you, across the state. It just broadened my horizons from my principal being so--sticking so well with me and promoting me. Another thing that happened, back then you had the white teacher association, the GAE [Georgia Association of Educators], and you had the black teacher association [Georgia Teachers and Education Association; Georgia Association of Educators]. So the gentleman from the black teacher association, who was a friend of our family, he came to speak at a banquet at our school. And of course, my principal is singing my praises again. And, so he pulled me to the side and said, "Miss Jernigan, I hear you're doing a really good job. Is there anything I can do for you?" I said, "Yeah, get me a job in Atlanta," (laughter). A few weeks later, I had a contract. So, but Dalton was a good experience, it was great. Story_ID: 662325 Speaker 1: So you go to Murphy High School [J.C. Murphy High School, Atlanta, Georgia] in-- Speaker 2: I go to Murphy High School. Speaker 1: Now what was the, was this, was this an all-black high school? Speaker 2: By the time I got there, it was 99 percent black. It had been an all-white school and it flipped, I would guess, in a matter of five years from all white to all black. So when I got there, it was all black. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But you had a mixed faculty. Speaker 1: And where is Murphy in Atlanta [Georgia]? Speaker 2: Murphy is on the Eastside of Atlanta, I-20 [Interstate 20]. It's close to downtown. It later changed names to Crim High [Alonzo A. Crim Open Campus High School]. We had a super- superintendent here, Alonzo Crim [Alonzo A. Crim], and they renamed the school for him. But that was after I left. Speaker 1: Now he was a black superintendent, right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Uh-huh, um-hm. Speaker 1: Alonzo Crim. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: I heard a presentation about him at the Oral History Association. Speaker 2: Is that right? Speaker 1: He's--he really made quite an impression on-- Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: Yeah, one of the heroes of Atlanta education. Okay. So it's now Alonzo Crim High School. Okay, C-R-I-M, right? Speaker 2: C-R-I-M, um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, well, what were things like at Murphy? Speaker 2: It was different, different culture. We're talking big city, you know. I'd always been--I'm--all of my experience has been in the country. Albany's [Albany, Georgia] country, Monroe [Georgia]--and students were different, faculty was different. But I had a department chairman who was very supportive, and she worked very closely with me. And when I had a problem or a situation, she was right there to help me. And, so I didn't have big problems. My only problem was, you know, like I said before, the students. I'm looking younger than they are. And, you know, they wanted to know my age and that kind of thing. But we soon found our places, and it turned out. They--you had another question on the--that you proposed. And this may be a good time to--one of the interesting things that happened to me that stand out, was that was the first time I had ever come in contact with an openly gay person. And that person happened to be a student in my class. Story_ID: 662326 Speaker 1: So you were telling us about a student--the first time you encountered an openly gay student in class [at J.C. Murphy High School; Alonzo A. Crim Open Campus High School, Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 2: Openly gay person, period. And that was a, that was interesting, it was new. And, you know, he had, he was very engaging, very, beautiful young man and, you know, part of the students would pick on him. And then he had his following that loved him. So, you know, it was, it became my job to figure out how to bridge the gap because I don't think that anybody else or any other teacher made that effort. They just let happen what happened. And, so I became available for him to talk to, you know. He knew that whenever he had, he needed to talk, he'd come to me and talk. And, so I started just doing little things and having little conversations with certain students. The--you know, I'd always choose the leaders--and we came to just diffuse that whole situation. And everybody, everybody, you know, in my class, just came to love him and to treat him with respect. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But that was, that was new. And it was a little frightening because I didn't know what I was stepping into. Speaker 1: Yeah, that can be a touchy issue in the black community. Speaker 2: Yes, yes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Even though black people have been fighting for our rights-- Speaker 2: We don't-- Speaker 1: --for some reason there's--black people tend to be more conservative than even white people, in terms of that. Speaker 2: Absolutely. And the students followed, you know. So that was the situation. And I don't want anybody picking on any kid. And I knew it must have been hurtful to him. And it was hurtful to him, once I got to talk with him. But I was really proud of being able to step in and to make that a nice situation for him. Story_ID: 662327 Speaker 1: We're at Murphy High School [J.C. Murphy High School; Alonzo A. Crim Open Campus High School, Atlanta, Georgia] and, now is there--so you were there from '69 [1969] until seventy--that's nine years, right? Speaker 2: Probably, yeah, that sounds right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I was a teacher, I taught business one year. And then the next year, they asked me to be a vocational coordinator for the school, where students come to school in the mornings, and they work office jobs in the afternoons. So it was my job to find them jobs and to train them and to make sure that they had the skills to do the jobs. And I'd like to interject one thing right here because it's just really dear to me. I got, I came home from my Christmas vacation, I'm opening Christmas cards. Opened this thing I thought was a Christmas card. It was a program. And I looked at it and saw that it was a student that I had taught at Murphy High School over forty years ago. And it was her retirement program from General Services Administration, GSA. And it talked about all of her accomplishments and how people loved her and the things she did and her movement up into management. And then she had a card in the back of it to me. And she said, "You were the best thing that ever happened to me. I owe all of my career to you." I found her that job at GSA as a student. And she stayed there, got her education--everything, she stayed there. The gentleman who hired her also tried to hire me (laughter) at GSA. But I just wasn't willing to leave education at the time. But that--and then in the card, the beautiful words--and she put a hundred dollar bill. Now that's one of the highlights of my life. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So you are one of the teachers that our HistoryMakers refer to when they, when I ask them about who mentored them and (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Is that right? Speaker 1: So you're one of the (unclear). Speaker 2: And, you know, just about two weeks after that, I was at my beauty shop. And this kid came in that I taught at another school when I came to DeKalb [DeKalb County, Georgia], at Cedar Grove [Cedar Grove High School, Ellenwood, Georgia]. And we were talking and I mentioned the card, you know, because I was so proud of it. And I said, I always tell my husband [Earl D. Glenn], "I wasn't the greatest teacher. I wasn't the most creative teacher but I, but I really cared." And he, before I could get--he said, "Oh, no, no, no. Oh, no, no, no. You were the best teacher I ever had. And all of us thought your--we loved coming to your class. And you didn't play, and you didn't--young girls with attitudes, you turned them around, you know." So those are the moments. You don't know when you're there then in the situation how much it means, but later on. Story_ID: 662328 Speaker 1: What was your educational philosophy as a young teacher? Speaker 2: My philosophy was I can, I can teach any student wherever you are, just don't come with an attitude. If you, if you leave your attitude at the door, wherever you come to me, whatever level, I can teach you something. But that's what I was known for. That's what he said, "Don't come with an attitude." And a lot of girls--boys are generally okay. But a lot of girls have attitudes. And maybe it's with female teachers. But that was one of the things that I just would not tolerate. Story_ID: 662329 Speaker 1: Now you're in Atlanta [Georgia] during the time of Atlanta's blossoming, basically. I mean, especially in terms of the black community in Atlanta. Maynard Jackson is elected mayor while you're at Murphy [J.C. Murphy High School; Alonzo A. Crim Open Campus High School, Atlanta, Georgia], I think. And a lot of other things happened. The airport I think was being built, you know, Hartsfield [William B. Hartsfield Atlanta International Airport; Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport, Atlanta, Georgia]. This is--well, what was it like being here when-- Speaker 2: It was amazing because, you know, the migration started. And just so many people were moving here, even when the economy was down everywhere else. And building--you'd hear on the news, building has stopped in pla- people were still building here. Homes were still being built. Back in--I had a real estate company. I always wanted to be a teacher but then I decided I wanted to be a business owner. So I tried several different things. But back in that time, it was just, you know, especially here in DeKalb County [Georgia] which used to be 90 per- I would say 90 percent white, you know. And, now we're--it's turning a corner in the--when I came to DeKalb to teach in the '80s [1980s], population was about 80 [percent] white, 30 [percent] black. And then back when we started the newspaper [The Champion] in '91 [1991], it was right at 50/50 black, white. So, you know, we're starting all of our organizations, you know. For instance, I'm a Delta [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority]. Well, my Delta Sigma Theta chapter is the very first chapter to be in the suburbs of any organization. So people were running for political office that had never, you know, they'd never had in DeKalb County. People were moving here because, I think, mainly the housing. You could just get a better value for your money. But I think the reason--going back, I think the reason behind Atlanta and people migrating back was, of course, the transportation, the hub, that kind of thing. But I think the AU Center [Atlanta University Center; Atlanta University Center Consortium, Atlanta, Georgia] had a lot to do with that. Because nowhere in America do you have, how many--seven, six black colleges? You know, some towns you have one, some you have, you know. My husband [Earl D. Glenn] and I looked at it one time. Some--wherever you have more black colleges [HBCUs], those people--blacks are more progressive. And I think people coming to Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia], coming to Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia], to Clark [Clark College; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia], AU [Atlanta University; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia], Morris Brown [Morris Brown College, Atlanta, Georgia]--a lot of them stayed here. A lot of people sent their children back from California. If they, you know, they sent their kids back to the AU Center. So I think that was the--kind of, one of the things that caused the migration and the housing. But it was just great because you were meeting new people, you were, you were on the ground floor with the politics. You were on the ground floor with the new organizations. So it's kind of like knowing everybody and being a part of it. It was, it was good. Speaker 1: Okay. So you've got advances in city government. You've got, like the old guard of Auburn Avenue is still alive then. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Civil rights. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Lieutenants of Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]-- Speaker 2: Right (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) like Whitney Young and C.T. Vivian [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. C.T. Vivian], Joseph Lowery [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Joseph Lowery], they're all in town. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: It's just a lot of, you know-- Speaker 2: Rich history, rich culture. Speaker 1: Okay. So you, did you, were you civically involved then, as a young teacher in Atlanta? Speaker 2: When I, now I always lived in DeKalb County. I never lived in Atlanta. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, you mean the state [sic.]. But, you know, when we talk about Atlanta, we're talking about the whole (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The metro. Speaker 1: Metro. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Well, you know, I was one of the three that had the idea to start a chapter with my sorority. We did--there was a little article in the paper one--way back that said, you know, the papers didn't really talk about the black community. But it said that there was a real significant uptick in voter registration among black people in DeKalb County. Well, the only people that were doing voter registration was our sorority. Every Saturday, we were doing voter registra- so we knew, you know, where that was coming from. So, yeah, those kinds of things we were involved in. The NAACP [National Association for the Advancement for Colored People]--see, everything out here was new. You know, it was, even if there had been a chapter, now it's burgeoning. So again we're in on the ground floor. And I was a part of a lot of things, you know, going on and especially after I became a business owner and started to work with my husband. Story_ID: 662330 Speaker 1: Now you worked on a, on your master's degree while you were teaching in the early days-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --from Georgia State [Georgia State University, Atlanta, Georgia], right (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. Speaker 1: So you got a master's in business and office education. Speaker 2: Actually, it was business and vocational education. Speaker 1: Vocational education. Okay, okay, business and vocational education. All right, this is in 1972-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --right. Well, are there any stories there about, about your teachers or advisors that kind of-- Speaker 2: Yeah. That was actually my first integrated experience. I had always--through high school [George Washington Carver Elementary and High School, Monroe, Georgia], through college, I'd never had a, I'd always had black teachers. So when I went to Georgia State, now I'm in an integrated setting in a classroom and with the teachers. And, you know, I didn't know--I mean, it's new for me. So I don't know how I'm going to--where I'll fit. You know, if, you know, what I have to, what hurdles I have to jump, what I have to do to be successful here. Well, it was no different. It was just like going to school. And the teachers there in the business department came to me after they, you know, after I had, you know, they had seen what I would do in class, and my academic progress. They came to ask me if I would start to take student teachers from Georgia State. And then they asked me to quit my job in the school system and come on faculty at Georgia State to work on my Ph.D. So it was, it was, it was a great experience, you know, to go there, to excel and for them to take an interest in me and to invite me to do that. Story_ID: 662331 Speaker 1: In the early '70s [1970s]--now you receive an outstanding service award. I wouldn't mention these, except that these are coming in the midst of your career. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And you get, like a teacher of the year award-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --in '73 [1973]. So in '78 [1978], time, by time you get to '78 [1978], you change schools. Now what happened when you go to Cedar Grove? Speaker 2: I was a, as I said before, a vocational coordinator. And a job--there were no blacks in posi- in that--there was one black in that position in DeKalb County [Georgia]. And she was retir- she was resigning from that position. Because you know, it takes--your days are longer, and there's more involved. And she had young children. So she came to me and she said, "Carolyn [HistoryMaker Carolyn Glenn], I hate to give this job up in DeKalb County because I'm the only black coordinator. And if I give it up, I don't know if they'll place another black in the position." She said, "But if you apply for the job--I know that you live in DeKalb County. I know that, you know, you will be hired. So I'm just going to tell you about it, and you can do what you want to do." And thought about it. And it was closer to home and decided to apply for it. And that's just how it happened. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So Cedar Grove High School [Ellenwood, Georgia]. Now where is that in relation to the other one? Speaker 2: Cedar Grove is in the southernmost part of DeKalb County. It's really south. It's the southernmost high school in DeKalb County. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was, you know, like in a once--kind of almost rural area. It's off the beaten path. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. And was this a predominantly black school as well? Speaker 2: No, it was, it was-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --predominantly white at the time. Speaker 1: And what was the black percentage, would you say? Speaker 2: The--probably about 20, 25 percent. Story_ID: 662332 Speaker 1: You were there [Cedar Grove High School, Ellenwood, Georgia] also from '78 [1978] to '85 [1985]? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So that's a pretty good stretch. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Well, what are some of the highlights of being there? Speaker 2: Well, you know, being in business education, it's always a natural for me. I always try to find a way to work with the school and to, you know, to be a good citizen, even in the school. So it's always a natural for me to work with PTA [Parent Teacher Association] because I can do their programs. I can, you know, it's a natural fit for me to help. So I worked with the PTA. As a matter of fact, they gave me an honorary life membership in the Georgia PTA. I was advisor to the yearbook. Usually, you know, I taught three classes in the morning 'til twelve noon and then I left the school to do the other part of my job. So I'm not at school, you know, when extracurricular things are going on. But that was one thing they asked me to do. Had a great relationship with the faculty, the staff, the principal--students were outstanding. I was able to get them hired in office positions. One of the students there, I found a job at Geo- Georgia-Pacific [Georgia-Pacific LLC] at the time when she was in high school. She is still at Georgia-Pacific today, only she's a CPA [certified public accountant] with Georgia-Pacific. So those are the re- you know, still the rewarding stories from teaching. Story_ID: 662333 Speaker 1: Now you worked on a master's degree, too, that you received in '85 [1985]-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --again, from Georgia State [Georgia State University, Atlanta, Georgia]-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --in educational administration? Speaker 2: Yeah. I thought it was--I'd done this job for seventeen years. I thought, you know, maybe I need a change. Maybe I need to--because it's the same, you know, you're doing the same thing every year. And I thought, well, maybe it's time for me to go into administration. So I remember my supervisor coming out from the county office saying, "Carolyn [HistoryMaker Carolyn Glenn], I heard that you applied for administration." I said, "Yes." She said, "Are you sure you want to do that? We--you've got the best job in the whole system. And don't you--?" I said, "Yeah, it is a good job." You know, it was great, wonderful. But sometimes you just want to expand, you know, you want to just see another side. So I went into administration and the same--in '85 [1985]--the summer of '85 [1985]. In the spring of '86 [1986], I got married to my husband, who was opening a new dental office. And then in-- Speaker 1: Well, tell us how you met him. This is--you got married in '85 [1985] to Dr. Earl D. Glenn, right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This is interesting. You'll like this. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He--his ex-wife was my, was my hair stylist. So I was sitting in her chair one day, and he came to her shop. And they were divorced, but we're--we've always maintained a great friendship, never had a problem. And he walked in, and he said, and she had, she confirmed it later on. And he said, "Gayle [ph.], who is that?" And she said, "That's my customer." She said, "Come and meet her." So I met him and that was that. Two years later, we were both sitting--that's my first year as a teacher, as a pr- as a high school administrator. I'm a young--the low man on the totem pole. So all the things that other people don't want to do--late night, whatever, I got to do it. So I was--it was voted that I go to the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] banquet in Atlanta [Georgia], you know, which--and got there, I'm sitting at the last table in the back of the room. I'm eating my dinner, listening to the program. Then I want to get home. So these two gentlemen came over to the table, my husband and his friend. And we thought we had seen each other before, but we couldn't remember. But that's the story. We met--his wife introduced us two years before, but we met at the NAACP banquet. And less than six months later, we were married. Speaker 1: Okay. So this happened pretty quickly. So, all right. So, and he's a dentist, right? Speaker 2: He's retired, uh-huh (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Retired de- dentist, okay. Speaker 2: Okay. And, so, now I have a note in here that you joined Greenforest Baptist Church [Greenforest Community Baptist Church, Decatur, Georgia] around the same time. Was this, was he a member there, too, or did-- Speaker 1: We joined together. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: We were, we were--he was a member at a huge non-denominational called Chapel Hill Harvester [Chapel Hill Harvester Church; Spirit and Truth Sanctuary, Decatur, Georgia]. And we--I joined him there. And then after a couple of years, we moved to Greenforest, and we've been there ever since. Story_ID: 662334 Speaker 1: Things start changing here. I know your son is born in '86 [1986] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 1: Your son-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --yeah, Christian Glenn. And '88 [1988], in 1988, you left teaching or education. Because you weren't doing teaching at the time (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was forced to leave. My husband [Earl D. Glenn] said, you know, I'm at school [Gordon High School, Decatur, Georgia] at seven [o'clock] in the morning. I'm there a lot of times until eleven [o'clock] at night. You know, very organized, very, you know, just I couldn't do my desk job as long as teachers were in the building. So I attended to them. And then after they left, I did my desk job. And he came one day, and he said, "[HistoryMaker] Carolyn Glenn, I didn't get married to live like this." Because he had to get the baby, bathe the--when I came home, it was--so it was time. It was just too--his new office, the new baby. It was a lot, it was, it was a lot. Speaker 1: Let me just ask you about this. Now I've seen other people do it, and I don't know. I mean, is it--it's got to be hard to balance, you know, being a mother and having a career. But at the same time, some people will go home at five o'clock, and some people will stay until eleven o'clock at night. And, so what is--I mean is it, is it--what makes you stay until eleven o'clock at night? Speaker 2: Because I just wanted to be the best at what I was doing. I wanted to make change. I was in a predominantly--well, I was in an all-black school--lots of challenges and not a lot of parental support. And, so, you know, I just wanted to be creative, to try to figure out how to get this done, how to make these changes, how to bring the level of academics up. So, you know, it takes thinking, it takes quiet time, it takes reading, it takes research. So it was just, it was just a bit much. So, and then coupled with that, my son needed more attention. He needed a lot of attention. And we say that my husband helped to start the school at our church [Greenforest Community Baptist Church, Decatur, Georgia]. And he was the head of finance. My son--and in that I enrolled the first people, I made sure that, for the history, he was the first student to enroll in the school at three years old. He was the first student that they expe- they put out of the school three months later (laughter). But he was just very active and needed a lot of attention. And, you know, that was more important to me. I had to give my child first. So-- Speaker 1: Okay, so (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And I know a lot of people balance it, and they do really well at it. But it was, it was, I was willing to do it. My husband was not willing for me to do it--for the family. Speaker 1: Okay. So were people shocked at work that you were leaving, you know? Speaker 2: Yes, yes, especially my mother [Flossie Etchison Hill]. You know, because black mothers tell you, you always have your (laughter), your own. But I did it, and I never looked back, never regretted it. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So what did do when--you just, you were basically a housewife (unclear)? Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I helped my husband with his office. I became his office manager. But I had all the flexibility, you know, to go to the school, you know, to go to school, you know, day care, that kind of thing. So I was a big part of my son's life, but I also needed to help my husband. And it worked out really great. Story_ID: 662335 Speaker 1: So between '88 [1988] and '91 [1991] when you found The Champion newspaper, what was going on? What was informing this process by which you established the, the newspaper? Speaker 2: Remember, now this is the migration, you know, of all these people coming to Atlanta [Georgia]. A lot of people said, you know, "Yeah, I live in Atlanta now." Well, you know, you--we talk about, we really said--in terms of metro. But at that time, most of the people moving here were moving to DeKalb County [Georgia]. Because you had the great location, and you had the best values in homes. So in my husband's dental office, we were working in there, you know, all day, every day together. And we're seeing all of these people, all of these important people, accomplished people, moving to DeKalb County and living in DeKalb County, and we don't even know each other. Because when I used to, when I grew up in Monroe, Georgia, the only way to get to Atlanta was to come through DeKalb County because there were no expressways or what have you. We knew that it was 95 percent white. So, now you've got a Tuskegee Airman as a patient. You've got a gentleman who designed an official stamp for the UN [United Nations]. You've got movie stars, you've got top entertainers. You've got news anchors, you've got, just all kinds of people. Who was the president at that time? The gentleman who handled the security for the president of the United States. You've got top educators, you know, retirees. You've got college presidents. Just wonderful, accomplished people. But we didn't know each other. So in my family, my husband [Earl D. Glenn] is the visionary. He sees things way, way, way ahead. I'm the worker bee. I know how to--he does the research and he puts it together and then he--I figure it out. So he said, "Carol [HistoryMaker Carolyn Glenn]," we said to each other, "we need a way to get to know one another." And eventually after lots of talks and whatever, we came up with the idea that we needed a forum, and the newspaper may be that forum. So we started The Champion newspaper. Story_ID: 662336 Speaker 1: Heading towards 1991, now you're, you're exploring, you know, you know, what it's going to take to, you know, this idea. So, you're bringing people together in meetings. Explain what you were doing (unclear). Speaker 2: We brought the pastors of about ten of the leading churches, and it was unanimous. They thought it was a great idea. My best friend [Arthur C. Searles, Jr.] from Albany, Georgia, his family had that year, that was their fiftieth year publishing The Albany Southwest Georgian. So we had his father [Arthur C. Searles, Sr.] come up, and we went down and, you know, just--he counseled us about, you know, what it was going to take and that kind of thing. Actually, his son came in as a partner, it was the three of us. His son lived here in DeKalb County [Georgia]. And, you know, we just started talking to our friends and organizations and finally decided that, okay, it's a go. Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But we, I think we found out we didn't do enough talking, because this is the hardest thing that we ever, that I've ever undertaken. It's a tough business. Speaker 1: Now did the Atlanta Daily World or any other black paper have a distribution out here in DeKalb? Speaker 2: No presence. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No one had a presence at that time. Now after, after we started, there has been some activity, but no one had a presence. And we couldn't even get, you know, from my sorority [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority] and from my days of--I used to do a lot of extra programs with my students. You know, I would teach them because they were going into the business world. I wanted them to know etiquette and manners and dress and how to walk and talk. And, so I would do extra programs, and would try to get those things in the newspaper, you know, to help motivate students and the parents as well and could just never get anything, could never get anywhere. So, no, there was no presence, no place for our news about our community. And see, at that time we were like 50/50, and the county was about five hundred thousand. So 240, maybe a thousand blacks, 260 white in 1991. Speaker 1: And that's-- Speaker 2: So it was time, it was time. And we decided to take a chance. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, the paper really didn't have any rivals over here. Now how did you decide--I've looked at the current edition of the paper. Because the current edition--I mean, that the tabloid style, it reminded me of the Chicago Reader, the entertainment paper in Chicago [Illinois]--the same size, the same thickness and fold and everything. Speaker 2: What was the, I guess the--well, first of all, what was the--you know, you have size, you have a lot of things to consider when you're putting together a paper. So what were some of the considerations or what was the, I guess, the editorial philosophy of the paper? Speaker 1: Well, we--the size, that decision--we--because our friend who had the newspaper experience, his father's paper was--oh, god, tabloid and--I can't even think of the term. Speaker 2: He had a big one-- Speaker 1: There's a name for it. But he decided that was the way we needed to go, and we said fine. He had the experience, no problem. But, you know, we never published our newspaper [The Champion] using linotype and all of that. A lot of papers at that time were still using that. We started out on the computer. Speaker 2: On desktop? Speaker 1: On desktop. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And it was later on when we changed over to tabloid. It was because it was easier to print. Tabloid, it was less expensive. And, so, and we kind of, we did a little survey. And people actually like holding a tabloid in their hands rather than the regular size paper and some other considerations. But it wasn't a knee jerk. We took some time, and eventually we changed over. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And I want to say that in 1991 when we started the newspaper, seventy-four newspapers across the country went out of business. Speaker 2: Really? Speaker 1: Seventy-four. Speaker 2: How many of those were minority newspapers (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I don't know. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I don't know, but I would think most of them were, most of them had to be major newspapers. If the majority were black pa- papers, we would know it. You know, your black papers, they kind of stuck around. You might have one or two to go out of business here and there. But-- Speaker 2: Okay. So the distribution, was it just in DeKalb County? Was your distribution just in DeKalb County? Speaker 1: Our, yes, our distribution was chiefly in south of DeKalb County, because that's where African Americans lived. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: The white newspaper, the major newspaper, Record [ph.] here didn't distribute in our part of the county at the time. Speaker 2: So that made it, (laughter) made it, it created more of a demand for your paper, I suppose. Story_ID: 662337 Speaker 1: What was the headline, what was the major story in the first issue? Speaker 2: The first issue was 'Born on the 4th of July' [ph.] (laughter). I'll never forget it. 'Born'--we published our first issue in 1991, July 4. Speaker 1: Okay. 'Born on the 4th of July.' And what was the substance of that story or headline? Speaker 2: Just, you know, talking about (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The birth of the paper? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, the birth of the paper [The Champion], our reason behind it, and hopefully people would, you know, support and that kind of thing-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --who was involved, what our goals were, where we were headed, you know. We need a forum in order to make this work. It takes all of us, that kind of thing. Story_ID: 662338 Speaker 1: Also in 1991, you founded ACE III Communications [ACE III Communications, Inc., Decatur, Georgia]. Speaker 2: We actually (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Is that how you-- Speaker 2: --founded--ACE III Communications is the parent company. And then The Champion is--comes under ACE III Communications. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So ACE III. They were all founded the same year but just in a-- Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: --this sequence. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: ACE III-- Speaker 2: In that we were a partnership-- Speaker 1: --and The Champion-- Speaker 2: --we thought it best to form a corporation, since there were three of us. And then we formed the paper. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So is the partnership between you and your husband [Earl D. Glenn], basically? Speaker 2: No, three of us. Speaker 1: Three. Okay, who is the third (unclear)? Speaker 2: My friend, who was Arthur Searles [Arthur C. Searles, Jr.]. Speaker 1: Arthur Searles, okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Uh-huh and his father [Arthur C. Searles, Sr.] is a legend in the newspaper business in Georgia. Because now, I mean, he's passed away. And Art went on eventually to run that paper after his partner, after his father passed away. But I would think they've been publishing now--if that was fifty--so they've been publishing almost seventy-five years down in Albany, Georgia. Story_ID: 662339 Speaker 1: It proved to be very, very difficult. And initially, my husband [Earl D. Glenn] and I put the cash in, and our--Art [Arthur C. Searles, Jr.] put in some equipment, and that kind of thing. Well, when it became clear that it was going to take much, much, more than what we thought it would take in terms of money, in terms of time, in terms of resources--it was time now to figure out, well, we've got to infuse more money into this if we're going to make it go. And my friend was not in a position to do that and, so he bowed out of the business. So my husband and I looked up one morning, and it was just the two of us. He's a full-time dentist, I'm part-time running his dental office, front office and raising my child [Christian Glenn], which you know, that's what we had set out to do. And we looked at each other and said, "What are we going to do?" And, you know, when we thought about all these people we had been to--all the ministers, all the political, you know, leaders, organizations. And we had so passionately talked about the need for this newspaper [The Champion]. How could we just fold, you know, and go away? So that was the motivation behind keeping going because we couldn't go back on our word. I mean, you can't be passionate one day and cold the next. So we worked, we hired a secreta- we hired a receptionist slash data entry person, and we hired an editor. And very fortunate, we were very fortunate that this young lady came with great credentials. She had been a news anchor over in Alabama, in Birmingham, and she gave us an excellent start because clearly my husband and I didn't know anything. We knew business, but we didn't know anything about newspapers. So she kind of really gave us--set it down and put some roots to it. And she was out in the community everywhere. We all were but with her experience--and she was very polished. And like I said, we were very blessed because we couldn't pay that much money. Speaker 2: Now, what's her name, and where did she go to school? Speaker 1: Her name was Theresa Racine [ph.]. She went to, if I'm not mistaken, she went to an Ivy League school. I can't remember which one but very well educated, very well spoken, smart. And she stayed with us for about three or four years and really set the paper in a, in a, in a good direction. And we hired a salesperson on commission basis. And, so my husband and I worked eighteen, twenty-hour days, seven days a week for seven years. We never got a paycheck. Matter of fact, he provided the space in his office building. We've--I've never paid him rent to this day. He bought all of equipment, we've never paid him back for that. What we could pay, what we were able to pay were our employees and pay for the printing. And then after maybe five or six years we were able to hire a few more people, a couple more people, not a few, a couple more people. But we put everything back into the business, you know, trying to make sure that it would work. But we knew, we knew that something had to happen in order to keep this going. Speaker 2: How long did, I mean did it--at this junction, six years in, was it turning a profit at all? Speaker 1: No, because we weren't paying ourselves. So, no, it wasn't turning a profit (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I see what you're saying, okay. You had to keep your head above water. Speaker 1: Yeah, you know, if we had been, if we had been paying ourselves that--so, no, I can't say we were. Story_ID: 662340 Speaker 1: We, of course, started looking at other ways and having consultants, talking to consultants about how we could build the brand. And we knew that one of those avenues to, would be to become the legal organ of the county [DeKalb County, Georgia]. And-- Speaker 2: Okay. So you would publish legal notices and-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --that sort of thing. Speaker 1: In Georgia, which is different from some other states--in Georgia, if you are the paper of record as determined by the state legislature--if you're the paper of record, anybody that prints a legal notice, they--has to print it in the legal organ. Now in other places you can print your notices in different venues. But in Georgia, for it to be legal, it must be in the legal organ. So that's the key there. Other--lots of people have come to us, especially, you know, African American publishers wanting to know how we did it. And-- Speaker 2: Did they give you a special deal or something or (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Huh? Speaker 2: Did they get a special deal or something like that? Speaker 1: The first thing I say is, "You got to check your criteria. What's the criteria in your state?" And thankfully, Georgia had that criteria. And, so you know that if you get the designation, then you automatic- the advertising is going to come through the door. So, but that was not our goal in 1996, to become a legal organ because we weren't qualified, we didn't meet the criteria. And what happened--I decided I wanted to know everything about the legal organ. I wanted to know all the innuendo, all--there were a couple of things we couldn't find in that section of the law. You know, that people told us, "You have to be, you have to have an office at the county seat." That was not in the code. So we didn't know if what we were hearing was correct, was correct or not. So we wrote a letter to one of the judges here in the county to ask him to meet with us and discu- discuss it. We just wanted to get more information. A week later in January of '97 [1997], he wrote, he wrote back and said, "Now that you have applied to become the legal organ, you must be present at a hearing in my courtroom on January 31st." I said, "Oh, he misunderstood." I picked up the phone and I said, "Judge, you misunderstood." I never met him personally. I just said, "Judge, you misunderstood. I'm not applying to be the legal organ, I am not qualified. I just wanted to meet with you to ask you some questions and to clear up some things." And he said, "Now that you have applied to become the legal organ, meet me in my courtroom on January 31st." And, so the light came on. I said, "Okay." I said, "Well, as I said, I'm not qualified. But if I decide that I'm going to come to the hearing, I will let you know in plenty of time." So I was enraged because now I figured out what's happening. I'm not qualified, everybody knows I'm not qualified. But if I come to that courtroom that day, then everybody knows formally The Champion is not qualified and--go home and be quiet, you know, and I'm squashed. That was--that's what I interpreted as the reason. So being a little bit angry, I just decided I'd set my sights on how to become qualified. So in two weeks, I became qualified. I did all the work to become qualified. Story_ID: 662341 Speaker 1: And I called him, and January 31st I met him, we met in the courtroom and we made our presentations. And I personally believe that it was to rubber stamp the current, the existing newspaper [Decatur DeKalb News Era]. You know, just get us there and rubber stamp it, and everything goes away. But one of the officials there--let me back up. We had to bring--we were requested to bring certain information--your audits and other information about your newspaper and to make a presentation. Well, one of--we made our presentation, we were asked to go first. The other newspaper made their presentation. But their whole presentation was about what The Champion could not do. We can't do this, we can't do that, we couldn't do this. We couldn't do that. And, so my husband [Earl D. Glenn] told me later, he said, "I'm just sitting there getting really upset. You know, them talking about what my wife can't do, what she can't do." And he said he looked over at me, I was on the other side of the room. He looked over at me, and I was just feverishly writing. I was just writing, right. Because they were telling me what to do. They actually told me what to do. But the highlight of that day was one of the officials said at the end--when the judge was getting ready to, I guess, almost rubber stamp it. And she said, "I see an out point here," talking to the other newspaper. "If what I'm reading is correct, you're not qualified." One of the qualification points, they didn't meet. And it showed up in their paperwork. And all hell broke loose. So they had to po- to po- the judge said finally, "We'll postpone, we'll postpone this meeting. We'll have to look at it further, and we'll come back to you." So over--that was in January, February, March. At the end of March, we heard that a bill was going through the Georgia legislature [Georgia General Assembly] to change the law. So what they were doing--we hadn't heard anything. So what they were doing, they were waiting to get that law changed to disqualify us. And it's--that's real, that's not an assumption. And they tacked the, they tacked the law onto another piece of legislation. So it was kind of camouflaged. So people voting on it didn't know really what they were voting--you know how that works, they didn't know what they were voting on. So everybody voted-- Speaker 2: They do that in the Chicago City Council. They call the number of the case, and then they-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --say aye. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And they don't even read it. Speaker 1: And this is tacked on at the end. So everybody in the House [Georgia House of Representatives] voted for the bill except three people, two of them in my county [DeKalb County, Georgia]. And they later told me it just didn't feel right. Something, you know, because they knew what we were trying to do, and somebody else from South Georgia. But to make a long story short, when---there are three votes for this legal organ in the county. And this one gentleman was believed to be--one of the votes was--the judge was believed to be working along with getting this law. Because he was the hold up in making a decision and coming back together. And when the, when the other two votes found out--the other two people who vote found out, they were enraged because they felt disrespected. They felt that things were going on behind their backs, and they weren't being kept in the loop and that's what they had agreed to do. So they decided it takes any two votes of three, so they decided to vote us in the 1st of April. And this bill to change the law, to disqualify us had special language in it that said--most bills, they pass the House, and then they sit there 'til maybe September or August and then they automatically become law. Well, on this particular bill, they put special wording that it becomes law immediately upon the governor's signature. So they fast tracked the bill to the governor's [Zell Miller] desk. And he signed it April, maybe April 14th, 15th, somewhere mid-April. But we had already been designated. Speaker 2: Now this is in nineteen ninety-- Speaker 1: Ninety-seven [1997]. Speaker 2: Ninety-seven [1997], okay. Speaker 1: We had already been designated. Story_ID: 662342 Speaker 1: And who was the governor then of Georgia? Speaker 2: Roy Barnes [sic. Zell Miller]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, well, let me think, was it Roy Barnes? Yeah, Roy Barnes. So then when the governor signed the bill, the same day, the other newspaper [Decatur DeKalb News Era], the Georgia print and the Georgia Press Association, sued us. Even though we were qualified, they sued us. No judge in the county [DeKalb County, Georgia] would hear the case. So they recused themselves and they sent down, they agreed upon a Georgia, a judge from South Georgia to come up and hear the case. And in July we had a few skirmishes. Some things were done and, you know, underhandedly, what have you. But in July the case was heard. And the court trial was really interesting, a lot of things came up. We had very good lawyers, and the judge rendered his decision I think a week later in our favor. Then they petitioned the judge to ask him to refrain from letting us start printing because they were going to appeal. He said, "Well, if I do that, then it would be like they never won the case." But at the, at the end of the day--this is very important. At the end of the court case that day, the judge said, "It would be," he said, "I would bring the justice system to its knees, if I overturned a decision made by two constitutional officers." And that just resounded throughout the whole area. So a week later he came back and he ruled in our favor. They appealed to the Georgia Court of Appeals, I think it was October or November. And we rec- we got the decision in January '98 [1998] that we won the case. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But we were printing all the time. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. And, so this is a major victory. Speaker 2: Major. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's good. Speaker 2: We're the only African American owned newspaper [The Champion] that has ever done that in the State of Georgia. Our lawyers said in the country, to have a designation of this magnitude, you know, for a county this size. At that time they said that they did a little research, and they didn't know of another African American owned paper that had achieved that. Speaker 1: I know the Defender [Chicago Defender] prints legal notices from time to time and, so does the little paper (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Is that, what's her name? I know your publishers in Chicago [Illinois]. (Makes sound) What's her name? Speaker 1: You're talking about the Crusader [Chicago Crusader], I think, right? Speaker 2: Well, both of them-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --two of them. Because we used to, you know, go to the NNPA [National Newspaper Publishers Association]. Speaker 1: Well, the Defender is the Sengstackes family. They are, I think, I don't--can't think of the current (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, they-- Speaker 1: --head's name now. But-- Speaker 2: What's the--her name? She used to be the president. Speaker 1: (Unclear) Lavelle is (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, Leavell, Dorothy Leavell [HistoryMaker Dorothy R. Leavell]. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's the Crusader, yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. And then the other guy, there's another--what's his name? You have another paper there. Speaker 1: Metro [Chicago Metro News], yeah, well, there's several. There's a, there's a, there's quite a few of them. Speaker 2: Oh, I can't, you know. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I'm sixty-six years old. It's just getting to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It's Martin [ph.], I mean Martin-- Speaker 2: Yeah, but they were-- Speaker 1: --the Chicago Standard and-- Speaker 2: Okay, um-hm. Speaker 1: --it's-- Speaker 2: But they were, the two of them, Dorothy and this oth- they were pretty high up in the NNPA. They, you know, they--long time and they've got lots of advertising. And that was the problem, you know. NNPA is political. You know, we--with the Atlanta [Georgia] papers being right there and having been there so long, it was very difficult for us to--even though our numbers were great, and here we are in a county. At that time we were the second most affluent African American community, second to Prince George's County [Maryland] at that time. And, so it was just so difficult. So I just had to find a way, and that, that became our way of really becoming profitable. Story_ID: 662343 Speaker 1: What was your circulation in these days, in the early '90s [1990s], I mean in the '90s [1990s]? Speaker 2: We--our circulation was about ten thousand. But what happened, one of the ways that I became qualified, is I split my circulation. One of the, one of the rules is that you had to be 80 percent paid circulation. But no African American owned newspaper is 80 percent paid circulation. So what I did, I took my paid circulation and kept that Champion newspaper. And then I started up in two weeks a sister paper, called The Champion Free Press, which is a free paper. And, so that satisfies my advertisers. You know, they're getting their readership. You know, they're getting the numbers. But over here, my paid newspaper is 80 percent paid. Now we're 95 percent paid circulation. So the judge told me in the court I cooked the books. Speaker 1: Yeah, but it wasn't, it wasn't illegal apparently so (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, not illegal. I didn't do anything illegal. And the other thing I did, when the other, the other side [Decatur DeKalb News Era], they--once I said how I did it in this hearing in January, they went to some of my major advertisers, like the hospital and some other--said, "The Champion is doing this. You're not getting what you paid for because they're not, they're only publishing this amount of newspapers," or what have you. Well, what they didn't know was that I couldn't start the paper. It took me two or three weeks to get the other paper going. But what they didn't know was that I had already communicated with my advertisers what I was doing. And I said to them, "You won't get the circulation for two weeks, two or three weeks. And if you require, you know, a refund for that amount of time, I will happily do it. Just let, just give me a call, and I will come and, you know, we'll make that happen." Nobody requested a refund. So when they went to them thinking they're giving them new information, they already had it. I had already, you know, made sure that I was doing the right thing. Story_ID: 662344 Speaker 1: Let me ask you about Atlanta Goodlife. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Now this is, this was published in 1999. This is shortly after you were able to, you know, make this big, you know, close this major legal--or get over this major legal hurdle with the county [DeKalb County, Georgia]. So, well, Atlanta Goodlife. Speaker 2: Well, my husband [Earl D. Glenn] retired from his dental office in 1999. And in 1998, he decided that he wanted a project. And his project was going to be this metro magazine. And his name--he had the name--I think he even bought the domain, (laughter) blackatlanta.com. And after extensive research and focus groups and what have you, it was determined that that was not a good name, and the name Atlanta Goodlife emerged. It was--people loved the magazine, but it was very expensive. Magazines are very expensive to produce. It was not substantially profitable. It paid its bills. There was a little money left over but for the work that went into that magazine for a monthly publication and for the staff that you had to have, I determined that it was just not worth it. Speaker 1: So was there a lot of color? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: Slick paper? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: This was a real, I mean a-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: How many pages was it? Speaker 2: Maybe thirty, whatever the--thirty-eight or whatever the, in the thirties, maybe. But, you know, it wasn't getting any bigger. It was--we weren't getting any major, new major advertising. To me, it was just a drain on the current Champion [The Champion] staff, who had to do some of the work. And, you know, I presented it each year for about three years to my husband. And finally, I mean, he knew that, he's a businessman, and he knew. But it was just like a hobby for him. And he loved it, and people loved it, but we finally folded it-- Speaker 1: Now-- Speaker 2: --after about eight years. Speaker 1: Okay. Now I'm looking at some--and I don't know if this is out of place or not, but did this magazine win awards? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. So this is, there is, this is the, this is talking about the magazine. You received a Printing Industry Association-- Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) of Georgia award [Printing Industry Association of Georgia Inc.; Printing and Imaging Association of Georgia, Inc.] for-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --best in category. Speaker 2: Every year-- Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: --every year our printer entered it into something with his association. And it always won the top award. So, yeah, it won awards with the Atlanta black press, Atlanta, Atlanta press association, Atlanta Black Journalists [Atlanta Association of Black Journalists], yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Atlanta Black Journal- all right. So, and it features the profiles of successful black peo- people-- Speaker 2: Right, it had, you know, newsy sections like a little business section or what have you. But these are--you'll see covers around our offices of, you know, we had, you know, major people on covers--Gabrielle Union, Hosea Williams, Maynard Jackson. So we always had beautiful covers and great stories about those people. But it just wasn't making significant profits. Speaker 1: Okay. So even with the dotcom, I mean the web page, it--which he had the foresight to do, it still wasn't really-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: All right. Now black folks in those days weren't really using the Internet at--the way they are today. I mean, I imagine they weren't, right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: In 1999. Speaker 2: And it was free, you know, it was a free magazine. Story_ID: 662345 Speaker 1: Oh I didn't ask you about the O- the Olympics. Well, what did your paper do special for the Olympics in '96 [1996 Summer Olympics, Atlanta, Georgia]? Speaker 2: I just think we did--no, we didn't do-- Speaker 1: And I wondered if-- Speaker 2: No (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I wondered when I saw it if the name choice, Champion, had anything to do with the Olympic Games-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --coming in. Because I'm sure you knew they were coming and maybe (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No. Speaker 1: --you wanted to-- Speaker 2: No. My husband [Earl D. Glenn], he's the visionary. He's also, he also names everything that we do. And he came up one day with the name, The Champion, and I asked him why. He said, "Because any time any other newspaper talks about us, whatever their name is, they have to say The Champion" (laughter). So that was his rationale (laughter). He's a character. I wish he was here, but he's a character. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, well, that makes sense. So in '96 [1996], there was no special attention--I see the masthead and I think of that era. It has a Olympic torch on it, it appears. Speaker 2: But nothing-- Speaker 1: Nothing. Speaker 2: --nothing about the Olympics. Story_ID: 662346 Speaker 1: So what does The Champion basically cover? You know, you don't cover the kind of things the Atlanta Daily World covered, in terms of neighborhood shootings and stuff like that. But, what did, what (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, we-- Speaker 1: --do you cover? Speaker 2: You see, once we became the official newspaper for the county, then our goal was to, or our vision was to the first choice of local news for our residents in DeKalb County [Georgia], not just south DeKalb anymore. We had to attend to the entire county because the other newspaper [Decatur DeKalb News Era] folded. And, so we're it, and we have to cover everything. So that was another reason for The Free Press [The Champion Free Press]. Because in The Free Press, it gives us the latitude to do more, you know, for our roots. You know, we don't want to forget where we came from. But, no, we are the community newspaper for entirety DeKalb County. Speaker 1: Okay, so-- Speaker 2: And we do, we cover the county commission [DeKalb County Board of Commissioners], the school board [DeKalb Board of Education]. Each of our reporters has beats to cover the entire county. So we are African American owned, but we are, we publish news for the entire county. And our county at one time, back when we started was the most diverse county in the State of Georgia. We are still diverse. So, you know, so we have to attend to, you know, we're not heavily in the Hispanic community or whatever, but we still attempt to cover the entire county. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. And how many reporters do you employ now (unclear)? Speaker 2: I have one, two, three, four, five full time. And then I have contributing writers. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And there's a full time editor (unclear)? Speaker 2: Yeah, well, I was county editor. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: Let me see, one, two, three--I'm sorry, three, four, five six. We have six. Story_ID: 662347 Speaker 1: I notice you're a board member of a lot of organizations, the United Way [United Way Worldwide] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, I'm not newspaper, I don't have a newspaper-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --background. But my job is to be out there in the community and being a part of organizations. I don't do as much now as I used to. I'm--my--John [John Hewitt] that you've met, who actually is like our COO. He has taken on some of those organizations that I used to be a part of. But, yes, any--from chamber of commerce [DeKalb Chamber of Commerce] to the DeKalb History Center [Decatur, Georgia], to the art center, to the convention and visitors bureau [DeKalb Convention and Visitors Bureau], whatever, you know, we're always--try to have a presence. And we're always supportive. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, what's the editorial philosophy of The Champion? Speaker 2: Well, we want to be the voice of unity in our, in DeKalb County [Georgia]. We have, remember when we started, I said that we were the most diverse county in the State of Georgia. And that was our, one of our philosophies then, is to be the voice of unity. If you can imagine, when we became the legal organ we had our, we had many detractors. And I think maybe that's where that came from, that we've tried very hard to be a good citizen and to make sure that people trust us and believe in us and know that we're going to do the job, and we're going to do it right. So I think that--and then another thing that we do, we don't, we don't take, we do not endorse candidates. We always have forums, public forums. We always present information about the candidates. But our philosophy is, we'll give you the information, we won't put a slant on it, you decide. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now, yeah, because you're a member of The Links [The Links, Incorporated], the United Way, the council for the arts [DeKalb Council for the Arts]-- Speaker 2: Now some of those are past (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) the crisis center [DeKalb Rape Crisis Center, Decatur, Georgia]--yeah, okay. But it's just the idea that there's so many. Speaker 2: Right, yeah. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: I didn't know how to stop. I was like the--they call me the Energizer bunny. But, no, my, one of my favorite organizations is the--that I've been on the board for about twelve years--is our community college [Perimeter College, Atlanta, Georgia]. We have a fantastic community college and they, and I work with them. And I, you know, wherever I am, I always try to get back to those meetings because it's dear to my heart. Story_ID: 662348 Speaker 1: So what are some of your favorite stories over the years that The Champion's covered? Speaker 2: Wow (pause)-- Speaker 1: Well, which ones have been the most fun to cover or made the most impact or the-- Speaker 2: Well, see, now I have to think hard. Speaker 1: --or made a lot of-- Speaker 2: Now I'm--see, I'm not editorial, remember. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I'm the publisher, on that side. So I don't cover, I don't really cover stor- I mean-- Speaker 1: I know (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) back in the day, I did everything. But-- Speaker 1: But in terms of the, you know, the response from the public to what you published, you know, what's been the most successful, I guess, in terms of that. Speaker 2: I'll tell you one thing that was, that I remember. Back when we first started publishing as the legal organ, it was at the height of the O.J. Simpson case [People of the State of California v. Orenthal James Simpson, 1995]. And we all know how large, a large part of the black communication feels one way, a large part of the white community feels, not everybody, but we know that they're different, there were the differences. And I had a lawyer--we used to get these calls when we first became legal organ. People would say--white folks in the county would say, "Listen, all I want are the legal notices. Would you take the cover, would you take the first section, two sections, off the paper and just send me the legal organ?" Oh, you know, goes with the territory. So we had a lot of problems with the, with the post office at the time. We had to do a lot of investigating. We found one post office would just put the sack of papers in the corner, and they wouldn't get delivered. And the lawyers are waiting on their legal notices. And, so we had to go send somebody out and say, "Well, where is it?" You know, we found it in the corner in the dark and, but this one lawyer used to call me. He had called because he was not getting his paper. And all those people, if they didn't get their papers--we sent a courier, sent a paper by courier to their office. You know, we were just public commu- service oriented. We wanted to make sure. We had to do every- we had to do everything right. So this one lawyer called. He would call upset, "I didn't get my paper this week." "Okay, it's on the way. It's the post office, we're trying to work with them, it was mailed, you know." So he called, so finally, I said that when he calls, direct him to me, let me talk to him. And, you know, I could kind of--he wouldn't be as upset because I'm giving him attention. So he called. He said, "Miss Glenn [HistoryMaker Carolyn Glenn], I didn't get my paper." I said, "Okay, well, you know the drill. You got it, give us an hour. And I do apologize, we're still working on the problem." He said, "You know, but let me, let me, let me--before you hang up, let me just ask you something." He said, "Let me say something." He said, "You know, I've been reading," you know, some--you know, if they get the whole, if they get the paper, they'll look at the front page and put it down. Then maybe one day, they'll turn the pa- you know, so it kind of was progressive with a lot of the community. He said, "I have been reading the stories that you all have been pu- publishing about the O.J. Simpson case and the opinion pieces and what have you." He said, "If I had not stopped to read your paper, I would not have understood that there is another side." Is that heavy or what? Speaker 1: Yeah, it is (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That has stuck with me to this day. He said, "Not that I agree, but I understand maybe how somebody can feel this way or maybe how you--but I never would have known if I didn't read your newspaper." Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That was important, and I do remember that to this day. Story_ID: 662349 Speaker 1: Are there any stories around the coverage of the election of Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama]? Speaker 2: The what? Speaker 1: The election of Obama in 2008 and the recent reelection (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah. Yeah, we have, we have that one in (laughter), in plastic. It's up front. It's right behind the desk, where Obama wins. And of course, you know, we do that. You know, any major stories like that we're going to, we're going to do. I mean, that's African American. You know, I mean I'm still African American, okay. I publish a newspaper, but some things I have to print. And even though it's not local news, it's history. Speaker 1: Right, right. So did you get a chance to, as the press--well, I, you know, I don't--well, send staff or go yourself to any of the events associated with it (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure, sure. Speaker 1: (Unclear)-- Speaker 2: My staff, they go all over the world on fam trips [familiarization trip], they go to press conferences--you know, they get the credentials and, you know, if it's something that we need to cover. But remember now, our focus is DeKalb County [Georgia] and, you know, some things in Atlanta [Georgia] that--well, actually there is a part of Atlanta in DeKalb County. We have ten cities in our county. So, east Atlanta is in our county proper. So a part of Atlanta is--we do cover. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: So it may mean sometimes if something affects east DeKalb, I mean east Atlanta, then we have to do something about the board of commissioners [DeKalb County Board of Commissioners] or the school board [DeKalb Board of Education] or what have you because it affects that part of our county. Story_ID: 662350 Speaker 1: I know you have some sort of digital presence on the Internet, right? You've got a website and-- Speaker 2: Don't ask--they do it all. The website, the Twitter, the--we do all the social medi- I have a person who just does, who does social media. The blogs, the--all of that. Speaker 1: Because nowadays you have to do that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They're not in my realm. Speaker 1: --in order to have a real, I mean to really make an impact, you have to have a digital presence. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Because, you know, with the way newspa- you know, I don't know where we're going to be in ten years or if we're going to be in ten years. You know, I hope one day we don't have to go to a museum to put our hands on a newspaper. But, you know, we're still in there plugging and, and, and, you know, we're going to try to keep it alive. But it's our business, and we'll be here as long as we can. Story_ID: 662351 Speaker 1: In 2008 you, you founded, this is the year of the Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] election. You and your husband [Earl D. Glenn] founded the Earl and Carolyn Glenn Foundation [Tucker, Georgia]. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: That's what I do now. It's great to be able to give back. You know, even when we didn't have anything, my husband and I always tried to give back. So, now we have the found- the Earl and Carolyn Glenn Foundation, which is the foundation that supposedly raises the funds to fund our programs and projects. And our programs come under another foundation which is ULC, Unconditional Love for Children [Unconditional Love for Children, Inc.]. And, so with that, we have a very viable board, and we're involved in a lot of activities. We set up this foundation to provide opportunities for children, to empower them to--through educational opportunities, access to health, athletics and life skills training--so that hopefully they can live a holistic life, it will help them to live a holistic life. We--in DeKalb County [Georgia], we have two major projects. My husband's pro- major project is chess. He believes that chess--he calls it sharpening the blade. Chess helps children with critical thinking skills. So he says by the time that kids are ready to go to college, they don't have to beg for a scholarship. They'll have, they'll have it up here, they can earn their scholarships. So he has four chess programs in operation right now. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: One at the barbershop with the kids on Saturday morning. And it's amazing that all these people come out and stand around just to watch the kids do the chess. We have one at a center with girls who are foster, in the foster program, foster care program and, or juvenile justice. We have a program at the community college [Perimeter College, Atlanta, Georgia] on Saturdays. And our new program is at our church, after school program, Greenforest Community Baptist Church [Decatur, Georgia]. So we hire the teacher, we have a coordinator, and we teach the children chess. My program that is being written at this point is self-esteem, is regarding self-esteem. You remember the black doll project back in the '40s? Speaker 1: Right, Kenneth Clark, yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And how the black kids chose white dolls because they were prettier, they were smarter. Anderson Cooper did a follow up about three years ago, and not a lot of progress has been made. Black kids are still choosing white dolls because they're smarter, they're prettier. So one segment that just grabbed my heart was when this mother, I think maybe she picked up her daughter from school. They were walking home, black mother, black daughter. And she was asking her about her day. And the girl was, the child was just so energetic and, "Oh, mama, I love school. It's this, it's that." And then she said kind of quietly, "But mama, I don't like my skin." This is recent. And I say that we've got to start with our young children. We've got to start giving them the information or the ammunition so that when they go out into the world they're able to understand, they're able--they have information that they can pass along. Well, why is--you know, they know who they are. They love, they know that they're pretty, they know that they're capable, and they know that they can do whatever they want to do. But, you know, they--I remember my son [Christian Glenn], and he was busy, he was just busy. And he said, "Mama, that teacher," you know, six years old, "that teacher doesn't like me." I said, "Well, it doesn't matter." You know, how you have that conversation. "You just do what you need to do." He said, "No, mama, she doesn't--." They know when they are not preferred. You know, they know, children know. So I just want to help little boys and girls understand who they are, before they're hit with all of the negatives, and, and maybe it'll help them to understand and help them to navigate that situation. Story_ID: 662352 Speaker 1: Our major programs that we have been doing, that we started, are in Jamaica. And very quickly--we do a, we worked, we worked first with an orphanage, then we went to a little remote community called Mount Zion [Mount Zion Village, Jamaica]. We assessed the situation. There were two Links groups, one from Montgomery County, Pennsylvania, the other from Reston, Virginia. And they were working--one in academics and infrastructure, one in health and nutrition. And, so we found our niche to be extracurricular. So we went in and we did a three week summer camp and--in the arts. We started their band, we took over thirty instruments. We rehabbed the old garage for their band room. We built a basketball court, we put in a playground. I've got pictures--a playground. And, but since The Links [The Links, Incorporated], this--it was a little remote community, but it's still close to like the major hotels and, so we understood after a while that they got a lot of help coming from the whole--you know, like a corporation will bring their employees over, and then one day they're going to do community service. So the school gets the community service. So this other school reached out to us that had no help at all. So we were with them last year. And tomorrow I go to Jamaica. We're going to meet with a school where we hope to be for about five years so that we can really track progress. But we do a summer camp, we've done it two years. The community college [Perimeter College, Atlanta, Georgia], I got them to sign on with us. And their international learning, international studies program, they set up one for Jamaica because I ask them. And they go and do their classwork during the day, during--in the evenings. And they come to the--our camp and they teach the children during the day. And they send over three to five professors and twelve to fifteen students each year. And then in December, we do a mission trip. We take thirty to forty of our friends and supporters to Jamaica, and we do a huge program. And we do programs for, we do projects--programs with the parents, with the teachers, with the students, and everybody loves it. So ever--our group, most of them go back with us every year. We've done that for four years. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So that's kind of in a nutshell what we do with our foundation [Earl and Carolyn Glenn Foundation, Tucker, Georgia]. Speaker 2: Seems like you've been operating primarily with Mount Zion Primary School [Mount Zion Primary and Infant School, Ocho Rios, Jamaica] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 2: In Montego Bay [sic.], right? Speaker 1: We--right. And we went to Maroon Town [Jamaica]. I don't know if you know the Maroon culture. They have the richest culture in Jamaica. But we went to Maroon Town, and their gift to us at the end of the week, the two weeks, the community, the whole--you know, because they've never left their African roots. There are people there who've never been en- you know, they've never been enslaved [sic.]. They have communities there that are not even under the Jamaican government and have--they've never been [sic.]. And, so the community came in, these little old ladies--boy, they could beat those drums--and just took us back to Africa because they never left their African roots. So it's been good, really good. Speaker 2: Okay. Now, this year--you all doing anything special this year? This is, you know, the hundredth anniver- versary of Marcus Garvey's UNIA [Universal Negro Improvement Association]. Speaker 1: Is that right? Speaker 2: In Jamaica, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, see, year before last it was their emancipation. Well, I don't know we--what--when we worked with the program that year--their emancipation--our closing program was, I took a former news anchor, former NBC news anchor that taught the kids speech and drama. And she also wrote and produced the final program with all the children (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Who is this? Speaker 1: And it was around-- Speaker 2: Who is this? Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Steen Miles. Speaker 2: Steen (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) She used to be with our affiliate. Speaker 2: Steen King Miles, right? Speaker 1: She--uh-huh. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: She used to be with the--WXIA [WXIA-TV] here in Atlanta [Georgia] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, Steen King Miles, right, okay. Speaker 1: She's my very good friend. She does all of our programs for The Champion. Everything that we do, she directs them for us. So we took her, we took, we have a couple that supports us. They have a professional--daughter who's a professional dancer in Detroit [Michigan]. They sponsored their daughter to come for two weeks to teach dance. So it's people like that. We have an award winning music--our band director, not band dire- he's the head of music with our school system. And, you know-- Speaker 2: Who is he, what is his name? Speaker 1: Don Roberts [Don P. Roberts]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Do you know him? 'Drumline' (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, but we usually get his--oh, yeah, I know about 'Drumline,' yeah. Speaker 1: His band was in 'Drumline.' He's the guy who, I hired him in 1986 at Gordon High School [Decatur, Georgia]. He was a, he's a little short guy, real tiny. And I'm saying, "I don't know if I'm making the right decision." He's so, he's so young, you know. But I--we hired him as band director. That gentleman has made nothing but history ever since. He had, he stayed at that school for two years. I--that was the year I retired. And then he went, he has four hundred peo- member bands. And he's built--we have the premier band, bands, in the whole area of DeKalb County [Georgia]. So he has the taken the 'Drumline' thing--he has a stage production that he does all over the country, and internationally. I think he went to China with it. But he's fantastic. Speaker 2: Yeah, (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So he--so we have people like that who come to assist us. Story_ID: 662353 Speaker 1: So this foundation, h- well, where does the foundation [Earl and Carolyn Glenn Foundation, Tucker, Georgia] get its money from, for all of these activities? Speaker 2: Right now, it's Earl [Earl D. Glenn] and [HistoryMaker] Carolyn Glenn. We, we have not asked any, you know, we get small amounts of money. You know, we get a little grant from Wachovia bank each year. We get--I mean, Wells Fargo [Wells Fargo and Company]. But it's just like friends and family who have given--but we've not asked anybody for money. Because it's--we want to produce something to--that we can show you what we do and what we, you know, how we operate before we ask you to give us money, before we ask a corporation. So we haven't asked anybody. So it's just us doing this and happy to do it. Story_ID: 662354 Speaker 1: Now do you have a--what's next for you in terms of--is there a plan to keep, to--I mean, to keep The Champion running, you know, for awhile? I mean, I know you don't plan to dissolve it, but I'm just saying what's next? Is there, are there expansion plans or what? Speaker 2: No. As long as we have the designation, we just want to do the, be the best, do the best job at what we do. And we, you know, we want to try to hire the best people. You know, we're getting a new employee, a new reporter in, I think it's next week, she had to give a two week notice, who is coming from the Hispanic newspaper. She's been with major news--she--her credentials are fantastic. So we just want to, you know, get the best staff we can and do the coverage for DeKalb County [Georgia]. But no major expansions, you know. We did create the social media person because we want to, you know, we want to stay up to, as up to date as we can. But I just don't know that it's important now to branch out into something, you know, with newspaper, the newspaper business is so dicey, you just don't know. So we just want to do the best job. We're just kind of hiring the best people and staying abreast of what's going on. I don't tweet, I don't do Facebook, but my--they're--we're out there with The Champion. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now-- Speaker 2: And we, and what we do, too--what we did add, you know, with the website now, we--though we're a weekly paper, we update. Every day we update the news, current news, every day. So that's something else that we, you know, make sure that we do. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: To stay relevant and up to date. Speaker 1: All right, okay. And you pick up national stories through NNPA [National Newspaper Publishers Association], right? You-- Speaker 2: We pick up NNPA and Associated Press. And I think there are some other sources. But those two, yes. Story_ID: 662355 Speaker 1: Now you're addressing some of your concerns about the black community in Atlanta [Georgia] and the world. But we always ask this question formally. What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: I guess it's--one of the things center- centers around politics and what's happening. Just here in our county [DeKalb County, Georgia], we've had some very severe hits. Don't really know where they're coming from, and trying to figure out what's going on. Our school board [DeKalb Board of Education] was ousted, the entire school board was ousted by the governor of the State of Georgia. The governor took my vote and ousted my school board because of--no criminal, criminal activity. I mean, I've read the court documents and all of that. No criminal activity. Just because they don't always get along, that's the way I see it (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now this is--who's the governor? Now this is-- Speaker 2: Per- not Perdue [Sonny Perdue]. Deal, Nathan Deal. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Our CEO [Burrell Ellis], who's a black lawyer, the governor took him out of his office and put in an interim CEO. We have a CEO form of government, which is unique in the State of Geor- we're the only one in the State of Georgia. And he's now in a battle in court. Our superintendent [Crawford Lewis] just got indicted, and he said to me that he pled obstruction. That was the only thing that--and the obstruction was that he called the DA's office to say, "What is the status of the case?" He wasn't on tr- he wasn't involved. At the time, it was some workers in the system. And he took, he took the case to the DA [district attorney] saying, "There's something going on here, and I need for you to investigate." And later on, he became--well, the DA became--went after him. So it's been going on now for about three or four years. And finally, just to get it to go away he pled to obstruction which was, which consisted of him calling the DA's off- according to what I've heard--calling the DA's office to say, "What is the status of the case? I really need to get someone in this position, but do I have time based upon what you all are planning to do?" Speaker 1: So they're charging him with obstruction of the investigation by checking on the status of an investigation (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Absolutely. Speaker 1: --he called for, that now includes him? Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: That he-- Speaker 2: And the judge [Cynthia Becker], supposedly the judge signed the plea deal. You know, if he did, if he pled to that, then he would--I don't know what--if he would do community service or pay some money or whatever. But it was--he wouldn't go to jail. But when he got there, the judge said, "Frankly, I'm not impressed with your testimony, and you're going to jail." She sent him to jail that night, no bond. And then she left town. So, you know, all--and then the--my good friend Beverly Hall in Deca- in Atlanta [Georgia], you know what's happening with her. Speaker 1: What? Tell us what's (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And, I mean-- Speaker 1: Tell us what's happening. Speaker 2: Well, she has--she's under indictment too. She's positioned to go to jail for the cheating scandal in Atlanta on the-- Speaker 1: The school board? Speaker 2: Yeah. And I wasn't there, I don't know. But I know that Beverly Hall is not a stupid lady. I--you can- you cannot tell me that she went down and she told the teacher to cheat, okay. But other things. Why hasn't her right hand, her chief of staff--you never hear her name. She's never been indicted, she's never been in any of the--all these scores of names of teachers and principals and what have you, the person who was the supervisor of what- of these people, she's never been in the news. She's never--her name is nowhere. But Beverly Hall, they want to send her to jail for--they've taken her passport, they've--I mean, you know, it's amazing. So all of these things are happening here. So I can't help but worry about what's happening with the political scene in metro Atlanta for black people, for our people. Just don't know where it's coming from, don't know why. And with our school board, nothing criminal. Anybody--all the cases that, anybody that had ever been removed from office, it's been something criminal. So that's my biggest concern. That's the biggest concern that's on the table for me. I'll tell you another thing in the Atlanta area--this traffic. Of course, that's not just black people. You want to know about our community and our people. Story_ID: 662356 Speaker 1: In regards to that first concern, though. The--do you see the paper as, The Champion, as being able to investigate some of these issues and shed some light on what's really going on? Speaker 2: We, yeah, we--but most of the time the lawyers won't let the officials talk to us or talk to any paper. So we just have to, you know, go in the background. Or another case. Our community college president [Anthony Tricoli], he was a white guy. I don't know, maybe he might have been Italian descent, I'm not sure. But he was just phenomenal, just phenomenal. But he, you know, this is [HistoryMaker] Carolyn Glenn speaking. He was a, I think considered an upstart, from California. You know, he was an award winning educator from California, came over here and just took our college [Perimeter College, Atlanta, Georgia] to great heights. Smart man, creative. All of a sudden he has a, somewhere between a 19 and $25 dollar shortfall in his bu- over budget, you know, spe- overspending. He never knew a thing about it, never knew a thing about it. A lot of people are saying they're not even sure that there was a shortfall. You know, a lot of people are saying that, you know, they just wanted him out of, out of here. Because he, in my opinion he was so creative. He was show- he could have been showing up some of the other presidents across the state, I don't know. But when the Republicans--and I'm getting maybe too political here. But it's okay. When the Republicans finally took over and went into office after Roy Barnes, after the last Democrat, immediately, the county [DeKalb County, Georgia], you know, everybody's in cutback mode, money is short. But immediately, our neighboring county, which is probably the most Re- you know, largest Republican county--they got a four year college [Georgia Gwinnett College, Lawrenceville, Georgia]. We had a program out there in that community, a very successful program. They kicked us out. And, so it was said to our president, "Well, now that Gwinnett's [Gwinnett County, Georgia] coming online, you've got about ten, twelve thousand students. You know, next year, you're probably going to have about eight or seven. Because, you know, it was projected, everybody's going to go to the, to the new school." Didn't happen. Our president wouldn't let it ha- you know what he told them? He said, they said, "And what are you going to do when that happens?" He said, "Well, I guess we'll just have to have about sixteen, seventeen thousand students." And do you know he did it? The next year he had six- seventeen thousand students, all the way up to twenty-five thousand. And before he left, he was in talks with the [U.S.] military. We were going to be training military all over the world, online. So we would have been up thirty, forty thousand. Just super creative. But, you know, creative people like that, a lot of times to the establishment, they can be a nuisance, you know, if you don't see the value of their worth and the value of creativity. So, but those are the stories just right here in our county, coupled with Beverly Hall, that concerns me. And every one of these people, you know, I know personally. And most of them, I just have, I hold them in high regard. And I just don't know how you can do these things, how you can take my vote, how you can just take my vote. And then you put alleged Republicans in seats where Democrats had won, you know, their election. So right now, you know, we're just saying, "Well, the best thing--maybe one of the greatest things that can happen is that--," and that went all the way to the Georgia Court of, Court of Appeals [Georgia Court of Appeals]. Even the court of appeals appealed that. So you just say, "Well, maybe you'll run again and win the seat again," (laughter). I don't know, I don't know. But it's very (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But it's tough on--yeah. Speaker 2: It's very disturbing. It's very disturbing. Story_ID: 662357 Speaker 1: Now do you ever regret not--well, you probably don't. But do you ever regret not staying in education or-- Speaker 2: I haven't, you know, I loved it while I was in it. I thought I would be there forever and retire. But I have, but where I, after I left and where I've gone since then, I've never regretted it. I've never regretted being there for my child [Christian Glenn]. Because I truly think if I had not been there, something could have happened. It's--a negative could have come in. And I would have been more distraught about that than leaving education. No, I've never looked back. Administration was hard. And not that I'm against hard work. I don't mind working hard. But when you feel like you're on a treadmill, when you really have no power--you can't hire or fire. You know, all the bureaucracy with that. When you beat your head against the wall trying to plan dinner--free dinners and activities and things to get parents to come out and, you know, it's a lot, it's a lot. And I think that while I was there, I gave my best. I did a good job, I made a contribution, and I'm happy with that. Story_ID: 662358 Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done to this point, what today would you consider to be your, I guess, professional legacy? Speaker 2: Professional legacy? I guess it would have to be with the newspaper [The Champion], to have created an organization in a year when seventy-four newspapers failed or folded. And to have achieved the lucrative designation as legal organ. And then to have gone on to become Georgia's most award winning weekly newspaper across the state, hands down. I'm happy with that place. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We're the only African American owned newspaper in the state that's a member of the Georgia Press [Georgia Press Association]. And to have won that, oh, to have held that designation for six, seven years, I'm just very pleased with that. I'm pleased for our county, I'm pleased for our staff. Because, you know, that keeps them going. And I just--other than, you know, the impact I made on students while I was a teacher--I can't, you know, leave that out. But I think maybe our accomplishments with the paper. Story_ID: 662359 Speaker 1: Tell us something about your family. You've got two sons, right? Speaker 2: No, I have one son [Christian Glenn]. Speaker 1: One son, okay. I thought it was--okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He works here at the paper [The Champion]. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: You've probably seen him coming in bringing things. He's a very lovely young man, very sensitive, very well mannered. But he doesn't share his mom and dad's [Earl D. Glenn] (laughter) vision about education. And we're hoping that soon--he's saying, you know, he's going to do this, and the light is going to come on. But in the meantime, he's my son, he's learning here. And hopefully, you know, he's going diff- different departments, learning the different skillsets. And, you know, everybody doesn't get to the same place at the same time. Story_ID: 662360 Speaker 1: Now is there anything we haven't talked about that we need to discuss before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: Not that I know of. I can't think of anything. I think you've covered it. Speaker 1: Okay. We've done a pretty good job anyway, maybe, I--you know. Speaker 2: Well, you've been, you've been fantastic. You--the comfort level has been great. Speaker 1: Okay, well, thank you. Now the last question is similar to legacy but a little bit different. How would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: How would I like to be remembered? (Pause) I guess, very simple--I can make it very simple, that (pause) she always tried to do her best. I always tried to do my best. And that I brought sunshine everywhere I went in every arena. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I brought the light. Story_ID: 662361 Speaker 1: Please go ahead and describe the first photo. Speaker 2: These are the principals at The Champion newspaper, Dr. Earl Glenn [Earl D. Glenn], Carolyn Jernigan Glenn and John Hewitt, the publishers and the COO. This picture was taken in 19--I'm sorry, this picture was taken in 2010. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Carolyn Glenn, emceeing the black history program at the DeKalb History Center [Decatur, Georgia], honoring women in media. Picture taken in 2014. Speaker 1: Carolyn Glenn, high school cheer- high school cheerleader [at George Washington Carver Elementary and High School, Monroe, Georgia]. Speaker 2: Don't--do not be alarmed by the sideways-- Speaker 1: (Unclear) go ahead, go ahead. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: That picture was taken in 1962. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Carolyn Glenn, a teacher in Atlanta Public Schools. Picture taken approximately--it's on--19--I'm sorry, yeah, 19--it's on the back. Speaker 2: Oh, okay, (unclear). Nineteen seventy-three [1973]? Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Thank you. Speaker 1: Nineteen (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You say it, yeah. Speaker 1: Nineteen seventy-three [1973]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Tell me what, give me the year on there. Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Before you put them up, tell me--or turn it around and let me see it. Speaker 2: Ninety-eight [1998], '98 [1998]. Speaker 1: Earl and Carolyn Glenn. We had just been, our newspaper had just been designated as the official newspaper for DeKalb County, Georgia. It was taken in 1998. Speaker 2: No date on this one. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: Earl and Carolyn Glenn again, publishers of The Champion newspaper. Picture taken approximately 1995. Speaker 1: You've done that one (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Unclear) 2014. Speaker 1: You've done that picture. Speaker 2: No, we didn't. Speaker 1: You've done that picture. Speaker 2: No, we didn't. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Unclear) (Simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Carolyn Glenn, emcee, the black history program for the DeKalb History Center honoring women in media. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, thank you. Speaker 2: Taken 2014. Speaker 1: An article appeared in Dr. Glenn's hometown newspaper, the Goldsboro News-Argus-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Can you take care of the fold, Larry [Larry Crowe]? Speaker 1: --just announcing-- Speaker 2: Do you want me to stretch a little bit? Speaker 1: --that-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Or fold it back on itself so that (unclear)-- Speaker 1: --just announcing that we are publishing a newspaper in DeKalb County and congratulating us. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: What's the date on that paper, the one you're-- Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: Unh-uh, the one you're giving me now, the one in your-- Speaker 1: Oh, oh this (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) left hand? Speaker 1: Two thousand six [2006], October 14. Speaker 2: Okay. And if you've got other pictures, just turn--I'll--can see the back and I'll know the year. Two thousand what? Speaker 1: Six [2006]. Speaker 2: Okay. This is a picture of Carolyn Glenn and the then president of Albany State [Albany State University, Albany, Georgia], Dr. Freeman [Everette Freeman]. I was invited to be the principal speaker at Founder's Day. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Speaker 2: The Earl and Carolyn Glenn Foundation [Tucker, Georgia] and the Unconditional Love for Children non-profit [Unconditional Love for Children, Inc.] promotes children in Jamaica. And we started an arts program for this little remote school. And this is the band that we started. We took over thirty new and rehabbed instruments for that school. We pay the--yeah, uh-huh. Speaker 1: The beg- the beginning of our working with Unconditional Love for Children in Jamaica, we met with Links [The Links, Incorporated] from Montgo- Montgomery County, Pennsylvania, Diane Duggin, and Links from Reston, Virginia. They asked me and my foundation to join them. So we were doing a strategy session. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Two thousand twelve [2012], summer camp sponsored by Unconditional Love for Children at Mount Zion School [Mount Zion Primary and Infant School, Ocho Rios, Jamaica]. Earl Glenn and Carolyn Glenn are teaching chess to the students. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: It's 2013. Speaker 2: Unconditional Love for Children newsletter, 2013. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: Twenty twelve [2012] by their shirts (laughter). Speaker 1: Unconditional Love for Children in 2012 presented a three week summer camp. And we presented all the sixty-five students with certificates-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) at the end of the program. Speaker 2: Two thousand twelve [2012], December. The playground that Unconditional Love for Children installed for the preschoolers was dedicated. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Unclear). Speaker 2: Two thousand thirteen [2013], December. Friends and supporters of Unconditional Love for Children donated and packed and shipped to Chatsworth School [Chatsworth Primary and Infant School] in Maroon Town, Jamaica, two tons of clothing, school supplies and toys. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: Two thousand twelve [2012], article appeared in the Observer [Jamaica Observer], a Jamaican newspaper, citing the work that we were doing with Mount Zion School and community. Speaker 1: Oh, what year is that? Two thousand eleven [2011] was our twentieth anniversary for The Champion newspaper. We held a program honoring people who do community service in our community. This is the program booklet for that occasion. Story_ID: 662362 Speaker 1: This is the Founder's Day program for Albany State University [Albany, Georgia], where [HistoryMaker] Carolyn Glenn was invited as the guest speaker in 2010. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: This is 1964. Speaker 2: Carolyn Glenn, a sophomore at Albany State University [Albany State College; Albany State University], Miss Omega homecoming court picture. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: That was 1964. Speaker 1: That was 1964 (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, you have to say it in the mic because they won't be able to hear me. Speaker 1: I said, I said it. Speaker 2: Okay. This is '65 [1965]. Speaker 1: Ninety sixty-five [1965]. Carolyn Glenn on the far right, a picture of first ladies--the college presidents' wives that participated in the homecoming football game. And I'm there as Miss Omega Psi Phi [of Omega Psi Phi Fraternity]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Next. Speaker 1: Ooh, what year is on that one? Speaker 2: There's nothing on that one. Speaker 1: Okay. Georgia Press Association, Champion staff. Awards that were presented to us in 2009. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: Champion staff, Georgia Press Association annual convention awards presented to us in 2010. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: Twenty thirteen [2013] on this one. Speaker 2: The year is 2013. Carolyn Glenn honored as a trailblazer, by Congressman Hank Johnson and Commissioner Stan Watson. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Next. Speaker 2: Okay, 2014. Speaker 1: Twenty fourteen, [2014]. Carolyn Glenn, emcee of the black history program at the DeKalb History Center [Decatur, Georgia] honoring women in media, in DeKalb County [Georgia]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Speaker 1: Twenty thirteen [2013]. Speaker 2: Twenty thirteen [2013]. The front page of a Champion newspaper that shows The Champion takes top press association awards for the fifth consecutive year at the Georgia press convention. Speaker 1: Carolyn Glenn's family, friend--family and friends, who attended her sixtieth birthday party in Florida, 189 people attended. Speaker 2: Carolyn Glenn's sixtieth birthday party, a second picture of some of the attendees. Speaker 1: The--ooh, when was that taken? Boy, that was, like, 1991. Nineteen ninety-two [1992], the Glenn family, Earl Glenn [Earl D. Glenn], Carolyn Glenn and son, William Christian Glenn. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Hold on, hold on. Okay. I have it. Speaker 1: Grandparents of Carolyn Glenn, Mollie [Mollie Jackson Etchison] and Artee Etchison [Memory Etchison]. I don't know when that was taken. Speaker 2: (Unclear). Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Hold on, hold on. Okay. Speaker 2: Father of Carolyn Glenn, Albert Collier Jernigan [Albert Jernigan, Sr.], taken somewhere in the '50s [1950s]. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Next. Speaker 2: Flossie Mae Jernigan, Etchison Jernigan Hill [Flossie Etchison Hill], Carolyn Glenn's mother. This is her graduation picture taken approximately-- Speaker 1: Nineteen forty, what, '2 [1942] or '3 [1943] or something? Speaker 2: Taken approximately 1943. Speaker 1: Earl and Carolyn Glenn were married in 1985, and this is a picture from their ceremony. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION) Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Go ahead, please. Speaker 1: Earl and Carolyn in Jamaica planning for a mission trip, 2011. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Earl and Carolyn Glenn, 2008. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: Okay. You can name them from left to right, please (laughter). Speaker 2: The Etchison family reunion, my mother's side of the family. That was approximately 1984. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: At that same, at the Etchison family reunion, a picture of my siblings, my mother and my siblings. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE) All right. Speaker 2: And the last one. Speaker 1: Earl, Carolyn and Christian Glenn...