 Story_ID: 116232 Speaker 1: Okay, so my name is Julieanna Richardson, and I'm the interviewer. Matthew Hickey is videographer and we're gonna start out by slating the interview, and I need you to state your name and spell it for us--I don't think you have a middle name--and your date of birth. Speaker 2: My name is James Richard Griffin, I was born 1940, January 28th, and James is spelled, J-A-M-E-S, Richard, R-I-C-H-A-R-D, Griffin, G-R-I-F-F-I-N. Speaker 1: Okay, did you say, 1928? Speaker 2: 1940. Speaker 1: Forty-eighth, okay, 1940. Speaker 2: January 28th. Speaker 1: Eighth, 1940. (Simultaneous) Speaker 2: 1940. Speaker 1: Okay, good. I thought I had, okay. Speaker 2: And, my professional name is Dick Griffin, which most people know me by and I, I got that name when I was in high school, it was a nickname and it stuck for all these years, so most people will know me as Dick Griffin. Speaker 1: Right, and that's the name you really go by, is Dick Griffin? Speaker 2: Yes, that's the name I go by, yeah. That's the name I've built as a career name and I, that's it, you know. Most people, if you ask about James, when dow--people come visit me downstairs, they ask let me speak to Jam--Dick Griffin, they'll be looking out, (laughter) hold on, who is Dick Griffin, there's James downstairs (unclear) person, (laughter). Speaker 1: Oh that's cute. Well I said, I said Dick Griffin, that was okay. Speaker 2: I--nobody was my, actually nobody but my family and my close friends that knew me when I was in elementary school and growing up in Jackson, Mississippi, know me as James. And most of my family called me James Richard, you know, that's what my mother [Ruby Mae Griffith O'Banner] used to ca--refer to me, James Richard and when I was in trouble, I, she had a tone that she would say, uh-oh, James Richard, uh, I knew something was going on (laughter). Speaker 1: That's cute. Okay, so let's--I need to ask you about--well I need to--we're just gonna slate at the beginning. They're just so--some preliminary-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --Things, and then we'll get into the story telling. What is you--what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today is February? Speaker 1: (whispering), 19th. Speaker 2: Is it 19th or 20th? Speaker 1: Is it the 20th or 19th? Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA SPEAKER: It's the 19th. Speaker 1: Nineteenth. Speaker 2: 19th, February 19th, yeah, Wednesday, February 19th, yeah. (Laughter) Speaker 1: Two thousand four-- Speaker 2: 2000? Speaker 1: Fourteen. Speaker 2: Fourteen [2014], yeah. Speaker 1: God, it's hard to think. Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: Okay, and then our location? Speaker 2: Is New York City, I'm in 400 W. 43rd Street, Apartment 32H, in New York, New York, 10036. Speaker 1: And, and your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm a jazz musician or just a musician, I don't necessarily say jazz all the time because I play all types of music, I--I'm a musician and a fine artist, and that's my occupation. Speaker 1: And, also your place of birth? Speaker 2: And, I was born in a place, Fannin, Mississippi, it's almost eighteen miles out of Jackson, Mississippi, and my mother moved into Jackson, I guess when I was about a year old, and--but-- Speaker 1: So, how do you spell Fannin? Speaker 2: F-A-N-N-I-N. Speaker 1: G. Speaker 2: Fannin, Mississippi. Speaker 1: Okay, oh is it with a "G"? Speaker 2: No, no, it's just-- Speaker 1: No. F-I-N-N-- Speaker 2: No, F-A-N-N-I-N. Speaker 1: "N," okay, okay, Fannin, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah-- Story_ID: 116233 Speaker 1: And then I have five People magazine-ish questions and we'll be over this part. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Your favorite food? Speaker 2: Oh, my favorite food. Boy, I can say, whew, fish, a simon [sic], maybe-- Speaker 1: Salmon. Speaker 2: Salmon, salmon-- Speaker 1: --Maybe? Speaker 2: --Maybe, but, but I go in different periods, I've always loved--if I go back to--I like fruit and I like grapes. Speaker 1: I love grapes. Speaker 2: (Laughter) and my, my favorite nut wou--I guess would be pecans, we call them pecans. Speaker 1: Pecans, right. Speaker 2: When we announce it, but, if I had, you know. Speaker 1: Fresh pecans too? Speaker 2: Fresh pecans, yeah, I--I--I've been lately eating raw food, I did pretty much the whole summer and now I--I ate a lot of watermelon, I love watermelon. Watermelon is probably my favorite go to breakfast, if I--if I just wake up and, and do my exercise and stuff, I like watermelon because that gives me everything I need for that morning. And then, I like a lot of fruit: bananas, watermelon, and nuts: cashews, and pecans, so those are my fav--go to. Speaker 1: Favorite. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Now what about your favorite color? Speaker 2: My favorite color would be, I could say, blue, maybe. Speaker 1: Okay, your favorite, time of year? Speaker 2: Summer. Speaker 1: Favorite place to vacation? Speaker 2: Africa. Speaker 1: Favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Favorite phrase or saying...my mother [Ruby Mae Griffith O'Banner] (laughter) had this saying, "that's right, that's exactly right." We always quote her, but let me see, my favorite saying would be, when I complete something, it's hard to think, let me see, what I would say, it's like maybe, "wow." (Laughter) Speaker 1: Wow? Speaker 2: (simultaneous) Wow, yeah. Speaker 1: (simultaneous) Okay, good. Story_ID: 116234 Speaker 1: (simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 2: (simultaneous) Okay, I--you know, we've been talking about your mother [Ruby Mae Griffith O'Banner]. Now, I would like to start with you--I know you were raised by your mother. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Do you know who your father was? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Okay, can you give his name? Speaker 1: His name is Lieutenant Johnson and his first name was Lieutenant, that was, that was--I never understood why? But, back in days people named their ki--children Major, Lieutenant, you know, and he went to the [U.S.] Army and I knew my father after I became an adult. When I say an adult, when I finished college, my father kinda came into my life and by hanging out with him or by spending some time with him, I understood that he was always supportive in my life, but his, his wife's sister lived on the same street that my mother lived on, so he wouldn't visit me because of the conflict that, and he explained it to me, he said, but he would always give my mother, you know, money to help support me and all that, but I never knew that. And, we had a famous saying, my mother, she never remarried and she never had anybody, any male people visiting her, but she would always disappear at the top of the hill, and I, (laughing) my, my sisters, we all figured it out, you know, she, she was very respectful, I, I enjoyed that. That she never had any males coming around the house, you know, whatever she did she-- Speaker 2: So she was respectful? Speaker 1: --Respectful, oh very respectful, you know, but we always say, when my mother would disappear at the top of the hill, 'cause we living in this place called Under-The-Hill, and it was a very strange, not strange, it was a rough neighborhood when it, when it, when it came to people, you know, coming into the, under, going under the hill and coming out, you know, and there was a place called Dootleville [ph.] in Jackson, Mississippi, so Dootleville and Under-The-Hill, were the two rough neighborhoods, I mean, you, if you went down there to date somebody, you had to be sure that you had, you know, you were ready to come with some, some problems, and, you know. And one thing I can say, being in the segregated south, there was never, to my knowledge, and most of the people, of any white people in that neighborhood after the sun went down, they were not to be seen, or if they were down there, they weren't down there for too much of anything but trouble, but they just didn't come, you know, the insurance men and the salesman that sold different beers and stuff like that, they were never caught in a, or never visit the black neighborhoods after mid--after dark. Story_ID: 116235 Speaker 1: And as a result of that, I--I'm kind of talkin abo--as a result of that, I'd--at around eleven or twelve, I started to work on a beer truck and the reason I was working on the beer truck, because the white salesman used to have helpers, they would be the white salesman driving the beer truck and have the helpers to bring the beer into the restaurants and wherev--wherever cafes we called them, but a lot of the cafes didn't open 'til five and six especially in the black neighborhood, so as a result there was a guy named L.C. who could drive and I don't think L.C. was that much older than me, back in those days you could--if you knew how to drive, you, you, you didn't have to worry about license, you just knew how to drive, you know. So, L.C. and I used to go into the neighborhood, we'd go to Dootleville [ph.] and, and we're Under-The-Hill and all the black neighborhoods selling beer. Now, I couldn't drive L.C. could, could drive so when one--he'd go in one cafe and he'd take the order, I want two cases of Pabst Blue Ribbon, I want a case of this, so he would tell me, you know, two cases and I would bring it in, the next rest, I mean, the cafe, I would go in, I would take the order, and I'd call out L.C., come here, so we did that and it was so funny, after I moved from Under The Hill, he used to pick me up and I was in junior high school, I was embarrassed, you know, 'cause he would be out there with the truck and, you know, I want to be cool, you know, but when I get on that truck, and we go and do our, you know, deliveries in the neighborhood, it was--. Speaker 2: You were embarrassed 'cause you didn't want to be working? Speaker 1: Well, just for, you know, I did--I, I was embarrassed, first of all it was a beer truck, and, and L.C. didn't go to school, you know, he was one of the guys that, that's all he, he dropped out, he was a, but I, you know, I, you know, tryin' to be hip and, you know, the girls and everything, (laughter) what is he doing getting on this beer truck, you know-- Speaker 2: Beer truck. Speaker 1: You know, but, you know, I guess that was my thing, you know, it, it wasn't about he didn't just having a job, but the kind of job and where, what, what you know, I was definitely in junior high school, you know, within, okay I guess it was the, the embarrassment of, okay, what is he doing on a beer truck, and (laughter) he's in-- Speaker 2: Right, he's in junior high. Speaker 1: Right, but that was so funny, when I remember he, he'd be out there waiting for me after school, you know, so we'd go and get on that route and, and sell the beer in these, in Dootleville, and all these rough neighborhoods because, like I say, in the segregated south there were hardly ever anybody selling insurance or anybody, of, of, white in those black neighborhoods, that was a no, no, you know. Speaker 2: Right. That's similar even--well I don't know if it's similar today, but, you know, the neighborhoods are getting rough. Story_ID: 116236 Speaker 1: (simultaneous) Now-- Speaker 2: (simultaneous) Right. Speaker 1: --I want to ask you about your mother, her name? Speaker 2: Ruby Mae O'Banner. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Now her, her maiden name was Ruby Mae Griffith, G-R-I-F-F-I-T-H and it was funny, it wasn't funny but, and, and, speaking to my father, my biological father [Lieutenant Johnson], I have the birth certificate and he, his name is erased off the birth certificate and he said that he--when I was born, my, they, you know, I was born out of wedlock and that was a (unclear), but he wanted to see if I was his kid and when he discovered that I was his son, you know, and whatever he could see, he asked my mother to marry him and she said no. And his name is kinda erased off the birth certificate and the midwife that gave birth, and helped my mother give birth, she wrote G-R-I-F-F-I-S, on my birth certificate so I never heard of the name and nobody, so I just decided it was gonna be Griffin, but if I had taken my mother's maiden name which I was supposed though, what I, what happened, I would have been Griffith and the funny thing, the first, very first album or CD I recorded, they wrote Dick Griffith on the CD and it was so, it was just a typoguy--typographical error, but it was not in a sense, had I taken the right spelling it would have been that name. So, it was so funny, I say, wow. Story_ID: 116237 Speaker 1: So when did you start spelling your name with an "N"? Speaker 2: Well, I started right away because when I saw it, when here's what happened though, going back to my early, early childhood, my mother [Ruby Mae Griffith O'Banner] didn't marry my biological father [Lieutenant Johnson], I was born in January, January 28th, a year later and a month she married my stepfather that was in February of the following year, I was a year old, so that's when we moved to Under-the-Hill [Jackson, Mississippi?], so, I can--they been--I can vaguely remember being in the country, we call that, 'cause that's what we, when we went to visit our grandparents and everything we called it going to the country, you know, so, but I remember being in the country, and I, I loved it, I had a dog, a German shepherd named, Kilroy and I, that dog, I could ride him like a horse, he was so smart, but if I wanted to get a spanking, he could catch me and take me by my diaper or whatever I had on and hold me until my mother got me. He, he was just so smart and, and I would get angry at him and I'd beat him, hit him and then I'd ride him like a horse, so I remember that very, vaguely, very clearly. In a sense, my sister, Shirley [ph.], she, she knows more about my history like that, she can tell me so many things, but I refer to her a lot about that so, basically I was born in Fannin, Mississippi, on January 28, 1940, and my uncle, my uncle Bubba, told me that night that I was born, the day that I was born, it was snowing, had one of the biggest snow storms and the midwife came in a horse, you know, with a horse and, because, you know, the, the way they traveled back in those days, but he said it was like at seven in the morning and I was born. Story_ID: 116238 Speaker 1: And after that, I was in, in Fannin [Mississippi], but I would always go to Fannin, because my grandmother and my great-grandmother, my grandma, grandma, we called her Big Mama, but her name was Minnie [Griffith] and then, Grandma Molly was my great-grandmother, she lived next door to my, to my mother in a, in a house, and I remember I was a kid, I always liked to talk to my great-grandmother, she was so smart, she, she had a way of being, hanging with all the young kids, any dance we thought that we could do, she knew all those dances, she could dance and she lived to be ninety-plus, I think. But, the thing that was so fascinating about her, she never put a straightening comb in her hair and, and I would sit and watch her do all these styles that I see, young kids doing now, the cornrow and the twist and all that, she used to do that, but she never had a straightening comb and she'd have her hair, she have some kind of way she would wrap strings around 'em, then she would do, put powder in her hair, so kinda little powder, but she did her hair every day, but she never put--and so I just loved to sit and watch do her hair. But, I also loved to talk to her and she told me she was eleven years old when her parents were freed from slavery, so she was born in slavery and, now saying that, saying it's probably was she was in a sharecropper situation and it took so many years for slaves to actually knew that they were, know that they were free and even after they were free they were so called--they living on plantations, though they were in, in like another kind of state, but she said her parents were born in, you know, and she was eleven years old when she remembered being, being free. Speaker 2: Did she tell you anything about her parents or time back then? Did she-- Speaker 1: Yes, she did. I had a aunt who knew her parents and one was a Indian and one was an African and their last name was Love, and it was, I had an uncle George, and he was grandpa, we call him Grandpa George and Grandma Anna, now those were my great-grandmother, that was my grandmothers parents, my Grandma Minnie and my grandma, Big Mama we called her, her husband was named Bob Griffith and that was grandpa Bob, but he passed away he kinda, before, I, maybe before I was born or around. But my Uncle Bubba, who was, I thought, that was one of the smartest person, when I say smart, he had a good memory, he could tell you what, who stole second base in a baseball game and he had the Bible, he knew the Bible for word, for word, the ministers in that neighborhood, in that community, they would say, whenever we wanted to know something about the Bible, we call J.T., and he would quote, he had all these things he could, he knew every bible verse word to word, and that was my Uncle Bubba. But he told me about my grandpa, because he said, Grandpa Bob, and, and he, he was, I kind of, I think he had, had basically had shot a couple of people, when I say shot, he, he was one of those guys that didn't take anything and he said that they, they thought they would, they would say, don't bother, don't bother Bob's kids he's crazy, he didn't take any mess. My uncle had an estate and we would go down a long, long path to go to his estate or where the, where the, that family, our family lived and we had a uncle, my Uncle Jack, he was like the keeper, he had a long, long gate, I mean the gate was about twelve or eighteen feet long, I was, you know. So, when anybody came, he could see who was coming all the way down that road because back in those days, everything was like on the side, was just as far as, you know, that we called woods and everything, but he, and, and if it was family, you know, he would see, he could see, but if you weren't a family member he'd come out and see who you were before you could come into the estate, then he'd bring this long fence and then you'd go in and most of the time we would walk--for some strange reason we walk down that, that path 'cause we would get a ride to that, that particular road, sometimes we would ride the train out to Fannin [Mississippi], from Jackson [Mississippi]. And if we rode the train out there we would walk on the railroad track all the way down to my grandmother's house and, so, but, and, and then, and when we went in this long gate it would open up and Uncle Jack, if you were a stranger, he had a gun or whatever and he'd have his rifle, whatever, you know, to see who it was or whatever and then, but most of the time he would know who it was and whenever, I never experienced anybody trying to come in there, that would do, cause any problems. Story_ID: 116239 Speaker 1: But then, when we went in that gate, to the right, up the hill was Grandpa George's house, in one of those shotgun houses, it was a house that you could go up the steps and you could see all the way through, it wasn't anything on it, it wasn't anything, just like a big corridor and then on the right side was rooms, how-- you know, and on the left side was, was rooms and my, my Aunt (unclear) used to say, you would hate to--in the winter time, 'cause you'd have to go, for somebody else room, you'd have to go outside almost and go across, it, it was a roof over it, but it was kinda really nice, you know, it was like, but as kids, you know, we thought that was really fun, I mean, I never thought of anything as being inconvenient. And then he had a big barn and then, there was a big house, and then a big barn and then coming down from that house there was a pond that was a really, really nice pond where you could fish in and had (unclear) and then we'd go down, there was a lot of cedar trees, a beautiful hanging moss and cedar trees and magnolia trees during those times. So, we'd go down that, kinda like a little path, and go to my grandmother [Minnie Griffith]'s house and, and, I'm gonna draw this because, I'm an artist, I'm gonna have to do this 'cause I've got it in my head, I can see the pictures. We go down to her house, that's Big Mama's house, then on the left of, of, actually right, of Big Mama's house was my [great] grandma Molly's house, then down the hill from there you go to the road, railroad tracks and if you walk up the railroad tracks, you could walk to this town, which is Fannin [Mississippi], and the town wasn't anything but just a grocery store, it was just somebody who had, this guy name was Bryant Long [ph.], and he had a grocery store and, you know, most of the people bought their sugar and their flour and just basic stuff because every, all the other stuff, people made themselves. Speaker 2: Okay, so the one who owned the, the grocery store, was white? Speaker 1: White, yeah. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Bryant Long. Speaker 2: Bryant Long, and then this, your Uncle Jack, did he, wa--was this your mother's brother? Speaker 1: Yeah, my grandmother's brother. Speaker 2: Your grandmother's brother. Speaker 1: Yeah, Uncle Jack. Speaker 2: Okay, okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay, okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And, but your grandm--so, are you saying that your grandmother and your great-grandmother Mol-- nah, right Molly. Speaker 1: Grandma Molly, yeah. Speaker 2: Right, did they live next to--that's what I was wondering, did they live next to each other? Speaker 1: Yeah, my, my grandmother, or Grandma Molly lived to the left of my grandmother, you know, well we call her Big Mama. So, Big Mama's house was here and right off to the left was a small house, it was just as unique, and they say it's still out there. Speaker 2: Wow. Speaker 1: And, I like to take pictures so I did take pictures of some of those houses, you know, that still, and they say is still there in, in, in Fannin [Mississippi]. And, I'm definitely gonna, next time I go down there, I'm gonna, you know, see if I can see it, because as a kid we thought those houses were so big and then once when I got to be adult, it was just like, it was small, you know, two, two to three rooms, maybe two rooms and that was it, but we thought, ah, that was a big house, you know, I mean, so, but, yeah. And then my, my grandmother had nine sisters and brothers, we had our, our grand--let's see, we called him Uncle Bob and Uncle Leon, Uncle Tommy, we had Aunt Camille, let's see, Aunt Annie, but it was, it was nine of them and, but Uncle Tommy, he went to Chicago [Illinois], Uncle Leon, I think he went to Chicago, and, but, it was, it was, I still, my, my cousin in Brooklyn [New York City, New York] did a family tree, so he has all that stuff documented. But, I remember that as a kid, oh that was some really good time because when we went to the country, I mean, we just had such a good fun and now, speaking of that, speaking of the segregated south, the--we could ride the train from Jackson [Mississippi] to Fannin, and, and Fannin, like I say, it was a guy named Bryant Long and he had this grocery store and people, you know, got whatever the, basic essential from him, but on the Saturday night, they would be the movie, and the guy would come and build a tent and the tent would hav--would be a rope down the middle, white people sit on one side of the tent and black people sit on the one, another side, on Saturday night, and they would show movies like 'Hopalong Cassidy,' whatever, and that was a treat. But when we finished the movie on the Saturday night, we had to walk that railroad track all the way back down to, to, my grandmother's house, Big Mama's house. Now, sometimes we had a choice of right, walkin' on the track or sometimes we could walk a path through the woods, and when we walked the path through the woods, there was a snake, a big snake, the snake was about this big around, I mean, just, I was, and if that snake was going across we would just stop and wait 'til the snake came across the path and then we would walk, it was just (laughter), but-- Speaker 2: So you're growing a path through a lot of family around. Speaker 1: Oh yes. Speaker 2: You know, in generations, so there's a lot-- Story_ID: 116240 Speaker 1: So, I want to go back to the description of your mother [Ruby Mae Griffith O'Banner] though, can you tell me what she was like as a person and--? Speaker 2: My mother was a--the oldest of five children and my mother was a leader, she was Sagittarius, she loved being in charge, she had a lot of pride, you know, and to think, I thought back when, when my mother told my father [Lieutenant Johnson] that he wouldn't marry her 'cause he had to wait to see if I was his kid, you know, she said no, but, that my mother was like, I can say she was a very sweet person and that when my, my, she married my stepfather when I was about a year old and I didn't know that he was my stepfather because, you know, as a kid. Speaker 1: 'Cause you're too young. Speaker 2: Yeah, and, and, the only reason I knew something was different, my mother, they would call her Ms. O'Banner, you know, everybody referred to her as Ms. O'Banner, Ruby Mae O'Banner, was her name, but, my mother was like, she was a take charge person and, and always, you know, like leading, I guess, my aunt, I had a aunt named, Aunt Lena, and Aunt Lena used to say, well, whatever Ruby want, you know, we did it, you know, and she told me this story, it was so funny. She said, when I was a little kid, you know, my mother would have Aunt Lena, watching me, so one day, Aunt Lena took a diaper and tied one, tied my leg to, you know, put one end of the diaper around my leg and one end around the bedpost, so that mean I wasn't gonna crawl away and get away, and she took a nap, (laughter) and so, so, my mother came in and discovered that I was just crawling around, I was having fun, you know, my, I, I, with my leg, I wasn't gonna go out in, you know, in the, and she said, Ruby got on me, she beat me, you know, but that was, that was my mother and my mother, one thing I know about my mother, she, we had a lot of--she was very funny, you know, she had a very good sense of humor, she would tell you so many funny things that she would laugh telling you almost. And one thing that stands out in my mind, that my, my mother, she never said anything bad about people, she never let us talk about, you know, how some people talk about, she would never, I never heard her say anything bad about people, even when, 'cause coming up in, in, in the South, you know, we had a lot of tension between races, she would say, well now James Richard, you know, that's what she'd always say, now James Richard, you know, there's some good people, black people and some good people, white people, you just have to be able to judge 'em and, and she, she wouldn't let us, you know, just get into a hate thing and, and she never, I never heard her say, anything, you know, like talking about (unclear) and she wouldn't let us do that, talk about people, oh you know, that, it 'cause, you know, that was natural tendency, you know so and so, and so, she did this, or she doesn't like this and she does, my mother wouldn't let us do it, that was the, the earliest, you know, that was the thing that stands out. Story_ID: 116241 Speaker 1: Now, one thing my mother [Ruby Mae Griffith O'Banner] did, she, she was a domestic worker, she worked for a couple of families, I think Miss Hester [ph.], and the Langfords [ph.], but my mother, she, she looked at, you know, what they were doing and, patterns and stuff, and so she like emulated those things, she wanted the nice things, everything, my mother had the best kept house on the block, people used to come to our house and look to see what Ms. Ruby's doing. She was a president of the, of the, like block committee and everything, her yard was the model yard, and she was like, she had the club, if she was club member, had teas and everything and people loved to come to our house 'cause she'd have everything, almost like a museum and I do things right now, when I put something down, it's in threes in a pyramid, she would have those dollies that you, that you all roll up. So, that was her and I knew this is what, when we lived Under-The-Hill, I was the oldest so, I had to take care of my sisters and, every day we had to sweep and mop the floors, we had linoleum on the floors, but my mother would come in and she'd, you know, just inspect the house just like a sergeant, she'd reach under there, you didn't sweep under here, you know, or you didn't mop under here, dust and everything, but I remember she was ambidextrous, she wrote with her left hand and whenever I got a whooping, I wouldn't know which hand was, to, to dodge because she would have switch in one hand, (laughter), but I ain't get a lot of whoopings, but whenever she gave me one, she would always, you know, you, you, couldn't block her, you know, she wasn't going a lefthander and she would go either hand, and she would, like I say, when I was taking care of my sisters now, she always would like worked as a domestic worker. But, there was, when we lived Under-The-Hill, there was a street, on Seville Street [ph.], 1329 Seville Street was our, our address on, Under-The-Hill, and I always remembered my telephone number too, Fleetwood, 5-9-2-7-, oh, or something like that, but I have those numbers memor--I was very good and, and, but my mother would fix up a lunch and everything, I'd have to wash the dishes and, and a lot times when she--you know, I mean, all the kids, and I take care of my sisters, I feed them and everything, I wouldn't have the dishes washed, so I would see my mother coming down at the end of the block, so what I'd do, I'd take all the dishes and put 'em in the oven and she had a friend that, next door that she would sit and talk to, Miss Gussie [ph.] and she sometimes, she'd come in and she'd take a look and see if everything is clean, you know, take a, and then she'd go out and sit with, talk to Miss Gussie, while she's out there, I would sneak out and wash the dishes and have all while, you know, put away, so she would never know that I didn't wash 'em on time and stuff like that, but, that was my mother. Story_ID: 116242 Speaker 1: Is your sister, her name and was she, was O'Ban--? Speaker 2: She's O'Banner, yeah. Speaker 1: Oh, okay, okay. Speaker 2: So my mother [Ruby Mae Griffith O'Banner] never married my-- Speaker 1: --Father [Lieutenant Johnson]. Speaker 2: --My biological father, and four years later, after she married my stepfather [Otha O'Banner], my oldest sister was born, so-- Speaker 1: You mean your younger sister? Speaker 2: My oldest sister, Shirley, and then my youngest sister-- Speaker 1: You mean the sister, the sister that's older, but you're the oldest--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: (simultaneous)--I'm the oldest, yeah. Speaker 1: Right, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, my, my oldest sister though, she's, she's a, I have three sisters by my, you know, that my, my stepfather and, and my mother, so, my father, my biological father married, that's weird, I think he married in August, I'm trying to get the timeline, he must have married August of that year, or something and my mother married in February, but I'm not quite sure exactly, and he, he had three children, I have a brother and two sisters from my biological side and we--we're closer now that our parents are deceased, then we were when they were alive, you know, I mean, my oldest sister Gloria, on my father's side, we're just so tight and we, tal--she calls me just as much as my, any of my other sisters and we talk and, and then I have a sister Germaine on, on my fath--biologic father and we're close, she's Aquarius like me and she's real quiet but she's--and then I have a brother Ricky, who, you know, he, he's living in Jackson [Mississippi] now, he's back in Jackson. Story_ID: 116243 Speaker 1: But, yeah, I, I got to tell you this, now I--I'm getting back to when I was Under-The-Hill and, you know, my, my mother [Ruby Mae Griffith O'Banion], the--my, my mother, actually my stepfather [Otha O'Banner] got killed in a car accident when I was seven years old, so she raised us as a single parent when I was seven, and so, that had to be, if I was born in 1940, that was 1947, and the reason he died, he was in the back seat of the car-- Speaker 2: This is O'Banner? Speaker 1: My, my father's name was Otha O'Banner. Speaker 2: O--Otho O'Banner-- Speaker 1: Otha O'Banner, and-- Speaker 2: How do you spell that, O-T-H-O? Speaker 1: Yeah. O-T-H-O, let me see, O-T-H-A, Otha. Speaker 2: Otha, and then O'Banion? Speaker 1: O'Banner, O'-B-A-N-N-E-R. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: O'Banner, Otha O'Banner. So, my mother's to the day, she, you know, until she died in 2006, was Ms. O'Banner, you know. Story_ID: 116244 Speaker 1: Now, I could roll it back a bit, now when-- Speaker 2: And your sisters though, their names? The oldest-- Speaker 1: The oldest is Shirley Ann O'Banner (unclear) and Betty Jo O'Banner and Minnie Lee O'Banner, and my mother [Ruby Mae Griffith O'Banner] said that she liked to have, well back in the day, people had two names, so she, a lady from Chicago [Illinois], and she, her children had, you know, two names, you know, Fannie Mae and, and, and Minnie Lee and, you know, James Richard, you know, not just James or John or--but that was the reason she liked and she named everybody, you know, two names, and, so. But in, in that early period my stepfather [Otha O'Banner], I remember, you know, coming up as a kid, I didn't know he wasn't my father, you know, that wasn't an issue, but when I went to school, they ha--you had to take your birth certificate in and that's when I discovered my name wasn't O'Banner, 'cause I gon--you know, James O'Banner, James O'Banner, and the kids in the neighborhood used to call me James O'Banner, James O'Banner, Ms. O'Banner, I was all--and so, when I went to school, I discovered that my name wasn't really O'Banner, so they said, they would put O'Banner in the middle, you know, James O'Banner Griffin, and they sti--they let me carry, I carried James O'Banner probably up until junior high school, you know, because everybody knew me as Ms. O'Banner's son, you know, and then so. But my stepfather got killed in 1947, I was seven years old in second grade and then my mother never remarried and-- Speaker 2: So, so, can I ask, when you found out that your father, you know, that you--your--that father, O'Banner was-- Speaker 1: Not your father, un-hum. Speaker 2: --Not your father, were you upset? Speaker 1: No, no. See, because as a kid, you know, what upsets you is somebody won too many marbles or, you know, or somebody stole your pop gun or some of the stuff like that, you know, not stu--stuff like the heavier stuff didn't bother us, you know, or you couldn't go to some, go out to play or something, those were the things that were upsetting to you. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Those were issues with you, and the other thing though, I remember, I'm go just tell you the whole thing, 'cause, I remember that being a, my mother was a single parent, there was a thing, we could get free lunches, you know, that was like welfare and, and, and, I was kinda embarrassed to get the free lunches, you know, I thought that was oh, you know, 'cause kids kinda made a little fun, you, you know, you could--it was, it was a privilege and stuff, but, you know, you didn't have to pay, then later on I enjoyed getting free lunches because I understood that if I made 25 cents or 30 cents that week doing little errands, I didn't have to spend my money, you know, and so, but it would at a point, you know, you'll say, ah man you on, you free lunches, you, you on welfare, they didn't call it welfare then, but they, they was, they'd say okay. And I realized that being, you know, my mother was a domestic worker and we, we had free lunches and I was kinda embarrassed at one point-- Story_ID: 116245 Speaker 1: Now, so, what about school, what about church and what about school? Speaker 2: Very important in my life. Now here's, my mother [Ruby Mae Griffith O'Banner]--I went to church every Sunday, we didn't miss a Sunday. Speaker 1: The name of the church? Speaker 2: No. It was Fairview Baptist Church. Speaker 1: Fairfield? Speaker 2: Fairview Baptist Church and, that was Under-The-Hill [Jackson, Mississippi] and there was a Methodist church and Fairview Baptist Church and they were almost next door to each other, but, and the other thing was that, when we moved from Under-The-Hill to Lanier [ph.] Avenue there was a, what we call a, a holy rolling church we call it. There's a family had six kids and they had church in my backyard, in other words, we had a little small yard and this family was sanctified, no that's the word I want, it was a sanctified church so I went to church my mother made sure I went to church every Sunday, there wasn't know question about it, we just got dressed and we went to church. But, when I, I moved from Under-The-Hill, we, the sanctified church, everybody would be getting ready for church, I'd go over and, and 'cause I was a musician and I loved music so much, I'd go over and we'd be jamming, I would see these young kids that we be playing with and they would go into these trances and they would be shouting and they'd be playing these tambourines and going into, you know. And while I enjoyed that, I did it every day and then, and my mother would knew, she knew that I'd be over there so when they got ready to go to Fairview, I would've had so much church and gotten the Holy Ghost and played the tambourines and see them dancing and getting the spirit, and I would go to the regular and there I'd still see people shout and do everything. But getting back to the church, when I was living Under-The-Hill, I was trying to be, I guess, mischievous, okay I'll put it like that, I was mischievous. So, in--under the hill, there was not much recreation for young kids at the time. They built a playground with a lot of sawdust on it, the playground, they had swings and everything, but most of the guys didn't go to school, they dropped out and one of our recreations, our pastime was shooting dice, I mean, you know, so, and I was pretty good at that and, and the real, they call 'em the hustlers and everything, I would be down all week, you know, shooting dice and doing whatever I'm doing, but on Sunday, I would always get dressed up going to church in our fancy car and they be laughing and they called me schoolboy, because I was one of the few pe--kids that went to school on a regular basis down there, and I would be down there gambling and winning that money and then walking up on, on Sunday, go right by the same guys I've been playing, you know, shooting dice with and winning the money, going to church. And I was in church, I, I, used to do plays, the Easter plays, the Christmas plays and I sing in, in the choir, and I gotta tell you this story. It's a, how we used to go to the movie and I saw this movie, 'The Ten Commandments,' and in our church on every so often Sundays, the youth would have to teach the adults. So, I went, I had gone to see this movie, 'The Ten Commandments,' and I told that story, I said, they didn't know whatever I, I was reading about, I told the ten--story of, of the, just so how I saw the movie, right? And I said Moses parted the water, and they, those preachers, those deacons and everything was saying amen, and they started calling me preacher, you know, (laughter) because they thought I was called but I had, I had seen the movie. (Laughter) Speaker 1: (Laughter). So you were describing the movie and they thought you were a child prodigy? Speaker 2: (Laughter). That's right. Speaker 1: So they were ready to put you in the pulpit. Speaker 2: Yeah, they was, they were in and one of them, Deacon Jones, used to call me, how you doin' preacher, he thought I was called 'cause I told, I'm always laughing, and, but it was so, I just, you know, told the story but they thought that I was called, they thought I was gon' be a preacher, they thought, 'cause I could tell they (unclear), and I said (unclear)and then Moses parted the water and this (unclear) he, he put his rod in and they was saying amen, yeah, yeah, preach son and I was, but I would always, that was such a thing, I will always remember, they, they never let me down, how you doing preacher and I was, you know, a young kid and everything, yeah. Speaker 1: Do you remember the name of your minister? Who was the minister? Speaker 2: Yeah, Reverend Truvillion [ph.] Speaker 1: Tru? Speaker 2: Truvillion, Reverend-- Speaker 1: Truvillion. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Reverend, Reverend Truvillion. Speaker 1: Okay. And he was in the Baptist tradition? Speaker 2: Yeah, he was-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --In the Baptist (unclear). He, he preached the same sermon every (laughter) (unclear) hummm nah and you hear the hummm nah and Moses split the water and hummmm nah, and (unclear) and hummmm nah, he go into that boy and more and boy, and people start shouting, it was just like a, a Broadway play or something. (Laughter) Oh boy, and hummmm nah and (unclear) a hummmm nah, and (unclear) and a hummmm nah, and boy he would, he would get in there and, and, and, and Moses, he would go down and Moses went down in the water and you want to be baptized, a hummmmm nah, and, and so he would go in the same thing and, and, I realized that now, and, and that the organ people would play the piano and they would get them and, and they would go and every time he never missed, he wou--he would, say he might have tell you different stories, but he would, ending he would always go into the chant thing and I, I realize, 'cause I was musical and I said, okay, here we go. And then I start looking around and the other side of it, alright, I'm, I'm in there, my sister Beth, they knew that when I see people cry and shout, you know, it gets to me too. So, my sister Beth she, she'd look at me she knows when I'm go getting ready to, I have this thing I do, like my eyes are tired but I'd (unclear) (laughter). Speaker 1: You would cry? Speaker 2: Yeah, I was (unclear) usually 'cause I would feel, you know, a lot of people-- Speaker 1: You would, you would feel the spirit. Speaker 2: Oh yes. When the, when the people start shouting and, and they, and they (unclear) and I would feel it and so, my sister Beth, she'd look at me, she knew what I, you know, she knew what I was gon' be doing sometimes I would say, okay, my eyes are tired. (Laughter) Story_ID: 116246 Speaker 1: Now when you say you, you, when did you know you were musical? Speaker 2: Well, I--I in church, but when I really, really got, there was a guy in my neighborhood named Mr. Jesse [ph.], he lived two doors down, and when we lived Under-The-Hill, there's Miss Katie[ph.] and Sam lived right next door and then Mr. Jesse and he used to come home, he'd--his occupation was digging ditches, that was, you talkin in the '40s [1940s], he would come home from his job and he would have mud, you know, overalls with muddy yeah, you know, 'cause that's what they did, they were down in, and, and he would get washed up and he would take out his guitar and he'd start to, to sing and play for us. So, every day we heard music and, and he would entertain, that was a daily thing, I mean, it was just, and we'd all gather around on the steps and no, no, and Under-The-Hill, the water came up and in spring and, and the--the houses were about, you know, that high off the ground and had these po--poles and, you know, that they, we call--we call 'em, they would be up on stilts and then they brick stilts about this big under each house, so as a kid, we could just run around in the house on a rainy day, we could, we could just run and play under the houses just because we weren't so tall, you know, it was just like, whenever it rained during like, you know, during the summer or anytime it was raining, we could just go under the house and, and we have a little setup under the house and we'd play and do whatever we need to do, because of the houses were so big, high off the ground. And the, you know, like that was the thing that, I kind of lost my track-- Speaker 1: Well, Mr. Jesse, you were-- Speaker 2: So, Mr. Jesse would--we had these steps, that each house you had to go up the steps 'cause they were built so high, so Mr. Jesse, would sit on the steps and play his guitar and I had a friend named Herbert Delaney, and he was like a big brother, he was like three years older than me, so walking through the black neighbor--the, the white neighborhoods, we never walked through there alone, maybe you could in, in chance but most of the time we walked in pairs and that way, if something goes down, you know, we would know what was happening, we could--so we had to walk from Under-The-Hill through a white neighborhood to the elementary school, which was Smith Robinson, so, and the, the state capital [Jackson, Mississippi], there was, we passed that going up to Smith Robinson [Street?], and Herbert Delaney started to take piano lessons and I was eleven years old and, you know, being that we walked together, I would go by the piano lessons so, after one lesson I said, I wanted to take piano lessons 'cause he had a piano and he was taking piano lessons and he was also playing the saxophone, so he was in the band and everything, he was, you know-- Speaker 1: Mr. Jesse? Speaker 2: No, no, no. Speaker 1: This is-- Speaker 2: This is Herbert Delaney. Speaker 1: This is Herbert Delan--your frien--okay, (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: Herbert Delaney. Now Herbert Delaney was almost like a big brother or mentor-- Speaker 1: To you, okay. Speaker 2: --To me, because I didn't have a father and, you know, you, you got it, I got it from my uncle, my uncle Bubba and Herbert Delaney, those are the two major male figures in my upbringing and, so, once he started taking piano lessons, it, it was just there, I, I wanted to take piano lessons. And I started taking piano lessons at eleven, but the lady, Betty, I mean, Betsy Marie [ph.], Betsie Marino, we called her, I used to say Betsy Marie, 'cause we didn't un--understand it, you know, but her name was Betsy Marino and she passed away after a year of me taking piano lessons, but I never stopped playing, I would always, you know, I never got another teacher, but I always start, I would just play every time I got a chance to play. I had pretty good ears, so when people say, play by ears, I could do a lot of that, I could take, hear something on the radio, or something, I could figure it out how to play it. So, that was in the eleventh grade, I mean eleven. Speaker 1: When you were eleven. Speaker 2: Eleven, when I was eleven years old. Story_ID: 116247 Speaker 1: So, when I went to junior high school at fourteen, seventh grade, I was--it was a guy named Freddy Waits, one of my good friends, we were in the first grade together and Miss Cassley [ph.] was our teacher and we, we were in this, you know, like sometimes you get in one little group and you just go first grade, second grade, third grade, you in the same room, same homeroom everything, so we were in the sev--seventh grade and, and, we're in the same homeroom so, he got in a band, he came, he had drumsticks, so he got his drumsticks and, and, he was beating on the, you know, desk and books and everything, next day I ran to the band director and asked Mr. Holly [ph.], I want to play trumpet and he said, well son, he, if (unclear) one thing he did do, refer to you as his kid, well son, I don't need that many trumpets, all I've got is trumpets, but if you want to play the trombone you can take the case home today. I said, give me the trombone. He sit down he showed me positions, you know, the lesson, he gave me a lesson, he would take a lot of time with his students, he'd sit one-to-one a lot with you, anytime you wanted to learn something, he had time for you, Mr. Holly, Mr. Kermit Holly. And he, he'd show me how to, to, you know, the positions and everything and gave me the book and I went home with the trombone and the rest was history, because it was, it was a pride when you walking through your neighborhood with an instrument like, you know, you in the band, you know, they don't know what level you're in but you've got a case and, you got a trombone case and you, and, and, that was it, I was, I was, in, in the band from the seventh grade. Story_ID: 116248 Speaker 1: And I had a lot of, of opportunities to sing, so by singing in the church choir, then I went into high school, in junior high school I was singing in the choir, I used to sing a lot and we had a group. When I was in the tenth and eleventh grade we had a group called the Sputniks, it was four, four singers. We wou--we would, we would do like, the doo-wop, like, I would say, the Four Tops or Temptations, that kind of stuff, so we were so good, we would, there was our, our talent show at the Alamo Theatre, we won the talent show, I think it was six months straight, or something, but the grand prize of the year was to open for Sam Cooke (unclear). And so what we did, we were on the Sam--it was at the College Park Auditorium in Jackson, Mississippi, so we're talking 1957, and we opened for Sam Cooke and one of the guys' members, I think it might have been Sam's mother, she made us shirts, costumes, special design, you know, for, like, like the, you know, like, I think00so in a vocal group, we all had the same kind of shirts and, and they were very--I remember that we had some red ruffles on it and we all had black pants and we looked just like a real top notch vocal group. So, Sam Cooke invited us, offered us a job going on the road with him in his, his revue, 'cause in those days when you had like Sam Cooke, you would have maybe two of the Spaniels they would have some other, you know-- Speaker 2: Other (unclear)-- Speaker 1: --Yeah, like five, five or six. Speaker 2: Oh gosh-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I'm thinking of the, the--What are they? There's the Spaniels, the-- Speaker 1: Teenagers, all of 'em, the Spaniels, The Teenagers, The, well, The Drifters, back in those-- Speaker 2: The Drifters, right. Speaker 1: Yeah, and all those groups were out there so. Speaker 2: So you, you guys were pretty good then? Speaker 1: We were definitely good. And, the only thing that, well not the only thing, my mother [Ruby Mae Griffith O'Banner] told me no, you gon' stay in school, you know, and I'm glad she said that. Story_ID: 116249 Speaker 1: Then the other side of it, when we lived Under-The-Hill, there was a group, there was a f--fair which still happens in Jackson, Mississippi, in October. For two years they called this the State Fair, they would travel around and that was--they would have this show called Harlem in Havana and it was a Leon Class, I think it's Leon Clax--Claxton out of Tampa, Florida, that was a part of the State Fair and in that State Fair they would have all these acts there. I saw Peg Leg Bates there, I saw some great, great musicians, I saw--and Peg Leg was one of the s--stars that he did for every year and I was so amazed by how he would have like a blue suit and his peg was being blue he was so, so, so fantastic, and there was a thing, I wanted to go--I wanted to run off with the fair and I was, you know, all the musicians, you know, they looked so cool. Speaker 2: So how old were you at this point? Speaker 1: I, I was definitely around eleven, twelve, something like that. Speaker 2: So, okay. Speaker 1: You know, I just--I was always gravitated towards music like that and I would go--and what happened as a younger-- Speaker 2: 'Cause I have you starting to play trombone in twelve, thirteen-- Speaker 1: Yeah, fourteen. Speaker 2: I (unclear). Speaker 1: No, fourteen. I, I was in the seventh grade. But even before I left, before I started to play the trombone I was wanting to work with the fair 'cause when they came to, to town and I was living Under-The-Hill, I have to tell you about the transition from living Under-The-Hill to going to Georgetown [Jackson Mississippi] and, I went to Georgetown, you know, while I was still in, I think, yeah, junior in high school so, but--the fair would come when I was, since I was like four or five, eight, nine, you know. Speaker 2: The fair would come every year? Speaker 1: Every year and, and Under-The-Hill-- Speaker 2: In the summer? Speaker 1: No, in October, because I would know every time in October, the fair came, people start to wear sweaters and wear long sleeve shirts and then it would get cool at night and right to the day, the State Fair still goes there. But here's what's happening during those times, during the day it was segregation, the fair would go one week for the white people and another week for the black people, so that was the way that went. And the Harlem in Havana show was a tent show. They would build a tent, they had live music, musicians and, and the musicians from the fair used to come over to our neighborhood which was just right across the street to eat lunch and everything, this lady, Miss Ethel was my mother's good friend, she and her fa--husband had a place, Mr. Willie Watson [ph.], named Ethel Watson [ph.], she had a cafe. Now in that cafe they would have [HM] B.B. King, Howlin' Wolf, Muddy Waters and they would have all these people coming to, to play in that cafe 'cause it was a big space. Then we had a guy in our neighborhood named Manny Grey [ph.] he played the piano and he would just play boogie woogie piano for people to dance, live music, that was just piano and they, they would dance and, and they would play after hours, you know, all these for the slow drain--dancers, and she had a piano in her cafe. Story_ID: 116250 Speaker 1: Now in that same housing, there was the white landlord of our (unclear) Mr. Wicker [ph.], he had his grocery store and hen--and hen--her [Ethel Watson (ph.)], in one part had the cafe, across the street was a black owner, Mr. Osmond [ph.], we called him Dad, Mr. Dad, I used to work for Mr. Dad as a young age, sometimes as a young age I worked on a beer truck, I was a clerk and a butcher and I used to have a paper route. But the paper route didn't work to much when the--I, I was a-- Speaker 2: So, Mr. Dad--Mr. Dad owned all those? Speaker 1: --Nah, Mr. Dad owned-- Speaker 2: The beer truck? Speaker 1: No, no. The beer truck was owned by Pabst Blue Ribbon. Speaker 2: Okay, but--but he owned? Speaker 1: --He owned the cafe. Speaker 2: The cafe, okay. Speaker 1: He owned the cafe and a grocery store. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But it was just across the street-- Speaker 2: From the-- Speaker 1: --From Mr. Wicker. Speaker 2: --Okay. Speaker 1: And Mr. Wicker was our landlord. He owned the houses that we rented on Seville Street [ph.] and he also had a grocery store so, but Mr. Dad was a black owner of--of the cafe and a grocery store and--and then he had another cafe across the street from Mr. Wicker's which was just a on--only all he had was a cafe there. So, but now, Mr. Dad, I used to work for Mr. Dad, Mr. Dad had--had a--a, a grocery store and the grocery store was here and the cafe was there, cafe were basically you just buy beer because it was a dry county. Now, Ja--Jackson [Mississippi] was a dry county and if you wanted to buy liquor, you'd have to go into Rankin County which we called cross the river into Rankin County and when you went across the river everything was different. You could buy liquor and, and, you, you know, lots of nice nightclubs and, and dance halls and, and famous people like Duke Ellington, all those different artist who were traveling, they would go across the river and it--it was, I think, there was a place called the Blue--Blue Room, I think, it's one of the big rooms over there and they had chandeliers in it, it was such a, they used to call it the little Las Vegas. Now they had a black section across the river and they had a white section across the river, so everything was sec, you know, segregated during that time so, but I--Mr. Dad, I used to work in his store and, and he used to, there again, one part of the morning, I would be the butcher, and there was a guy named Alfred, he would be the cashier, we--we did it all the time, you know, so, in the morning, Alfred would be the cashier and, and, if somebody came, if they wanted a bologna, we had bologna and pork chops, ham hocks, neck bones and maybe sometimes chicken, but chicken was like a weekend dish, but most of the time people had ham hocks, neck bones and, what was the other thing they see, hog head cheese, bologna, hog head souse they called it, hog head cheese and bologna and that was it. Then, then they would buy Vienna sausage they call them, vinna--Vienna sausage, I don't know what you call them-- Speaker 2: Vienna sausage. Speaker 1: Vienna sausage and, and crackers and, and cheese, and that was the things, you'd get a R--RC cola and a root beer, Barq's root beer and Coca-Cola sometimes but, but the RC's that were in the South, there was Barq's root beer and the RC colas and that was famous and then Orange Crush, we used to have those, th--that was our orange (unclear) it was, so, but here's what would happen, you see, Mr. Dad he was such a inspirational man, if you was smart, he would send you to college. So that's why I know the community taking care of them, there, there was a couple guys, a guy named Leroy Vincent [ph.], he was very smart, and he went to college, he was a boy scout leader, you know, but if, if you didn't have, your parents didn't have a lot, Mr.--Mr. Dad would just take of you, you know, send you to college, there was a guy named, we called him Mookie [ph.] and Mookie was very smart, Mookie didn't have to worry about, he worked for Mr. Dad and got, you know, got his education and everything. So what happened though, I would do the cashier in the morning, now he taught us a lot about responsibility. Speaker 2: Now, can I ask you, when you're doing the cashier duties-- Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: I wanna make--is this during the summers? Speaker 1: On Saturdays. Speaker 2: On Saturdays, okay during the whole, the whole time-- Speaker 1: Yeah, Saturdays, Speaker 2: On Saturdays. Speaker 1: Yeah, you know, like on Saturdays-- Speaker 2: So that was your job on Saturdays? Speaker 1: --On a Saturday, yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: 'Cause well, I'm going to school during-- Speaker 2: During the year, yeah. Speaker 1: Right, you know, he--he encouraged you, he really encouraged you to go to school, he was very big on education. Story_ID: 116251 Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And, was your mother [Ruby Mae Griffith O'Banner] big--she was big on education? Speaker 1: Oh yes. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: That's why she didn't let me drop out of school-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and, she was always, you know, destined for you to finish. But, in, my mother (unclear) finish the eighth grade, you know, she was really smart and she could write, you know, a lot of stuff--she--I always loved the way she wrote, she had a special--I have every letter she's ever written, I, I've got it in a folder and she was--she was left-handed, she would write with her left hand but she was very, very prolific in, in, in--back in those days when you gotta eighth grade education, it's almost equivalent to a high school education now (unclear) so, but she, she could read and, and write, she loved reading and writing and then she big on education. But the thing that Mr. Dad taught us was how to run a store, I mean, on Saturday, we would take inventory, you know, count the cans and everything and, and how to do bookkeeping and, and accounting and a lot of stuff so, it was just a really great opportunity and I was--I couldn't have been more than twelve years old because I think when I left from Under-The-Hill, I was onto eighth grade. Story_ID: 116252 Speaker 1: So the move, how did the move from Under-The-Hill, you were gonna tell that. Speaker 2: Yeah, the mo--move from Under-The-Hill. I was, down Under-The-Hill, we shot dice and we did a lot of wrestling, you know, and, and, you know just nothing too much other than devilment, you know, when I say it wasn't a whole lot of things because that was the lifestyle, there was a lot of guys down there and I remember this, and I don't like to tell this, but this is part of my life, they--I was hanging out with some guys that used to have crooked dice and, you know, that was my game, I was a gambler and I, you know, so we would get together and these guys would wait for the guys who worked all week and get drunk and everything, we'd roll them for their money and one time this guy, Willie, Willie T.[ph.] lived across the street from me, he had a wife and two kids and he would work on the beer truck and, you know, he had a--well the beer truck system was like this, a guy named Fats [ph.], Fats taught me a lot about music, Fats used to work on the beer truck. Now, this was an adult and he was working with another adult, white salesman right? So those guys had another kinda system going because they worked during the day, they worked from nine to five while we're in school and everything. But, some of the cafes I said didn't open 'til five o'clock so that's when L.C. and I took over because the white drivers, they wouldn't go in through the neighborhood at night with a system with a white driver and a, and a black helper, so at night it would be a black driver and a black helper and that was for me and L.C. and we did Dootleville, the rough neighborhoods and Under-The-Hill, so, I'm saying all that to say that when, when--I, you know, I started too--I, I was just, just--I was good at that gambling thing, but it hurt my feeling when, I mean, I got, I got, one time I saw this guy he--he made his money and everything, he would lose most of his money and then he had two wife and two kids and so I just couldn't do it anymore, I couldn't-- Speaker 1: Oh, so you stopped? So that's what you-- Speaker 2: --I stopped the, the--the gambling, the crooked dice and stuff. Speaker 1: But what made you move though, what?-- Speaker 2: Okay, here's what made me move and this is a--this something I learned very late in my life, Miss Ethel [Watson (ph.)], she wo--she had the cafe, now she was there all the time, my mother [Ruby Mae Griffith O'Banner] worked, you know, during the day as a domestic worker. Miss Ethel would see me hanging out, shooting dice with the guys and doing all the little devilment, my mother never said anything to me about it you know, she, she said Ethel, and then I heard 'bout this around about fifty years old, I'm older, she said, Ethel used to tell me that James Richard was down there shooting dice with the guys and everything, 'cause I was a goody-two-shoe guy, I thought I was slick, I thought that nobody knew now devilish I was, you know, I was trying to do this, then I--like I said, I would beat--I would win those guys money and then walk by on Sunday with my suit and tie on (laughter) and then we'd laugh you know, look at each other and go, yeah I got you and then I gotcha money in my pocket, and that kinda thing. So, but my mother, said Miss Ethel told her that James Richard was down there shooting dice and she saw me one day, she said she never said anything to me, she said she knew it was time for her to move. Story_ID: 116253 Speaker 1: Dig this, she [Ruby Mae Griffith O'Banion] moved from Under-The-Hill, never said to me or anything about the gambling or anything, when we moved from Under-The-Hill, we moved two blocks from the high school which it had been just newly built, Lanier High School. There, nobody in the bushes gambling and stealing corn whiskey and all that stuff, 'cause that was all that we would--we would steal the whiskey and sell it and drink it and all kinds of stuff goin'. I started to play tennis and, and football, see 'cause it wasn't--the atmosphere, wasn't nobody in the bushes gambling, and nobody, no corn whiskey, you know, hang--(unclear), so it was just like I didn't know what hit me, but I just--I was so happy, I was two blocks from the high school and I was in the band, I was so happy to be in, I was always over at the school playing music, I used to go out for the football team just for training so I could learn to do all the 440 rolls and everything, I would train and then when football season came I would get in the band, 'cause I was just, I was in the high school all the time, I mean, I was there, you know, that school was new, and they had tennis courts, they had running tracks and all of this stuff-- Speaker 2: --So-- Story_ID: 116254 Speaker 1: So your--your friend though, that you had, he didn't move? Speaker 2: Yeah, he, he moved around the same time. Speaker 1: He did? Speaker 2: Herb Delaney [Herbert Delaney], yeah. Speaker 1: He did? Oh, so you bo-- okay. Speaker 2: So he, he was down, he lived on, on--on maybe two blocks from where I lived. Speaker 1: Ohhh. Speaker 2: Herb Delaney, so but, yeah. So, 'cause what happened it eventually the water got so bad the hot water it just stopped, the, the whole neighborhood had to-- Speaker 1: To move. Speaker 2: --Had to move, yeah.-- Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: --'Cause the snakes were getting into your house, I mean, I would say water moccasins would come if the water got up so high there would be water moccasins, as a kid it didn't bother us because, you know, we'd grab a water moccasin just, throw him out but, you know adults, think about some people had to walk planks all the way for two or three blocks on a little narrow plank like this and, and not fall off into the water 'cause it, it was like so, and what we would do as kids, we would run, you know, go to the--that was a good season for us 'cause we would get a nickel to go to the store for people, so we'd run around--what you want me to get, and we'd run on these planks and, and if we fall off in the water, we could jump back up and swim you know, but adults, imagine, somebody having to walk on that for two or three blocks to get out up into the other part of town where the water wasn't happening so-- Speaker 1: --Wait-- Story_ID: 116255 Speaker 1: Now, the other question I had for you, Mr. Griffin, what is, do--what is Lanier [High School, Jackson, Mississippi]? Is Lanier segregated still at this point or not? Because you would have been going to Lanier well may--I don't know if-- Speaker 2: Fifty-'-50 [1950], I, I went to Lanier from I guess from '54 [1954] to '58[1958], when I graduated. Speaker 1: Right. So, Brown b--ver, Brown versus Board of Education comes in '54 [1954], but you were in the segregated South so-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah, segregated. Speaker 1: So, so, what, what is Lanier? Is it black, is it white? Is it-- Speaker 2: It, it--it was a black school. There were only two high schools in Jackson, black high schools, there was a high school on the west side of town called Jim Hill [High School] and Lanier was on the yeah, on the east side I guess. And, and, and during those days each neighborhood like at from the west Jackson to, to, to what we call Georgetown where I lived was where Lanier was, you had to go through white neighborhoods to get to those 'cause every neighborhood had a little, you know, a little pocket, you know, white people were living in, in Capitol Street and Prentiss Street and all that so, what we would do is, it was just un, un, wouldn't even thought about, but we'd stand on the corner and people would give us a ride through the white neighborhoods. If you wanted to go to West Jackson you'd stand on the corner of Maple Street and (unclear) Woodrow Wilson, Woodrow Wilson, Maple Street and peopled make that right turn and you'd say you going out, you going out west, jump in the car, and that, that was the way we did it. But we had a teacher named Mr. Lyles [ph.] he lived in West Jackson and he used to walk, he was an adult see, but he would walk from West Jackson to, to, to Lanier, he would walk through the neighborhood, but Mr. Lyles he did it, I understand now he just did it because he wanted to exercise, that was one of the way he, he stayed in shape, so he would walk and we thought he was cheap, (laughter) yeah so, Mr. Lyles. Speaker 1: And nothing ever happened to him? Speaker 2: No, no nothing, you know, he was an adult, you know. Speaker 1: What? Speaker 2: He was an adult, he was, you know, and then people kinda knew who to bother and who not to bother. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And the kids bothered kids, most of the time-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --the kids didn't mess with adults too much. Speaker 1: Right. Story_ID: 116256 Speaker 1: Now, you--do you--once you started playing trombone did you continue that in, in high school [at Lanier High School, Jackson, Mississippi]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I never stopped. Speaker 1: So you, did you work with the piano still? Or did you stop pia--? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, so you were playing piano and trombone? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, was there-- Speaker 2: Now-- Speaker 1: --Okay, go on. Speaker 2: --When, when I started playing the trombone, I was playing the trombone and I was also singing in the choir but I also developed, or, or I had a band in high school that I would play piano and, and I, I that, that band was we calling the Blue Notes and we would play for the proms every season and I, I was pretty much a pianist because trombone didn't fit in. I wasn't very good at trombone playing it and during that time, but trombone didn't fit in as well as saxophones and pianos and everything, you know, you, you did it in the marching band and did it in concert band but wasn't a lot of people just playing trombone as a lead instrument and they wanted a piano player much more than they wanted a trombone player. Speaker 1: So is this after the time or is this when you still remember how you were opening, you had the doo-wop group? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: This is after? Speaker 2: Yeah, after now, now here's what happen-- Speaker 1: So are you still--are there groups still competing and things like that, are you making mon--you know, are you making money as a band or? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: See here's, here's what was do--we're doing, I always felt I wanted to make money at work right? Story_ID: 116257 Speaker 1: I have to tell you this one, this is during that same period when I was living Under-The-Hill, I, I tried all the different little things. I used to work for Mr. Osmond, Mr. Dad, we worked for him on Saturdays and then I worked at a, a grocery store, Jitney Jungle, now this was in a white neighborhood, white grocery store and it was just around the time that Emmett kill--Till got killed and I had a thing that I wouldn't--I had a art of not saying yes sir, no sir to white people and this is when I was living Under-The-Hill, and, and I--I would, I would--every time I would come back from like going to the movie and I would be walking back from the movie by myself maybe 10 or 12 O'clock, I would pass through one little block where there was a white boarding house for girls and through that boarding house, the cars and the kids were in the cars and making out and all this stuff and before I would go through that block, there would always be a policeman there, I'm saying not always but pretty, pretty much, so he'd see me and he'd stop and then we'd have this conversation. Boy where you going? I--I'm going to in my home, blah, blah, blah. Where you been? Blah, blah, I been to the movies. See, he would want me to start saying yes sir, no sir, you know, and he said, you know, where you live? I live 1329 Seville Street [ph.], you know, and, and he'd stare, he'd see that, this guy hasn't said yes sir to me, you know, and we'd sit there and it would go on for on and on and on and I always have something and answer him with a sentence, I would never say yes sir, so and then he'd said okay now, you go on home so--go on home boy, he would always call me, you know, boy (unclear). And so we had this thing every time, so I had this art of not saying yes sir and no sir. And a lot of times when the insurance salesman and stuff like that would come to my house, they would say--they would call my mother [Ruby Mae Griffith O'Banner] by Ruby, everybody, you know the white people address most black people by their first name. He would say, is Ruby in? I'd say Ms. O'Banner is gone to work today, well, so and so and so, Ms. O'Banner is not doing so and so. So, I always was aware of what c--a--aware of that kinda stuff and so and, you know that was my thing, I, I, I picked that up long, long time ago. My mother was kinda afraid for me 'cause, you know she was from another generation, but-- Speaker 2: So, she didn't encourage it? You just picked it up. Speaker 1: Oh, I picked it up-- Story_ID: 116258 Speaker 1: I knew because here's what's happening, was brewing then, I had, I had witnessed Emmett Till, let me tell you the story about Emmett Till, now this is really, really a true story. When, during the time of Emmett Till got killed there was a guy named Max--what's his name? He was a sharp shooter, he had killed five white people. Speaker 2: Like (unclear) Speaker 1: Yes, like a sharp shooter, what's her name, Max, see because I was aware of all these things, my grandpa had, had shot, I don't know whether he killed him, but he shot some white people, so I told you see, Bob Griffin [sic, Griffith], you know his, he, he-- Speaker 2: Crazy. Speaker 1: He's crazy, right and my, my sisters and my mother [Ruby Mae Griffith O'Banner] and my brother, they didn't have to--they went to school they didn't have to--so a lot of the people, you know would, would have to pick cotton and do everything until all that, my, my, mother and father didn't have to do that, but my uncles and every--'cause they were Bob Griffin kids. Now Bob Griffin owned cars T-Model Fords and stuff he had his own property so that people never talk about the people that, that didn't take a lot of stuff or that white people respected as much as they could during that time and that was, that was the situation. Everybody wasn't abused and wasn't, wasn't you know, you know, taken advantage of, it wasn't like that, there were some that had a lot of pride and they, they recognized that, they wouldn't bother 'em, they, they would classify them as crazy, this guy named Max, I can forget his name but he had shot six people. He was a sharp shooter before they ki--they killed him. So I was aware of all this, Emmett Till, I would remember if it was a story about Emmett Till, I was working at this place, a white establishment, it was the Jitney Jungle and I was a, you know, 'cause I'd be going to work, I was-- Speaker 2: How do you, Gent-- Speaker 1: Jitney Jungle. Speaker 2: Jit--Jitney Jungle. Speaker 1: Jitney Jungle. So, I was working at Jitney Jungle and, and again I would, I wouldn't like to s--I didn't like to say yes sir and no sir to white people, so the guys there, they all, two of them lived Under-The-Hill so they got me the job so, I--and then I, then there was a white lady who wanted me to always, young white nurse, always wanted me to take her groceries home, you know and back during those days, you take the groceries home, you see and she'd offer you water or whatever, you know. So then they picked it up they say, they didn't say it to me, but I, I figured that out later, he said, you know, they called me James Richard back then, they say James Richard, you know, I got a good job for you, see you know, this is, you don't have to work as hard as you're doing here and they got me a job in the shoe shine parlor down on Farish Street with a guy named Bear Trap, I was shining shoes in the black neighborhood, you know, didn't have to deal with any white people at all because they figured, they saw that I wasn't saying yes sir and no sir to the people and this white lady was asking me to bring her gro--you know, to take her groceries home and everything, they didn't like what was going on. The--they say, they say, but I didn't know until later on 'cause it happened like they were doing me a favor, they were protecting me and, and they didn't fire me, the guy didn't fire me they just said, okay we gon' have to get him out of this situation and put him in a situation where he'll be safe or you cannot have to say yes sir and no sir. So, but I thought, I figured out later on, I said, wow, that was smooth and they, no, nothing was said, and I said okay, I liked the job 'cause I was there, I could hear music, I was hearing Earl Bostic and I would have this argument with this guy about Charlie Parker and Earl Bostic. I thought Earl Bostic was a much better player than Charlie Parker, you know, so that was it, all I did was shine shoes and hear--listen to music all day and this guy named Bear Trap, he could tap dance and p--p--and shine the shoes. So, he, he would tap dance and he would be tapping and then shi--popping the rag and stuff, so he had a act, ah man, that guy was so talented, but he, that was his thing, he had a shoe shine parlor and I used to work for him. Speaker 2: So, when you, when you, wha--the incident you're talking about when they told you about the other job (unclear). Is that before or after Emmett Till? Speaker 1: That was during the same time I think-- Speaker 2: It was around the-- Speaker 1: --Aft--after Emmett Till. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, because Emmett Till and I would have been around the same--close to the same age. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And, yeah, that was around that same time. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 116259 Speaker 1: I want to go back to your group, so I can just get--so you had--when was the Sputniks? Was the Sputniks--who was f--which group, 'cause you had several-- Speaker 2: The Sput--the Sputniks was a vocal group. Speaker 1: --That was the first group? Speaker 2: Because we got the name from the, the first, what you call it, the first Russians-- Speaker 1: The, the, the--when they went into space. Speaker 2: Space, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: So, then we got the name from that it was like 50--'57 [1957], or '50-something like that. Speaker 1: Okay, and how many people were in the group? Speaker 2: Four, four people, it was Sam Baker, Paul Woods and Mark Blond [ph.]. Speaker 1: Okay, now I had it to, am I wrong, that Freddie--'cause I read, you know, you don't know if things are-- Speaker 2: Uh-hum. Speaker 1: But, but Freddie Waits, I have that he was in the Sputniks with you, is that right? Speaker 2: No, no, Freddie played drums. Speaker 1: He played drums. Speaker 2: Freddie was in, in, in, you know, like we were in high school and, and different bands together, and so-- Speaker 1: Oh, I see, okay. See that was wrong. Speaker 2: Yeah, Freddie, Freddie played drums now, we all, Freddie was a professional in high school, now he was really playing with this guy named Duke Hutterson [ph.], and even in high school Freddie was making money and I was making money too, but not a--as much, you know, like I wasn't never a regular band like Freddie, but Freddie was working during the week, you know like the Wagon Wheel and different places like that 'cause he played the drums, he was very in demand, as I said drums and saxophones and pianos, tho--those were the ones that we gotta, got a lot of work. Now, but we weren't in--we were in the marching band together in high school, then when college came, that's when we started to have more like a--I was playing piano as a jazz pianist and Freddie used to play and, and drums in there. So, that's when we started to really, you know-- Speaker 1: You and Freddie in college? Speaker 2: Yeah, right in college. Speaker 1: In college. But now did he go to Lanier [High School, Jackson, Mississippi] with you? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. So, okay, I just want-- Speaker 2: Fred--Freddie was in, in--and Smith Robertson was our first school and we were in the first grade that's when I met Freddie in Smith Robertson and, and we were in the first grade together. So we went from the first grade, second grade, all these different grades we were in the same class and in the seventh grade, when we moved from elementary school to junior high school which was the old Lanier, that was on Ash Street, and we, we were in the seventh grade, the same homeroom and, and then that's when he got in the band before I did, he got his drumsticks and then I got, you know, in the band to be playing trombone. But during that time, I was singing also in the vocal group and, and I was just--after that period I started to make money in music. I did all these little odd jobs, I worked at the grocery store, had a newspaper route, worked for Mr. Osmond down when I was living Under-The-Hill, but then when I started making money with music, I, I didn't do too much other than that. Story_ID: 116260 Speaker 1: So, let me ask you, as--well a couple things I want to ask you. When do you think you developed your ear for music? At what point are you--you know-- Speaker 2: Well I think the biggest training and when I developed it was singing with the Sputniks because I was singing this high falsetto. I used to sing this, you know, high, you know, very low like, like Eddie Kendricks and all those guys that did the high falsetto. So, I knew I, I had to remember how high I could go and I, I was the one that always gave everybody the pitch for our key, you know, we would sing a capella, but they would call for me to--to give them what key we're in, you know, what note we're gonna start on. And so, I, I developed that th--then, you know, 'cause I knew how high I could sing. I knew I cou--could'nt go--you know, I would know what--I'd hear that high note in my head and so-- Story_ID: 116261 Speaker 1: But h--how--why didn't you continue singing then? And why were the-- Speaker 2: Well, believe it or not, it was strange, I, I auditioned as a vocalist and a instrumentalist in, in college and I didn't get a scholarship. I was singing in a vocal group, I was singing in the choir, you know, in high school and, and oh, I was working after I--I'd finished high school singing and playing piano, that was my profession. I would sing, "For your precious love, dah, dah, dah, dah," I would sing all of Sam Cooke, "Darling you send me," I was singing all those songs and, and playing in this nightclub, singing was just a thing I did, very easily but, here's what happened. When I finished high school, and this is a real good story, I've gotta tell it. My friend Herbert Delaney, I didn't get the scholarship 'cause otherwise I didn't have any money, my mother [Ruby Mae Griffith O'Banner] was, you know a single parent and-- Speaker 1: Now, can I ask you, I'm sorry. When you finish high school is it assumed where you're gonna go to school? I mean-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --You know, it is?-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --Assumed that you're gonna go to Jackson State [University, Jackson, Mississippi]? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I mean it was almost like everybody expected me, 'cause I was pretty popular around, I was a pretty decent musician and everything, but the thing that happened is there's only a limited amount of scholarships passed out, right? So, I auditioned as a vocalist 'cause I could sing pretty good, in high school, I was doing, you know operettas and singing in the choir and all these different things and playing the trombone, my trombone playing wasn't that very--I, I, say advanced as I--maybe the singing, but what happened when I auditioned, I auditioned for both and the, the head of the music department Dr. Henry, he was a vocalist and I didn't realize that he didn't like people that did both, because either you're gonna be in their vocal department or choir or you're gonna be in the band. You don't have the, you know--it wasn't like in high school I could do that, but in college, so and I--everybody was supposed to because I was pretty good, or, or just as good as some of the people that got scholarships and I had pretty good talent and I didn't get a scholarship. So, that was really, I didn't know what I was gonna do. I was just so cocky in thinking that well, you know, Freddie [Waits] got a scholarship, all the guys, you know, all my friends got scholarships, so, I'm sitting there, it was in June, and my friend Herbert Delaney, he had gone off to the [U.S.] Air Force, he, he finished high school and he went into the Air Force and he was back home on furlough, furlough and I'm sitting there and we had this conversation, he said, what you gon' do? I didn't get a scholarship, I said, I'm gon' get married, he said well, who you gon' get married to? And I had this crush on this lady that, that I, you know, we never really, just cr--I just had a crush on her, I'm gon' marry Thelma. He said, oh yeah? He said, w--does she know about it? I said no. He said well you know what? I think she should be in on this. You know, (laughter) it was like joking, he said you gon' get married to her but she don't even know, you gon' get married to her--? Story_ID: 116262 Speaker 1: And then, so then, the, the mailman came that day and, and, and, the mail come and there was something in the mail said that tuition free all you had to do was pay a activity fee to go to Utica Junior College [now Hinds Community College, Utica, Mississippi], Utica Junior College was thirty miles away, he [Herbert Delaney] looked at it and he said, this is what you gonna do, you're gonna go to school, and that's what I did. It was only ten dollars a year for activity fee and that was a saver, 'cause I was just like at a turning point. And my mother [Ruby Mae Griffith O'Bannner], believe it or not, she, she thought when you finished high school, you know, you're finished, she didn't have any con--and, and, I was the first person in my family to go to college, to get a degree. So, you know that was her thinking that she was--well you, you're finished, you go get a job, you know. So, I got--I went to junior college, ten dollars of, you know, a semester that's nothing and then, you know, that was just like free, so, but you had to get a bus. At seven o'clock in the morning, the bus--I lived on Lanier Avenue, you walked down to the corner to (unclear) right down the block, the bus would pick you up, take you to Utica Junior College which was thirty miles away, you'd go down there, it's just beautiful, it's like nice campus, junior college campus and then you're there 'til about four o'clock and it takes about thirty minutes or so, hour to get back and you're back home by five. So, that's what I did for two years, but the good thing about it, I ran into a music--a band director named Mr. Louis Lee, and Mr. Louis Lee, he took me in and he was--I was like his prize student. When I say prize student, I could write music, he taught me how to write arrangements, he, he was very good, he said write it down and taught me how to write an arrangements of music. Then I had a problem with my trombone playing because my embouchure wasn't right, he corrected my embouchure for playing the trombone and he also got me a job playing four nights a week, playing piano and singing, I was making ten dollars a night. So, I can say music has been so good to me 'cause I, I haven't had done it--I haven't had to do anything in my life but music. Speaker 2: See and that's wonder--'cause you're--it's the school is only what? Thirty--thirty? Speaker 1: Thirty, thirty miles away. Speaker 2: And you're making t--and you're--but you're making ten dollars a night. Speaker 1: I made more than my Uncle Bubba, my Uncle Bubba was bringing home like some thirty, thirty dollars a week after taxes or whatever and I was making that cash. Story_ID: 116263 Speaker 1: So after two year--so you continued to, to sing and play and, and, and you start working on your trombone and you're working also? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what--one place I read, and I want to ask you about this that really playing the piano and singing influenced your trombone playing? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: You know, can you talk about that? Speaker 2: Yeah, well playing the---actually the, the trombone playing taught me to read music because when I, I was in college and everything I majored in trombone in my, my undergrad work. But, I, I didn't use that as my major instrument, I was gonna be around new--around Jackson, I was playing the piano, I even had trios where I would just play piano and drum. But, I went to--I used to go to Chicago[Illinois]and, now here's--I finished college--I finished high school in '58 [1958], and in that summer I'd, you know, I, I was supposed to go to Chicago in '58 [1958], and I didn't go, but I went to Chicago in '59 [1959], and every summer 'til--up until '63' [1963] or '64 [1964], I would leave Mississippi, and leave Jackson [Mississippi] for the summer. So, I went in '59 [1959], and then in '60 [1960], I met Sun Ra in Chicago and that's when I started to play trombone and started to getting serious about the trombone. Because when I first went to Chicago, I went to Chicago as a piano player and a singer, you know what I was doing in Jackson, Mississippi, but I could read music so one day I'm, I'm walking on the South Side of Chicago and I hear some live music. Now, I was staying with my Aunt Camille, one of my Big Mama's sisters, her youngest sister in Chicago and Aunt Camille was kinda strict and she thought me, you know, being from Mississippi, Chicago's a rough place you gotta stay, you can't go out to late, you gotta be in by a certain time and everything so I, I went in this mus--and there was Sun Ra rehearsing at the Pershing Ballroom and I said, ah man, you know I, I play trombone, he said bring your trombone tomorrow, we'll be--we'll be here from 11 o'clock whatever time and I started and that was it, I didn't look back. I started really seriously thinking about the trombone and, and I star--I would rehearse with Sun Ra every day and then we would play at night and, and my Aunt C--Camille, I--you know, she was kinda strict so I started staying with my Aunt Evie [ph.] she's still alive. My Uncle Walter and Aunt Evie, and Uncle Walter he was so good, we would be--we'd meet up at his favorite bar at four o'clock in the morning (laughter) and we'd come home together, you know, they were so, they were just great and she just like my second mother in a sense 'cause she's still alive, I talked to her yesterday. But then when I, I would always go to Chicago, it would never be a question of where I'm gonna stay, I would go to Uncle Walter and Aunt Evie and they never had any children between the two and they were--so. But that's, that's when I really started to think seriously about playing the trombone and I, you know, I got through college and, and then when I came out I was really, really in touch with, you know coming to Chicago being a trombonist-- Speaker 1: So you (unclear) that Sun Ra what year you say? Speaker 2: Around '60 [1960], 1960. Speaker 1: Sixty [1960], okay so where is he in his caree--you know his--what, what--where is his group? What--at what stage is Sun Ra's group at this point? Speaker 2: At that point he, he was--he had Pat Patrick, he had Marshall Allen which is the leader now with the Sun Ra group, and he had John Gilmore, he had Ronnie Boykins on, on bass and I--I'm not sure of the drummer, he might have had--I'm not quite sure who drummer, I mean, you know, but those people. And then when, when he left Chicago [Illinois] and came to New York, I was playing with him then, you know, when he, when he moved on Third Street, he used to live on Third Street which was right down the street from Slug's [Slug's Saloon] and so I started playing with him then. Story_ID: 116264 Speaker 1: Now, here's how the Civil Rights Movement or, or the for--forerunners of the Civil Rights Movement came into play. When I started going to Utica Junior College [now Hinds Community College, Utica, Mississippi] in 195--'58 [1958] after high school, I went there for two years, when I came to Jackson State [University, Jackson, Mississippi] in, in, in 1960, I had to do five years in college, I did two in junior college and three in, in the major college so my, my class that I would have graduated with would have been 1962, but actually I graduated in 1963. But, in Jackson being that everything was segregated, and the Civil Rights Movement was really, really brewing, the civil rights, I mean, the Freedom Riders and stuff were coming to town in the '62s [1962] and '63s [1963] and Medgar Evers was a lawyer and, and, and wer--had his office right across the street from a place called Smackover's. Now in those neighborhoods, you know, there weren't a whole lot of options where people had to eat, they wou--most people ate at Smackover's, but at that time James Meredith, he wa--he was integrating Mississippi State [sic, University of Mississippi, Oxford, Mississippi], he was a classmate of mine, he came out the [U.S.] Air Force, I used to see him on campus with his wife [Mary June Meredith] and he was wearing his army fatigues and, and then he went to Mississippi State. I was there in college at Jackson State, he was my classmate for a while, James Meredith, then, all of that got me definitely deep into the Civil Rights Movement. But, I was--my cousin who, Miller Green [ph.], he lived on the same street, on Seville Street [ph.], he was younger than me and my sister was younger, my sister was in high school, now, and the plot was, it was very clear, if I was an adult, I was twenty or twenty-one around that time. If they had arrested me for any kind of, I say, any kinda sit-in or anything like that, they would've sent me to Parchman [Mississippi State Penitentiary] 'cause I was being a upper-class rather than adult and I would probably go to Parchman and never be seen again, you know, up there and somebody would murder me or whatever 'cause a lot of people, you know didn't, didn't make it out of Parchman but, as a teenager and not--my sister was and, and my cousin Miller Green, was one of the first se--Freedom Riders from Mississippi. In order to get the federal government involved with it, they had to have freedom riders from Mississippi, it was a law that the people coming out of the state wouldn't get the right laws in, in proper place for the federal government to be involved. So, my cousin right to the day, he, he's involved in, in a book and everything, his name is Miller Green, he was young and my sister was young, so what they did in order to keep the high school teachers from being involved, they would wait 'til the last day of school and the kids were out and they would empty out and go downtown. So, the, the teachers didn't have any jurisdiction over them or didn't have anything to do with it so they kept everything clean, and Medgar Evers figured out all these plots. The students, they did all the sit-ins bec--young people did all the sit-ins. Where I worked was, was voter registration, I could go around to anybody and, and tell 'em how--and back in those days in order to get a person to vote they had to pay a poll tax and you had to pass the Mississippi, you had to interpret the Mississippi state constitution. So, I failed twice, and they kept, you know, sa--the guy said no you have to keep going back 'cause they gonna fail ya. And, and what happened is, all you have to do is just write exactly what you see and I did it and they couldn't do it, and I teach everybody else, look if they're gonna interpret it, all you do is just write what you see, that's what you--that's what you saw and this how you interpreted it, you're not gonna dispute it, you're not gonna say, this, that, or the, you just write exactly what you see and that was the loophole, they couldn't say you didn't interpret it. You told me, I'm going to the store? And I say, I see this as I'm going to the store. So, and they had this, this poll tax, so you had to--even if the people, were, you know not able you'd give them their two dollars and take 'em down there and wait 'til they come out. That's what I did. Story_ID: 116265 Speaker 1: There wasn't no, no (unclear) Speaker 2: And you did, so you did that while you were still in college? Speaker 1: College, yeah, yeah, that's the only way you had--and so Medgar, that's why Medgar Evers was my friend, so we would talk and, you know, like hey, we've ate at, at Smackover's. So, he had all these strategies to do and he told me why--and my sister was in a meeting the night he got shot, he was organizing this, this group of high school kids 'cause she was--my sister had gotten arrested and she was put in jail and wasn't in a jail, they had, they filled the jails up so they built a tent and my sister told me this and she almost made me cry when she told me. She said, they built a tent and they just fed them--threw bologna and bread in t--in, in the pit like they were animals, and so, you know, she never told me this (unclear) very late, just like maybe a year or so ago. But when she got arrested my mother [Ruby Mae Griffith O'Banner] went down and nobody never said anything, we ne--she never talked about it or never said anything about it but that was what went down and that's--and then, let me tell you this other side of it. When--after Medgars had got--Medgar Evers had gotten killed, his brot--his brother Charles lived across the street from a lady, my girlfriend's sister, Nita [ph.] and I was dating Lottie [ph.], so Charles knew that his phone was tapped so he would get his phone calls across the street to Nita, but when he came to get his phone calls he would walk out with his gun in his hand, he'd walk across the street, he knew that he wasn't gonna get taken out like his brother and that's it. Speaker 2: So do you remem--did you go to Medgar Evers funeral? Speaker 1: No I didn't. Speaker 2: You didn't, okay, okay. Speaker 1: I--it's so, I mean my friend knows a guy named Walter Jackson, is an artist friend, he lived two doors down the street on Guide[ph.] Street from Medgar Evers on the same side of the street he lived two doors down and he heard the shots when, when they fir--when they were fired, he's my good friend Walter and Walter doesn't like to talk about it, he, he just act like, you know, it's fine. I don't mind talking about it because it happened but, I, I kinda talk about it and he just, you know (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: Now, who killed him again? Do we, do we--well this was this? Speaker 1: I think it was what? Byron Deloyd Beckwith [sic, Byron De La Beckwith]? Not Beck--something. Speaker 2: No, it wasn't? Okay. Speaker 1: No, Beckwith [sic, James Earl Ray] killed [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.]. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, tha--that--well that's someone else. Speaker 1: Yeah, but I--oh man, I forget the guy's name. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: It was so, but-- Story_ID: 116266 Speaker 1: So, so-- you, you, you come--you're saying you came to Chicago [Illinois] and I'm talking about Sun Ra now, so, so you're saying who was playing for Sun Ra at the time? Speaker 2: John Gilmore, Marshall Allen and Pat Patrick and Ronnie Boykins and I'm not quite sure of the drummer and then (unclear)(simultaneous) Speaker 1: So at this point he doesn't have the lar--does he have the--the large Arkes--Arkestra? Speaker 2: No, he does--doesn't. Speaker 1: But this is before? Speaker 2: Yeah, before. Speaker 1: So, this is the early stages? Speaker 2: The early stages-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --Where he just only had maybe a, a quintet or, you know, four or five horns, and then when he came to New York, that's when he started having really two trombones and the two trombones there at that time and I--we played every Monday night at Slug's [Saloon], it was like a regular Monday night gig and it was me and a guy named Charles Stevens, he's deceased now, I played trombone, most of those things, there was John Gilmore and Marshall and James Jo--what's his name, Jackson, James Jacson and at that time Clifford, Clifford Jarvis played drums and Ronnie Boykins played the base and June Tyson used to sing and, and she stayed with him until she passed away, June Tyson and that was in New York. And then when they moved to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], I would still play with him, you know, when they--and, and the guy, oh Joseph Callens [ph.] used to play trumpet. Speaker 1: Do you know who taught--I interviewed--he plays the trombone I think, horn, he played--what, do you--what, is it Victor Bailey [ph.] and he talked about Sun Ra in Philadelphia. Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: But then, by that point and time it's--he consid--he didn't say it was cultish, but he said you, you know it was--everybody was in the house and, you know-- Speaker 2: Uh-hum. Speaker 1: --And he, you know, not--I won't say called it cultish but, he said it was somewhat like all-consuming, you know, you were either in or you were out. Speaker 2: Yeah, now this a, this is a true thing with Sun Ra, and when he lived in New York on Third Street, that's all they did was music and they'll rehearse all day and I was married, I got married around '68 [1968], and, and I didn't need to live in the house, you understand, I, I loved the music and I'd go to rehearsal but I was never one who needed to live in the house. I, I had a apartment, you know and, and a wife and my son [Jakubu Griffin], so I would go down and rehearse and Charles Stevens didn't need to live in the household, it was Marshall and John and Jacson and, those are the people I know that were just there, they lived in the house, it was like a family, you know they cooked and they paid the rent and they didn't do anything but the music. It was like you say, if, if you wanna think of it a cult, but that's how dedicated they were and then, you know. Story_ID: 116267 Speaker 1: The other thing I know, I can say this, it was funny, Sun Ra never put his money in the bank and I just thought about it, you know, he used to wear a lot of, you know dashikis like it (unclear) and this guy told me, he said man, Sunny never used to have a bank account, so he always had this cash on him, so one time, it was so funny, one time we went to Detroit [Michigan] and--I--well, you know he, he would pay me and, and, and, and I guess the people that lived in the house, they had a different system, anyway so, one time we in Detroit, (laughter) we finish this gig and Sun Ra was so creative, I went towards my money, he looked out the window, you see, see that cat running there? He just robbed the bank, I think he (laughter) got and, and you know he's running off with your money and, you know it, it was so funny but I didn't, I didn't get paid then but, you know, he, he was something. But, Sunny was like, he was always like a kid, he--if he went shopping--if he saw you--a drum something, something in the, something unusual he would buy it right then and there, he was, and, and the band was would have those new caps or new hats or new--on the band that night, Sun Ra was a very (unclear). Speaker 2: 'Cause he came from Alabama, right? Speaker 1: Alabama. Speaker 2: He (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 1: Now see, I knew a guy named Johnny Grimes [ph.] who knew Sun Ra when he was a kid and Johnny Grimes told me this story and it was so important, he said, Sonny lived in a house that, it was kinda mysterious house, even back in those days, they, you know he, he wou--people would go there but he didn't hold--he didn't have a whole lot of, people in and out of this house or anything it was kinda mysterious even as a child, his name was Sonny Blount [sic, Herman Poole Blount] and Johnny Grimes was about the same age as Sun Ra, but he said that, that anybody wanted the arrangements and stuff taken off the record they would go to him, he could write if off but they, they never visit him, you know his house was just kinda, nobody was, was hanging around his house, it was been a weird kinda thing, he was different from all of them. Story_ID: 116268 Speaker 1: Now you--the other thing--see I wanna go back to what I also read that you, you were hearing the, that it took you some time--well, first of all I read that you liked playing with Sun Ra, not the best, but you liked the freeform? Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: Right, and can you talk more about that? Speaker 2: Yeah. Here's what happened when I started with Sun Ra he was the first person that I could just play, I wasn't a good technician to the day I'm not technically so good on the trombone, I have developed my own voices but, as far as being technically correct on the instrument, I wasn't and I never been. And I don--I don't know whether I never will ever be because I don't hear it that way, but when I started to play with Sun Ra, anything I played was okay and so I didn't have to, you know, I could just express myself 'cause it's a flow and he encouraged me. And one night he said something to me and he always challenged me mentally and musically. When I say mentally musically, he would say, Griffin, you know I knew how to play II-V-Is, how to play changes, he'd say Griffin, and he never called me Dick, he'd say Griffin, Griffin I want you to play tonight but, once you play a one lick, I want you to play, you (unclear) can't play it but one time, you gotta play it different and that was something that was most challenging thing he said to me, he said and you, you know you have II-V-I, da doo da bada bahdoo bedoo bedoo, this pattern, he said once you play that pattern you can't play it anymore the same way you gotta play different so. And then the other challenge he did, we were in Milan, Italy, and we was in a big theater, big theater, I would say not like carn--Carnegie Hall, but maybe smaller, but the same kind of feeling cl--you know the place was packed, he'd say Griffin I want you to go out and open tonight and the band's not coming out until you get a standing ovation. I walk out on the stage and I had to play until I played enough to have everybody standing, that was a hell of a challenge and I did it and then when, when I did it he came out, he, he did--you know, it didn't make or anything, he just smiled and sit down and started playing. So, that's the way Sun Ra was, he was always challenging and if I--if you pass out some music and I could play it easily, give me your part, he kept playing it until I couldn't play it, I mean he kept writing different chart until it was so difficult I couldn't play it. That's one thing about him. Story_ID: 116269 Speaker 1: At the same time I'm playing with Rahsaan Roland Kirk, I would play Monday nights with Rahsaan, I mean Sun Ra and then Tuesday through Sunday at the Village Vanguard, playing with Rahsaan which was straight ahead, straight, I mean structured. Speaker 2: Right, structured. And so, that's what I was wondering. So wait, Sun Ra you meet in 1960? Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Who do--when do you meet Rahsaan? You meet-- Speaker 1: I met--I met Rahsaan around '63 [1963]. I met him in '63 [1963], 'cause I remember I, I came to chi--to New York in '64 [1964], I met Sun Ra, I mean I met Rahsaan at, in the Keys Fitzgerald [ph.], Fitzgerald's Lounge, the Keys Lounge and Sun Ra was playing there. The reason I knew ss--I mean Rahsaan, the reason I knew Rahsaan was through a guy named Alvin Washington who was in college with me, he had come back from the [U.S.] Air Force like James Meredith, you know they had gone away and done time in the Air Force, they came back to college. Alvin Washington was stationed in, in Columbus, Ohio and he was sa--came back then, man I knew this guy he blind, he can play three horns at one time and he can play anything on the record, and we, you know I never heard of anybody playing three saxophones. So, when I went to Chicago [Illinois] that summer in '63 [1963], I met Rahsaan, I saw him, he played--he had developed a echo chamber on his flute, he made some out of masking tape, he made a little curve, a little cup they put on his flute and made--it sounded like (unclear) so from that time we started to, to write each other, his wife at that time Edith, Edith used to send me music and then I came to New York in '64[1964], the summer of '6'[1964], and then I visit him and I rehearse with him and he introduced me to Charles Mingus at the Vans--at the, at the Five Spot. Now at that time in '64 [1964], the Five Spot and Birdland [Jazz Club] was still intact and there was a place called the Hickory House where Billy Taylor was playing, that was the last, probably the last part of the 57th [sic, 52nd] Street movement when, you know Charlie Parker and, and, and, and all these guys played on 57th--52nd Street, so the Hickory House was right there on the corner of 52nd and Birdland was on, on 52nd and then a place called the Alvin Hotel was right across the street on 52nd Street and, and Broadway and then they had a place called Ham and Eggs, right on the corner that all the musicians that played at night used to hang out on 52nd Street and, and Broadway. And the building is still there, I mean the, the, the, Birdland, the original place and they, they changed that, Lloyd Price bought that place and called it the Turntable [Club] and I got a chance to play there when it was the turntable. But I say in the original Birdland, I saw John Coltrane play one night, I saw Cannonball [Adderly] play and I saw Bill Cosby do his first act, he was doing this thing about Noah and he was like the int--during the intermission, Bill Cosby was, was just getting started in Birdland in 60--'64[1964], in the original Birdland. Speaker 2: And I'd read also I think you'd met Warren Smith down in '64 [1964]. Speaker 1: Yes I did. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yes, I, I met Warren Smith during that time and that was Warren Smith, Joe Wilder and Jack Jeffers, these guys were, you know they're in New York and our first trip to New York and Warren Smith had a studio called The Wis, Studio Wis, I think it was on 21st Street, I'm not sure, but anyway he had a studio where he had all of his percussion equipment and stuff so, yeah, I met him back in those, that time. Speaker 2: So you were doing, you would do cup--composing right? Speaker 1: Oh yeah. Speaker 2: (simultaneous)You would write down, because he didn't know-- Story_ID: 116270 Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: See, I was, I was in college, I, I wrote for the marching band, a 100-piece marching band and I wrote arrangement on (unclear), I wrote arrangement called 'Dobbin the Red Fox,' [ph.] I wrote arrangement on 'Hard Times,' I wrote arrangement on 'Summertime' and several other arrangements, but I wrote so many arrangements for the marching band the students gave me an award of student arranger, they gave me a trophy and that was probably one of the biggest honors I could have. They recognized me for, for writing, you know all of those arrangements so they gave me a trophy, yeah. Speaker 1: So, now did you learn yo--in the arranging part, did you learn anything from Sun Ra, 'cause he cou--he, he wrote too, right? Didn't he? Speaker 2: Yes, he wrote. I, I-- Speaker 1: Okay. Did you learn any, anything else? Speaker 2: I learned most of my arrangement technics from a Mr. William W. Davis, Mr.--we called him Prof. Davis and, and Louis Lee. Louis Lee was my first teacher-- Speaker 1: And that was at Utica [Junior College, now Hinds Community College, Utica, Mississippi]? Speaker 2: At Utica. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Louis Lee was always say write it down. And he was very organized and he could--he taught me how to write, you know scores and stuff like that, so I have my first score I wrote in 1958, I have that written out, I mean in some--in some books in (unclear). Story_ID: 116271 Speaker 1: So you're, you're in New York in 1964, so that really--it's--you've already known and been playing with Sun Ra for four years and then you, you meet Rahsaan [Roland Kirk], and then you, through Rahsaan you meet [Charles] Mingus right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay and so, can you talk about that, that meeting with Mingus at the Five Spot? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Can you talk about that night? Speaker 2: Yes, okay. At that time Rahsaan--I was just coming for the summer, see I, I did all my stuff in Mississippi, I taught school and everything but I would always leave Mississippi in the summer. So, from '59 [1959], was the first '58 [1958], I didn't go, I stayed in, in Mississippi. But from '59 [1959], all the way, I would always spend my summers out of Mississippi. Story_ID: 160131 Speaker 1: All right, so now Rahsaan [Roland Kirk] was living at, at, at, 14, four--415 Central Park West and that's where Max Rhodes [ph.] lived and Elvin Jones. So we, we go down, you know, Rahsaan being that he's sightless or blind, we go down to, to the Five Spot and [Charles] Mingus is there playing 'cause Mingus used to play at the Five Spot sometimes as much as six weeks, six months at a time, you know just he was like a fixture there and, and at that time so Jack Adais [ph.] was in the band, I think Lonny Hilliard [ph.] and Charles McPherson [ph.]. So, anyway, m--Rahsaan, you know introduced me to Mingus and I think I had my horn so, Mingus get on the microphone and say, ladies and gentlemen we're gonna have this young trombone player, Roland t--Roland Kirks' cousin, that's what he said, it's Roland Kirks cousin gon' sit in with, with, (laughter) I don't know where he got the cousin part, anyway so, I sit in and, and we played 'C Jam Blues,' and that was nice they didn't try to hurt me and then play any fast stuff so, and that night, believe it or not J.J. Johnson was in the audience and I'm playin', you know and, and J.J. said, who's the kid over there on the trombone? And I went to introduce myself and at that time J.J. was getting' ready to go to California to start doing all the writing and, and stuff they were doing so that was, that was the night. But, later on Mingus hired me to play in, in his big band he got me, Guggenheim [Foundation] grant, so I played with Mingus for about almost a ye--two years, close to two years. Speaker 2: From what year to what year, do you know? Speaker 1: It was '70 [1970] to '71 [1971]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So.-- Speaker 2: So can you talk about Mingus because there was this whole story about, and I think it was when you were playing in his big band, I think it was and he was upset with you or he was gonna, you know-- Speaker 1: Oh yeah, fire me? (Laughter) Speaker 2: Yeah. (Laughter) Speaker 1: Let me tell you about that one. So anyway, I got in the band, he had, he got a Guggenheim Grant, for $10,000 back in the day and so he formed the big band, it wa--he had--I was on trombone, he had Eddie Bert, the late Eddie Bert now and he had Lonnie Hilliard [ph.] and Virgil Jones and Richard Williams, but all of those people are pretty much gone, deceased and whe--when we got in the band for first we were rehearsing at the Lewis Vanguard, so I got up and I played on 'Black Saint and the Sinner Lady,' we played, so okay, and he didn't say nothing, you know everything so, time goes on I had to get out, I had to go, I had to be off one day and I seen 'em in the sub a guy named Mike, Mike Terry [ph.] is his name so Mingus didn't say anything. So one night we at the Village Vanguard, 'cause we just played the Village Vanguard maybe four and five times, you know a year, you know for the weeks and, you know we could just play, it was kind of, we'd be in there one week and then we'd let a couple months go by and we there again, we go to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], we were working ever since, every week we had something to do. So, we at the Village Vanguard and we start playing and playing the blues in F and we played the blues and now everybody had a chance to solo, you know, everybody got a, everybody in the band soloed, so I played, then they went from F to B which is, you know, a hard key is, the B now that's a hard key for some. So then they went from B to F-sharp, now they had this piano player named John Foster, he, he had perfect pitch and he was, you know very good piano, so that night, I was married at the time, I get home maybe two, two or three o'clock in the morning the phone rang and my ex-wife say, here, here the phone, somebody, and it was Charles Mingus say, hey Griffins this is Charles Mingus, he didn't like for you to call him Charlie, no, we be, a lot of people did call him Charlie Mingus, he didn't like that he wanted Charles. It's Charles Mingus, I owe you apology. Wow, I said, what, what was it, he said, well I'm gon' tell you, I was mad at you 'cause when you got up and played on 'Black Saints and the Sinner Lady' I didn't think you knew what you were doing, then you send in a sub and Mike Terry, he didn't play it good, don't ever do that anymore, so next time you send in a sub, send somebody that play better than you like, Garnett Brown. I said okay. He said, but, you the only person that impressed me tonight, I said wow. Then he said, you need a draw? You know that means when you, back in the day there you could withdraw your money, they, they really trust you, they could pay you every night and 'cause they know that you wasn't gonna get the money and go off and get high and never, never show up again and all that stuff. So, he said you need a draw? I said nah, I'm okay, you know 'cause at that time I was teaching and then my wife was teaching and so anyway he said man, he say, you know I, I was mad at you but man, you, you impressed me and blah, blah, and say you, you all right with me and so that was it. He said I, I was asking Eddie is he playing his parts, he said yes, 'cause I was gon' fire you (laughter), but he was gon' put me through the test, you know, he was gon' make sure, and so, and, and then, and then after that it was like I couldn't do no wrong. Story_ID: 160132 Speaker 1: I really, he [Charles Mingus] would call me almost every night 'cause he had this insomnia thing, he couldn't sleep and I only slept into the day until just recently, I only sleep three hours a night and, and, and that's what I--I've been, that's why you see all this painting here, I, I don't sleep a lot. Speaker 2: So th--so you've made perfect (unclear). Speaker 1: Yeah, cause he-- Speaker 2: So what--so what would he talk to you about? Speaker 1: Oh, everything. He, he told me things that he said don't, don't ever tell anybody, you know, his, his--'cause Mingus was misunderstood in a lot of ways and he said the reason that he hit certain people in the mouth, you know he'd tell me the scenario and then say you'd probably do the same thing, and I would have, you know. It was, you know some things, but ah man, I guess (unclear) but when-- Speaker 2: Well you should tell some things. Speaker 1: Yeah, well this is, this is just something that happened there but, and, and, you know back in the day, the security and stuff wasn't that great in, in places now with our metal detect--we did this show 'The Ed Sullivan Show,' and Mingus was on the show and, I go in the dressing room and everything 'cause we tight, that time I was playing in his band and Mingus had his gun on him, you know he said I have to protect myself, he said these gangsters out to get me and, he, he was, you know, you saw--you saw in one of the, well documentaries where he shot his shotgun off, but Mingus didn't, didn't, didn't want, you know, people were after him, he said these gangsters are after him and he wasn't gonna walk around unprotected and he had this dashiki on, it's a real fact and he showed me his gun, it's right at his side, (laugher) we up at CBS, 'Ed Sullivan Show' and so, and, and but we got to be so close. He would call me every night look like and I was married at the time, my, my wife--the phone rang about two o'clock and say here's your friend and she's just hand me the phone and we'd get on the phone and he really, he encouraged me about my comp--compositions 'cause he said--but he'd talk to me as if I was him, you know like I was in, in his peers, he'd say, man you should do a record, you should do this, you know, he liked my composition. I would sit on--I'd play the piano, I remember playing this one piece called 'Madrid' I wrote long time ago and still--and I'd say man, I tried to write songs that, that portray a picture and that's what he did, he said, t--'Tijuana Brass' [sic, 'Tijuana Moods'] and all those Tijuana those like, he said I do the same thing that's the way I write, I want to, you know, I, I make a story out of this in his writing, so, we wrote the same way. He kept, and the one thing I did, the last, the, the album I did called, 'The Eighth Wonder' I was able to give it him and so he could hear it and, 'cause he was going, you know his health was going at the time, but he was really, really a--just a--amazing friend and encouragement and he, he--I took--at the time we had these little Wurlitzer pianos, electric pianos, so I lived in an apartment building so we could play and I could play the electric piano at, at late at night, you know, softly and everything and he could hear and I played my composition for him. Speaker 2: Oh, you would play your compositions for him? Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Story_ID: 160133 Speaker 1: --Yeah. Speaker 2: Now the thing is, he had a p--a reputation of being like really very difficult and, you know, up-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --and down moods and-- Speaker 1: Oh yeah. Speaker 2: --he would cuss people out in a minute and-- Speaker 1: Right, now here's the thing and I know, I listen to, to know to a fact, Charles McPherson, he--[Charles] Mingus, if, if you're on his good side, you couldn't do any wrong, if he didn't like you, yo--you had a tough time, you couldn't come in. So, what I--and when he saw that I knew what I was doing and he tested my music, test me in that my ears because I don't have perfect pitch, I miss, anybody perfect, they don't miss, but I'm pretty close, I, I'm good, I have good absolute or good pitch, I can hear, you know I can pick a--a note out of the air sometimes but sometimes I miss, I, I'm not a perfect pitch. Some people say absolute perfect some people were like that, Ella Fitzgerald, and, and, you know some of the piano players I know, Hilton Ruiz, Stanley Clarke, Donald Smith, some guys, you know that's really got perfect pitch, Terese--what's her name? Patrice Rushen, these people like that have perfect pitch they can, they can just hear very good, but I don't, I don't, I don't come--I don't get nowhere close to any of those people but I have pretty good, I can hear pretty good. But, I was, you know he, he, he recog--he recognized that and, and he respected that so, he, he--and after that I mean I was on his good side so Charlie McPherson was like that and Charles McPherson said, one day he was ga--he gave a homeless person some money like on the street, I think five dollars or something and, and after that he never said anything to Charles, you know like, you know how you keep cursing people out, Charlie, you know, he never, he never bothered anybody if, if you in, I guess he (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: If he had respect for you. Speaker 1: --Yeah, he had respect for you so, I was the same way and the one thing I did and I have to say this, 'cause I've got to tell the real truth. At that time I was playing with Thad Jones and Mel Lewis band [Thad Jones/Mel Lewis Big Band], I was playing with [Charles] Mingus band and Charles, Thad--Thad and the Mel Lewis band. So Thad Jones and Mel Lewis had this gig, Mingus was paying $50 a night, Thad Jones and Mel Lewis had the gig paying $75 a night going to Chicago [Illinois]. So, I go to Mingus, I wanna go to Chicago for Friday and Saturday and I come back on Sunday and I called Mingus, I said Mingus I'm gon' have to take off for a couple of days and I, I, you know for some family, you know, I didn't tell him about, (laughter) that's a lie, I didn't tell him, he'd made me feel so bad, he called me up he said, he said Dick Griffin, you, you need any money? You know and I felt so bad and I went to Chicago but I never let him knew 'cause that would've been, ah he probably beat me up too. But I, but you know you, you do things, you know I say oh that make me--and I get a chance to go out to Chicago and, and I did, I went to Chicago and I came back and everything was good. But he said okay, 'cause he was so sincere, he said man you need any money, you know family, you know, but then I, I, I always think that, you know after, I felt so bad, but I mean you had to get all, you know you (unclear) you know I'm not perfect so I, I did that but he never knew so it worked out. Story_ID: 160134 Speaker 1: So what would you consider his [Charles Mingus'] genius? I mean and, and how would you describe his genius? Speaker 2: Genius it was, he was original, he was fearless. See, a lot of people and back in that day and time he came from a, a school where people had to be individual, you, you had to find your own voice. Now the music is so where, it--it's institutionalized, its class--it's gotten to be classic so you have a lot of technicians, you have a lot of people that can play like 'Flight of the Bumblebee' on the, in the jazz, you know, they can play the 'Giant Steps' and all the changes, they play correctly and they play (unclear), but they have lost the so called soul and the feeling and Mingus had that, he was original, his originality and he described things and, and I, you know he was political too, you know, you know because and, and he would--he would do things like he would speed tempos up, duh, duh, duh, duh, duh,duh,duh,duh, you know, he wanted to--he didn't want you to be tight, that's one of the things he said. I remember we were at a rehearsal and there was a saxophone player, a guy from uptown and he had problems, had, had drugs problems and, and you know, back in those days your hand be swollen, you could see that you've had drug problems and this little guy from the studio, you know the one--when the gal to lead alto players, he was a, you know very proper and very correct and everything. So they kept getting on the guy that was kind of not playing the parts in tune and not playing and, and Mingus stopped this guy and said listen, cursed him out and he used profanity, he said don't you ever say anything to anybody in my band. This guy turned red as a tomato, he said, I know what I want to and I don't want this guy to play into, I want him to not be tight, I know what I want to hear and so after that, you know he, he knew what he was doing, he was saying he, he mentioned it when people clap, he said, you know in the black church people don't clap, everybody don't hit the same time, it's not tight, it flap, you hear flam--and so, you know and he by (unclear) you know, laaadadadada, you know everything he wrote was a picture and that's what he--he said he wrote, he, he was political, you know-- Speaker 1: Yeah-- Speaker 2: --'Fables of Faubus' and all those things and, you know all of that was all about and, and, you know, the, the less [ph.](unclear), you know he wrote for Lester Young and sad, you know that sound that dadadadadadada, he, he was actually a poet, musical poet and he wrote musical poetries. That's why, that's why I can't describe it, everything was coming out--outta his real soul, he was expressing himself like that. Story_ID: 160135 Speaker 1: 'Cause he [Charles Mingus], he also--I was looking, you know in preparation, he really, he would get upset with Charlie Parker, you know at this point Charlie Parker maybe at, you know later at-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --when he was before his, you know-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --demise and so he would, he would--I think, there was one concert where he yelled at him, you know on stage or said, you know don't pay attention to these guys they're outta their mind. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: So he was, he--he was disciplined in, in that approach and sort of committed, right? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah. See Mingus to me, well you have to know Mingus' background, his mother was Chinese and-- Speaker 1: Well that was the other thing that wasn't clear, what it--something about white too-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --There was, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, so then he, he, if you look at Mingus, he, he was, he was bowlegged, he was short, he, he--his mother was Chinese and, and, his father was black and, so he was brought up in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] in that mix. And he was--said he, he didn't mix, he didn't fit, he was kind of a misfit, you know a mutt, they were saying, you know like, like, you know what, where your (unclear) and I know he was bowlegged, I mean, I, I, I can remember Mingus very well 'cause I was around him. I even saw him go through--ah it was so many funny things in, (laughter) in the, in the dressing room and I can only share this with you, Roy, Roy Brooks, (laughter), Roy Brooks was in the band and Mingus in the band and Roy was making--Mingus making fun of Roy because Roy had some mental issues too and, and, and (laughter) (unclear) and they say yeah, yeah Roy, we in the same (unclear) we need to be going to some place like, Bellevue [Psychiatric Hospital, New York City, New York] or something, he say yeah Ming, you know and they be laughing (laughter) say we both at wrapped too tight are we Roy and they joking at each other then, but Mingus he, he had his thing. I don't know if he was bipolar or whatever, something was going on, but he (unclear) but I, I would always remember that in village (unclear) and, and, and, Roy would be laughing, yeah Ming. (Laughter) I understand. Speaker 1: (Laughter) (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: Oh it was so funny, yeah. Speaker 1: Was there a bad point that you had with him that you knew, like you had a falling out? Speaker 2: With Charles Mingus? Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: No. It, it was just like I say, he, he was gonna fire me and then once I got on his good side, it, it wasn't no harm, I could never, you know I didn't do anything wrong, I even, when I went to Chicago [Illinois] with Thad Jones/Mel Lewis [Big] Band he didn't know it at the time, had been the internet and Facebook and all that stuff, I'd have been in big trouble now, but in--information didn't, didn't go so, I never had any problems after that. In fact we always had pretty good, you know relationship, (unclear) once you're in though, you couldn't do no harm. Speaker 1: You were, you were fine? Speaker 2: Yeah, no (unclear) but he told me about all, not pre--all, all but, pretty much 'cause we talked a lot, he told me about a lot of instances where he did hit some people in the mouth and, and he got upset and, you know, those are disagreements he was pretty, you know and then he told me this situation and scenario I guess I would have done something similar to that, you know. Speaker 1: Well, but do you get--you remember one of those incidences he told you about? Speaker 2: Well I think he supposedly hit somebody in the mouth and knocked their teeth out but that's about it, you know, just they were doing something that-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --was related to his family or disrespecting his family. Speaker 1: Right, right, and you wouldn't put up with that yourself anyway? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: You know-- Speaker 2: No. Story_ID: 160136 Speaker 1: Now you know what is interesting? So you had, you had [Charles] Mingus here, you had Rahsa-- Speaker 2: Rahsaan [Roland Kirk]? Speaker 1: --Rahsaan-- Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: --and then you had Sun Ra. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And those are three sort of different, all three different personalities and experiences. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: How is one influencing the other? You know and, are--is there any--do you ever get confu--there's not-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --No confusion? Speaker 2: Let's add, let's add this. I was also the house band at the Apollo Theater. Speaker 1: That's--you-- Speaker 2: (Unclear) thing, I'll always look at it as a person who speaks lots of languages because I really, really enjoyed the plans at the Hol--at, at the Apollo Theater. I got fired from Thad Jones[/Mel Jones Big] Band because I didn't take off one night to play a benefit that, and I was working at the, the Apollo Theater and I didn't know that I should take off from a paying gig to play a non-paying gig. Well anyway, that's what happened. And that's true, I was in Thad Jones and Mel Lewis Band, they had something to play on Monday night and it was a benefit, they weren't (unclear) to get paid and I said wow, I'm working at the Apollo Theater so I got somebody else, they got somebody else and they, that's when Quentin Jackson, "Butter," in which he got a much better play--player to fit at the end--in what's happening, they, they, they wrote a lot of arrangements around him during the plunge and everything but that's what was happening, that, that actually happened and that's the truth. Speaker 1: So now-- Speaker 2: I got fired. Speaker 1: --So, how long did you play with Thad Jones? Speaker 2: About a ye--year and a half, maybe two. Speaker 1: And you started when? What year is this? Speaker 2: Oh, my--I knew I was playing at Thad Jones and Mel Lewis Band when my son [Jakubu Griffin] was born. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because I always thought he wrote 'A Child Is Born,' I thought a child was born for my son. But I'm not gonna take any credit for that. I knew that he used to play, I knew he developed that song during that time. Story_ID: 160137 Speaker 1: But-- Speaker 2: --So, so what--well, I just wanna develop the--so you come [to New York City, New York] in '64 [1964], when do you get married? 'Cause you keep mentioning-- Speaker 1: I got married in '68 [1968], now I came in '64 [1964], just for the summer. Speaker 2: Just--then when do you move here? Speaker 1: I move here in '67 [1967]. Speaker 2: Oh, I see. Speaker 1: So when I move, when I came in '64 [1964], I got my connections here 'cause I had the, the experience of the Civil Rights Movement and a lady named Janet Roe--Rowes[ph.] she was a civil rights Freedom Rider, you know during that time so, she was living in New York, so she was my connection so when I got to Indiana in '65 [1965], graduate school, I would go to New York because of the youth fair they had, it was roundtrip $42 from Indianapolis to New York. So, gigs were paying $30 and sometimes, $25 if you do two gigs, I would come to New York on a weekend and do two gigs and come out a little, you know ahead because I gotta have my youth fair for, for the $42 and roundtrip and, and that's the way I would do it and then that's when I got in touch with Pharaoh Sanders, we used to play, Pharaoh used to do Monday nights at, at Slug's [Saloon], I would come in and do the Monday nights and get back to Indiana, so I did that back and forth until I graduated in '67 [1967], and then I moved here to New York to stay. Speaker 2: Now what made you decide to move then? Is it just because it was a place to be? Speaker 1: It was--I was already grounded here, I was already setup, in fact I was scheduled, now this a--I was scheduled to perform with Coltrane and, and John Coltrane died in July, I was scheduled to, to graduate in June, but I discovered that I hadn't passed my English proficiency somewhere down the line they said oh, you didn't do this so I had to stay in school for that summer and I, I did that summer to get my English proficiency because I hadn't--something was overlooked and, and John Coltrane died in July and I came to New York in August. But Pharaoh Sanders had told John and Allie--Alice about me doing the multiphonics and they were really, you know they were ready he--to hear me do that and, and at that time a lot of people were playing with John Coltrane sitting in a lot of the free players and everything so they were--he had told them you know about this thing I was doing the multiphonics and they wanted to hear that because he was open for a lot of new sounds and stuff like that. Story_ID: 160138 Speaker 1: So you started your multiphonics back in-- Speaker 2: Oh, I started my multiphonics back in maybe '60 [1960], around when I started with Sun Ra, because-- Speaker 1: Actually, I thought that was later for some reason. Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No, it took me all these years to, to develop and then Rahsaan [Roland Kirk], he did--I recorded with him on 'Rahsaan Rahsaan,' so he wanted me to play it on that and that's wha--and then I, I re--I recorded it on 'The Loud Minority' record that Frank Foster did. So, I was doing it way, way back. And at one point Curtis Fuller said that I was the first that he had heard do it and then there's a guy named Albis--Albert Mangelsdorff in Germany was doing it. So the two of us at that time was either wo--the fir--he was the first or the second because I didn't know anything about Albert Ma--Mangelsdorff and he didn't know anything about me, so I don't know which one was doing it first or whatever on the trombone. But, and the wa--the way, the way I got started doing it, I heard John Coltrane, that, that record where he did the hummin' and then I, I saw a guy in Chicago [Illinois] doing it on the trumpet, it was in (unclear) so I said I wanna do that and then I, that's when I started around about '60 [1960]. And then I bought a book, there's a book, I think it was 'Carnetti[ph.] Exercise Book,' I think it's Carnetti, anyway the book had where back in the day that the trombonist used to do the cello transcriptions and they started doing those multi--they was doing the double stops so that's where, where it really came from. Speaker 1: So why don't you describe multiphonics, can you do that? Speaker 2: Multiphonics is, is, oh well, it's just playing t--it's like the didgeridoo. You, you, you're playing one note and you're singing another and then from that you'll get the overtones. Speaker 1: So you get two no--two notes? Speaker 2: You get two notes, yeah. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: I mean maybe I, I, if I played it would-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Yeah, if I could do that. Speaker 1: We would like that. Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I'll do that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, and then that way you'll hear it. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Story_ID: 160139 Speaker 1: So now you--so you, so you get married in '68 [1968], but you move here in '67 [1967]--? Speaker 2: --Seven. Speaker 1: Who's your wife? Speaker 2: My wife at the time was Geraldine Orry [ph.]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah and-- Speaker 1: And then your son [Jakubu Griffin] was born in? Speaker 2: 1970. Speaker 1: 1970, okay. Story_ID: 160140 Speaker 1: So now at this point in time when you start with Rahsaan [Roland Kirk] he's really known as Roland Kirk, right? Speaker 2: Right. Roland Kirk. Speaker 1: Okay and then you're on the recording of '[The] Inflated Tear,' you're on that album? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay, and so really, at this--at this point, are you working with [Charles] Mingus at this point? And s-- Speaker 2: No, no. That, that was pre-Mingus (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: This is pre--this is pre Mingus, okay. Speaker 2: Here's what happened, okay, I missed playing with John Coltrane, I plan, you know sitting in with him 'cause back in those days a lot of people were just sitting in, 'cause John had a--when he played, you know-- Speaker 1: Everybody would-- Speaker 2: --Every--a lot of people just free players and everything and, but I, I missed that opportunity. When I came to New York, John had, passed in, in July, I came in August, I finished and got my master's degree. And, and when I got here I was--there's a saxophone player named Marzette Watts. I went to Canada, I went to Montreal, Canada with Marzette Watts, we supposed to be for two weeks, we wind up staying in Canada for six weeks. We wined up--we went in August and then there--then there was September, and I think we must've gotten back like the last part of September or somewhere like that 'cause, 'cause then we're playing in a place called the Black Bottom and in that band we had a guy named, what's Richard's name? Oh man, Richard playing the French horn, my--I mean, Norman Connors was on drums, Junior Booth was playing bass and Richard was playing French horn and Marzette Watts was playing soprano and tenor [saxophone] and the (unclear)--so, ah man, so that was the band and, and we was--it was a quintet, you know but no piano and we played at the place called The Black Bottoms and, and in Montreal and they--and we did two weeks and then held over for another two weeks and it held over for another two weeks and that was it. And then when I got back here, Rahsaan was just waiting for me because or, so that was--that took me up to September. October started working with Rahsaan, started going out to--he was living in New Jersey, so next thing I know, November comes, I'm over to his house rehearsing and at this time I was living with this lady, Janet Rowes that I told you about was my connection, she was like my sister and kept me all, with in touch with train and, and she lived down on lower east side so she knew all the people and kept me going, what was going on with Slug's [Saloon] and every time I came into New York, I came in--I was playing because she would always have me setup with the gigs and everything, so I would fly in from Indiana, Indiana and play a gig, sit in with Pharaoh [Sanders] or somebody on Monday nights or whatever and back to, to Indiana to do my college thing. So, I, I got to, you know, like I say, I got to New York and then next thing I know Rahsaan said let's g--you, you--I was over to his house rehearsing right? And then Janet called and said she was going through some kind of problem, but anyway he got on the phone he said nah, let's go head let's finish rehearsing, so we go and we rehearse, I mean we rehearse that day and then we went to do a studio, 'cause we went, went down to Webster Hall on 11th Street, which is still there, it was snowing like mad that day and we did the first record, '[The] Inflated Tear.' Jimmy Hopps, Steve Novosel, and Ron Burton and myself, that was in 1967. Speaker 1: That's your first record, right? Speaker 2: First record, first record and then I worked with him throughout '67 [1967], that, that particular s--Christmas, that we going now into Christmas, that Christmas I didn't go home, I was always going home to be with my family, so that was New Year's, I remember the year of '68 [1968], went by and I met Donald Byrd in, I think around March, or February or March of that year, of '68 [1968], and Donald said man, you, you got your master's degree and Donald was teaching in the junior high school, he said get you a license, he said you got your master's degree and you don't play g--you play gigs at night, you can do this. So I started doing that, I started teaching and that--I got my license and start--substitute teaching and then I met my ex-wife then, there and, and we got married in June, it was very quick. Story_ID: 116272 Speaker 1: --'Cause money often eludes musicians. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You know 'cause--maybe you don't get paid, you know, you-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So now I wanted to, I wanted to ask another question about Rahsaan [Roland Kirk] because I had read or maybe I heard you speak about, that you know he had a way of pushing you? Speaker 2: Oh yes. Speaker 1: And that he was a task master? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So can you talk about that? Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: You also said he was a dreamer? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, he, he was a dreamer. Now both Rahsaan and, and Sun Ra had basically the same thing, they, they knew I had some talent and they would check, they would challenge me all the time. The way Rahsaan did it, he would play these songs so fast and, you know 'cause he know I had pretty good ears, he, he would play a song real fast that I didn't know, he knew that I didn't know 'cause he would kind--he would always testing me for songs, you know, that I didn't know, he'd play it fast and then two times and then he'd throw me out there and say solo. The key was I didn't, I couldn't catch melodies so fast but I could hear changes very good so, that's what I would do and, and, and, you know, and I'd play out there and then--'cause I wou--would analyze it. He'd play the melody and, and it was so awkward now, like a saxophone is very, has more flexibility and more agility and, and trombone is just all lip, you know so it's some things you can do it--just like with your hands and on the keys on the saxophone but you can't do it so easily, you know on the trombone, but I could hear those changes so, that's why I would do. And, and I had a good way of remembering that so, that's the way he would always do it and he would challenge me. And another thing he would do, like if somebody heard you sing, '[I] Say A Little Prayer,' by me singing in the vocal groups, I could hear that harmony part real quick you know, dadahladadah, I knew what (unclear) dadahladadah, you know I hear the counterpart right away, you know and he would do that, so that's why he liked me so much 'cause he would just play whatever he wanted to and I was harmonize it on the spot because I was thinking like I was thinking in the vocal group so from I'm singing in, you know the doo-wop groups that's where my, that talent came in-- Story_ID: 116273 Speaker 1: So, I--at one point I was at like I said, I was with Rahsaan [Roland Kirk], I was in the house band at Apollo [Theater] playing the R&B, I never-- Speaker 2: But you started with the house band at the Apollo when? Speaker 1: Around '70 [1970] '71 [1971]. Speaker 2: Oh, was it? Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, very early. Speaker 2: Okay, okay. Now who, who was in charge of the house band at that time? Speaker 1: Reuben Phillips. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: He was the director then and they would--they, the contractor for Motown was Dave Matthew [ph.] and then there was a arranger, Maurice McKinney [ph.], no, no yeah, Maurice--Maurice King, Maurice King. Speaker 2: Maurice King? Okay. Speaker 1: Maurice McKinney is, is the (unclear). Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But Maurice King, and I, I see in the, in the Motown, I went to see the 'Motown Revue' and they mentioned Maurice King 'cause Maurice King's arrangements were so difficult to play. He wrote them out exactly like they supposed to be played and have da-dah-dit-it-dit-it-tah-tah, you know it was another way to write but he wanted everything very precise and I heard that h--Thad Jones w--got some influence by him too, you know. Speaker 2: I see. Speaker 1: But they all from that Detroit [Michigan] area. Speaker 2: Now how long did you play at the--part of the Apollo Theater. Speaker 1: Apollo Theater about, I would say three, about three or four years. Speaker 2: So who's performing at the Apollo Theater at that time 'cause everybody was coming through there? Speaker 1: Everybody. I saw Smokey Robinson when it was Smokey Robinson and The Miracles and thing Reuben, Reuben Phillips used to play god and then when those guys come in like I saw, I saw Harold Melvin & The Blue Notes when Teddy Pender--yea, yeah, Ted--Teddy Pender-- Speaker 2: Teddy Pendergrass Speaker 1: He was in the group, he was there but he wasn't doing the solo thing then, I saw all of those groups like-- Speaker 2: Gladys Knight and the Pips, right? Speaker 1: Oh, Gladys Knight & The Pips-- Speaker 2: Uh-hum. Speaker 1: --When they were, you know like, and I did-- Speaker 2: Well, The Supremes, even coming thr--or maybe-- Speaker 1: No, The Supremes, Supremes-- Speaker 2: --They weren't-- Speaker 1: Yeah, The Supremes I played with them on a different venue, there was a guy, when, when I played with Diana Ross at one time, but not with the Supremes. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Because at that time-- Speaker 2: When she had gone solo? Speaker 1: --when she had gone solo. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: And so, but and, and it was just all the Motown groups, oh man, the Tops, I miss those guys 'cause they were such a really down to earth guys, you know and they came backstage, you know we all back on the, the stage but they were so friendly and so much fun, you know and I, I saw The Temptations when Eddie Kendricks was in the band, all of them, Melvin [Franklin], and all those guys, man, you know, oh my, all those guys in that band, I saw the original guys, I saw Dennis, Dennis Edwards when he was there 'cause he took Eddie Kendricks' place and they did different groups and, but I, I was there through a lot of that, that transition and The O'Jays when they first had their first hit. Speaker 2: See now that's interesting because I just happened to interview [HM] Eddie Levert, you know-- Speaker 1: Is that right? Speaker 2: --and the person I was gonna ask you about who, doesn't have anything to do with music-- Speaker 1: Uh-hum-- Speaker 2: --is Charlie Atkins because, you know he gave them, a lot of those groups their look. Speaker 1: Oh yes, yeah. Speaker 2: That's a choreographer. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 116274 Speaker 1: So now I want, the, the thing is, is that, un--you do a lot of albums with Rahsaan [Roland Kirk]-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --I mean, a lot that's who, who you're, so you're on 'Left & Right,' 'Volunteered Slavery,' I mean he's doing things, so is h-- Speaker 2: We did nine altogether. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So, he, he's going into the studio a lot now are these--what, what, what label are these albums? Speaker 2: On Atlantic [Records]. Speaker 1: On Atlantic-- Speaker 2: 'cause see-- Speaker 1: 'Cause Atlantic was the? Speaker 2: Yeah, see here's what was happening with Rahsaan. During that period I was with him, he was with Atlantic and that was before he had his stroke. See, Steve Turre pointed out to me that when he started playing with Rahsaan, Rahsaan had had his stroke, he was playing with one hand. I was playing with Rahsaan when, before stroke, before he had the stroke and he was playing both hands and all this energy and he was beating he was tearing up chairs and he was burning dollars, I went through so many periods with him, you know and, and let me tell you this joke, I gotta say this one (unclear). So, Rahsaan, he went through the chair, breaking chair period and sometimes he would grab one of those oak chairs and he'd be down there scuffling it and I would, you know help him break it 'cause I, 'cause I know he'd be there forever doing, you know I tried to do something, to step on it or something to help him get. But one night he was burning dollars, he's going through this period so, he always-- Speaker 1: This is part of his act? Speaker 2: It's part of his act, he'd always checked with me, I was his man, I was his eyes, he'd say (unclear), Rahsaan that's a twenty, he'd put it back in real quick, that's a five he'd put it back, that's a one, okay, (unclear) I say, Rahsaan, that's a twenty, I'm sorry. (Laughter) I said, I'm sorry man I thought that wa--and then, then he, laugh because he knew I'd got him, you know, then he look at it, he say okay, 'cause he (unclear) but you know, I would always do these jokes, we, we were fun, I would always mess with him like that, we make (unclear) and he would just, (unclear) and I'd say nah, that's okay, it's okay Rahsaan, that was, that was a one, you know. And he'd laugh, you know, but he was such a really nice person. But he would give the band gifts, we came--for Christmas he'd give the band, he'd give us Christmas gifts, I got some of his Christmas gifts right now, he was like a real guy, you know a really good guy, we'd come over to his house, he gave Christmas gifts to the band. He was one of the few that would pay unemployment for the band. So, back in the day if you wanna work in his band, I never had the priv--I never needed it, and that's one thing he knew about me, my--I worked as a teacher, my wife worked as a teacher, so when I went to Europe (laughter) he would, Dick how much do you need? He would, he would ask me how much can I pay, how much can I get by paying you to go to Europe and sometimes I say, and I was so generous, sometimes, I say well you know, whatever you think, you know. He'd give me twenty dollars, thirty dollars, you know and it was a funny thing. This is something I gotta say too-- I would work, you know, but he was very practical now, some of those guys in the band that's all they did, I didn't need a lot of money, I was teaching, my wife was teaching and I wasn't there for the money, I was there for the music but after awhile you know, I'm gon' be in the (unclear) with everybody it, you know, I get down there, I'm working all week, you know and and, and then he wants me to be there on time, you know and I'm teaching and, at all during the week and I'm working every night down there with him and so sometimes I wouldn't show up, 'cause I got, you know, I--I'm, I'm a person that like money and what (unclear) up so I say, Rahsaan, hey you know, you paying me twenty dollars a night and whatever and so, I say how much--I say how many nights am I working this week, right? Well look here, you know, he be (unclear) well I can pay you for Friday and Saturday so, I wouldn't show up on Tuesday, he'd call me, man, (unclear) you gotta come down, you know. I knew what he wanted, so I just went on, so I sta--I just went on started whenever he comes there to (unclear) I'm just all there and every weekend I get my little forty dollars, (laughter) but the other guys, they would, they were right they had to pay their rent, they had their families and stuff like that, I didn't need it, I mean I'm--I was blessed to have a job and teaching and then my wife was at that time was a teacher so, but I remember he, he would always do that-- Story_ID: 116275 Speaker 1: (unclear) Speaker 2: So, so when did Roland become Rahsaan [Roland Kirk]? Speaker 1: He had it in a dream, you know, it was back, he told me about it. Speaker 2: He had dreams though right? Speaker 1: Oh yes, everything came to him in dream, he dreamed in color too, he told me. And so one night we (unclear) on thing, he said my name is Rahsaan, you know, I'm Rahsaan now, name came to me in a dream and that was it, wasn't no more Roland, you know. Speaker 2: I bet people thought he was crazy? Speaker 1: (Laughter) That's right, well see, if you ever look at a lot of stuff, Rahsaan did a lot of things, he, he was a rebel, when I say rebel he was very, very smart. Now, I don't know if anybody ever said this but this is one thing for a fact, he had a I.Q. that was very high. Number one, he--I, I never heard him, some people come around and test his spelling ability 'cause if you notice some of these records, he made up these words level, liver, liloquy [ph.], you know, he knew how so he was very smart, so people would come to the Vanguard and ask him how to spell this. I remember when somebody came in and asked him how to spell Czechoslovakia, you know, this way he'd spell it, he'd spell anything, he was very good at spelling and he had a friend who was a psychiatrist, a doctor, so he hung out, he was, he was very, very bright. But think about it all the things he did, playing a flute in his nose and playing a oboe, I mean that took a lot of mentality and a lot of intelligence to figure that out and do that so that's one thing I knew he was very, very bright, and academically he was not, not, you know slow, he could figure out stuff, even as he was blind. He had masking tape, he would fix his saxophone with just some masking tape that you tear, this little paper kind of maskin--he fixed everything with masking tape, temporarily he could fix everything. Speaker 2: So, he had lost his sight when? Speaker 1: Either the doctor or the nurse put the wrong medicine in his eye when he was a kid. I think he said it was 'round early, like one, two, something like that, you know, I'm not sure. I, I'd be lying if I said the exact time of when he lost his sight, but he said that at, at one point he could see and he said that somebody, one of the nurses came in and put the wrong medicine in his eyes or something, that's, that's what I heard. Story_ID: 116276 Speaker 1: So was he--were all three of them good managers of their bands? You know, I mean of their groups-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: --I mean their groups, they were all three? Speaker 2: Which--which one, which-- Speaker 1: [Charles] Mingus, Rahsaan [Roland Kirk] and Sun Ra, were they all good? Speaker 2: Nah, they were different. Now, let me tell you about Sun Ra. Sun Ra he was good a disciplining the band, but Sun Ra was more like a person who rehab--rehabilitated people. So Sun Ra was good at, at, you know people that had troubled pasts and everything, one guy was in prison, he fell out with, you know (unclear), Sun Ra was good at that kinda stuff, but I don't think he was financially? No, he was like a kid in a candy store. I remember, let me tell you this and this is a fact, I don't wanna talk about the negative thing but, I went to--when Sun Ra would get rid of somebody, he would call me, he would--somebody he fired in, in Europe, they were in Europe so he sent 'em home, you know somebody did something, Sun Ra was more like, he was in control of your social habits, you know you didn't talk to this person and that, you know, certain kinda things like that so, this guy messed up some kinda way and then he sent 'em home, so he sent for me. I went to Paris [France], we went to Madrid [Spain] and we went to Yugoslavia [now Slovenia, Macedonia, Croatia, Serbia, Montenegro, Kosovo and Bosnia] at the time because that was the name of it, so we were all over Europe and then in Madrid, I remember we were getting ready, they were getting ready to go to Egypt, they didn't have any gigs he just want--Sun Ra just wanted to go to Egypt, right? I said nah, I'm going back to New York. They got stranded in Eg--Egypt, they plan (laughter), so you know, that was, that was Sun Ra, you know they got stranded in Egypt, the guy from the Village Vanguard, Arthur Lubbock sent for him, you know got through there and they played it, you know, but Sun Ra was like that. Now Rahsaan, he was a good band to read--leader, he, he knew how to manage money, he knew how to manage--he was very good to his band members, he didn't pay, you know a lot but he worked a lot, see that's the other thing, if, if you get a lot of money, you can get say five hundred dollars a gig, but if you don't gig but three or four times a year, what does that make? Rahsaan would be workin' th-forty-nine or fifty weeks of out of the year so then, you know he wasn't paying a whole lot of money. He told me, he said man, I could--I could, you know work and I don't get that much my money, but I love playing so he just did that, that was Sun Ra [sic, Rahsaan]. Now with Mingus? I would think that Mingus was probably very good at managing, I never had any problem, but you know, he was from the era where you paid--lot of people paid cash and you know, that, that way he had a lot of people that were using drugs and doing what they think, so he was, he was a little different. I think that he never, never, never, never not paid me, he paid me on time and very, very correct. But I think some people, maybe if he didn't like 'em of somethin' he might have-- Speaker 1: They didn't get--they had trouble with their pay. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, trouble, 'cause I remember this one trumpet player, I wasn't gon' name any names 'cause these people are deceased now. But this one trumpet player, Mingus owed him some money, so he came to the, to the (unclear) Avery Fisher Hall, with his piece too, you know knife or somethin' to get his money, you know that kind of stuff so a lot of that was going on. Story_ID: 116277 Speaker 1: Now in 1974, you release your, your first album? Speaker 2: Right, yeah. Speaker 1: Right, and that's 'The Eighth Wonder'? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: How long had it taken you and what was the motivation for doing it? Speaker 2: Well, here's the thing, that I was with Rahsaan [Roland Kirk] at the time, Rahsaan had taken me to Buddah Records. At the same time Norman Connors went to Buddah Records and Norman was in my band, he was playing drums with me most of the time, in fact Norman stayed, you know, spent some time in we--you know, at my house, you know where we lived on 84th Street so we were really pretty close. But when I went to Buddah Records, Nor--I mean Rahsaan took me in, Joe Fields (unclear), he, he said okay I want you to do this and then he, he's kinda like, told me what he wanted on the record, you know like, now I want you to play one standard and I want you to do this and then, so at the time I heard about Strata-East [Records] and this was a independent label where a group of, of musicians would own their product and they'd come under the umbrella of the, of the name and they'd get the distribution, so at that time we setup the greatest thing that ever probably had happened in the history of, of record, recording music, we had our own distributors, we had distributors out of Detroit [Michigan] and Black Fire [Records] and they had all these distributors and, and then on the, all the artists own their product, we got--we, we would pref--you know pay for everything but we were getting 85 percent of our sales and the, and the Strata-East was taking 15 percent, so that was quite good. Let me tell you what happened then, now that was going good. Now, a lot of musicians wanted to put out their records so I had a choice of going with Buddah [Records] doing it with a label and then I took the Strata-East route, but during that time, Strata-East had something happen that they, that they weren't prepared for, Gil Scott-Heron put out a record that became a hit, in 'The Bottle' and 'The Bottle' that was put out on Strata-East and 'The Bottle' just took the whole layout that we had, people were ordering, I would be in the office sometimes, people ordering 10,000 records and at that time they were, you know pressing and, and, and Charles Tolliver at the time, he said man, I got--I'm going home, I can't, (laughter), I can't, you know fill that kinda order. And then one night it--I was at Charles' house and he had a royalty record, royalty check for Gil Scott Heron for like a 100, back in those days a 100 and somethin' thousand dollars or somethin', very big amount of money and then here's what happened, by that record becoming a hit it come most--it probably destroyed Strata-East as the structure that we had because it was just so much stuff and then when men--big hits and then money comes around different kinds of people of different kinds of persuasion comes in for the picture, so at that time Joe Robinson, at All Platinum Records did a cover on that record, on 'The Bottle.' That became a big saler, so everybody was makin' I mean Joe, that, that record that Strata-East did it did the exzame [ph.]--exact same, that record became just such a big hit and Strata-East was involved in that and just money was going, things and come, so my record came out during that time, so it got--here's what I would do on the phone sometime, they would call the office, they say I want so and so and the Gil Scott, I say okay you can get 'em so and so but you have to order a 100 of Dick Griffin (laughter). And they would, so anyway that was, that's what happen at Strata-East and then you know just, that was the times. Speaker 1: And, and Strata-East stayed with its 15 percent or did they try-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah-- Speaker 1: --They stayed? Speaker 2: Yeah they stayed with it. Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: But, it doesn't s--you know, I, I, I'm not quite sure and clearly as what went down but, with the, with the (unclear) of Strata-East but I guess two things happened. It was almost like it, the record company, industry wasn't ready for this kind of competition from a group of musicians, self-owned and everything and it was too big and too fast and just blindsided everybody so something had to kind of happen to demise it, d--destroyed it and then they got to be infight with Strata-East, some people started to take, you know the, the leaders of Strata-East and there was, it was division there-- Story_ID: 116278 Speaker 1: --and then once you-- Speaker 2: So who was, who was in charge of Strata-East [Records] at the time? Speaker 1: Stanley Cowell and Charles Tolliver at the time and they had one lady she passed away (unclear) she was the secretary, you know and that was it. And then they had a, oh man what's the guy who, who was doing all the packing, I forget his name, but anyway there was a guy who did all the shipping out and it was just like they were pressing, you know, vinyl records at that time, wasn't nothing thinking about no, no CDs or anything. Speaker 2: Wait a minute, so they had to fill out those orders (laughter) then? Speaker 1: Yeah, I guess they filled them to the, to the (unclear) but it was just too many, you know they had--and the pressing plants couldn't get out, you know it wasn't like, they were like Columbia [Records] or, or some of the bigger companies who had all these--they could press a 1000 records a day or 10,000 or fill a order in for 30,000, you know and they were coming in. But, and then like I said, it still was set--it still was 15 percent, 80 percent, 85 percent, you know. Speaker 2: Which is great you know, 'cause artists today, this is the closest that you get to there where they're just trying to go around the record label. Speaker 1: Oh yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: And they're saying forget it, so you're right about that. Story_ID: 116279 Speaker 1: Now, you--so what is the work that goes into your album, 'Eighth Wonder,' Warren Smith is on the album? Speaker 2: Yeah, now that was funny, I had heard Sam Cooke, not Sam Cooke, Sam, Sam Rivers playing on a jazz (unclear) I was re--I was rehearsing and playing in Sam Rivers' band. I always loved the way he played flute and the saxophone too. So, I just said okay, I, I asked Sam to play, he said sure and then I, Freddie Waits was on there, my good friend from college and from the first grade, then Leopoldo Fleming 'cause I wanted the African, Cuban and that, that kind and then Warren Smith was playing the vibes and, and the gong and all the--and Ron Burton from, from my association with playing with him from Rahsaan [Roland Kirk] and Cecil McBee. Now Cecil McBee was a friend of mine since 1963, because he came--I met him in Jackson, Mississippi, he came to Jackson with Paul Winters, my friend Freddy Waits had gone from Jackson to started to travel and gone to Detroit [Michigan] and playing around, so he came back to Jackson with Paul Winters and Cecil McBee was in the band and Paul Winters and they did Elysium program [ph.]. So from that time on, I, I've been, you know acquainted a known, a friend of Cecil McBee, so he was on the record so that's how, how it happened. And the material I guess I was, I have so many, I've been writing songs now for--my main thing was writing probably more than playing 'cause I wrote a lot in college and I started writing compositions in college, so composing hasn't been a problem, I guess getting compositions heard and, you know that's been the most thing 'cause I sit down this morning and started composing, you know playing something, so that's no problem, it's just, I wanna have five CDs out and I got maybe a 100 compositions some more and, and how many, you know you put-- Speaker 1: I mean can you choo-what do you choose to put on it? Speaker 2: --Yeah, yeah. And some people are very good at getting their pieces played by other people and that's taken another kinda energy, you know, you--I probably could try to shop my songs out, some people are bet--very good at that but that's what my, my thing is. Story_ID: 116280 Speaker 1: And I wrote this piece, I got a, a grant to write a piece in 1980 for symphony orchestra, a National Endowment [for the Arts] grant, so I did that and the Brooklyn Philharmonic Orchestra performed it in 1980. Freddy Waits was on it, Hilton Ruiz, the late Hilton Ruiz, the late Freddy Waits and Bob Cunningham and myself, this was a quartet so that was for full orchestra, I haven't had it performed but one time, that, that one performance. Speaker 2: Was that the 'World Vibration Suite.' (Simultaneous). Speaker 1: 'World Vibration Suite,' yeah. Speaker 2: Okay and the other (unclear) that was (unclear) okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: So, that had a--now when did the Symphony of The New World come in? Speaker 1: Well, here's what happen, when I came outta Indiana [University], graduated in 1967, I had been playing a lot of classical music and, and one time they had a concert, the Symphony of The New World, had a concert and some of the musicians either was on strike or something with them, but anyway, I got a chance to perform with that, with that orchestra. Speaker 2: I see. Speaker 1: And, it was just one, one performance, but I remember Jimmy Orange [ph.] was there and, and a lot of their classical players. At that time when I first came outta inst--Indiana, I, I was playing a trombone a larger bore trombone with the F-attachment, so it's pretty much suited for that kinda music, you know and I find that in one way, classical music, notation-wise and for the brass players, it's not a lot, when I say, not a lot, it's just, just that the sound, and the fullness, and the attack, and the cleanliness, and like that, so some pieces are very easy to play and some are very difficult, but I found it's not as challenges as some of the jazz pieces, ja-'Giant Steps' or you know or 'Cherokee' playing through the keys and stuff like that some of the classical players you gotta (unclear) the attack is good and fullness and bbonnnggg badah bombombom, and so you play that and you play it with so much power and everything, so much precise and, and but you not playing the 'Flight of the Bumblebee' [Nikolai Rimsky Korsakov]-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --you know, on the trombone, pretty much that's the way classical setup is, you know, that is just designed for the strings and the flutes and the clarinets and stuff, but-- Story_ID: 116281 Speaker 1: Now you had released another album on Tri--Trident Records and I just want to ask, 'cause that had your artwork on the cover and that was a year before you did the, the, you know the symphonic piece, orche-- Speaker 2: Right orchestra Speaker 1: --orchest--, orchestral piece. Speaker 2: Orchestra piece, yeah now I did also-- Speaker 1: But when are you starting to paint? Speaker 2: Okay, I'll give you a clear example, but I want to say one more thing about the classical part. Max Roach commissioned me when he got his MacArthur's grant in the '80s [1980s], to write two string quartets and those string quartets was premiered at the Vision Festival in, in 2011. When he--the reason he did that, he had a copy of a cassette tape of this symphony ['World Vibration Suite'] that I did at, at Symphony Space with the Brooklyn Philharmonic and I gave it to him. So when we would see each other on the road traveling in Europe and different places, he'd be on the plane, he would take that out of his cassette player or whatever and show me that he's listening to that. So, and to prove that he liked it and he was very proud of my work, when he got his MacArthur's grant, he commissioned me to write two string quartets for his daughter at the time upting--Uptown String Quartet. Now here's what happened, that was for recording date and at that time I was living in New Jersey and I just, you know would phone call, I couldn't find out when I had to bring the piece in and every--I had it ready. So when, I finally got them to read the piece, they had decided on what they were gonna do, 'cause they only could record six pieces and that was it ,so the piece, he paid me, it was very nice pay at that time to do those, those pieces, but they never were performed, so that's from the '80s [1980s], they were laying around so I, I got them pr--a performance in the Vision Festival in 2011. Speaker 1: That's wonderful. Well you know 'cause the--his--they have the big donation of his, of his archives and collections, to the Library of Congress this year. Speaker 2: Oh yeah? Speaker 1: Um-hum, big--there was a big ceremony up like a few weeks ago with his family. Speaker 2: Oh, okay. Speaker 1: It was like a huge donation to the--okay we've gotta switch. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 116282 Speaker 1: Oh yeah, when, when I was in, in high school, I was good at drawing, I, I, you know, I would look at people and these girls come down, draw me, I say okay and I would always make 'em look pretty and everything they say, ahhhhh, you know. So that was good and then when I finished high school, I went into music, I mean it was just like, wasn't no choice. I love music more than, than art, you know and I got, you know I just never thought about it but I always was critical about art I saw and, and I didn't do much drawing, I was always doodling though, on the phone, I got s--I wish I could've kept some of those things, I would just doodle, just draw all these different scenes you know. And then I got this show in Paris [France], I, I got us--got to go to Paris to do 'Black and Blue,' the first version of it, that was 1985. Now, I was kinda thinking about it, when about I was living in Teaneck [New Jersey] and, at that time I was divorced, I had my own place with wall-to-wall carpet, I lived upstairs in a two, two family house and-- Speaker 2: You were divorced in what year? Speaker 1: In '81 [1981]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So, I, I was--that was around '85 [1985], so I had, you know, I was still living in Teaneck because I wanted to be in my son [Jakubu Griffin]'s life and, you know do-- Speaker 2: And your son's name is? Speaker 1: Jakubu. Jakubu Mewangi [ph.] Griffin and he, he, you know, like I said, I was there and I would always go to his school events and everything, we had a pretty decent whole thing worked out for my son. So, I got this gig in Paris and I'm over in Paris and I start to--I had this dream, I had--three o'clock in the morning, exactly the same time two nights in a row, it was all about some colors spinning around and, and-- Speaker 2: Your son had, had his effect on you, right? Speaker 1: Right. That's right. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Speaker 1: And so, I said wow, and I wanted to study there 'cause now, me thinking I got a master's degree in music and I--why should I just jump up and start paying you without trying to study knowing because I know there's an art and the artists know a lot of stuff. So, I, I got--I got in touch with a guy and I didn't like his way of painting because he was, he was not doing realistic stuff, he was doing this kinda distorted, but and didn't look good to me, I wanted somethin' that if its look--if you're doing something real, I want it to look real, you know and if you're doing somethin' abstract, you know it's okay. So anyway, I, I, I to--I was in, I was, at that time I had been playing five years with Abdullah Ibrahim. I started in '80 [1980], '81 [1981], no, '83 [1983], and I painted up until '88' [1988], we talking '85 [1985], so I was still a regular member of the Abdullah Ibrahim, that's all I did, I--we went to Europe we went to Africa and we would travel four and five months out of the year, you know just working and lot of work Village Vanguard, I mean, nah, nah Sweet Basil's [Jazz Club], swa--Sweet Basil's two weeks at a time that was six weeks of work right there. So anyway, I'm on the train and we were in Berlin [Germany] 'cause we did a lot in Europe. I'm on the train going from Berlin to Paris, six hours train ride and I see this lady with some pastels and I say, you know, since I'm, you know we had some time to kill, can I use some of your work and I sit there and I did this painting and working and I rubbed it and did that, and I finish it and by the time we got to Paris, and I showed it to the bass player, he didn't believe I did it. He thought that the girl had done it and I was just sshh--(unclear) he couldn't believe it. So, I took a photo of it, it was my first painting that I used color in and then I got back in '86 [1986], after being there for about a year and I was living in my apartment and I had just woke up--'cause I didn't think about painting too much, you know, 'cause I knew I didn't want to mess up my floor and everything and I got the apartment here in '89 [1989], August of '89 [1989]. Speaker 2: You moved here? Speaker 1: I moved here August, '89 [1989]. Story_ID: 116283 Speaker 1: In November of '89 [1989], November 19th Freddie [Waits] died and I said, wow. Speaker 2: He died of renal failure right? Speaker 1: Yeah, renal failure and I said, wow. He will never know that I can paint and if I don't get started, no one will know, so I went on--that was in November. Speaker 2: Now, but Freddie--what--why was it significant about his death and him not knowing you can--(unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: Well, here's, here's the way Freddie and I, we had this thing we'd always one up on each other, when I say one up--it was a friendly, it wasn't a competitive mean-spirited thing, Freddie got married before I did, his son was born six months before my son, so we did all these things without even thinking about it, kinda parallel to each other. Freddie came to New York, I came to New York, Fr--Freddie and I we in the--he got in the band before I did, you know, it was just like things just happened and when I got my car, he got his car, I got my car. I got my computer he, he got a computer, you know so it was just--we were feeding off of each other's energy and, and it wasn't a ne--never a mean-spirited thing, but I say wow, he was so close to me, I say man, Freddie will know, not know that I'm a painter and if I don't get started, no one will. So he died in November, I went to the art store in December and my first painting, I did it in December, 1989-- Speaker 2: So you-- Speaker 1: --with that thing, that thing, with the--that I had in my head, I saw. Story_ID: 116284 Speaker 1: Wow, so you do that in '89 [1989], and you have your first exhibition in 1990? That's--I have you, have your first art exhibition at the Ottawa Jazz Museum? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: In 1990? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Now that was a--you see that poster there? That was that. Speaker 1: Ohh. Speaker 2: I had made the poster and--of that painting and that-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --So, that's what, and, and then when I took that up, they, they--I was playing at Ottawa and so they exhibited that, that, that piece and I sold it on the, on the gig and what the funniest thing about this, I had never been in the art world and selling art so, I sold the poster and there was a lady, I sold a lot of them, 'cause you know that's a print there and I, I wanted to sign, this lady had bought it and I was gonna sign, she had it under her arm and she was just trembling, she say, no, no that's okay and I said wow, she, she just really was excited about the piece and I said I didn't know people respond that way or I--over art, you know, she said no, no that's okay, you know, she was just so happy to have it and I said wow. Speaker 1: But you moved into this place when you said, in what year? Speaker 2: In, in '89 [1989], of August, August 14th. Speaker 1: Eighty-nine [1989], he dies and then you, you go and buy your-- Speaker 2: Art, artist--I bought my art supply-- Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: In December, and then I started painting and then I went to Ottawa in 1990, of the summer like June, July, something like that. Speaker 1: So are you playing as much during this time still? Or are you? Speaker 2: Pretty much, that's all I was doing at that time, I mean-- Speaker 1: So you--what, did you're no longer teaching at this point? Speaker 2: --I had stopped teaching from-- Speaker 1: Before you went to Paris? Speaker 2: Yeah. No that, that's from that period, from the period, I'll tell you how my teaching thing went. I, I went, when I was married, I was teaching up until, substituting and everything until around '81 [1981], and then-- Speaker 1: Then you taught at SUNY [State University of New York at Old Westbury, SUNY Old Westbury in Old Westbury, New York] Speaker 2: I taught at SUNY, that was in '81 [1981], that's after I had got my divorce, (unclear) and then I taught at--before that at Wesleyan University [Middletown, Connecticut], but I had left the Board of Education in like '75 [1975]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, I was teaching from like, you know, '68 [1968], up until around '75 [1975], in the Board of Education and then, when I, I just started to play, I was doing nothing but playing music and then I , I got out of, of teaching and got divorced and everything and when I went back to teach, it was in around '90 [1990], '91 [1991], because there, that's when the first Gulf War situation happened in Kuwait or what have you and I had a big tour that was--I was supposed to be going to Europe, I had played the Ottawa Jazz Festival, my band I had gone to, to Rotterdam [Netherlands], you know I was getting pretty popular with band leading and, and I do see a lot of artist that were just developing now they really big and they doing quite, quite well. But my son [Jakubu Griffin] was in college at that time and I figured out wow, and I had to pay, you know, tuition and child support and I thought, I said let me, when the Kuwait situation happened, I had a big tour, it was cancelled, so I said let me substitute, so I substitute teaching and the lady liked me so well, so offered me a regular job. At that time I had a gig to go to Berlin [Germany] with Muhal Richard Abrams and I said, nahhh, I can take the job but if you work with me on my times I have to take off, I'll take it. So she said okay, she said as long as we can do it and you don't embarrass me, you don't have to take off too many days. So that happened and I stayed in the Board of Education for five years, up until '99 [1999], because I had to get vested and buy back some time and all that, so that's what I did, so I got my health insurance and pension and all that back, so that's-- Speaker 1: So you're doing that but you're having a prolific period with your art, and your art changes too? Speaker 2: --Yes, it, it-- Speaker 1: It changes 'cause you look at this piece here and you look behind you which is a wonderful-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --backdrop, so when does it chang--and is this an interim piece over there? Is that on the way to-- Speaker 2: Yeah-- Speaker 1: --Look how it starts and then. Speaker 2: Yeah, well here's what happened, when I, when I had this image of, of, of this red ball spinning around it was like the one that you see right there on the door and the one you see up on the top over there, that was what I did for like maybe a fi--a 150 pieces in all different versions in all different si--and then all of a sudden, I just felt that I had done enough, I got tired of doing the round sphere and, and, and I have a piece that I sold to a corporation where the sun actually sets, the sun just goes down. (Laughter) you know-- Speaker 1: It's done. Speaker 2: It was done, you know it done, the sun has been up too long, let the sun go down and then when it did it just dispersed and it burst and that's when you got all of that. Story_ID: 116285 Speaker 1: So what year are you starting to paint like we see it. Speaker 2: Okay, the year, the year started was December, I can easily say December 12 of 1989, I started. Speaker 1: Right-- Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: --So when does it change? Speaker 2: It changed around, yeah it changed around, yeah it changed around '80 [1980], no '-90--, '98 [1998], that's where I met Ed Clark [HM Edward Clark]. Speaker 1: Oh, I see. Speaker 2: I met Ed Clark and I was getting to the abstract stuff and then Ed Clarke gave me a solo show at his studio, I'm the only person that had that. Speaker 1: That is huge. Speaker 2: Yeah, and then after that, Danny Simmons said, I want you to show some of your art in this friend's restaurant, but he said, big pieces, I hadn't done any big pieces, you know, I'd done small pieces 'cause I tried to keep everything. So, I went to the store and bought two large canvases, one was three feet by five feet and one was two free by--three by five feet, and I, I called Ed over, I said Ed, I'm trying to paint this piece. He would come over, I wanted him to tell me what to do, he said, never would, he used to look at it and say, doesn't look finished. Then one time he came and said, you haven't painted big before. That's all he would say, he wouldn't tell me what to put colors here or nothing like that, so one day I waste some paint on the, on the canvas and I just pushed it like that, he came over, he loved it, he said, and he'd sit and talked to about an hour just about how expressive that painting was and how he liked it, and so I had him tape it, I said, you wanna see--I want you to turn--I'm gonna turn the tape on and I want you to talk about it again and ever since then. So, after that, he said come over to my studio, I want to show you something, he came over, I went over to the studio he gave me a master lesson. He said I've never shown anybody my secrets or anything, you can use it like you want to. And after I did that I had twelve polaroids and I can show you that in, in, after this interview and I went to--I was at the--a friend had a, a gallery opening up at the Macy [Art] Gallery in Columbia University [New York City, New York], so I'm showing this to a friend named Isaac Colwing [ph.], I say man this is a new, oh man this is some of my new work and he looked at it and he was surprised, this is you? It was such a change from what I had been doing before and a lady was looking over his shoulder at it, she said, I want that one, I want that one, you in the show. What? She said, I got a show it's a jewelry show I want you to be in it. I want those two pieces in the show, so I went and I got this person who, who did my framing, I had a dispute with him, but we (unclear), so he said Griffin come in, he said I showed 'em the pi--the, the twelve polaroids and he said, don't, don't do anything, don't talk to me, and take this around to my friend Arnie, that was around the corner on 39th street, I took it around, Arnie looked at and go oh, he said can I hold on to these for a while? I says yeah, he held on for about two or three weeks and I got a little nervous, I said what they doing? Getting somebody to steal my work and stuff? He called me up after about three weeks and he said my boss like your paintings, he want twenty of them. They were all big pieces like the one behind you and be--I said wow, I hadn't done but twelve, so I went to the immediately to the, to the art store and bought fifteen more big canvas and I started to paint and I took him the twelve that I had and then I started to swap out the ones of--that one yellow one around the corner, I, I, I, took it back, I swapped it out 'cause I didn't want to let that one go, I thought it was stronger and I had let all--a lot of my strong pieces go with that, that corporation. So that was in 2000, and then-- Speaker 1: So you're an official, really you're official at that point. Speaker 2: --yeah. Speaker 1: You were official before but you're really-- Speaker 2: Right, right. So that was it, then when I sold those and then, then people start to ask me to be in shows. Story_ID: 116286 Speaker 1: Now there was a period when I had stopped, I thought I was gonna give up, and I have to tell you this one briefly. When I first started around '80 [1980], you know, like '90 [1990], '90 [1990], up 'til like '97 [1997], there was a lady named Joanne Ashe [ph.] and she had me in these little shows, they were one night shows in discos, and different clubs and she just loved my work and she would really inspire me to come on, she was just showing me, I want to be in this show. So, she passed away, so about a year, I didn't paint at all and then a guy named Arnonnie Silver [ph.] called me up, he said Dick, I want you to be in my group, it's called the Global Vision we, we (unclear). So I decided then and there, okay, I would get back in and I hadn't painted for a year now, I started back and I started showing. Now the thing that, that started me, one time at, at one point there was a gallery, a famous shop on 72nd Street and I went in with my artwork and the guy starting to show my work and he put my work in the window and that's where I met Arnonnie Silver and then I met a artist named Amar Kostabi (ph.), he saw my work there and he said I want you--he came down here, he wanted to see my studio and he invited me to, to work in his studio, work with his artists for two years and that was during the time that I wrote, I did this piece in 1995, so it was like 1993, to 1995. But he also played piano, being that I'm an artist and a musician, so we had the collaboration so he let me work in his studio, use his paint, use the--you learn to stretch paint, I mean stretch canvas and all that stuff and he had six artists doing his work, so that was a period that I really, really, kinda went to art school. And I was-- Speaker 2: That's what--from years what? Speaker 1: That, that was like from I would think '93 [1993] to '95 [1995], or something like that. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Because that time I had started teaching regularly, I started teaching because I wanted to get back into the system and get my Board of Education stuff, I hadn't stopped playing, I was still playing, but I was juggling my playing according to my teaching, I wouldn't go on a European tour for three or four weeks, stuff like that, but I was always active playin', you know still performing with different band-- Story_ID: 116287 Speaker 1: Oh, that's when I got involved with Lionel Hampton's band, I started his band in like '95 [1995], up until he died and he died in 2002, and then I got into Cab Calloway's big band. Speaker 2: So, so Lionel Hampton is more strai--what you call straight on, right? Speaker 1: Yeah, he, he's swing. Speaker 2: He's swing, I'm sorry. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah swing, yeah. Well see, I've always had that ability, I played with the Count Basie Band, I played with the Lionel Hampton, I played with Frank Foster's band, Thad Jones and Mel Lewis [Thad Jones/Mel Lewis Big Band], so the big band work was, was pretty much a part of my playing too. Speaker 2: Well you've done things and weren't you--didn't want you, didn't you also play on 'The Wiz'?-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --In the, in the band of the 'Wiz'?-- Speaker 1: Oh yeah. Speaker 2: So you did all--I mean you did-- Speaker 1: Yeah, I, I, did the 'Wiz' for five years, but I was playing bass trombone, I was subbing for a trombone player named Jack Jeffers, and I was playing bass trombone then and, then I got a show in, this is '76 [1976], I got a show around '76 [1976], with a la--Linda Hopkins called, 'Me and Bessie,' so that show ran for about a year and a half and I was able to, well that was, me and my ex-wife, we was able to buy a house in Teaneck [New Jersey], that's when we was able to get the down payment and, and start to purchase a house in Teaneck, New Jersey. And we did that in 1960--60, no 1950, 1976, 'cause Jos, my son at that time was going into the first grade and he was born in 1970, so he was just going. So, he, he started school out there but prior to that he had gone to some privates schools, the Montessori School and the Little Red Schoolhouse and different schools, but, yeah, so. But that's what all I did was that Broadway thing, I think the last Broadway show I did was Lena, Lena Horne, I played with her on Broadway. Speaker 2: That's--that was for coming out? Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: Um-Hum. Speaker 1: So, I did that. My thing was, was I'm a musician and I just play music, you know. All-- Speaker 2: But you're a great--but you, became a artist? So too that's the other thing. Speaker 1: Oh yeah. Speaker 2: I mean, and so what, I mean do you, so what do you consid--so you, do you consistently like pa--paint and you consistently play? Speaker 1: Sort of. Let me tell you what. I don't sleep a lot, I've had this thing, I didn't ever have a long sleeping period. I sleep about three hours, soundly and that's about it. Speaker 2: But you said, more recently you're sleeping more? Speaker 1: More, more recently, yeah. I, I sleep a little longer, but-- Story_ID: 116288 Speaker 1: I, number of thing, one thing I, I can tell you going all the way back to when I was in Mississippi, working on the beer truck, and, and, I--I'd, I'd use to--I got drunk twice, when I was a teenager. One time when I, when I was working on the beer truck they give you these big kegs of draft beer, so you s--you drinking tell stories and everything, that's why I was living Under-The-Hill. I'd jump off this porch and the world start spinning around and I came home and I regurgitated and spinning round. So then another time I got drunk and the same kinda, got the sickness while I was living on the hill, so after that I decided I didn't like getting drunk, I didn't drink. And I did smoke up until I was twenty-five, but after that I just, you know, peer in there, back when early back in days I would smoke a little marijuana but never got into deep anything, so that is probably been a helpful thing. The reason I didn't get in certain cliques in the music world, now that I know about it--I was a good friend of ab--Thelonious Monk and when I was playing with Rahsaan Roland Kirk in the '60s [1960s], 1968, Thelonious Monk band was playing opposite our band, but instead of me going out, you know, smoking weed or doing whatever the guys doing, I would just stay in the kitchen 'cause, I didn't, I didn't get high. I didn't like to get high and it wasn't that I was not snobbish about it but, I would always be back in the kitchen with Thelonious and then he heard me do the multiphonics and he, he started to work out a thing when he threw his arm out, I would play the multiphonics and, and he would do--I would do it on cue, and I would just sit there and he was grin his teeth and, you know, like check that out. And so we had this routine, and he, he really co--come to like me and spend a lot of time off the (unclear) and just--and lot of times we--he didn't talk a lot, he would be pacing, he would walk back and forth and he'd stop and tell you something, then he, he'd walk back and forth and then he'd stop and say something to me and a lot of times it be just, we both be just in the room and nothing, nobody saying anything. And I wouldn't ask him a whole lot of questions, but he would, it was like mental telepathy or whatever, he would sometimes answer questions that I wouldn't ask, you know, read my energy. That's something my mother [Ruby May Griffith O'Banner] taught me from the South, how to read people. Well not, not by what race they are or whatever complexion they are, just read their energy. It's like a dog has a sixth sense. When you walk in a room, the dog knows who's afraid of him, he'll bark at that person, he knows when you're a stranger or whenever you--they read their energy. So, I've kinda learned to do that. Story_ID: 116289 Speaker 1: So but you, you--I didn't know about Thelonious Monk, so that's very good 'cause you worked literally with a lot, a lot of people. Speaker 2: Oh yes. Yeah. Speaker 1: Lot of household names that people don't, you know. Speaker 2: Yeah, I was able to, to, I mean, you know, like blessed to be in, in the company of a lot of great people, worked with [Charles] Mingus, I worked with--I even performed once with Duke Ellington, that's my highlight. I was in Thad--no I was in Clark Terry's Big Band, so I was in a lot of big bands, you know, I played with Clark Terry's Big Band, we used to play at the Club Baron, that's when I got a chance to meet Louis Armstrong, he came to hear the band play. Speaker 1: I was gonna ask you about Louis Armstrong. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay so. Speaker 2: I have so many stories my guys, this friend Johnny Grimes used to tell me so many stories about Pops and, but he came to hear Clark's [ph.] Bi--Big Band, I got a chance to meet him and nice guy, I mean he's just, just a sweet person, you could tell he was just like, warm you know, wasn't no jivin' about him, just nice, friendly. Speaker 1: 'Cause he left his records, I mean he, he was much different than what he appeared, you know-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --Out on the outside. Speaker 2: I got a chance to meet--I'm gon' name some historical names, and for me, I got a chance to meet and hear Coleman Hawkins, I got a chance to play and meet Don Byas, I played with him 'cause he came to Rahsaan Roland Kirk, Pony Poindexter, I went to Europe and, and then, you know I got a chance to see Johnny Griffin, I never played with him, but you know, Bud Powell, I got a chance to see Bud Powell. Some of these really, really fabulous people that I--I saw Wes Montgomery and, you know, they were all these different people, they playing in Village Vanguard. I saw the Modern Jazz Quartet play at the Village Vanguard, saw Miles Davis play at the Village Vanguard when they had that, you know different forms of groups. Because, when I came with Rahsaan, Rahsaan played the Village Vanguard like that was his home, you know, we played every Christmastime around two weeks or three weeks before Christmas and we did a whole little stint, and then Monk was always there. And was just, Rahsaan would play a set, Thelonious Monk would play a set, Rahsaan would play a set, Thelonious Monk would play a set. And that's the way the evening went. And sometimes the band who got there first played the first set, you know, somebody wouldn't be, all be intact and so okay, you take the first set, it wasn't know, you know big thing about who played first and who played last, it was just. That was my career so, I got a chance to really meet-- Story_ID: 116290 Speaker 1: And one of my good friends, dear, Donald Byrd, he was such a mentor, such a good friend, he--very, very bright, he was-- Speaker 2: You said he came into your life at what point? Speaker 1: He came into my life when I first got here, I met him in '68 [1968], out at the--we taught, that was it. Once we--I met him in '68 [1968], I got-- Speaker 2: He told you, he's the one who told you about going into teaching. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah you see I had my, my master's degree but he said, get your license. So we taught a whole year, and I--he had this j--Jaguar, we, I lived on 84th Street and he lived on, on 79th street, on the corner and we would ride to Brooklyn [New York City, New York] in his Jaguar every day to school, I never took the train out there at all anytime. We'd ride and--but then, now what happens, he tells you so many stories about [John] Coltrane, about all these different artist, Betty Carter, you know, he knew (unclear) so that was my history lesson, going out there every day and going back. 'Cause my--I had my best conversation with my mother [Ruby May Griffith O'Banner] when we were in the car, it's, it's a situation where, if you really want to talk to somebody, get in c--get them in the car and go for a nice pleasant ride and you've got them, there's no phone to ring, just, you know, now it probably is because people got cell phones, but back in those days, there was no distraction you could just talk and one to one, I mean you wouldn't have to get up to do this or get up to do that. So he told me a lot about the history of music and he was so bright and kind. I remember every time I went to Jazzmobile and he was up there, he would make me come into his class and we would teach together, 'cause we did it back in the day at the, at junior high school and we, we just had that thing. He loved working with me, you know and loved teaching with me and he'd-- Speaker 2: Now it's hard to think of all these masters teaching you know, junior high school and you know it's hard to think-- Speaker 1: --Oh yeah, he was always teaching, Donald was always teaching. If, if something--yeah, well I think, even up until the day he passed away he was teaching down in Delaware someplace, but he, he, you know he got his doctorate, he, he had a collection of art that was unbelievable. And see all these things. This is the thing that I miss--Eubie Blake, lived around the corner from where we were teaching in Brooklyn and Donald would go around, he said, I went over to see Mr. Eubie Blake, I didn't never ever go with him. And, I--Eubie Blake, did die, you know lived to be a 100, but he lived around the corner from where I was teaching in Brooklyn and, you know and, Donald said, I went over to see Mr., you know, he probably go in on his lunch time to Eubie Blake. But I never did that, you know, I never went with him but, I-- Speaker 2: Yeah--I mean legend beyond-- Story_ID: 114757 Speaker 1: The art history, I mean the Black History Month in Fairleigh Dickinson University [Teaneck, New Jersey], a solo show in a big room. So all of these things have come after me, I mean they have been offered to me and I guess and I sold a piece not too long ago, I have a business card, that yellow piece over there on that business card, I just sold that piece and a smaller piece so, I say my art is doing all right, it's my art is kinda generating energy that I didn't even know. It's working me because, you see how large these pieces are, I mean I have to transport 'em and I have to ship them out and I mean, I, I would--if I was twenty-five years younger, I wouldn't mind doing all that manual work but, you know that's the way it is, I love doing it. The piece over there, the one over here, those are--that's a new piece, that one and that one over there is a new piece, so and I got a couple, that piece right behind you is the one I did for Thelonious Monk [HM T.S. Monk, III], I was in the show, they asked me because I knew Thelonious, they asked me to be in a show that's that was at the (unclear) Gallery and I was in it and it got a write-up in, in the [New York] Amsterdam News about that. So now they're having another exhibition for Melba Liston who is a trombonist, they asked me to be in that show so I'm gonna do a piece for her so, I guess that's where my art is. Story_ID: 114758 Speaker 1: So, do you--does the music and the art combine ever? Speaker 2: I could say-- Speaker 1: Do you play mu--to music or do you--I mean, do you paint to music? Speaker 2: Yes, I do, I do. I used to paint, I used to--well I paint, I love this song by McCoy Tyner, 'You Taught My Heart to Sing,' and I like to put it in a loop and, and I can get into that and I listen to that and--but I, music and art has, is they're tools. It's like putting a bunch of football players out on a basketball court, you know, they don't mix to well and, and they, just in my, my opinion. Now, what you can do, I mean music is to be sit and listened to, that's the way I like it, I don't like to play background music. I mean you can have somebody in the ba--in the corner playing a saxophone and the bass and people are talking and ju--it's just atmospheric music, that, that's not my thing. If somebody, if I'm playing my trombone, I want you to be sitting and listening and absorbing every note I put out and when I put my art out there I want you to look at every piece and absorb it, that way. So, my opinion with that is yes and no, I always think of when you go to the Pace Gallery and you go to some of the high-end galleries on 57th Street, you don't hear a whole lot of music and you don't see a lot of food, you know people have a glass of wine and they talk and it's not loud and they're looking at art and, that's, that's my thing on it you know, but it's in some cases some people think it's offensive if, you know a situation, they have no intentions of buying or even looking at the art, they're just there to talk and to get drunk, you know, I can say, well, you know, talk and drink and eat, so that's my opinion on it. I just recently had somebody ask me to bring my trombone and I told 'em no and then, they kinda convinced me to do it, but I didn't take it out 'cause I, you know, you gotta listen to me, I mean, why, why, why just talk and nobody's listening, you know? I mean you can play that, you know like, just music like background music, or atmospheric music can be live that's fine, that's, that's cute. But, that's what my thing is, art is art and music is music. Story_ID: 114759 Speaker 1: So--Mr. Griffin, you've had an amazing career in a lot of ways, so where are you in your life right now? Speaker 2: Well, I'm seventy-four years old, I turned seventy-four in January 28th, I've had prostate cancer, a bout with that, I'm at a point where, I, I want to take wherever I am now to another level. When I say another level, I mean, I, I see myself getting paid more for my paintings then I've been selling them for, I see myself being in a bigger stage than I've ever, you know played. So I want to move now to, to an area where, I know, I'm ready, I know I've deserved it, I put my, paid my dues, so at this point, thank God my health is in better sh--condition than it was, I'm, I'm pretty much now on a point where I can move and do and, and be so I'm gonna try to see if I can have some of the things that I've been striving for so, that's where I am in, in this point in my life. Like the situation going to Sweden, this the first time that I would be going out the the country like, as an artist. I've been out for several times, I went to, to, what, to, I went to Vienna [Austria] and had a solo show and it was a, you know like nice solo show and I had some, I painted (unclear). But this time, this, this is a little different, this is one where it's gonna be like a four-day festival with a lot of artist and (unclear), some--and it's gonna music involved and I'm, I'm gonna take my horn and play and stuff. So I'm just saying I'm gonna just move myself or put myself in positions that I need to be in and try to strive for everything that I, I need, 'cause the answer's no if you don't ask. And if you don't, don't respond to your prayers, because your prayers are answered, you just don't hear them. The door is being knocked on, your prayers are answered, you just ignore them or you don't hear them, or you choose not to answer the door, the phone rings you don't pick it up that's your prayer being answered. Most people want, I want the phone, I want somebody to bring it and, in, in a car and then I can see them out the window, and it's not gon' come like that. Your prayers are answered, but what it boils down too, you just have to move in faith, not fear and that's biblical, you have to walk by faith, not by fear, because either way, you're gonna go when you have to go, you're gonna leave this country when you have to leave, nobody knows when, where and how. Good example a dear friend of mine, Terry Adkins died in his sleep at sixty years old, and we had just done this performance in December 19th, very, very bright, beautiful young man, had wife and two kids, professor over at University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], had, had the Rome grant [Rome Prize in visual arts] to study in Rome [Italy] for a year. Nobody, nobody saw that coming, he didn't see it coming, died in his sleep. And so, that's the way I am (laughs) I mean, and we all face fears, but most of the time when I don't do something it's because I have fears, I'm afraid I'm gonna fail, I'm afraid I'm not gonna be accepted, I'm afraid that it's not the right time, you know, everybody say, oh it's not time, maybe you can do it later, no, you have to live in the now, whether you want to or not. It's all about that. Story_ID: 114760 Speaker 1: Now you have--had a significant role to play in what is now, you know, touted as American music or the-- Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: The original American music-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and that, the complexion, there has been, you know, sometimes believes that the complexion of the people who either attend or you know collect, or play the music are not the-- Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: --the complexion of yourself-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --or the background of yourself. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --what are your thoughts about that, sir? Speaker 2: Well, that's a fact, here what hap--in jazz I can say. Speaker 1: I mean in jazz. Speaker 2: In jazz, here's what's happened, jazz changed complexion, it has done it in the past in the '50s [1950s], we had more white musicians taking leadership and more audience and, and, and then, the cool school, and then it shifted back in, well guys like Horace Silver when they took it back to the churchy feeling, blues and stuff. So now it seems to shift back into more a European or u--universal, they have Indian, we have Indian jazz musicians--I have nothing against that--we have, we have people from France, you know French jazz musicians, you know they have the Italian jazz musicians, you even have some African jazz musicians so, the world has come and taken a global, you know, global scope. But the thing is that the audience, the reason the audience complexion has changed is economics, I mean, there're very few people, can afford to go and sit in Birdland or Blue Note and spend a 100 dollars to hear jazz and that's what it's become so, that saying that the compl--the audience have, have changed and, and that, and economically. So now, people have dis--(unclear) music that was accessible to the average man because when jazz was being developed back in the day, you could go into a bar and buy a beer and you could hear John Coltrane and you could hear Miles Davis, and you could hear Sonny Stitt and you could hear Gene Ammons and all the guys and you could just go economically they were in the neighborhood, they were in the hood, in--on the south side in Harlem, in Brooklyn [New York City, New York], in the black neighborhoods, but when you changed that, that location, and you put it off into the other or particular venues, then you isolate the people who love it and who respect it. Now you can go in a club now, you see. Used to be you go in a club, you see, black people on the bandstand and white people in the audience, now it's just a, it's just a--you see white people on the bandstand and white people in the audience, that's the way it goes. Story_ID: 114761 Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: How do you feel about that? Speaker 1: I feel that, I saw it coming and I saw how it developed and I feel that maybe it's a good thing and maybe it's a bad thing. It's a bad thing that the way this country is, that they don't give the recognition or the, or the (unclear), you know they're, they're trying to now take claim, like they have done with everything, like when, like when they got through and the land in, in the South, the land of forty acres. My uncle had, we had forty-two acres of land in, in, in the South, they got a reservoir and they bought their land for little nothing, now I'm, we--our family have twelve acres, we (unclear) all that. So, people come in they see a good thing, they rip it off and they, they dupe you for it and then they, they, they cl--stakes they claims on it. But any way you look at it, this music, jazz music is a byproduct of slavery, gospel, and it's created by African American people, black people, you know, that's why the blues was, blues and gospel was existing at the same time, they was singing the same message. One was from the church and one was from the juke joint, but they had the same 12 bars, the same feeling and the same, pentatonic scale. But as a byproduct of all this stuff, what happened? Hip-hop. It's just the next level, and we keep moving, and we're gonna, something else gonna come and they keep chasing the creator, that's the way I see it. And the reason hip-hop happened, why? They took the music out of the schools, took the instruments out of our hands so we had the voice, we had all these creative stuff so, they're not--you know, it's just a--that's what is happening. And we have not been sitting in one place and, and in (unclear) creativity, we've always been forefront. Maxwell said this, he said, what do you think about, you know the question of racism and white musicians in jazz, black musicians? Max said yeah, he respected a lot of the white musicians, but it's probably highly unlikely, and I hope it doesn't happen, that we'll be looking for them to create what we do, you understand? It always comes from us and they follow, that's been there, it has never changed that regardless of what it is, if its hip hop, blues, like blues, his complexion of blues has changed. You can say that seventy-five percent of the blues artist out there are now white, and you almost be able to say the same thing with jazz. Story_ID: 114762 Speaker 1: Is there any up and coming jazz artists that you particularly like? And I wanna make sure we get a chance to hear you play. Speaker 2: Yeah. It's hard to say, but I, I love some of the guys like James Carter. I love him because a lot of the jazz artist are getting, what we call faked out of position by going into the schools. They, they stopped being out there in the club on the bandstand and they get locked up in these schools, so once you get a great player or somebody, the innovative guy like na--guy named Sean Jones and some of the great, I got nothing against that but they, they drop 'em in the school and they locked 'em down in a sense at first, that, that whole scene of you gotta be out there in front of the audience playing, doing and moving, and that's what you do. I ain't perform, I'm a performer. Now you teach, if you get a teach they give you this professorship, you're locked in, they'll say you can run out there and do your thing but it's not like you're just out there doing your thing, like most of the people I know, like Rahsaan [Roland Kirk], that's all he did. He was out there he would say, now go visit house, he'd sit there and he'd be playing, he'd be listening to music, he'd be playing classical music, he'd be practicing, he be working down at the club that weekend, he's playing that same song, that's all he had, he wasn't in, in, involved in universities, [Thelonious] Monk [HM T.S. Monk, III] wasn't involved in universities, Miles wasn't involved in universities, Coltrane wasn't involved in universities, Sonny Rollins to the day is still out there and he's not involved in teaching, you know. Not saying that teaching's a bad thing, but what you do, teaching's planting seeds, so what kinda seed are you gonna harvest from what you plant? If you plant a watermelon, you gon' get a watermelon, if you plant a peach, you gon' get a peach, you plant a apple that's what you gon' get a apple. So, that's what teaching is, it's planting seeds, and you harvest your growth, so you go to universities, you, you, you plant your seeds and your harvest your season, what do you plan to come outta there? It's what you, what you planted. You can't plant a pear and expect it to come out to be a lemon tree, so, that's what, that's what it is. And, I look at it like I, I'm disappointed in a lot of ways, but then I know that things have to move and things have to go and it shifts and we've always been able to be like cream, somehow we rise, it just, you keep beating it and it still come back up to the top. Sometimes you can't see it, but it's gonna happen (laughter). Story_ID: 114763 Speaker 1: Now, what do you want your legacy to be, sir? Speaker 2: Well, I want it to be that I contributed something. Well you can see all this art--I contributed something to music and art. I know I brought something to music, I have my own special brand that people say, I'm the, the most defining thing that I do is coming from my heart, it's something that I don't even worry about who else is doing it. I never thought of that, I never, even with my art, a lot of artists try to copy what I do, I don't even think that way. I just know that I'm being as much as I can be, as being me and I want to share with the world. I want the art to be seen by different people and different places in the world, and I want the music to be heard, and I know it's so important now to be, you know truthful. Because, the truth will set you free, truth will make you strong and, you know, lies will just weaken you, if you can be truthful then, the first (unclear) to thine own self be true? Stay there. Face your fears, work on your weakness, that's basically what I want to do. You have to find it, you have to face it and you fix it, every day and, and the more you be honest with yourself first, the more people will see the honesty in you, yeah, so that, that's my legacy. Story_ID: 114764 Speaker 1: I have one more question. I want to ask you 'cause your son [Jakubu Griffin] is a drummer, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hum. Speaker 1: And then I keep thinking about the very rich family history you told, I mean very rich history you told. And I just want to have you ask--answer one more question, and that is what do you want people to say about you, (unclear) in the context of, you know this little boy was, you know, drawing but knew, you know hearing, you know, you took to music very early on and-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --And your description of your neighborhood and you know the people and all the people, like all the community that surrounded you, I, I want you to, to tell me what, what you want people to say about you? Speaker 2: Well, I, I want them to say that I was kind of like my mother [Ruby Mae Griffith O'Banner], when I say like my mother, I, I, was a giver. That's one thing I have to say, it makes me feel cheerful sometimes, if, if there's somebody gon' get taken in the deal, I want to be the one to get taken, 'cause I can't stand the, the pain that would pun--be pun, upon me to have taken somebody, to have beaten somebody outta something, to have used somebody. Let, let--use me. I'm strong enough. Take, you know cheat me outta something, I can take it, give me your best point. You can hustle me, steal my money, beat me out, I don't wanna have that on my, I can't go to sleep with that, so that's what my mother was. She was a good-hearted person and in this world with all this jive and crooks and people hustling you, I, I see 'em so much they, just come to me like flies to on honey or something. But, it, it bothers me, sometimes I let some in 'cause I'm not perfect, and I make mistakes, but I want people to say that, and everybody can't say this, I never beat anybody outta any money, I never not paid them what I said I was gonna pay them, I never, if I, in my power have not kept my word, and that's what I want. I don't want nobody to say, he's a this and he did that and he hurt me or he mistreated me or he, he beat me outta this, he's slick, he's greedy, you know and I'm human so, I'm not perfect like all that. But if somebody, my legacy, I want my, my sisters and everything, I always tried to treat people, when I'm out, you know, hey I got this check 'cause you know, 'cause it ain't gon' kill me, I'm not gonna go to the poor house if I don't, if I do that you know. And I always, sometimes I try to give to people, help people and they misunderstand it so, but that's me, that's, I'm, I'm, I'm a person who wants to help, to give, to share, you know, and try to be a good human being. Speaker 1: One thing that kinda kept me really straight in my life, my, is the Ten Commandments and I've studied and, and, you know, looked into different religions and everything but, if everybody stayed close to that, Ten Commandments, you know it's close and, and the sins, the world would be in a better place. Those are the rules. I mean, you know, honor your mother and father and thou shalt not live--steal, kill, you know, such basic stuff, do onto others, you want them to do unto you, you know better to give then to receive, which it is, it's hard to see but everybody wants to receive, you know, gimme, you know and you feel it, I feel, I read their energy. I'm not, you know, and sometime, I enjoy letting something like that come too close to me because I do realize that some people do that 'cause that's all they know to do, they have to do it, you know they in desperate situation, you know, but, my legacy is to help and to have been a good friend, you know been a person, a man of my word and been a kind person. I don't want nobody come around me and not feel good and not feel, you know loved and feel respected and everything, the basic things in my life and I recommend, I say accept people, respect people and trust. If you can get all of those in one person, you've, you've got a pretty good friendship going. If you've got somebody you can trust, you got somebody you can respect, what you do and you accept who they are, you don't try to remake them, just accept them, they're a crook, they're a crook, you know, so, I did, I mean I deal with 'em all the time, you know. If they a slickster, they a slickster, you know? You accept them, and, and you know, you know where the, you know where to pull the line when it comes to trust. Speaker 2: Thank you. Speaker 1: Yeah, so I'll play for you, if you want me to, the trombone. Speaker 2: I do, very much. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay, can we just, okay do you need to get your instrument? Story_ID: 114765 Speaker 1: (Playing trombone) Speaker 2: That's a great tune, Dick Griffin doing multiphonics and circularphonics (laughter). Story_ID: 114766 Speaker 1: Oh that's a picture of me in Paris [France] and I was on tour with Archie Shepp in 1979. We did a recording of, of, 'Attica Blues,' too. Speaker 2: That's a picture of me in 1980, around '84 [1984], or '85 [1985], with [HM] Angela Davis and her sister on the right and I was with Abdulla Ibrahim's band and we played at the Berkeley Jazz Festival. Speaker 1: That's a picture of me playing with Hilton Ruiz group and I'm not sure of the date, it had to be around '89 [1989], maybe. Speaker 2: Nineteen-eighty nine [1989]? Speaker 1: Maybe, I'm not sure of the date. It could be a little bit later. Speaker 2: You have a good memory for a (unclear). Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: (Unclear). Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA SPEAKER: Any age. Speaker 2: That's what I'm saying. It's true. Speaker 1: Now that one is, is a picture of me in 1976, with Bill Barron and I was teaching at, at Wesleyan University [Middletown, Connecticut]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And that was in 1976. Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA SPEAKER: (Unclear) Speaker 1: Okay that's a school picture when I was teaching in New York public school system in 19, sss--it's around eight, '80, 1980, I think around that time. Speaker 2: That's a picture of me. Artie Handlins [ph.], took that photo of me up in the--at his brownstone in Harlem [New York City, New York] and that was done around 2002, or '03 [2003]. Speaker 1: I'm sorry. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Oh, that's right you were saying the pictures were out. Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Now that one, that's a head shot of me that was done around 19, maybe 1980, '89 [1989], I think around that time. Speaker 1: Let's see. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Let me do it this way, beautiful. Speaker 2: That's another head shot of me around '87 [1987]. Speaker 1: Okay Speaker 2: This one, I know exactly when this was. That was done of me in 1983, I was doing a picture, 'The Cotton Club,' that's, that's from the shot. That's, that was me in 'The Cotton Club' movie, that's, that's the way I was on screen. If you look at the movie, that's, that's the way I looked on screen, I was playing a trombone solo. Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: I was in 'The Cotton Club' movie, Richard Gere. Speaker 1: (Unclear) this one. Speaker 2: Um-Hum. Speaker 1: Can you describe it? Speaker 2: Ok, that was a movie that, if you look on that picture there's a piece of paper on, on my foot. That was a movie shot in 2008, out at Coney Island, and it was, the movie was a independent movie called, 'Keeping America Clean' and, you wanna take a picture of that, of that poster there? Speaker 1: Yeah, we should 'cause he talks about that, talks about that and the one behind you. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You know-- Speaker 2: Um-hum, okay. Speaker 1: (Unclear) Speaker 2: Oh yeah, now this was, was in 1990, I started very early, that's one of my early paintings, I used to put their name on 'em, I started painting in '89 [1989], so that was done between '89 [1989], I mean, I started in December of '89 [1989], so that had to be done like March, or April of that next year which was 1990, and the only piece I have of, of print, a poster and that's called 'Love Triangle,' and it's, it's, let me see it's kind of a, how can I explain it, it's two things. Some people see it as two fish swimming together, it depends on how you're looking at it or on what different days. Some people say that there's a vase in the middle and well some people like to turn it up--upside down and it looks like a face. When my mother [Ruby Mae Griffith O'Banner] did it she had it framed, but she had it turned upside down, tur--turned it around and see that and-- Speaker 1: Oh, he can do that? Speaker 2: It, it looks like a face that way. Speaker 1: Yeah, we can do that ourselves. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah right, yeah...