 Story_ID: 654494 Speaker 1: I think it's crazy all these people who weren't athletes at all, all of a sudden running in these-- Speaker 2: Marathons (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) marathons. That is the craziest thing in the world (unclear) when you hear about it. Speaker 2: Okay, all right, okay. Now, we always ask this question. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 1: Well, I--my concerns are the same, I think, the majority of us have and that is that these children must be educated and, and really be proud of who they are. I was fortunate having parents [Virginia Clark Gayton and John J. Gayton] who, who let us believe that we were as good anybody, and you have to have that, I think, to be successful in life. But some way, we have to develop, and it seems to me we can do that, especially when these kids realize that they are somebody and to participate. But the thing they also have to realize is that when you, you have to like yourself or you can't help anyone else. If you don't like yourself, you have problems. There's no reason for a lot of 'em not to like themselves, and, and all, and the thing that upsets me when you see a statement like Justice Thomas [Clarence Thomas], and I says, gee, even with his education, he doesn't seem to understand anything. And so there's a lot to be done, but all of us have to pitch in, and at times, I feel guilty 'cause I haven't mentored 'cause, the reason I have not ment- I've mentored law students. But the reason it's tough to mentor when you travel a lot, you have to be there for them when they expect you there or else it becomes a big disappointment. And I did that once when I was much younger, and the kid got so disappointed. I said, I can't do this 'cause I don't wanna (unclear)--the traveling, my business is a traveling business. But we need that type of mentoring and, and we can't--we have to, black people have to, on their--to a great extent, the government can help a little, but we have to really pitch in ourselves and try to, to participate. I do not like all this rap stuff and all. And I don't think that helps. I'll be honest with you. I don't see how that helps anybody, the way, they talk and, and all. And I'm the old timer on that stuff because I just, this nasty talk and, and talking about killing and--what is this? I don't see how it helps anybody, you know. And, but we have to take a big look at ourselves, look at ourselves. But it, it can be done. This can be done, and we're not, I don't think put on this earth to be mean, and I think that one thing that would help is to outlaw these guns on the streets and that type of thing. And here we have to fight the conservatives to, to get 'em off the streets, guns off the streets. So, but I would hope that people would think these things can be done and at least attempt to do 'em. Story_ID: 654495 Speaker 1: When you look at everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could? Speaker 2: The only thing I would, I would do differently, like I mentioned, the kids taking the course in black history, which I think is--they should. If they don't know it, they should do it, but they can do it on their own. I would like to have spent more time--I had to teach myself business (unclear). I would like to have taken more business courses. I didn't have to take as many political science courses. I loved it. I mean that was a luxury, political science, as far as I was concerned. But I would like to have taken more business courses. Everyone is taking more business courses. Doctors are taking more business courses. Everyone's taking it. You have to understand the markets. You have to understand the economy. You have to understand those things and business, I think, is just very important for people to, to be involved in. And that's the only thing I would do differently. My life, I've enjoyed. It's a wonderful, wonderful life. I've met--I was just down in L.A. [Los Angeles, California], and I sat next to Sidney Poitier in the deal, and Jamie Foxx. He introduced me to Jamie Foxx and all. And to be involved in those things and I'm going next week to see a young attorney, [HistoryMaker] Quincy Jones' brother, Richard Jones [Richard A. Jones], be sworn in as a federal judge. Quincy's gonna be there. See, those types of things are just wonderful, and I think I, I was able to participate in the Civil Right Movement. I was able to participate in the anti-war [Vietnam War], representing anti-war people who, in the late '60s [1960s]. So I mean I've, my life has been--I've been very blessed. I've been very fortunate. Story_ID: 654496 Speaker 1: Likewise, when you look at your life to this point, what, today would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: What I would--? Speaker 1: What would you consider today to be your legacy? Speaker 2: Well, I would hope my legacy would be participation, and, and standing up for what I felt was right. It's very important--I told my brothers and sisters [Guela Gayton Johnson, Sylvia Gayton Wesley and Elaine Gayton Whitehead] that, you know, we had a great grandfather, J.T. Gayton [Gayton's paternal grandfather, John T. Gayton], great parents [Virginia Clark Gayton and John J. Gayton] and Maggie Gayton [Magnolia Scott Gayton] and, and a grandfather--I didn't know my grandfather [Cyrus Clark] on my mother's [Virginia Clark Gayton] side well, but great grandmother [Guela Johnson Clark] on my mother's side. We were very fortunate. So the thing is, is that we have the obligation, we have an obligation to do more, try to do more than our fathers and mothers, finish college. My dad went through high school and also, there are five of us with advanced degrees in the family of eight, and, and I mentioned, one brother who built one of the big building downtown here, and, and very successful at that. So I mean, we have an obligation. So I don't think that I get, now, a lot of, you know, awards and all that. To me, it's, it's something I should have done. I should have participated. I should--when I received the, the distinguished alumni award in political science, 2005 from the University of Washington [Seattle, Washington], that meant a lot to me because it meant I--I thought I was doing things behind the scenes politically and all, but I wasn't. And it was right that--but it was something I should do, participate in, in, you know, various act- activities and all. It's your--it's our town. Grandfather came here in 1880. I'm one of three Gaytons, my brother [HistoryMaker Carver Gayton] and I and J.T., that's listed as one of the 270 people who, who made Seattle [Washington], so I'm, I'm happy about those things. But we should have participated (laughter). I don't, I don't consider it a big deal. My--I was lucky to have parents like I had. So, it's participation and taking a stand. I think I took a stand on things that, that I had to do at the time, and I think anyone in my same position should have done the same. Story_ID: 654497 Speaker 1: Did your parents have a chance to see you become successful, I mean in their-- Speaker 2: Yes, my, my mother [Virginia Clark Gayton] completely (laughter) she kept on asking me to come back from Washington [D.C.]. And we were able to--I was able to and my brothers and sisters were able to send her wherever she wanted to go. And she went on cruises, went to Europe. And I missed, as I told you about my dad [John J. Gayton], the one thing that I regret that he wasn't able to do that because he worked those sixteen hour jobs, you know, six and seven days a week. And, and, and he was such a wonderful, wonderful father. So I regret not being able to see him enjoy life a little more than, than he did. But, again, I, I have friends whose parents I've (unclear), you know. When, when--I was thirty-six when my dad died, and I mean, so--I shouldn't be crying about, about it, but I just wish that I could have done more for him. Story_ID: 654498 Speaker 1: Now, is there anything I need to ask you now before I ask my last question that we ha- we haven't talked about or touched on (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I think we covered--you've done a very good job (laughter) in every, every aspect of it (laughter). You went into things I didn't know (unclear). I would have, probably been a little better prepared if I'd known, but you did a good job in asking me the questions. Speaker 1: Well, thank you. The last question is similar to legacy, but it's a little different. Sir, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Well, I would like to be remembered, again, as a person who contributed to this community. The Seattle library foundation [Seattle Public Library Foundation, Seattle, Washington] came to me last year--that was probably August of 2006, and they said, "Gary [HistoryMaker Gary Gayton], the library that you know about, that you went to as a child at the--," it's called, the Douglass-Truth library [Douglass-Truth Branch, Seattle, Washington]. It used to be called Yesler library, has been completely redone, remodeled. "We'd like," two of the black members of the foundation came to me, and said, "Gary, no black is getting naming rights there," said Howard Schultz who owns Starbucks [Starbucks Corporation], you know, he lives in a portion of the area. And he had naming rights, and they were worried about other people who live next door to him which is the, the high end of the, of the Seattle [Washington] community, they might get the naming rights. "Can you do something there? And we're just asking you, it's gonna be--." I said, "What's the bottom line?" And they said, "Fifty thousand dollars," and something--talked to several members of my family. As you know, all families, it differs. And some of them said, "We can't do that" (laughter). And so I guaranteed it. I'm happy, I'm proud that I guaranteed it, but I told them, when I said I'd guarantee, they said, "Well, maybe, Gary Gayton on the room." Naming rights. It's called the, it's gonna be called the Gayton Family Meeting Room at the library that we went to. And I said, "No, we're gonna call it the, that same name. I'll guarantee it and pay it off in five years." I'm proud that I, not only agreed to guarantee it, but it got my, all my brothers and sisters too and now some cousins because they're going from J.T. Gayton [Gayton's paternal grandfather, John T. Gayton]--he had four children to contribute also. So getting that done means a lot to me. And the other thing that I'm proud of is my brother [HistoryMaker Carver Gayton] running the African, first African American Northwest museum [Northwest African American Museum, Seattle, Washington]. And we're gonna put that together in 2008. He's raised, we have raised most of the funds for that, for that. We're giving it some more. [HistoryMaker] Quincy Jones is coming in, in town for that, and, and those type of things, I'm participating in, and it--I, I think we have to set examples. Like the University of Washington [Seattle, Washington] asked me to give some money to the athletic department. Well, I think since I was a--there were black athletes out there in the '30s [1930s], but I was the first one really in the '50s [1950s] that came. There were no black athletes on campus when I came there. And I contribute 'cause I wanna set an example for all these kids wanting to be (unclear) and all to contribute back to a school that they got their education from. That type of thing, I, I think, I can help on by setting examples what should be done, that if you have the money, then you should participate. It's one reason how come I raise funds for these various organizations. I didn't like people thinking that blacks just wanna hand out all the time. I liked it when the president of Boeing [The Boeing Company] came to me, and he was the president of ACT Theatre [Seattle, Washington] down in down--and says, said, "Gary," 'cause I was president of PONCHO board [Patrons of Northwest Civic, Cultural and Charitable Organizations], came and said, "Gary, can you get me a hundred thousand or seventy-five hundred thousand for the ACT Theatre?" I love--and I said, "Yes." Here he is the president of Boeing. I mean I wanted to be in the mix here in town, and I think I was very fortunate because I am participating in the mix of this wonderful, Seattle community. Story_ID: 654499 Speaker 1: Those are the five oldest of the family, my younger brother, Phil [Philip Gayton]. He's the youngest one there. He's first, and I'm second. My brother, John [John C. Gayton], who passed away last year is on the horse. Then my sister, Sylvia [Sylvia Gayton Wesley], and my oldest sister, Guela [Guela Gayton Johnson]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): All right, we're up to speed. Next photo. Speaker 1: All right. Next. Who is this guy? Speaker 2: It just dawned on me. That's-- Speaker 1: Do we have the right one (unclear) or-- Speaker 2: Oh, I don't know where that came from, but I have it. But that's Bill Clements [sic. William A. Clement, Jr.]. He worked in the [U.S.] Small Business Administration. He's--well, he--and this is Bill Clement. He was assistant administrator of SBA. And he's Maynard Jackson's cousin. They stood up for each other, at each other's wedding. He was one of my closest friends in the Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] administration, and I was over in his office talking to him. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: Well, that's President Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton]. He was in town for a speech and I went up to say hello to him. Speaker 1: About what year is this? Speaker 2: Oh, that had to be about 1996. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: This is that Quincy-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: Yeah, this is in the Rose Garden that Jimmy Carter didn't believe in--because of energy problems, he didn't believe in cutting the grass there. This is the Rose Garden. This is-- Speaker 1: I liked Jimmy Carter. Speaker 2: --(laughter) this is the inner departmental committee on women in business [Interagency Committee on Women's Business Enterprise] that the White House asked me to sit on. This is Sarah Waddington [sic. Sarah Weddington] on the extreme right there, who was a counsel to the president. And she handled the Roe versus Wade case [Roe v. Wade, 1973]. Right here who was also on the committee was Donna Shalala who's now the mayor--I mean the president of Miami University [sic. University of Miami, Coral Gables, Florida]. I'm right behind her. These ladies here are all U.S. congresswomen. I can't recall their names. And there's President Carter signing the executive order. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: All right, this is [HistoryMaker] Quincy Jones. He was in town for, I think it was his sixtieth birthday. And there I am on the right and we had an event at the restaurant owned by these two gentlemen. This is Gene (Unclear), one of my closest friends, who was in partnership with this gentleman here in, in the restaurant. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Speaker 2: This is the 1955 Pacific Coast Conference track athletes on the team who went against the Pac- I mean the Big Ten [Big Ten Conference] at University of California. There I am here--and here's my good friend. I was captain of Washington's [University of Washington, Seattle, Washington] track team. These guys are from all the various Old Pacific Coast Conference schools. Here, here we have Bob Gary [Robert Gary] who was on the same track team with me in high school [James A. Garfield High School, Seattle, Washington]. He was an All-American at Washington State [Washington State University, Pullman, Washington]. He captained Washington State the same year I captained the University of Washington. And we beat the Big Ten in the, in the track meet. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: Here we have Sugar Ray Leonard. And he and I spoke at the fiftieth birthday party of Marion "Duke" Greene who lives in Washington, D.C. and a well known Washington, D.C. businessman. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: This is my immediate staff when I was the active administrator of Federal Transit Administration [Urban Mass Transportation Administration; Federal Transit Administration]. There I am, and this was my secretary who gave up a civil service position to, to become a Schedule C employee 'cause she wanted to be with me. I really, she's just a wonderful lady. And these are ladies--this lady I appointed the first lady to be a press person for an administrator. And this gentleman is head of civil rights. This was my deputy who was number two at the Port Authority in New York [Port Authority of New York and New Jersey] and just retired, and this was another special assistant of mine on this wonderful staff. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Speaker 2: This is a picture of me in Miami. It took place about in '72 [1972], '73 [1973] with Leon Higginbotham [A. Leon Higginbotham, Jr.], you know, the federal judge, and that's his wife [HistoryMaker Evelyn Brooks Higginbotham] over there. These other people are from Pennsylvania, from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. And they're doctors and the males are doctors there, next to the wives there. And there's my mother [Virginia Clark Gayton] who I took down to this convention in Miami, Florida, and there I am. Speaker 1: About what year is this? Speaker 2: About '72 [1972], I'd imagine. Speaker 1: I'm trying to think. All of a sudden, I forget the mountain, Mount, the highest peak in-- Speaker 2: Mount Rainier? Speaker 1: No, in California. Whitney, this is Mount Whitney. We're at the summit of Mount Whitney, and this fellow, who I'm with there, works with me in the firm of Siebert Brandford Shank [Siebert Brandford Shank and Company, LLC; Siebert Cisneros Shank and Company, LLC], and he's a graduate of Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California], All-American--former, All-American hammer thrower from Stanford, and we were down there climbing a mountain to schmooze with some clients. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And that's the second highest peak in the United States. Story_ID: 654500 Speaker 1: This is when I was in the Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] administration. We were there for the (cough)--[HistoryMaker] Lenny Wilkens was the coach of the Seattle SuperSonics. This gentleman here, Heckmann [Richard Heckmann], his name out of--he was assistant administrator over [U.S.] Small Business Administration, and I can't recall this gentleman, but he was head of the FAA [Federal Aviation Administration] at the time, and he wanted to meet Lenny. Lenny won the--the SuperSonics won the championship that year, and we were in the secretary's dining room of the [U.S.] Department of Transportation. Speaker 2: This is that night before they won? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Speaker 1: This is Ron Brown, I, I think that may have been a party in his honor, and that was about in 1978. He and I were very good, very good friends, and I certainly value that picture 'cause that's the only one I have of, of Ron. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: As you know, he was secretary of commerce, head of the Democratic Party and just a wonderful guy. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: This is when I was running track for the University of Washington [Seattle, Washington]. It's my senior year here, and so they're--the paper's announcing that it's my last year. And these are some articles about what I had done at the university where I was voted the track captain, the first black to be voted captain of any sport, major sport at the University of Washington and some of the trial runs I ran as a Husky track man. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: University of Washington, if I didn't mention that. I was an 880 [880 yards], and I anchored the mile relay team. Speaker 2: During the last two weeks we've been at Washington University in St. Louis [St. Louis, Missouri], and they had (unclear) Washington. Speaker 1: Oh, no kidding. Speaker 2: Really, yeah. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, we got it. Speaker 2: This is my mother [Virginia Clark Gayton] and father [John J. Gayton]. Unfortunately, that had to be in the middle '60s [1960s]. That's my mother and my father. He passed away at sixty-nine, and she passed away at, in 1993 at ninety-one years of age. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Next. Speaker 2: These are my brother and sisters. It's a day of my mother's funeral. And this is my brother, Phil [Philip Gatyton], my brother, Leonard [Leonard Gayton], my brother [sic. sister], Elaine [Elaine Gayton Whitehead], my brother, John [John C. Gayton], who's deceased, my oldest sister, Guela [Guela Gayton Johnson], there I am, my sister, Sylvia [Sylvia Gayton Wesley], and my brother, Carver [HistoryMaker Carver Gayton]. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: This is taken the same day, my brother, Carver, there I am, my brother, John, who was the oldest brother--now, I'm the oldest, my youngest brother, Leonard, and my brother, Philip. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Hold on. I got so many fingers there. I'm trying to get a shot here. All right, next. Speaker 2: My three sisters, my youngest sister. She's the youngest in the family, my sister, Sylvia, and my oldest sister, Guela. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Three minutes on this roll. Speaker 1: This is Charles Mitchell [Charles H. Mitchell]. He's the president of Seattle- the chancellor of Seattle community college [Seattle Colleges District, Seattle, Washington]. He used to be a professional football player at Denver [Denver Broncos], and, and at Buffalo [Buffalo Bills], and he played for the University of Washington, hockey- Huskies, and he was on the Rose Bowl team of 1961. And he just retired this year--he's retiring, I should say, this year. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, got it, next. Speaker 1: Yeah, this is my mother. We figure she's twenty-one or twenty-two at the time. And this picture was given to her in-law, my--J.T. Gayton [John T. Gayton] and Maggie Gayton [Magnolia Scott Gayton], when she was ready to marry my father. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, good, next. Speaker 1: This is my grandfather, Clark [Cyrus Clark], on my mother's side. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: This is J.T. Gayton who is recognized as one of the pioneer blacks. He used to have the picnics that all--we called them colored then, would come to every year. And was really the leader of the black community. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: This is my grandmother, Guela Clark [Guela Johnson Clark], on my mother's side. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Speaker 1: This is my grandmother on my father's side, Maggie Gayton. Magnolia is her formal name. Everyone called her Maggie. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: We're up to the little tiny pictures. Speaker 2: This is taken (laughter) 1938. There I am right there. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: Right there, in there, right there, yeah. And then point to that one--no, up there. That's Freddie Bakker [ph.], the first kid I ever met and we're close friends to this day. And there're several other people in that picture who are close personal friends to this day. Speaker 1: And they grew up in what neighborhood, the-- Speaker 2: The Madrona neighborhood [Seattle, Washington], in Madrona grade school [Madrona School; Madrona K-8 School]. That picture had to be taken about 19-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): One minute. Speaker 2: Only two, two more. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, go ahead. Speaker 2: Nineteen thirty-eight [1938]. Speaker 1: There I am in the back of my grandmother's home with my--I'm at the left there, and my brother, Phil, is in the center, my brother, John, the oldest, is on the right. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: And there John is, and I'm on the right there. Story_ID: 654501 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Gary David Gayton [HistoryMaker Gary Gayton], G-A-R-Y, David, D-A-V-I-D, Gayton, G-A-Y-T-O-N. Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Two, twenty-five, thirty-three [February 25, 1933]. Speaker 1: And where were you born? Speaker 2: Seattle, Washington. Speaker 1: Okay, and, sir, what is your occupation? Speaker 2: Well, I, I'm an attorney by profession, and I still--I've been with several law firms throughout the years. Now, I practice on my own, but I'm a senior vice president of Siebert, S-I-E-B-E-R-T, Brandford, B-R-A-N-D-F-O-R-D, and Shank [Siebert Brandford Shank and Company, LLC; Siebert Cisneros Shank and Company, LLC], S-H-A-N-K. It's minority, municipal bond underwriting firm. And it's the largest minority and female owned municipal bond underwriting firm in the nation. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. And, sir, what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is June 6, nine--2008. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're in my office at 2107 Elliott Avenue, Belltown, Seattle, Washington. Story_ID: 654502 Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five, lightweight questions we ask as kind of a warm up. Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And the first one is, do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Well, favorite food for me would be black eyed peas. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And ham hock. Speaker 1: Okay, and do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Blue. Speaker 1: All right, favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Thanksgiving. Speaker 1: Okay, and do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Hawaii. Speaker 1: And the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: A favorite what? Speaker 1: Phrase or saying? Speaker 2: What a difference a day makes. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Story_ID: 654503 Speaker 1: So I'm gonna ask you about your family history now. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: And I'm gonna start with your mother's side of the family, but we'll get to your father's [John J. Gayton] side (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Virginia Clark Gayton. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: I believe it was 1902. Speaker 1: Okay, and-- Speaker 2: And August 25th, I believe. Speaker 1: Okay, where, where was she born? Speaker 2: Nashville, Tennessee. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She was conceived in Spokane, Washington, however-- Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) but her mother wanted--when she was about, when my grandmother [Guela Johnson Clark] was about seven months pregnant, she went back to Nashville to give birth to her because, Spokane, she didn't think had proper hospital care, and she wanted to make sure that--and my grandfather worked for the railroad. So that's where she went to give birth. And after she was about two months old, my grandmother brought her back-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --to Spokane. Speaker 1: All right. Okay, and, well, what do you know about your mother's side of the family? What, what can you tell us about the ancestors on your mother's side? Speaker 2: Well, my mother's side, they had a lot of Caucasian blood in them and a lot of Indian [Native American] blood in them on, on both sides. But her grandfather, Lewis Clarke, was, looked like a--he's a product of a, of a slave master and all. And he looked like an abolitionist, and he, and he looked like a white man so he worked as an abolitionist in and around Kentucky and all, and with his brother, Milton Clarke, and which is, would be my great-grandfather and great uncle. Speaker 1: Now, there's a book, I think, a slave narrative that he wrote, right, that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: --was published that your brother was telling us about, that (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Yes, it's--I've got it over here on the table ['Narratives of the Sufferings of Lewis and Milton Clarke, Sons of a Soldier of the Revolution, During a Captivity of More than Twenty Years Among the Slaveholders of Kentucky, One of the So-Called Christian States of North America,' Lewis Clarke and Milton Clarke]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes, and, and he was the subject of 'Uncle Tom's Cabin' [Harriet Beecher Stowe]. He was the, the person who the--who's life they featured in that book. I think the character in the book was named Harris [George Harris], however. Speaker 1: Right, that's right. Okay, are there any stories about him that are passed down in the family that-- Speaker 2: Well, I don't know. My brother, Carver [HistoryMaker Carver Gayton], knows the story about--but the, you know, that, that book is, is very well known among people who followed the Underground Railroad and abolitionists, you know. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: 'Cause they, they later spent time up in, in Canada and all, and I haven't followed it as closely as my brother, Carver. Speaker 1: Okay, so he probably went up at the advent of the Fugitive Slave Act [Fugitive Slave Act of 1850] or something and then came back after the Civil War, I would guess, or-- Speaker 2: Yes, I, you know, I don't--and there was a whole, I think it was, you know, Ontario [Canada] or so. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: There was a whole group of, of African Americans, I guess you'd call 'em, that are coloreds then, who led--moved up there and, and they have quite a history from what I understand. Speaker 1: Yes, sir, that's right. That's right. Any other stories about your ancestors on your mother's side? Speaker 2: Well, no, I, I never--my grandfather, Cyrus Clark, was a teacher before he--and was involved in politics in Tennessee. And he was promised, I think, an appointment of some nature, and he didn't get it. And that's what brought him out to Spokane, Washington, decided to move to Spokane, Washington. And my grandmother had been a teacher there, from what I understand, in Nashville. So they moved out to Spokane, Washington. And that's where my mother went to school, at Lewis and Clark High [Lewis and Clark High School, Spokane, Washington] in, while there. And then, then my mother did go to Howard when she graduated from high school and spent two years at Howard University [Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's kind of ironic 'cause your mother's grandfather is named Lewis Clarke, and then she goes to Lewis and Clark High School. Speaker 2: Yes (laughter). Speaker 1: So, but she has a Lewis Clarke in the family. Speaker 2: Well, you know, in the Northwest, Lewis and Clark is a very well known name (laughter). In fact, I was asked to, to serve on the, on the commemorative board or something for that, for their journey, the Lewis and Clark [Meriwether Lewis and William Clark] journey out to the West. And I just didn't have the time to serve, but it was very interesting. And I wanted to do it, but I didn't have the time. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So your mother went to Howard, and she came back afterwards. Story_ID: 654504 Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: John J. Jacob, J-A-C-O-B, Gayton [John J. Gayton]. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: His date of birth was December 27th, 1899. Speaker 1: And where was he born? Speaker 2: Seattle, Washington. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, did his family have a long history here in Seattle or was he the first generation? Speaker 2: Yeah, he, he came before the fire, and you can belong to the Pioneer Association [Pioneer Association of the State of Washington] here if you had a forbear that was here before the fire. I don't-- Speaker 1: Now, when was the fire? Speaker 2: I'm trying to figure. It was, I think 1889 or somewhere around there, and, and my brother, Leonard [Leonard Gayton], serves on, on that board now, the Pioneer Association of Seattle [sic.]. And my brother, John [John C. Gayton], until he passed away, served on that board. Speaker 1: Okay, so this is like--out here, this is, I guess has the same weight as the Chicago fire or the San Francisco earthquake or something that's-- Speaker 2: Yes. It leveled (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) a time that a disaster that marked the-- Speaker 2: Yeah, it leveled the, you know, downtown area from what I understand. And J.T. Gayton [John T. Gayton] was very active. He--when he came out here, he brought a family out here, and he went to sort of a secretarial type school, administrative type school to learn how to take shorthand and, and take English courses and that type of thing. Speaker 1: Now, that's your grandfather, right? J.T. Gayton (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's my grandfather, yeah. Speaker 1: And, now, is he the one that actually drove a wagon out here? Speaker 2: He drove the wagon out here, yes. Speaker 1: Okay, with his master during--or--he drove some (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I don't know, I don't--I think he was paid. Speaker 1: He--yeah. Speaker 2: I don't know. He was--I don't think-- Speaker 1: Yeah, slavery was over then. Speaker 2: Yeah, slavery was over. Speaker 1: But he drove a wagon of some whites em-, some white employers (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, a white family out of Mississippi. Speaker 1: Yeah, out here, um-hm. Story_ID: 654505 Speaker 1: Okay, we're talking about your [paternal] grandfather, J.T. Gayton [John T. Gayton]. Speaker 2: Yeah, he, he started work--some time, I figure before the 1900s, for the Rainier Club [Seattle, Washington] as the chief steward. And I didn't realize--I'm a member of the Rainier Club, and I didn't realize that it was such a responsible position. I found out later, after talking to the historian of the club, and I later, when asked, served on the board of the Rainier Club so I could find out more about my grandfather. I just thought chief steward was like head waiter or something, but chief steward was managing, like the operating officer of the club. And what the historian of the Rainier Club told me that my grandfather made more money than about 60 percent of the members of the club at the time. And I didn't--the reason I was interested in finding out more about it is that Eddie Carlson [Edward Carlson], who was the president of United Airlines and also president of Western International Hotels, had been the chief steward there. That's where he started. And I said, well, gee, that position must have been an important position. That's when I checked with the historian, and I found out it was a very important position in the club. And my grandfather had great stature in the community because of that, especially in the, in the black community. And he was asked by the federal judge [Cornelius Holgate Hanford] who had just been appointed in 1904 to come with him to the federal courthouse and said, "Well, you're not gonna make as much money working for the federal government. But you'll have pension and you've gotta watch out for your family." So my father--grandfather went and went to work for him and stayed in that position from 1904 until he retired in about 1952. And he is mentioned in all the history books of the federal court in the Northwest because he not only became the bailiff for the first federal judge, but he became the librarian for the Ninth Circuit [U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit] that would--judges who would be here in town, the Ninth Circuit library at the federal courthouse. Speaker 1: I heard he had a phenomenal memory from-- Speaker 2: Pardon? Speaker 1: He had a phenomenal, phenomenal memory for cases. That's what I heard. Speaker 2: Yes, he had a phenomenal memory for cases, and that's one reason, I mean he was so appreciated by so many of the lawyers, and made it much easier for me when I became a, a lawyer. The only thing, we would--my father [John J. Gayton] and grandfather talked about all the time was lawyers. They--and I, I think I was somewhat political as a child and when my one brother said he was gonna be an engineer and so I said I was gonna (laughter) be a lawyer. I was treated very well by my grandfather (laughter). And, and they, the history--there's a history book of the first 100 years of the federal court in Seattle [Washington]. And they mention that I was like J.T. Gayton, that they mentioned that his, his grandson, [HistoryMaker] Gary Gayton is a prominent attorney in Seattle. So I--I have a lot of pride in my connection with my grandfather-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and father because my father was such a wonderful man. Story_ID: 654506 Speaker 1: Now your dad [John J. Gayton], now he got--did, did he get a chance to go to college? Speaker 2: Well, I don't know if he had a chance, but he started working--J.T. Gayton [Gayton's paternal grandfather, John T. Gayton] was a real task master, and he started working at sixteen and contributing to the family and when he was sixteen. And, nah, he didn't go to college, but he worked for the post office [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service] and retired from the post office. Speaker 1: Okay, is there a story about how your parents met? Speaker 2: No, I don't, I don't know any particular story how they met except that the interesting thing about that, my grand- my father was a very fine singer. And he was even paid, a soloist at some of the finest Caucasian churches in town. And he--a major singer from London [England], a black singer from London, came--and a well known (cough), pardon me, a well known international singer came through Seattle [Washington]. And he was so impressed with my father, he wanted him to come to London. He would sponsor my father to get singing lessons and all in London. And my father, at that point, had, had met my mother [Virginia Clark Gayton] and wanted to marry her. And so the reason he did not go to London was because of my mother 'cause he wanted to marry my mother, and he stayed here in Seattle. But he sang--most of his life, he led the choir at various churches in town and was a lead singer at the First A.M.E. Church [First African Methodist Episcopal Church, Seattle, Washington] here in town. The A.M.E. church which my grandfather is one of the founding members, and signed the mortgage. Speaker 1: Okay, now, your father, I think, I think your brother [HistoryMaker Carver Gayton] was saying he attended a music conservatory here or a music school to train his voice at a certain point (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, yes, he, he received a scholarship to the Cornish School of Music [Cornish College of the Arts, Seattle, Washington]. Nellie Cornish knew him well, and Nellie Cornish is a very highly respected in hist- in people who know the Seattle history, to have been, have known her, I guess it was quite an honor. And, and I was very happy when I was president of PONCHO [Patrons of Northwest Civic, Cultural and Charitable Organizations] which is an organization that raises money for the arts in Seattle, I saw that the Cornish School got some of the first money that--when I was president, that the PONCHO had given to Cornish School because--and I did that primarily because my father was so proud of having gone to Cornish School. Speaker 1: So your parents, when did they marry? Did they--they knew each other in high school, right? Or did they-- Speaker 2: No. No (simultaneous) Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, they didn't? Speaker 2: No, I think it-- Speaker 1: And he was from Seattle, and she was Spokane [Washington], and-- Speaker 2: She was Spokane. Speaker 1: So how did they get together? They (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And she had been to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And, and they didn't--and so they didn't marry until, I think like, father is twenty-seven, twenty-eight, right, you know, that age frame, and she was two years younger. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: So, I think it must have been--she must have been, you know, about twenty-five or so when they married, twenty-four or twenty-five. Story_ID: 654507 Speaker 1: Now, when you think about your parents' personalities and talents and gifts--who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: Well, I think I take a little bit from both of them. I'm--they were, I think, as probably a good--as nice a couple because they--there was never any conflict between them in regard to how to raise children. And they were disciplinarians. And my dad [John J. Gayton] told us, and he said, "You know, I had a friend that got in trouble, and he had to go to reform school." Kids used to go to reform school for missing, not going to class and things like that. And, and when the kid came out two years later, he told my dad, "You know, if I had a dad like yours, to discipline me, I wouldn't have had to go," (laughter), "to reform school." My dad said, "One thing, you kids don't have to worry. You will be disciplined" (laughter), you know. And, and he was--they disciplined us, even--and it was, you know, you don't--you had great, I had great respect. To this day, I always told my brothers and sisters [Guela Gayton Johnson, Sylvia Gayton Wesley and Elaine Gayton Whitehead], none of us could be as good as the parents. They raised, they lived for their family, you know, and involved--set examples. My dad, you know, he, he would buy one bottle of booze at Christmastime, and that bottle would last 'til the next Christmas. So you know he wasn't much of a (laughter), a drinker. But he indicated to us once, he said, "We had one uncle or great uncle that had a drinking problem, and you all better watch it because that--I understand that alcoholism runs in--may run in families. So you all better not be drinking," you know. He was very strict and told us, "You better not impregnate any girls or whatever 'cause if you do, you're gonna marry her," you know. And it--it kept me--I was (laughter) I was very careful (laughter), you know. I was, I was real square (laughter) (unclear). And the thing is, and I see this now, that, you know, when I was captain of University of Washington [Seattle, Washington] track team, and it was my turn to wash the dishes--we took turns washing the dishes, those dishes would be waiting for me, even after a major track meet, you know, or so. And a lot of times I'd be in a, a track meet, and then I'd go down to the Seattle Tennis Club [Seattle, Washington] and wait tables and come home, and there'd be those dishes for the, for (laughter) ten people. And they--(laughter), and so they--he didn't, he didn't--the thing that I think is great, he didn't make a big deal out of our athletic--Carver [HistoryMaker Carver Gayton] was a good athlete--all the boys were good athletes. But when it was time to do your chores, you had to do your chores, no, if, ands or buts about it, you know. And I think that discipline was very--it helped all of us 'cause I, I say all of us--none of us have been in any trouble of any nature, you know, and, and he, he told us that we, you know, we had to set--he felt pride in being a Gayton, and you had to take pride in who you are. And, but don't take anything off anybody. He taught us all the, you know, the things that you'd want to teach your children. Another thing I--mother [Virginia Clark Gayton] do--would do, she would, she gave us coloring books on, on black history when we were five, six, seven years of age. So we knew about black history. And our dad would go and buy the Pittsburgh Courier [New Pittsburgh Courier] every Saturday and Sunday. When you did not read in the major newspapers about lynchings and that type of thing, we kept up with all of that. And we knew who the--who were the major black people of accomplishment were. The one, the one that--I got it here today, the one autograph I have is of Paul Robeson. My dad took me to see Paul Robeson, introduced me to Paul Robeson. I mean all of that background. It was wonderful. He was very active in the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association]. And he was on the board of the YMCA. And I was honored to serve on the board with him, and I became chairman of the board of, of the YM- the, which was considered--the East Madison YMCA [Meredith Mathews East Madison YMCA, Seattle, Washington] was considered the, the African American YMCA. And my brother, John [John C. Gayton], followed me as chairman. But they really set examples for us, and, and kept our feet on the ground regardless of, of, you know, what our achievements were, very proud of what we achieved. But it was no spoiling or anything and there was no favoritism or anything of that nature. Speaker 1: Okay, well, that's, that's, that's you know, something I guess to really build on, that kind of a family. Story_ID: 654508 Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: Pardon? Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: (Cough) Pardon me. I don't--no, I don't really have a--I remember, you know, we, when we were five--when I was five years of age, we lived at 1400 on, on 14th [Avenue], right next to the A.M.E. church [First African Methodist Episcopal Church, Seattle, Washington]. And I remember moving to 32nd Avenue and Pike [Street] (cough), pardon me. And the thing, that is--we were five--I was--that was 1938. And I remember the windows being knocked out of our home. It was before Carver [HistoryMaker Carver Gayton] was born. Carver was born in '38 [1938]. And (cough), and my dad [John J. Gayton], the neighbors, I remember, came over and said, you know, if you move out, we'll pay you double what you paid for this home. And my dad said, no, and I always took pride that he, that he told us, "You guys better stick together because we're gonna--looks like we may have problems here. And if someone calls you a nigger or whatever, you all--you guys better take care of 'em, and you do it together. And if one of you don't, doesn't back the other one up, you're gonna--you might as well, because when you get home, and you haven't done that, I'll take care," (laughter), "of you," you know (laughter). We all had our, our responsi- that was my--of course, I was five or six years of age at that time. But I remember that. And that stuck with me my whole life, how he could do that and, you know, being offered double what he paid for the house, and say, no, I'm not gonna do it. So I always had pride in him. He was, he was a fine guy. Speaker 1: Okay, now, when you moved--you were five when you moved, what was the neighborhood called that you moved into? Speaker 2: Madrona neighborhood [Seattle, Washington]. Speaker 1: Oh, Madrona, okay, all right. Speaker 2: Um-hm, we went to--we were two blocks, a block and a half from Madrona grade school [Madrona School; Madrona K-8 School, Seattle, Washington]. Speaker 1: Okay, in those days, it was mostly a white neighborhood? Speaker 2: It was all--there were very few blacks. We were the only black kids in the, in Madrona grade school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And the thing that's so interesting about that is, to this day, five or six of those kids in kindergarten with me are still my very close personal friends. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And we talk regularly on the phone and, and see each other and have dinner. And, and one--the first fellow I ever met, we, we go on his boat every, every summer. I go on his boat every summer, and he and I just laugh and all (laughter) for a- about ten days and come--after his family gets off the boat. And I'm very close to his, his daughter and, and grandchildren and all. In fact, she asked me to take her to her ten, ten year reunion from high school 'cause he husband to be wasn't in town. And the reunion was taking place across the street from my condo. So I, I did it, and that's something and she went to Bellevue High [Bellevue High School, Bellevue, Washington] which was all white (laughter) high school, and in the, you know, it's the wealthy suburb in Seattle [Washington]. And it's interesting how I went to (laughter), I was twenty-eight and she was eighteen, and I had to explain to everyone that her, her husband to be was out of (laughter), out of town and I was (laughter) taking, taking his place, you know (laughter). So, I mean she, yeah, she was, she was twenty-eight, and I was, you know, my age, you know, I was in my forties, I think (laughter), you know, forties or fifties (laughter). Story_ID: 654509 Speaker 1: What were some of the--just kind of explain--describe the neighborhood for us, and what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Well, I, I was very, extremely fortunate. When I was about nine or ten years of age, there was a woman by the name of Mrs. White [ph.]. And she had a dime store on 34th [Avenue] and Union [Street], which was about four blocks away from--she let me work there. And she thought the world of me, and, and she gave--and when you're in a family of eight, you can see how parents were struggling and working hard and all. And this lady would, you know, let me make change and, and all that. It was just a wonderful--I wasn't paid much. Initially, I think she gave me bags of candy or, or something at the time. I guess now, they'd put you in jail for (laughter) that, but, but during the-- Speaker 1: Was this a black lady or-- Speaker 2: A white woman. Speaker 1: White woman. Speaker 2: A white woman, and she--and her sis- sister and brother-in-law owned two other dime stores, one out in Fremont [Seattle, Washington] and one out in West Seattle [Seattle, Washington]. And every now and then, let's say the clerk--if it's during the summer, the clerk at the one in Fremont didn't show up or so, I'd get on the bus and go out there and be the clerk in, in that store which was strictly no blacks at all were close out there in Fremont neighborhood. And it, you know, it was a store that did twenty-five to thirty dollars a day in the, in the early '40s [1940s], you know. And the, the thing is that she, you know, everything was rationed then, and--at the dime store, you know, we'd have let's say, we might get a dozen pair of nylons come in. And that was a big deal, and she gave me always a couple of pairs that I could take home to, for my mother [Virginia Clark Gayton] and, and sisters [Guela Gayton Johnson, Sylvia Gayton Wesley and Elaine Gayton Whitehead]. And it was just wonderful. Another thing she would do, when--Hershey bars were--candy was hard to get, and, and if there were twenty-four bars of Hershey came in, she'd me three or four of 'em. I was a very popular guy in the, in the neighborhood [Madrona, Seattle, Washington] 'cause I had these Hershey bars (laughter) that I could--. They were--she--I stayed very close to her until--well, all the way through college [University of Washington, Seattle, Washington] 'cause they were so--she was very close, just a wonderful, wonderful woman. And she took my side. There would be times when people would say, "He did this," or something. She always took my side on, on everything. I'll never forget, a very well known woman in the, in the community--I don't wanna mention her name because I, 'cause you would recognize it, and, and--well, she's an author. And her daughters were caught--I saw 'em stealing something. And I told Mrs. White about it. And so Ms. White told the author that your daughter--Gary [HistoryMaker Gary Gayton] saw--and she said, "You can't--my daughter wouldn't steal." You know, and, and Mrs. White said, "Gary would never lie about anything." And the woman says, "Son," she said, "you don't have to come in here at all anymore," and I, I, I mean I was--it made me a little nervous that she would do that 'cause this was a very prominent woman. And for her to take my side all the way like that (laughter), you know, she told her, "You don't have to come in this store anymore." And you have to just love somebody that would, you know, have that much confidence in you and take, and, and it would have been much easier for her to just sort of forget it and not challenge this woman on--and she said, "Gary would never lie." Well, she was just a wonderful, wonderful--I can't thank her enough for how she gave me direction and all. Story_ID: 654510 Speaker 1: Now, where did you start school? What, what was your grade school? Speaker 2: Pardon? Where? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Madrona, Madrona grade school [Madrona School; Madrona K-8 School, Seattle, Washington]. Speaker 1: Madrona, okay. Now, did you like school? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I thought you did (laughter). Speaker 2: Yeah. I was, I was a good student, and I ran for the boys club and I got good, good grades. And, and another lady that would, that I still have--I got the letter I think with me today. I became--at Madrona the big deal was to be on the patrol. And I became as a fifth grader, captain of the patrol, which was unheard of, but the captain of patrol. The grade school went to sixth grade, it's usually in the sixth grade. And Mrs. Randall [ph.] was head of the, she was our, our advisor of patrol. And she was a very wonderful person. She gave me, she thought I was a--too much of a, a perfectionist. She says, "Gary [HistoryMaker Gary Gayton], you have to, you have to sort of roll with things, you know. Don't get--you know, you're doing the right thing, but don't get too--," and something, everything now and then I pull out that letter (laughter) because I have a tendency to, to wanna, you know, make everything right, you know. And, and she saw that in me, and said, you know, just take it easy, you know. I have an intensity that probably at times should--I should cop out on (laughter), you know. But I had good, good teachers, and, and, and had good relationship with the teachers, and at Garfield [James A. Garfield High School, Seattle, Washington] I became what amounted to president, student vice president of the-- Speaker 1: Now, that's high school, right? Speaker 2: That's high school. Speaker 1: Now, did you go to middle school? Speaker 2: Yeah, I went to Ma- Meany Junior High School [Edmond S. Meany Junior High School; Edmond S. Meany Middle School, Seattle, Washington], and, and I was vice president of the, of the boys club there. And that's when I started--I can't recall my grades so much in grade school, but I, I got good grades in junior high school. (Cough) Pardon me. And high school, I'll never forget, I came home after my first year there, I was walking home, and I had, I think one B and all Cs. And I saw this other friend of mine who lived by us. And I said, "What, what'd you get?" And he told me, I think he had, you know, three Bs and an A or something. And I said to myself, gosh, and, you know, I've sort of been a self-driven person. I said, gosh, that guy, how did--he must have, you know, I'm crazy--I must be stupid. What am I doing, for him to have those--and I--after that I got nearly--I, I don't think I got another C. I got all Bs and A's and became what they call a gold seal on the honor society when I graduated and was an all-city athlete and president of the boys club. Speaker 1: Okay, now, did you have any special teachers or mentors along the way that really helped out? Speaker 2: Well, the, as I mentioned, there were always teachers, and I had a teacher in, in junior high school who said, you know, you're--told me I was the next Booker T. Washington (laughter), you know, and, and in, in high school, it was unusual for an athlete to get the good grades, you know, even then. And so the teachers were, you know, very respectful of me, and each high--in high school and junior high school, I was voted the person with the best personality by the school newspapers and all. So I had a--and very--I hated to miss school. I loved going to school and the relationships and friendships and what is very interesting to this day, a lot of my friends are, are still from high school. Speaker 1: Okay, now, did you run for class office? Speaker 2: I didn't run for class officer, just boys club president-- Speaker 1: Okay, okay (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) which is the, the number one position. There was no--the boys club president controlled the assembly, and, you know, all of that type of, of thing. Story_ID: 654511 Speaker 1: When you were on the verge of graduation--now, you graduated from Garfield [James A. Garfield High School, Seattle, Washington] in what year? Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty-one [1951]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and when you were (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And I received the Garfield alumni--it was a academic scholarship to University of Washington [Seattle, Washington]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: By the Garfield alumni association. Speaker 1: Okay, so 1951. When you were--so, when you were graduating, you knew you were going to University of Washington because you had the scholarship? Speaker 2: Well, I--before then I was trying to get to Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut]. I wanted to go to Yale. Yale didn't offer me enough scholarship. This, as you know, were the days before affirmative action. And they didn't offer me a scholarship that, that I could--it was something like four hundred dollars for the total scholarship. And I couldn't, you know, I couldn't go. So I'd always wanted to be a lawyer. I never wanted to be anything other than a lawyer. And so I went to the University of Washington. So I had this, this scholarship which was a one year. It only, it only paid your, your tuition for one year. But I worked, I wor- waited tables and all that. Story_ID: 654512 Speaker 1: But when I was out there, even though I'd been--the, I was--at Garfield [James A. Garfield High School, Seattle, Washington], we won the, the track championship, and I was the all-city miler, I didn't think that I was fast enough to, to be a miler in--or run track in college [University of Washington, Seattle, Washington]. And one of the fellows who graduated a year ahead of me saw me on campus. And he was turning out for track, said, "Gary [HistoryMaker Gary Gayton], how come you haven't turned out for track? You're all-city miler." And I said, "Well, I don't think I'm that good." He said, "You should come out." And, and try it (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You did? Speaker 1: --and I went out and-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and I lettered my first year and Hec Edmundson who's a legendary track coach, was a legendary basketball coach, very nice to me. And I--as I said, I was the only black kid in the, in the locker room. Story_ID: 654513 Speaker 1: All right, track club, University of Washington [Seattle, Washington]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. So I went out for track, and I went out for cross country. And that year which was the--'52 [1952], the Korean War was going. So NCAA [National Collegiate Athletic Association] said freshman were to enroll for varsity 'cause they didn't think guys were, were--the draft was on and guys were coming in school. And so I lettered not only in cross country, but I lettered as a two miler in, in track. And I had a very good relationship with the coach out there and the pavilion out there is named after him, Hec Edmundson, and as I said, I, I became captain of the track team. I, I had about the third fastest time in the nation in the half mile my senior year. And he--I didn't ask for a scholarship 'cause they only had seven scholarships for the whole track team. But because of--I became a fairly good half miler, he gave me a scholarship my last year, athletic scholarship. So between the money I was making--I was waiting tables and, during the summer and all, and, and on the weekends. And with the athletic scholarship and living at home, I did very well, always able to buy my own clothes and all. In fact, from the time I worked in the dime store, I always bought my own clothes for school and everything else 'cause you could see--you know, I always knew that if I asked my mother [Virginia Clark Gayton] or dad [John J. Gayton] for something, they would get it somehow. But you, you can sort of tell in a family that, when times were tough. And so I never asked. And, and I'm so happy that I didn't have to ask for any, any money. And I always had plenty of money when I was in, in school. Story_ID: 654514 Speaker 1: Now, what was your major [at the University of Washington, Seattle, Washington]? Political science or (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I majored in political science. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that's the thing I'm very proud of, I don't--is the fact that I majored in political science, and then the year 2005, the political science department named me the alumni, distinguished alumnus of the year 2005. And I gave the commencement address to the graduates of Ph.D. and, and master and bachelor degrees for the political science department. And of all my many, whatever I've ever accomplished, that to me was a distinguished honor because I, I--it--politics has been not only my vocation and all, but my, but my hobby also. And I've been involved politically from the time I became a lawyer all the way to, to this day. Story_ID: 654515 Speaker 1: Were there any special teachers or mentors at the University of Washington [Seattle, Washington] that took an interest in you (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, the--there wasn't any--you know, I was discouraged to--in the law school. The--I went into the [U.S. military] service, and when I came out, I went to--I saved money to go to law school when I was in the service. And, and the dean of the law school--in those days--now, the way law schools are, they don't take any student unless they think they're gonna go all the way through. They don't--it costs the school too much money to train kids and they not go through. So they, they, they now get less amount of students, but they wanna make sure they, they get through. In the old days, when I started University of Washington law school [University of Washington School of Law, Seattle, Washington], they said, "Look to your left and look to your right," and, you know, "One of you is gonna be gone." And they--and that's what happened in my class at University of Washington, went from 150 to 75. I was part of the seventy-five that made it the first year. Now, the second year, the dean kept calling me in, in his office, said, "You know, you're--I think you should be a track coach or a social worker." And I said, "Well, I wanna be a lawyer." And he said, "Well, you're working. I don't think--you can't work and go to this law school." And I said, "Well, I don't--what do poor people do?" And he said, "Well, I don't know. But you just, you just don't have--that's the reason I think you should be a coach or a social worker" (laughter). You're not-- Speaker 1: So meanwhile, you were passing the courses, right? So-- Speaker 2: I was passing course, yeah. Speaker 1: But he decided that you should be a coach (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah. Well, then, then the quarter after that, I flunked the class. I'd never flunked anything in my life. So I said, boy, they're teaching me a lesson here, you know. So I went to the dean and I said, "You know, I flunked that class, and I think you may be right." I was going along with him. "You may be right. Can I withdraw in good--with a good record, I mean so I can come back and, and go to law school without working? I won't work. I'll make enough money." And he says, "Yes, you can do that." And so I withdrew from the law school and started working for the park department. And I was gonna go back the next year after I had earned some money. Story_ID: 654516 Speaker 1: At that point, I, I saw--I bumped into a man downtown. He said, "Are you [HistoryMaker] Gary Gayton?" And I said, "Yes." He remembered me running track. He'd been a lawyer in Seattle [Washington]. He was the dean of the law school at Gonzaga [Gonzaga University School of Law, Spokane, Washington]. He asked me, "What are you doing now?" And I said, "Well, I was at the University of Washington law school [University of Washington School of Law, Seattle, Washington]." I told him the deal. He said, "Well, I'm the new dean of the law school at Gonzaga." And he said, "Why don't you come over to Gonzaga. I'll make a lawyer out of you." He said Gonzaga then was strictly a night law school. And, strictly a night law school, and everyone worked during the day. And I said, "That's what I'll do." I went over there, and, and I worked during the day and I, I got on the honor roll. And they gave me a scholarship there. I got a, a scholarship at Gonzaga, and I'm not Catholic and all. They were very good to me. Smithmore P. Myers is dean of the law school. And he's very--he became a U.S. magistrate. And he invited me just several years ago to his ninetieth birthday. We kept a good relation. He was a great mentor to me and, and I also had Tom Foley who became the speaker of the house. Tom Foley taught me constitutional law. And we became very close friends. And he, his dad [Ralph Foley] was a judge over there, and then the law school got me a job at the courthouse during the day when--where I worked for a title company. And the work I did for the title company was looking at different things filed each day to see if any property was involved. If property was involved, I would write a note about it, and, and send it to--downtown to the, to the title company. When I had time, I would sit in the courtroom. It was the best thing that happened to me to go over there because most law students don't get the practical aspect of law. And I could go over there, and I knew about filing papers and who should get this type of notice, and, and I could sit in and watch law cases all day when there wasn't much work. And so it was one of the best things that ever happened to me. And I'm very close to that law school. I think last year or year before, I was the only lawyer who was asked to speak at all three law schools. And that, gives me a sense of pride that three law schools in the state, the University of Washington, Seattle University law school [Seattle University School of Law, Seattle, Washington] and, and the Gonzaga law school. And the dean of the law school over there, when he--every time before he comes in town, he calls me, and we have lunch or dinner together. So I have a close relationship with the--over there. And another thing too (laughter) that's really funny, the dean of the law school at the University of Washington, he was the featured speaker when I graduated (laughter) at, from Gonzaga law school. And he said, "There's Gary Gayton, and I always knew he was gonna be," (laughter), "be an outstanding law, law student," or something of that. And I said, "I wish he had told me that 'cause I, I was so disappointed 'cause I thought my life was over there for a second." Speaker 2: You--it wasn't him that-- Speaker 1: Huh? Speaker 2: It wasn't him--it wasn't the dean that told you that you should be a coach, was it? Speaker 1: The, the dean who told me-- Speaker 2: At the University of Washington? Speaker 1: At the University of Washington that I should be a coach or a social worker was the featured speaker at the law school at Gonzaga when I graduated (laughter). Speaker 2: That is profound. Speaker 1: Yeah, and I just say to kids, you, you have to have it in you to do it. These kids worry about, "Oh, no, no one encouraged me. No one--." I mean (laughter) gosh, you know, I don't know. Maybe some of us are born with the desire-- Speaker 2: Your story shows that you can be discouraged because after he told you that, you didn't do too well. Speaker 1: Yeah, you know-- Speaker 2: But you came back (mumbles). Speaker 1: Yeah, I was gonna--you know, I told him I was gonna go back to University of Washington law school. I didn't go back, but when I was offered to go to Gonzaga, and the guy said, "I'll make a lawyer out of you," you know, that's all I wanted, you know. And, and I--my, very happy I contribute to that law school and to the University of Washington because, you know, I'm not Catholic, but they were very, very nice to me. And, you know, they only had two scholarships in the whole school, and, and I got one of 'em, and, you know, they had their problems over there too 'cause when they had my name up on the board for the scholarship, someone (gesture), you know, scratched it out you know (laughter). Story_ID: 654517 Speaker 1: But, going back to the University of Washington [Seattle, Washington], you know, I became so close to the--Hec Edmundson, track coach, he wrote--when I drafted in the [U.S.] Army, he wrote me letters all the time. Can you imagine? You know, a guy, I mean he--this guy was the top coach at University of Washington, and the sports editor of Seattle Times [The Seattle Times] wrote me letters, you know, for a track man which is, you know (laughter). But at the time, like that one picture that I showed of me running, that was a big, whole big picture like this in the PI. That was condensed, that picture. Speaker 2: And PI, you mean the Post-Intelligencer [Seattle Post-Intelligencer]? Speaker 1: The Post-Intelligencer, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, okay. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: Is it now--I mean just we--try to recap the timeline. You graduated from college in '55 [1955]? Is that '55 [1955]? Speaker 1: Fifty-five [1955]. Speaker 2: Yeah, and then you started law school that same year at University of Washington [University of Washington School of Law, Seattle, Washington]? Speaker 1: No, no, I was drafted in the Army. Speaker 2: You were drafted in the Army, okay. Speaker 1: September, September of '55 [1955]. Speaker 2: Okay, so in '55 [1955], did you serve overseas or were you here? Speaker 1: No, I, I served in, primarily in Boston [Massachusetts] and Texas, but I was in Special Services. And I ran track for the Army. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And Army on a all-Army track team. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Roosevelt Grier was part of that track team. He threw the shot [shot put] for us, Rosey, Rosey Grier (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, what do they call the track-- Speaker 1: Huh? Speaker 2: Yeah, Roosevelt Grier, the famous lineman from the New York Giants. Speaker 1: Yeah, he threw the shot-- Speaker 2: He's the-- Speaker 1: See, he was at Penn, I think Penn State [Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania] graduate, and he threw the shot for us. And I was the only number two guy on the team. Everyone else was number one, but the reason I was number--they let a number two guy on the team because--I can't think of his name, but he was out of Fort Ord [California]. He was a world record holder in half mile. And so they had me and him together. We were the only--it was a small track team. It was--I forget, what they called it the Tenth Army [Tenth U.S. Army] or whatever. But we, we ran Army track meets throughout, throughout the country. Speaker 2: Okay, okay. Speaker 1: It was right after, you know, the Army got in trouble for coddling athletes in '55 [1955], '56 [1956]. There's was a big investigation. They were at Fort Ord, and I think that place in New Jersey, Fort Dix--(cough), pardon me. And what the Army did was put us all over the country. There wasn't--they didn't put a whole group of athletes at any one base. And so I trained on the Harvard track [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], and--when I was in Boston. Speaker 2: Okay. I know the Marines [U.S. Marine Corps] had that, that big track team in Quantico [Marine Corps Base Quantico, Quantico, Virginia], the Quantico Marines are-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --you know, they used to run against AAU [Amateur Athletic Union] and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, well, they-- Speaker 2: --as the Marines, (unclear)-- Speaker 1: --they really raised hell about that in the, in the mid-'50s [1950s] there. And it worked out well for me 'cause I--what I did, I, I was on this--I was stationed at Deer Island, right outside Boston there, and I was, would be off--I was in Special Services. I'd get up in the morning and, and go over and it was a very small base, and go over and the cook would fix me whatever I, I wanted to eat (laughter). And, and, you know, it was, you know, you did get special, sort of special treatment (laughter), you know, and at five o'clock, I'd get--I was really a clerk typist. That was the, the assignment. But I never could type well, so they had me filing--I was the chief file clerk (laughter), you know. But what was interesting was that I would leave the base about 4:30 and, and go to downtown Boston. And I worked for Dr. Sterling Livingston [J. Sterling Livingston], in the graduate school of business at, at Harvard [Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts]. He had a place called Random House [ph.]. And I would proofread administrative management cases for him, and I--it was a wonderful place 'cause the--nothing but women employees there. And I met a whole bunch of young ladies and, and it was right by Storyville [Boston, Massachusetts], the nightclub, two blocks--two or three blocks away. And I'd go to Storyville and, and it was, it was wonderful. And I saved all that--that's how I saved money to go to the law school [University of Washington School of Law, Seattle, Washington] initially until, until I--it ran out (laughter) the second, as I said, the second year and the, and the dean didn't want me to work (laughter). Story_ID: 654518 Speaker 1: Okay, so you were in the [U.S.] Army from fifty--'55 [1955] and '56 [1956] and then you-- Speaker 2: Fifty--'55 [1955] to '57 [1957]. Speaker 1: To '57 [1957]. And then you started at the University of Washington (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Fifty-seven [1957] I started University of Washington law school [University of Washington School of Law, Seattle, Washington]. Speaker 1: Okay, '57 [1957], law school. And you dropped out in '58 [1958], I guess? Speaker 2: No, dropped out about '59 [1959]. Speaker 1: Okay, '59 [1959]. Okay, and you started back up in '60 [1960] or-- Speaker 2: Yes, 'cause I went two years. Yeah, about '60 [1960], yeah, um-hm. Speaker 1: And finished at Gonzaga [Gonzaga University School of Law, Spokane, Washington]? Speaker 2: Yeah, graduated from Gonzaga in '62 [1962]. Speaker 1: Okay, 1962. Now, these years, I guess from the time that you graduated, or well, from--I'm taking you all the way back to, I guess the University of Washington [Seattle, Washington] undergraduate days through '62 [1962]. These are some of the prime days of the Civil Rights Movement and that sort of thing. Speaker 2: No (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, how were-- Speaker 2: --no, not--no they-- Speaker 1: Yeah, well, '54 [1954], the Brown versus the Board [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954]. Speaker 2: Yeah, that started, it started. Speaker 1: Yeah, Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]-- Speaker 2: But soon as I got out of law school, that's when everything was about race. The, the--some of it started in '57 [1957], '58 [1958] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, the Montgomery Bus Boycott in '56 [1956]-- Speaker 2: Yeah, things started. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: But they, they really got hot in the early '60s [1960s], you know, '63 [1963], '64 [1964], really hot at about '65 [1965], all through--'64 [1964], '65 [1965], all in that time. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that's when I was representing all those kids. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Say about 60 percent of my--60 or 70 percent of my law practice was--well, see, from sixty--'62 [1962] to '65 [1965], I was assistant U.S. attorney. Sixty-five [1965], on, that's when really everything was really hot in-- Speaker 1: So up to, up to that point, race relations in Seattle [Washington] were--well, there weren't that many--when you went to high school, there weren't that many black people in school, and-- Speaker 2: Well, the--you know, there's the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) University of Washington, there weren't that many black people. Speaker 2: There weren't that many. There's--about a total of 100 kids--blacks at the University of Washington. And at Garfield [James A. Garfield High School, Seattle, Washington], everyone thought it was a black school, but there were only about a hundred, you know, there were more in Garfield than any other school at that time. Speaker 1: But it wasn't really (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It really wasn't. Speaker 1: --majority black. Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean I can show you the pictures of class. You can, you know, there's a sprinkling of blacks all through there, but it wasn't--you know, I'd say at the most 15 percent or so because we had a lot of Asians there too. Speaker 1: So you, you didn't have to go through some of the things that other people in--around the country went through, riding on the back of the bus or (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That stuff didn't start 'til-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --that stuff didn't start 'til the '60s [1960s], in the mid-'60s [1960s], I mean the civil rights stuff started. Speaker 1: No, I mean how you were treated. You didn't have to ride on the back of the bus here in Seattle (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, no, you--no, we never had any of that. Speaker 1: --as opposed--yeah. You didn't have-- Speaker 2: We never had any Jim Crow laws here. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. That's what I was trying to establish (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, no, no Jim Crow--except housing. Housing was bad, you know. Speaker 1: So there was redlining. Speaker 2: It was redlining, and that type of thing, but it wasn't, you know, it was all--it wasn't law. It was just redlining as you mentioned, you know. But the, the guy who came through the neighborhood, the real estate guy (laughter)--I'll never forget him. His name was Morris Hardcastle. And he became a very good friend of mine and, and a client. He came by my mother's house, and he just saw my mother [Virginia Clark Gayton], and my mother looked like a white woman. And he said, "You know, I could get you double what this house is worth. These black folks coming up here from the South, they don't, don't know anything about it. I can get you double what this house is worth." And, and my mother slammed the door on him (laughter), in his face. And then he went (laughter)-- Speaker 1: Now, is Morris Hardcastle black? Speaker 2: No, a white guy. Speaker 1: He's white, a white guy, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, he came up to my mother's house, you know. There wasn't any--at that point, I think there's probably one black, one or two black real estate people around, and they were just selling to black folks, you know. But he was going through the neighborhood, you know. He was--and he's the one who, who sold a lot of homes to blacks in the Madrona neighborhood [Seattle, Washington]. Madrona became, you know, during this period of time, you know, predominantly black. And it now has gone back the other way 'cause it's, it's the area--it's right in the center of town that is, is very easy access to--and, and has wonderful views. And, and now it's--it became I'd say predominantly black, and now the baby boomers moved in, and right now, it's some of the best real estate in town. Speaker 1: Okay, so (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And, and the--'cause most of the black folks in the city have moved south. Story_ID: 654519 Speaker 1: Now, when you graduated from Gonzaga law school [Gonzaga University School of Law, Spokane, Washington], were there many black lawyers in town or did you know any? Speaker 2: Yeah, we had about, you know, there were about seven or eight black lawyers in town because I, I became--when we formed the, what they call the Loren Miller Bar Association--it was a black law association, we did that, I think, in the late '60s [1960s]. And there were about ten of us that put that together. I was a founding member of that. Speaker 1: And it's called the what now? Speaker 2: The Loren Miller-- Speaker 1: Loren Miller, okay. Speaker 2: --Bar Association. Loren Miller (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, who is Loren Miller? Speaker 2: Loren Miller had been in Kansas, and he had brought a case involving housing that became a [U.S.] Supreme Court case, I think, about 1948 [Shelley v. Kraemer, 1948]. Then he moved out to Los Angeles [California], became a judge, and we named it after him. He's a very prominent black, black attorney out of Kansas, and then went to Los Angeles. Speaker 1: Okay, but he was never in Seattle [Washington]? Speaker 2: He was never in Seattle. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I mean he came up to visit. His son, we had speak recently. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so Loren Miller-- Speaker 2: Bar Association (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) Bar Association. Speaker 2: I was a founding (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Founding-- Speaker 2: I was one of the ten founding members. Story_ID: 654520 Speaker 1: You did have some black lawyers here and so you--tell us about how you got started with the--was it, was it justice department [U.S. Department of Justice] or, or-- Speaker 2: U.S. attorney? Speaker 1: U.S. attorney, yeah. Speaker 2: Well, when I came out, you know, Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] had been elected, you know, in '60 [1960], and he started, you know, they started to try to, to make integration work, not only in Washington [D.C.], but throughout the United States. And so the--his, the person who led his campaign in the state is a fellow by the name Brock Adams, was a graduate of Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], wonderful man. And Brock Adams had called me, and I was called primarily, not because I was a brilliant law student, but they remembered my name as a athlete. And--but at that same time, Brock was a Democrat, and he, he was a, he was Kennedy's campaign manager for the state. And he knew my family and, and he called and asked me to the U.S. attorney's--well, gee, we were all shocked because the U.S. attorney's office had never hired anyone right out of school under any administration. And I had been asked by John O'Connell, who was then the prominent attorney general of the state to go to his office, and then I was offered a job over in Spokane County [Washington]. And so I, I went to see Tom Foley, who I got to know. He was, he was assistant attorney general under John O'Connell. And he said, "Gary [HistoryMaker Gary Gayton], if you get an offer to go to U.S. attorney's office, you take that job. Are you sure you were offered the, the job?" (Laughter) And I said, "Yes." And he said, "Well, you take that." Well, the thing that was funny was that the, the prosecuting attorney here in this county was a fellow by the name of Chuck Carroll [Charles O. Carroll]. Chuck Carroll had been the All-American football player at UW [University of Washington, Seattle, Washington]. He ruled this state. He, he was a Republican, big Republican. And he--that was in the days where, you know, money exchanged hands and all that. And this guy-- Speaker 1: It doesn't happen anymore. Speaker 2: Yeah, (laughter) you know. And he, he was the guy who told different people who to run for governor and all that type of thing, very powerful guy. And there's never, hasn't been before or since, anyone as powerful as Chuck Carroll. He was the head of the committee--he knew my family. He was the head of the committee that got me the scholarship to University of Washington from Garfield [James A. Garfield High School, Seattle, Washington]. He went to Garfield High. And he calls and says, "You know, Gary," it was just the time when people were talking about, you know, blacks being in, in different positions where they had not been before. And so I, I had married right out of law school [Gonzaga University School of Law, Spokane, Washington]. And Chuck offered me, I think six hundred dollars a month, and Brock Adams, all he could offer me was $550 a month (laughter). And my wife went crazy when I said I was gonna take the $550 a month from the federal government, U.S. attorney was offering 550 and Chuck Carroll was offering six hundred (laughter). And she, I think it--that's the reason we broke up (laughter) is because, because I was taking fifty dollars less and (laughter), and I (unclear), but I, I went with the U.S. attorney's office. And, and then Chuck Carroll and I had big fights after that on, in, in court cases with his office. He, he wasn't, he wasn't trying any of those cases. But-- Speaker 1: But his last name is Carroll? Speaker 2: Carroll, C-A-R-R-O-L-L, Chuck Carroll. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: Charles Carroll, and what's interesting, the day--you may see Diamond parking lots [Diamond Parking Service, Seattle, Washington] all around here. When I came back from Washington [D.C.], when I served in the Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] administration, I went to work for, of counsel, with the firm of Joe Diamond [Josef Diamond], Diamond and Sylvester [Lycette, Diamond and Sylvester, Seattle, Washington]. You see Diamond parking lots all around here. He, he was the owner, very wealthy guy. And I was of counsel with his firm. He went to Garfield High too. There's something about the Garfield--I said--he asked me if I wanted to go to a birthday party that Chuck Carroll was having. And I said, of course, because Chuck and I had-- Story_ID: 654521 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you were talking about Chuck Carroll [Charles O. Carroll] and--yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, and so Chuck, Chuck Carroll, you know, I was involved in several controversial cases, representing Black Panthers [Black Panther Party] and, and all, and-- Speaker 1: Well let's not, we're not, we're not gonna speed past those. We have to go back to get those, but, but just tell us this story-- Speaker 2: Yeah, but I was just saying that-- Speaker 1: Okay, yeah. Speaker 2: --over the years, and I'm sorry that I was going back and forth. But I'll forget (laughter) this (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, go ahead and tell this story. Speaker 2: The Chuck Carroll, we--he was a person who I said was instrumental in me getting the initial scholarship. He went to Garfield [James A. Garfield High School, Seattle, Washington] and all that. But--and then we had those fights that we'll go into later. But I was at his last birthday party. He died four months after his birthday party. He was ninety--about ninety-four when he passed away. But I was there with, with Joe Diamond [Josef Diamond] who just passed away, two days prior to his hundredth birthday and with the Governor Rosellini [Albert Rosellini] who's still alive. He's ninety-two years and there were ten of us. But we became good--I mean we had all, we remained friends even though we were involved in, in some disagreements. Story_ID: 654522 Speaker 1: Okay, so U.S. attorney's office, and you, you're hired there (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: --in 1962? Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-two [1962] Chuck (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You--okay-- Speaker 2: Brock Adams. I went in there in 1962, and they gave me--I had very good cases. I brought an action against the State of Washington to allow Indians [Native American] to take fish off the reservation and sell it. Before then, they said that Indians could fish on usual and accustomed fishing grounds, but they caught the fish. They had to eat 'em all. (Laughter) You couldn't sell or take it off the reservation. So Ramsey Clark was head of the land division then before her became attorney general. Bobby Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy] was the, was the attorney general, and he asked me to file that case on behalf of the federal government against the State of Washington, and I did. And we won. The state did not appeal it because they didn't wanna set a precedent for it, and, and that was one of the first cases I, and major cases I tried. I also brought an action, the first fixed basketball, collegiate, fixed case prosecution in the nation against players at Seattle University [Seattle, Washington]. That--I should say not against, but involved, players from Seattle University and some-- Speaker 1: Now, that's not the first in the nation though, fixing-- Speaker 2: It was the first federal-- Speaker 1: First federal case? Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) First federal. Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause I remember the City College [City College of New York] case of New York [New York] in the '50s [1950s]-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I know. But it was the first federal. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: And that's the reason I put federal. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I, and the--it involved some, what you might call young guys in the mafioso of Chicago [Illinois] who had gone to school with the, one of the kids played for Seattle University and was trying to have him fix--what they were doing was shaving points at that point. And the Chicago guys--I went back there to talk to the fellow who had started to try to, you know, fix the cases, fix the, the games. And he was also charged with some mafioso type dealings in Chicago and the top hoodlum squad of the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation]. At that time, I went back to talk, try to talk him into pleading guilty. So--and if he didn't plead guilty back there, I'd bring him out here. I'd indict him, would indict him out here and he'd have to come out here. He did not wanna come out. So the deal was for him to turn state's evidence against the mafioso back there and we wouldn't ask for him to come out here. And he got a light sentence, and what's so interesting is the fact that the people out here thought it was no big deal. But after he turned state's evidence back there, he was, he was out six months--for about six months and he was machine gunned to death. Speaker 1: So there was no witness protection program for-- Speaker 2: Well, I guess-- Speaker 1: They just didn't think it was that big a deal-- Speaker 2: I don't even know, I don't even know if they had a witness protection program then. Speaker 1: I know they needed one with the mafia, any time they do a-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And so that was my-- Speaker 1: So it was a (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) that was a national, that was a national. The headline just all over the nation. Speaker 1: And it was a federal case because they would cross the state lines and do this or what? Speaker 2: Probably, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Federal, the first federal--'cause I asked the justice department [U.S. Department of Justice] to send me a indictment, a copy of indictment. And they said, "We haven't had one. You gotta make it up, and when you make up a form for indictment on this case, you send us, back to us so that we can have it on file." Speaker 1: There's lot of--a lot of money in sports, and-- Speaker 2: Yeah, it wasn't--these kids were only, you know, and that's what's so bad. I--the FBI got on me 'cause what I did, black kids (unclear), I dismissed the case to all the players and just went after the mafioso type guy. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, and the FBI called, head--head of the FBI unit in Seattle [Washington] called me up and said, "What do you mean by dismissing the case?" And I said, "Who in the hell do you think you're talking to? You do our footwork for us." You know, they weren't used to a young black federal prosecutor. "You do our footwork for us. You don't tell me who to indict and not," and hung up on him (laughter). And (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well that's the way to do it. Story_ID: 654523 Speaker 1: Now, there were like--did you know Thomas Todd [HistoryMaker Thomas N. Todd] in Chicago [Illinois]? Speaker 2: Who? Speaker 1: Tom Todd in Chicago. Speaker 2: Tom who? Speaker 1: Thomas Todd. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: T-O-D-D, yeah. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, oh, yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, he-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I knew him through the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]. Speaker 1: Yeah, he was, he was U.S. attorney in Chicago. Speaker 2: Yeah, I knew him from--I was very involved in NAACP during this time. Speaker 1: It had to be about the same era, wasn't it, around the same--no, I guess he was a little later than you, a little later. Speaker 2: Well, he's about my age, Tom Todd, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, were you the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I wasn't the U.S. attorney. I was assistant U.S. attorney. Speaker 1: Okay, he was too. But an assistant. But were you one of the first--who was the first black U.S. attorney? Was there--do you know who it was? Speaker 2: Oh, I wasn't-- Speaker 1: I know you were one of the first though. There weren't that many. Speaker 2: Well, I was one of the first-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --assistant, black U.S. attorneys. Speaker 1: Assistant, yeah, um-hm. Speaker 2: And I don't know if at that point there had been a black U.S. attorney. Speaker 1: Well, I mean assistant. I mean somebody (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: --doing what you're doing. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Were you one of the first to do that? Speaker 2: I was one of the first. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, okay. That's what I thought. Speaker 2: There certainly were none in the Northwest at any time (unclear)-- Speaker 1: Okay. So Thomas Todd in Chicago. Do you know of any others at that time beside yourself? Speaker 2: I can't recall exactly at that time, no. Speaker 1: Okay, but there weren't too many at all (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, there, no, at the most, you know, there were only probably ten or something all throughout the nation, at the very most, I would think-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --at that point. But it started with the Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] administration. Speaker 1: So when you look back at it, do you think there was a mandate from the Kennedy administration to hire black-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I think that he (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) assistant U.S. attorneys? Speaker 2: --encouraged, he encouraged--Bobby [Robert F. Kennedy] was the attorney general, and then Ramsey Clark's one of the most liberal guys in the world, you know. And, and I got along very well with, with him. And then Bobby Kennedy's public relations guy was from Seattle [Washington], who I knew very well. I can't think of his name off hand. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 654524 Speaker 1: What else happened when you were U.S. attorney [sic. assistant U.S. attorney]? Speaker 2: Well, the, the other major case I, I brought was one that involved archery. I'll never forget it. I think it was archery. And the guy was trying to sell archery, pardon me, businesses and franchises throughout the nation, like they had bowling alleys. And I, I brought--I never lost a case in the U.S. attorney's office. Speaker 1: Okay, so what was the problem with the archery franchises? Speaker 2: Well, just fraud, you know, getting people to give them money and not giving 'em their money, you know. There was nothing there. Speaker 1: So he was collecting money (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Hyping, hyping it up and just, you know, taking money and not doing anything with--that type of thing. Speaker 1: Okay, so he was collecting investors but no, nobody was-- Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm. Speaker 1: There's no product. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But it was a three year--I was in the U.S. attorney's office there for three years, and it was a very good experience. Story_ID: 654525 Speaker 1: So you, you were out of there in '65 [1965]? Speaker 2: I was out of there in sixty--formed a law firm in '65 [1965]. Speaker 1: Okay. And what was the name of your firm? Speaker 2: Stern, Gayton, Neubauer, N-E-U-B-A-U-E-R, and Brucker [Stern, Gayton, Neubauer and Brucker, Seattle, Washington], four man law firm. It went into approximately fourteen attorneys, and it lasted 'til I left to go in the Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] administration in '77 [1977]. But during that period of time is when I was involved in all the civil rights stuff-- Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) representing the black athletes at the University of Washington [Seattle, Washington]. I represented-- Speaker 1: Okay, now, was that the first case that you were involved in, I mean in terms of civil rights activities, University of Washington athletes? Speaker 2: I don't know. It's all--there was so much happening. Speaker 1: Was that the one that Joe Jones was involved in or-- Speaker 2: Well, yeah, all these guys were-- Speaker 1: Well, what happened? What did they--what happened in that case? Speaker 2: Well, the, the athletes accused the coach, the black athletes were accusing the coach of, of putting--let's say you had halfbacks, four halfbacks. You put the black guys all on, one (unclear), when they were probably better, they felt they were better than the left halfbacks. So they, he would stack the blacks in the right half, you see what I mean? So that you could have a white halfback over there, and a left halfback. That's what the charge was. My point, when, when I--when the newspapers came and asked me, "What are they squawking about?" I would never tell 'em because, you know, how are you going to--you'd look sort of foolish in the newspapers 'cause I didn't want the kids to look foolish because a coach has to make the determination who's, you know. And, and then he, he made some of the kids--he made the kids give an honor pledge and all this kind of stuff. At this point, when it was all happening, they, they came to conclusion. They had a, they had a faculty committee look through this and felt that there was something to it. And maybe what one should do is get, have a black coach. At that point, the coach, Jim Owens--my brother was working for Lockheed [Lockheed Missiles and Space Division; Lockheed Martin Space Systems Company] then, called Carver [HistoryMaker Carver Gayton] up and asked Carver to come as his assistant coach. And so Carver came up and, and quit Lockheed and came up as assistant coach. Then the thing broke open again and Carver was there. So Carver resigned and, and there was a boycott. The kids were boycotting and it blew up again. And I had represented, what's his name? Cal Jones [Calvin Jones], and Cal had, had quit the team, and he had great potential. And when Carver quit, they brought in an assistant athletic director, black assistant athletic director [Don Smith]. So he came--and, and all of us, and I was a member--we had Joe Jones was president, and I was vice president. I didn't--I told 'em I didn't wanna be president 'cause I was the attorney representing. It looked like I was doing--it was all me doing this. So Joe was president of the deal. Story_ID: 654526 Speaker 1: In the meantime, the assistant athletic director came to me and asked, said, "Gee, can't we solve this?" We, we went down--the coach, Owens and I, called Cal Jones and asked him to come back. And Cal Jones had gone to San Diego State [San Diego State College; San Diego State University, San Diego, California], I think it was. And he says he, he's not interested in talking to him unless I was there, until [HistoryMaker] Gary Gayton was present. And, and so they asked me if I'd be willing (cough) pardon me, to go down to California with coach, with the coach, Jim Owens and with Smith [Don Smith], the assistant athletic director. And I said, "Of course, I'll go down." And it was very interesting because, you know, I always like to go first class, even, going first class. I, and I get, I find out that they are sitting back in coach. So I changed my ticket 'cause I didn't wanna look like a hot shot. I changed my ticket (laughter) to coach. So I'd just be a regular guy (laughter) like everyone else. So I, I went down there, and I told Cal what--we had asked for a boycott, but what was done, what was happening was that the University of Washington [Seattle, Washington] was getting black athletes up here, but they were getting, you know, not the best. They were, they were just making sure they got black athletes. And certain guys were getting offered, black athletes were getting offers of playing up here who couldn't, you know, normally would never have made the grade. But they were black, and, and they wanted--they were, you know, they were breaking the, breaking the black--bringing the black athletes in here, just wasn't as good. So I, I told Cal, Calvin, I met with him and I said, "Calvin, you know, we're not solving the problem. Let's--I think the University of Washington is gonna try and do the same, the right thing. I'll protect you as much as I can, but you gotta come back. You can be, you can be an All-American at the university. And you, you've gotta spend a whole year down here before you can play football again. Come back and I'll protect you every way." So he came back, and that broke the, that solved the, the problem. Speaker 2: This is Cal Jones, you said? Speaker 1: Calvin Jones. Speaker 2: Calvin Jones. It's not, not the--okay. Speaker 1: Calvin Jones. Speaker 2: Calvin Jones, okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. And, and then he went through the deal. There were three, there were three different blow-ups out there at the University of Washington. And I always told Owens that the thing is, is that--'cause you couldn't explain it to the newspapers because it looked like--you couldn't say, "Well, he was stacking players and all that 'cause you--just, it just wouldn't look good." And, and so it worked itself out because after that, the university--Carver [HistoryMaker Carver Gayton] went on upper campus to teach. The athletic director--the assistant athletic director, Smith, stayed on, and, and after that Owens left and, and we brought in Don James who--I served on the committee to, you know, pick the new coach, you know, that type of--and so it, it's worked itself out. And right now, we're the only university in the nation that has a head basketball, head football and head female basketball coach, all black. There's no other major university in the nation has that. And so it has worked its way out. Story_ID: 654527 Speaker 1: Also, during this particular time, you had kids from the BSU [Black Student Union] who had gone over to help the kids at Franklin High School [Seattle, Washington]. And they'd shut down the school, and that's where [HistoryMaker] Larry Gossett was all involved. And I was asked by the ACLU [American Civil Liberties Union] if I would represent one of the four University of Washington [Seattle, Washington] students, BSU students who were involved in that. Gossett was involved and another kid by the name of Miller [Carl Miller]. And I forget my client, but I--my client was the only one who was found not guilty. And the, the reason they gave him to me was the fact that they thought he was the most guilty, and I had had more trial experience than the other attorneys. But I asked to speak last. So on cross examination and everything else, I spoke last. And some of the attorneys got up and were stating that the, these, the blacks had been in chains, had been discriminated for two hundred years. And I've always felt, you know, you get to the point. And when I spoke, I said, "I, well, it is true, and I don't know all about this, but I'm here to tell you my client is not guilty" (laughter). I got to the--, "He said he didn't do it. They said he did. There's a reasonable doubt, you know. You can find him guilty when the--you have to prove beyond a reasonable doubt." And my guy walked (laughter) and he was a guy who allegedly touched the principal and put his head down on (laughter) on the, on the desk and all, but (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But the defense of the other two guys, it was just a rhetorical-- Speaker 1: They just talk-- Speaker 2: --defense of, of black peo- people's history here in the country-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --rather than (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That was their primary deal. Story_ID: 654528 Speaker 1: And I've always felt with the kids--I had a similar case like that where they called the Seattle Seven case. I don't know quite as well, but I was representing a professor at University of Washington [Seattle, Washington]. That was a federal case, and I was retained by his, his, his--it was, it was tried over in Tacoma [Washington], I think with Judge Boldt [George Boldt]. And the--that case--they called it the Seattle Seven. They were comparing it with the, well, the Chicago Seven (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Chicago Ten [sic.]. Speaker 1: You know, and I said, you know, the kid said, "Well, yeah, you can--my dad's retained you, but I wanna argue." I told his dad who's a judge in New Jersey, I said, "I don't let anyone argue, you know. I'm--if he wants me to handle the case, I'll handle it. But I don't, I don't need him helping me argue a case," and--'cause he wanted to argue all this political stuff. And I wasn't gonna be used like that. And also, I withdrew from, from that case. It was interesting times and there were--and the reason I initially represented some of the Black Panthers [Black Panther Party] and all was the fact that the--having been a former assistant U.S. attorney, the marshal [U.S. Marshals Service] and FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] people, they trusted me. And there was always talk about going to--the police were afraid to go out into the Central Area [Central District, Seattle, Washington] and arrest Panthers and even BSU [Black Student Union] kids. They thought there'd be a big shoot out and stuff. And, and so they would always call me, and as I said, I ended up representing them for, for nothing because they asked me to bring 'em in. They didn't wanna go out and get 'em. And, and several times, I would get calls from the FBI and the marshal's office, knowing--there was no question in my mind at the time that they had stoolies in all those groups, and I'd get a, had a deal from the FBI saying that, you know, they planned to rob a bank at 23rd [Avenue] and so at two o'clock in the afternoon and all that. And I'd call guys up and say, "You know, don't go and rob the bank. They're, they'll just kill you, and shoot you." And they said, "How do you know this?" I said, "I'm telling you, don't do it." And that's how you kept things from happening on that. Speaker 2: Okay, so you used the inside information to, you know, ameliorate-- Speaker 1: Yeah, to-- Speaker 2: --the, some of the problems in the community (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The problem, yeah. Speaker 2: And the kids are in the Panthers, and the-- Speaker 1: Yeah, the kids, by and large-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --trusted me. Story_ID: 654529 Speaker 1: But they knew that I had--I mean, you know, at one time I had--I don't know if it was Aaron [HistoryMaker Aaron Dixon] or Elmer [Elmer Dixon III] in my office on something, and I had the head of the Minutemen in my office. See, the, the marshal's office [U.S. Marshals Service] was still referring cases to me. And the head Minuteman was in here-- Speaker 2: Now, the Minutemen, for the sake of history, tell us who they were (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The Minutemen, they were very conservative. They were, you know, right of the Ku Klux Klan [KKK]. These were people who had, you know, they hated their mothers, Catholics, blacks, everybody (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter) The government. Speaker 1: The government, you know. They were stashing (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The activists, everybody. Speaker 1: --they were stashing weapons and all that. Speaker 2: So were they a militia. Speaker 1: Militia type, yeah. Speaker 2: Okay, all right. Speaker 1: And they were out of--primarily out of east Washington, which is the conservative portion of this state. And so anyway, they, they asked the marshal's office, one of the guys, who should we get to represent us. And he said, "Well, I'd get [HistoryMaker] Gary Gayton, one of the marshals." And so they came in. And I charged 'em double what I normally would charge everyone else 'cause I didn't really wanna represent 'em. And anyway, we went to, to court and they were found guilty. And so in their paper, in east Washington, came out, "Nigger Attorney Turns Against" (laughter). But what was so funny, prior to that was that it was either Elmer or Eleano- or some other, one of the Black Panthers [Black Panther Party] sitting in the office, saw the guy. And, and he came in the office. He said, "Hey, Gayton, you know that guy's the head of the Minutemen. How do, how come you, how can you represent him?" I said, "He pays better than you guys" (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: But those were exciting and fun times really (laughter), you know. Speaker 2: It seems like that, that could only happen in Washington for some reason. I don't know. I've been around the country and I'd be hard pressed to figure out another place where something like that could happen. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: You have the Minutemen sitting in an office of a black attorney (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) Black man (laughter). But that was something when I saw that headline, "Nigger Attorney Turns Against." And, and what was so funny, one of the women on the jury came to me and said, "Mr. Gayton, you seem like such a nice young man. How can you represent such a terrible person?" Yeah, (laughter) and I said, "Ma'am, we- that's what we're supposed to. We're supposed to represent 'em, the best of our ability. We don't agree with what they're doing, but--." Story_ID: 654530 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Trish Bostrom case. That's another important one. Speaker 2: Yeah, another interesting case I had was--it was right after the, we more or less settled the problems at University of Washington [Seattle, Washington] with the black athletes, was that the attorney for Trish Bostrom [Patricia Bostrom] who was the best female tennis player in the, in the area, wanted to play tennis at the University of Washington, at varsity level. They didn't have a female tennis team at the time. So I went out to the University of Washington, and I said, "You know, you all don't have a--." It was just prior to Title IX, "You don't have a, a tennis team for females. And I think you should allow her to play the number six man," that's the last guy on the tennis team, "to see whether or not she can qualify to be the sixth person on the team." And I said, "You don't wanna go through what you went through with the black athletes. I'll tell you, I'm gonna push it all the way." And so I said, "You might as well see--give her the opportunity to play the number six person." And they allowed her to do that, and, and she lost. But the University of Washington at that point saw the handwriting on the, on the wall. And the next year, they established a, a tennis team for women and the Title IX came out at the same time. And it's very interesting. Just about a year ago, all the women who played tennis and all at the University of Washington and had not received letters and all, were honored in a ceremony out there. Six hundred people showed up and Trish Bostrom was the emcee and--of the evening, and she had me at her table there. So it was a very rewarding experience for me to see that the University of Washington did the right thing there and to see all these women who were active in all the sports get their--they got big W letters. Story_ID: 654531 Speaker 1: Now do you ever have any cases involving any of the professional athletes here in Seattle [Washington], or? Speaker 2: No, I didn't have any cases involving them. I represented the initial SuperSonics [Seattle SuperSonics], nearly all the SuperSonics, the initial SuperSonics, I represented. And I did quite a, a lot of representation of, of athletes from the University of Washington [Seattle, Washington] who in the pros, and--'cause I represented the initial SuperSonics. And I later served on the board of the SuperSonics after I quit representing athletes. They were a headache for me (laughter), and I didn't, I didn't like all the things I had to go through. But their--I remain good friends with them though. Speaker 1: Well, it seems in this conversation I'm just discovering something that I didn't really think about before was that Washington, I guess, has pioneered, I guess, in some ways the integration of sports. I mean the State of Washington has through, and some of your cases have helped to pioneer that. Now, the Seattle SuperSonic basketball team was one of the first pro teams to have a black coach. I know that. And then [HistoryMaker] Lenny Wilkens-- Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm. Speaker 1: I think Bill Russell had been player-coach. He was the first and-- Speaker 2: I know, and was Bill before-- Speaker 1: --at Boston [Boston Celtics], the first black, player-coach (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In Boston [Massachusetts], yes. Speaker 1: Yeah, in Boston. Speaker 2: Yeah, sure, uh-huh, yeah. Speaker 1: And the first in the NBA [National Basketball Association] as player coach. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: But after that, there was like a drought for a while (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: --and then there was a black coach in Detroit [Michigan] for a minute, I know at one time. And then, then Lenny Wilkens out here, I think, was one of the early-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --black coaches. Speaker 2: Yeah, Lenny did a wonderful job. He's still very prominent in the, in the community. And, and the athletes, most of 'em like it out here 'cause when Lenny first came here and, and I'm trying to think of the guard who changed his name, went to UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California], and I represented him too. Speaker 1: He changed his name and went to-- Speaker 2: He changed his name and then became a UCLA coach. Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: Gee, he'd be shocked that I forgot his name. But they thought Seattle was a square place, but when-- Speaker 1: Oh, Walt Hazzard. Speaker 2: Walt Hazzard, yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Hazzard, yeah, Walt Hazzard, right. Speaker 2: I represented Walt Hazzard. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And all of, all these guys who left here and went to--they all asked, you know, "Gary [HistoryMaker Gary Gayton], can, is there something, can you get me a job back there," and all--they, they like it here. You know, Bill Russell still lives here. And they've been a great addition to the community. Freddie Brown [Fred Brown] is a classy, you know, wonderful guy. Speaker 1: Downtown Freddie Brown. Speaker 2: Yeah, he's a wonderful guy. I had lunch with him several weeks ago. And Lenny is a top notch guy. He, he just had a fundraiser for Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] the other day. And they've added so much to the community and they're good friends and good, good people. And, and this, this community, by and large, you know, is I think, you know, fairly open. The, the thing is, they hate to be called prejudiced, you know, anyone. And they, they don't like to be called--so they open--they try to be friendly. Some people would say there was no prejudice here, and I'd say they're wrong about that. But generally speaking, it's a very open--and Sam Schulman who owned the team was a wonderful guy, you know. And I was the only outside director on the SuperSonic board when Lenny was the coach, and all. And I, I just happened to be--when I was in the Carter administration [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.], that's how I got to know Schulman well. I was in the Carter administration when, when Walt--when the SuperSonics played the Bullets [Washington Bullets] for championship there. I think it was '78 [1978]. Speaker 1: Yes, sir. Speaker 2: And I, I went with our mayor and with Schulman to that game. It was the sixth game, and everyone thought that we were gonna lose that game and win it back out in Seattle. But we won it that night. So we had to, we had to put together a real quick, a celebration (laughter) out there in Georgetown [Washington, D.C.] for that, for that evening. And I was happy that I, I was there for that event (laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah, that was a great SuperSonic team. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 654532 Speaker 1: Now, well, tell us how you, you got your post in the Carter administration? Jimmy Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Cater, Jr.] was elected in '76 [1976]. Speaker 2: Well, yeah, he, he was elected in '76 [1976]. What had happened is that I had--I told you that my grandfather [Gayton's paternal grandfather, John T. Gayton] worked at the federal courthouse. One of the young attorneys who came out here in the late '30s [1930s] that my grandfather sort of helped when he needed help in the library at the federal courthouse, was a well known attorney here by the name of Woolvin Patten who, whose family is from Atlanta, Georgia. And the--he was a senior partner in a major law firm here, called LeSourd and Patten [LeSourd and Patten, P.S.] and anyway, Jimmy Carter came out here as governor of, of Georgia. And he had a close relationship with Woolvin Patten's family in Georgia. And so Woolvin, because he knew my grandfather and all, and I had met him, he asked me to come to a reception honoring Jimmy Carter, the governor of, of Georgia. I had just read the Time magazine article about Woolvin Patten--I mean about Jimmy Carter, oh, approximately, I guess several months before, and it was called the 'New South' [ph.], remember that, with the picture of Jimmy Carter on the, on the cover. And so when I went there to the reception to meet him, he and, and Rosalynn [Rosalynn Carter], they were very gracious and all, and I was talking with him. And I told him that I was going to be in, going down south to, to Miami [Florida], where I hadn't been before, and, and he said, "Well, carry with you--if you're going down to Miami, you should stop by and see us in, in Atlanta." And I said, "Of course." And he was drinking water. I thought he was--I thought it was vodka at the time. But he was drinking water, and, and I thought it was just cocktail party talk, and, and so I went into Miami. And I came back and about a week later, I got a note from him, "I thought you were gonna stop in Atlanta to see us" (laughter), you know. I said--I went and told my partners, "This guy is gonna be president of the United States. Anyone who takes care of detail and all like that, you know." But the law partners didn't know who I was talking about, you know. I said, "Jimmy Carter." They didn't, you know, they, they weren't as political as me, didn't know who (laughter). And-- Speaker 1: Well, a lot of people didn't know who he was when he started running. Speaker 2: I know. He (laughter) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) They really didn't know who he was. Speaker 2: And so I said, "This guy's gonna be president." So in the meantime, I supported him for, for president, but just way behind the scenes. Nothing of any significance. And the day after he was elected, I got a call from Jack Watson who became his secretary of the cabinet. And he's attorney out of Atlanta, and he said, "This is Jack Watson. I'm counselor to the newly elected president of the United States. And he asked me to call you to ask what position you--would you be interested in, in the Carter administration." And I said, "I'm not interested in any position." My law practice was going big, and I'd been assistant U.S. attorney, and I, I wasn't interested in going back into the government. And so time transpired, and he, he picked Brock Adams, who had been my boss as U.S. attorney, as secretary of transportation. Brock had been chairman of the transportation, transportation subcommittee in the House [U.S. House of Representatives]. And so Brock called me, and Brock had asked me to go back to Washington [D.C.] with him when he became--I left the U.S. attorney's office in '65 [1965]. Brock was part of that group that was elected in '64 [1964]. He and Tom Foley, they were both elected in '64 [1964] as U.S. congressmen from the State of Washington. And Brock had done a wonderful job--had been doing a wonderful job in Washington and became secretary of transportation. So Brock calls me and says, "Gary [HistoryMaker Gary Gayton], I'd like you to come back and, and work with me in the [U.S.] Department of Transportation." I said, "Brock, I," but--and he said--and I, I think I was in Monte Carlo [Monaco] or something at the time. And he said, "Don't you think I could be over there? Don't you think--?" And he said, "You've gotta come back and help, help me." And I said, "Okay, I--let me consider it." And so I waited 'til about June of that '77 [1977], and I said, "Well, I will come back." And I took about a, about a--at least a 50 percent or even more cut in, in salary or income, I should say. Speaker 1: Now, were you still married at that time? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No. I (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You had mentioned the salary cut being a factor in the other-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I had--my marriage only lasted about a year. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In about '62 [1962] to about '64 [1964], right in there or something like that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so, anyway, you know, I could afford to go back there (laughter) because I wasn't married. There's no question about that. Story_ID: 654533 Speaker 1: And so I went back, and I was the special assistant. And, and he brought in all the administrators. The [U.S.] Department of Transportation has, you know, about--at that time, you know, about twelve administrations within it, the [U.S.] Coast Guard, the, the Federal Highway Administration, the UMTA, Urban Mass Transportation Administration [Federal Transit Administration], and so on. And so he brought them all in, even the commandant of the Coast Guard. And he said, "I brought [HistoryMaker] Gary Gayton here from Washington, and he worked for me when I was U.S. attorney. He was assistant U.S. attorney. He did a wonderful job. I want you to know when he talks, he talks for me." And one thing, everyone should know when they go into Washington, D.C., it's not necessary the title that you have. It's the power that the man gives you, whoever the man is. And he was the man at transportation. So it's very interesting. A lot of the administrators would come through me. I had a lot of power over--make decisions. In fact, he had me overlook his, his--the general counsel of the N double--of the transportation department. And then he made me White House liaison for the whole department. So every time there was a cabinet meeting, the, what they called--the appointee called the liaison person in, in a particular department, would meet with Hamilton Jordan, and, and Jody Powell and the, Anne Wexler, all the top people, staff people for Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] at the White House. And it's, and so it's a very interesting time for me because I, even--you know, had a driver and all assigned to me. And, and it was tough work. You know, everyone--I don't care what administration, this administration now--these guys--you work eighteen hours a day back there in those jobs. And the, the problem I had, I mean I did. I thought several great--had the opportunity to do several great things and one was putting together the affirmative action program for business for the total department. And, and Jimmy Carter asked all the departments to adopt that program. That was a 15 percent minority contract proposal. Several interesting things happened. The, the head of the manufacturers association, I believe it was, asked to speak to Carter--I mean speak to Brock Adams about that new program of minority participation on these contracts. And he said, "Well, I'll be over there with Gary Gayton." He said--they said, "We don't want Gary Gayton to come." And he said, "I'm not coming unless Gary Gayton is with me." And they were critical of that 15 percent minority participation. And so Brock went over to speak to 'em. I was there. And he said, "Now, I know you guys are a little upset with this proposal that Gayton put together that I endorsed for minority participation, but, you know, a lot of you inherited your, your businesses and all that. We have to have a--more of a balanced deal for minorities and, and all. And I want you to, to understand that we plan to enforce that. And gentlemen--." He looked at his watch. He said, "Gentlemen, I have to go to another meeting, and, and Gary will stay here and answer your questions." (Laughter) And he walked out on those guys. (Laughter) You could have heard a pin drop, you know, and I got up and said, "We're gonna enforce it" (laughter) and all, and walked out. They hated my guts, you know. But Brock was very fully supportive of it. And, and what had happened, even after that, Hamilton Jordan calls me, and he got a call from, from Reverend--the guy who follow Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] down there. Speaker 2: Yeah, you're talking about-- Speaker 1: Huh? Speaker 2: Yeah, I know who you're talking about. I don't know why I'm having a senior moment myself (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, with gray hair. I can see his picture and complaining about it because I put in minorities and women. And they wanted women knocked out. And I knew there'd be more, one way to get it through was, would be to have women part of it. And-- Speaker 2: Abernathy. Speaker 1: Pardon? Speaker 2: Ralph Abernathy, right? Speaker 1: Yes, it was Abernathy. He called and, and--well, or it was either Abernathy or Lowery [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Joseph Lowery]. Speaker 2: Joseph Lowery in Atlanta [Georgia] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I think it may have been Joseph Lowery-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --squawking about. I, but it was one of the two. And, and, and Hamilton Jordan called and said, "We, you know, we want--you gotta take that out." I said, "Hamilton, I'll take it out. And you send me a memo telling me to take it out and I will." I never got the memo, and so it stayed in. And later on, you know, I had several problems with him; and he told people around the White House and the Department of Transportation that Gary Gayton over there is either wealthy or crazy. Story_ID: 654534 Speaker 1: Because they--it's really interesting. Car- those people wa- you know, it's like this administration to an extent, this existing administration [of President George Walker Bush], and that is, you know, if you disagreed with them, you know, they wanna, they thought you were, you were their enemy or something. And one nice thing about Brock Adams, I worked for him. He wanted me there to be critical and, and all 'cause he knew when you're critical, you're trying to help. And Hamilton Jordan and those guys hated--they hated any criticism at all. And I didn't have too much for them. That's one reason I quit. I quit the administration early because of, of them. And that's when Carter's approval rate went down to 21 percent, and he asked all the, all of his cabinet to resign, you know, blaming everyone else. He was, he's been a wonderful ex-president, but he was a terrible president because he, he, he micromanaged stuff, and he couldn't make decisions, quick decisions. And, and to be honest with you, I worked behind the scenes after I left the administration there early, one year before it was over, to the National Alliance of Businessmen for Reagan [Ronald Wilson Reagan] 'cause I thought, I thought Hamilton Jordan and those guys were a bunch of incompetents. I'll be honest with you. But Carter and his people, they send me, you know, Christmas cards and, and all that all the, all the time. But I, I did not have much respect for him in running the government at all. Speaker 2: So you think--I know some have said that they've, that--have said in retrospect that Jimmy Carter's [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] group was totally a kind of insular group from Georgia, and they didn't really have any experience in D.C. [Washington, D.C.]. And they kind of just banded together when they got there and-- Speaker 1: Yeah, they thought everyone that was critical of them was prejudiced towards, prejudiced toward 'em because they were from the South. And that's true of the black guys too. I didn't get along with [HistoryMaker] Andrew Young and those guys either, you know. I really didn't. They didn't, they didn't any--you know, you criticize them, and--I'll never forget when the Bakke case [Regents of the University of California v. Bakke, 1978] came out, all the blacks would get together and, and try to find out, you know, what did this Bakke case mean? And we asked--there were about thirty of us, top executives, black executives in the administration from all the departments, got together. And I think Andrew was then the ambassador to the United Nations. And I, and they tried to determine what, what's, what's happening with this Bakke, you know, 'cause it was sort of a--it was a case that could be read several ways. And-- Speaker 2: That's a affirmative action case, just to recap that-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --Allan Bakke sued the-- Speaker 1: State of California. Speaker 2: State of California to say that he was being discriminated against because he was white-- Speaker 1: That's correct. Speaker 2: --because they were letting black people in [to the University of California Davis School of Medicine, Davis, California] that weren't as qualified as he was or something. Speaker 1: That's right. And, and, and so, I think the--everyone felt that what could be done would be to come out and say, the president could come out and say that I, we read Bakke as still allowing affirmative action and so on and so forth, you know. It could have been read that way 'cause it was (unclear) little--it was the--the decision wasn't as definitive as you wanted to believe. It was like, you know, reading the Bible and everyone sees something in it they like. And so the--I think somebody said, "Well, you should have the, you know, go to the president and tell him to come out and say that we're still for affirmative action." And somebody--I don't know who it was, said, "Well," (unclear)--I don't--it could have been Andrew, said, "Well, Gary [HistoryMaker Gary Gayton]--." I'm trying to think of the fellow's name with Atlanta Life [Atlanta Life Insurance Company; Atlanta Life Financial Group, Atlanta, Georgia] who gave, who gave President Carter his first money to run for (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, I know who you're talking about, but I can't think of-- Speaker 1: But anyway, he, he--I had named him as the head of an advisory group at the [U.S.] Department of Transportation. And Ga- and someone said, "Well, Gary, you know, you're meeting with him tomorrow. Why don't you have him," Jesse Helms, "why don't you have Jesse tell." Well they're beating around the bush. I mean Jesse's outside the administration and here Young is supposed to be close to the president. And he wouldn't even do it. I mean they--I always thought there were milly mousey guys, you know. Story_ID: 654535 Speaker 1: I didn't have too much respect for nearly the--but Bill Clement's [HistoryMaker William A. Clement, Jr.] one of my close friend who was, who was there at SBA [U.S. Small Business Administration] and, and we're still close. But I mean there were, you know, he thought I was a little--I was always trying to get him, you know, to be tougher on, on different things. They all thought I was a little way out, you know. And I, I don't know if it's because they're from the South or, and, and not used to talking to, talking to a white man like that or what. I, you know, but I, I was a little surprised that they weren't more aggressive and--'cause Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] may have gone along with them, you know, on--I don't think Carter was a bad man in any way. I just thought he, he didn't how to administrate, you know. You know, his, his policies, I'd probably agree with them 100 percent (laughter), and here you have a guy like Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] who was a good administrator or Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] who was a good administrator, but policies I'd disagree qui- completely (laughter), you know. But they knew how to administrate, you know. And I was shocked when I was back there to find out how many people, how many bureaucrats really liked working for Nixon because they knew what to do. He told them what, you know, this is what you do. Carter is fooling around. He let Brock [Brock Adams] and all suggest who his, his assistant should be and all. And, and then, he wants him fired later, later on, saying that he doesn't, he didn't have the stature--that's what Hamilton [Hamilton Jordan] told me, Brock's assistant didn't have the stature of a deputy secretary. And I told Hamilton, "Well, a lot of people don't think you have the stature"-- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: --"to be the, you know, chief of staff, but the president needs you and wants you." I mean, I said, "This fellow--." His name was Alan Butchman was, was Brock's chief of staff when Brock was a congressman, "And he has confidence in him. And, and the president has confidence in you," but he didn't like the comparison (laughter). But one thing I say, I learned in Washington [D.C.], you should never take a, a job like that unless you can walk out that day. And that's the reason I don't admire Powell or Rice. When you disagree, especially the great, big policy decision, you should be able to leave, especially and not do like Powell said (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Colin Powell [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] you mean? And-- Speaker 1: Yeah, say-- Speaker 2: --and Condoleezza Rice. Speaker 1: Yeah. So he, he--here he's a diplomat, not a solider. He's a diplomat. And most secretary of states, who had policy differences that he's had with Bush [President George Walker Bush] would have walked, said, "Well, Mr. President, it's nice, you know. We're still friends, but, bye." And that's the way I felt in this administration when I told Brock, they wanted--want him to be, replace all the deputies so that they could control--I said, "This is the type of thing Nixon did," you know. He had the deputies controlling. They put the secretaries in there with no power, but for good public image. And, and so I saw the handwriting on the wall. That's a--and I said, "I'm outta here." I said, "This guy's at 21 percent, and he's telling the, he's telling the cabinet that they gotta resign?" Story_ID: 654536 Speaker 1: --Nineteen seventy-seven [1977]-- Speaker 2: I--1980. Speaker 1: Ei- eighty [1980], okay. This is just before Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] comes in then, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. Speaker 2: It was nine--yeah, 1980, I left the Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] administration. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And just before he came in. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: May--it may have been late '79 [1979]. I can't quite, but I stayed in Washington [D.C.] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Probably late '79 [1979], I guess, yeah. Speaker 2: --'cause I went to work one day and quit. I had no id- I, my thought was to stay there through the administration. But what happened is that the day that he asked Brock Adams to come to the White House to talk to Hamilton [Hamilton Jordan] about where--what he wanted Brock to do, when he asked--and wanted to submit their resignations, we were on our way to Boston [Massachusetts] to deliver Boston their $100 million for their, for their Orange Line up there. And I was in the secretary's car with him, and, and with Alan Butchman, his deputy who the White House wanted out of there. And so when--we stopped by the White House [Washington, D.C.], and Brock said, "I'm going in. I'll be back around fifteen, twenty minutes." We're waiting outside. He comes back about fifteen, twenty minutes and says, "Well, they want me to stay, but they want me to fire Butchman." And I said, "I told Hamilton a long time ago he should talk to you about that and for them to say that now," I said, "Brock, it's all over. I'm quitting, you know, I'm, I'm outta here," (laughter). "I mean this, I'm not going down with this, to threaten--he's at 21 percent [approval rating], and he's wanting you to, to quit because of, you know, I mean, want Butchman out of there. I already told them that, that Butchman was needed by you just like he needed, Carter needed Hamilton" (laughter), you know. And so I, we got on the Coast Guard One, and flew up to Boston. I dictated my resignation up in Boston, yeah. And I, and I quit the next week. And Brock quit, I think three days after that. Story_ID: 654537 Speaker 1: Just a philosophical base here, do you think, I mean, you think like loyalty to a person stands in the way of doing your own duty? I mean doing the duty that you know you ought to do in a situation like that (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, loyalty people underestimate, I mean they overestimate loyalty, you know, like, like, let's take Mrs. Clinton [Hillary Rodham Clinton] or the Clintons. You know, they, they feel because you worked in their administration, you should just support Mrs. Clinton for loyalty. I said, well, that's--what does loyal--I mean, shoot, whether you like her or not (laughter), it's loyalty. That's crazy. Loyalty is being fair and honest and, and not talking behind their back. I mean that's a loyalty deal, not to go down the line when you disagree philosophically with somebody, especially the secretary of state position like how Colin Powell [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] said, "Well, I was overruled." What secretary of state's ever said he was overruled or something. What? Cheney [Dick Cheney] overruled him? I mean that, and he's loyal? I mean-- Speaker 1: They're not--he (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) I mean these, they've over, they're all, all of 'em talking about loyalty, Hamilton [Hamilton Jordan] and, and all those people with the Clintons. They're, you know, I have, I've lost complete respect for the Clintons, complete respect. Speaker 1: Because of this last campaign? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: This, the, the nomination for the presidency (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I mean they, you know, how they, they've--there's no question they, they brought in the racial stuff. They, they've--Clinton said the other night that, that minister, the priest who's, who made fun of Mrs. Clinton (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, Father Pfleger [Michael Pfleger], yeah. Speaker 2: The father--that he was put up to it by, by Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama]. I mean, gosh. Obama hasn't done one thing to them, you know. And, and these--I wrote some emails to some of my congresspeople there, and I said, you know, I'm gonna think twice before I give you any more support because here, he's won the nomination, and you all are waiting 'til she releases you. You know, I mean is that loyalty? I mean it's crazy, you know. She's trying to control--and they're pushing, trying to rack, deball him, you know. She's gonna be the vice president? Who would want a vice president like that? You know. No, loyalty is--they've got the wrong, using the wrong word. Story_ID: 654538 Speaker 1: Nineteen eighty [1980], then you're--what did you do in 1980 when you--did you come back to Seattle [Washington], I guess, right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I didn't come back. I, I quit. I went to work one day and quit. So I said, well, let me see how it is to practice law in Washington [D.C.] 'cause, you know, you--my whole deal was, was thinking that I would be there 'til, through '80 [1980]. And anyway I looked around and I talked to Ron Brown 'cause Ron was at that time, I think--I don't know if he had--he was before or after he'd been counsel to Kennedy's judiciary committee [U.S. Senate Committee on the Judiciary], you know, I can't recall. But he, he wanted to, to practice law and was wondering what I was doing. And I told him that I was going to see for a year--I worked out a contract with, a year, with some attorneys in Washington, just to see what it was like to practice law back there. After the second month, I knew I made a mistake, so I didn't try to develop a practice of any consequence back there. But I represented a lot of 8(a) companies, you know, SBA [U.S. Small Business Administration], 8(a) companies, and, and made arrangements to come back to Seattle to practice law. I had made a lot of good friends back there, and I like Washington, and it was a wonderful experience. But I'm a Northwest--I don't, you know, I can come to work like this, like you're dressed here. Back there, you can't do that so much. And I like the leisure style. Everyone said, "Well, you're gonna miss the parties." Well, I go to the parties (laughter) all the time anywhere all throughout the nation, you know. So I came back here, and I went to--I became of-counsel in Joe Diamond's [Josef Diamond] law firm, Diamond and Sylvester [Lycette, Diamond and Sylvester, Seattle, Washington]. And I represented the number one developer here in town on his zoning deals. And then about, in '85 [1985], I had a, you know, general practice, but primarily consult- consulting. A lot of people wanted to do business in Washington, wanted to know how to get in the [U.S.] Department of Commerce, how to do things with transportation, how to do those types of things. And I said, gee, first--at first I was just telling what to do, but I said, gee, I should be charging for this. So I sort of developed a consulting law practice. Story_ID: 654539 Speaker 1: Then the, Napoleon Brandford [HistoryMaker Napoleon Brandford, III] came to me. He remembered, he was debt manager of Dade County [Miami-Dade County, Florida], and--when I went down there to give them one--$100 million for their fixed guideway system, when I was running the, running the Federal Transit Administration, then called UMTA, Urban Mass Transportation Administration. And he had formed this investment banking firm with Calvin Grigsby and they wanted to get into the State of Washington so they retained me to help 'em get business here in the State of Washington. And I got them business here in the State of Washington, and then they asked if I could, knew anything about getting business in Louisiana. Well, when I ran the Federal Transit Administration, you get to know all the cities and counties and the, and the mayors and the county execs and the commissions and all that. So I could see where I could be of benefit to them, so I went around the nation and helped them get business. I took the security examinations and all, and I had Dulles national airport [Washington Dulles International Airport, Dulles, Virginia] as a client. I had Palm Beach, Florida as a client. I helped them--Mary Landrieu became the treasurer of, of Louisiana. I got in, got 'em business there. And then the thing I liked--it's a very political business, but the, the SEC [U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission] was getting, the pay for play rule and all. And it was primarily--what had happened, a lot of these black investment banking firms, underwriting firms, saw that the, the people making the decisions were all the city councils and the mayors. And a lot of blacks were becoming mayors and all them, they, they sort of got together and, and helped Washington [Harold Washington]--and helped Dinkins [HistoryMaker David N. Dinkins], helped Maynard [Maynard Jackson], helped, helped all these guys so that they could get deals in these, in these cities. And that's when the SEC did away, came out with a rule, 37--was it 37 or 38 SEC rules saying that--G-37 and G-38--said that you can't give money, political money to anybody you can't vote for. And for instance, I can't give Gossett [HistoryMaker Larry Gossett] money, and I've given him money my whole life to run for office. And they--it was, it was put in there, I think, primarily because the minority firms were getting a lot of the, the businesses, the business in underwriting bonds throughout the nation. I don't think there's any question about that. And so that limited me--how you get to know politicians is by going to their fundraisers, never been a quid pro quo or anything like that. Why would you just do it to the underwriting firms and, primarily because the blacks in a bond--the, the--in a bond deal, if blacks are involved, it's usually on the underwriting side. It's not--there are three major proponents in a bond deal. One would be the, you know, the bond counsel, the financial advisor, and if there is, the underwriter. And there were certainly more blacks underwriting. Story_ID: 654540 Speaker 1: And so anyway, they told me that, "Gary [HistoryMaker Gary Gayton], we'd like you to become a member of the firm [Siebert Brandford Shank and Company, LLC; Siebert Cisneros Shank and Company, LLC]." And, and so I--they've allowed me to continue to do consulting work as an attorney. And they've been very successful. The CEO is, is Suzanne Shank. She's out of Detroit [Michigan]. She's a Wharton [Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] graduate and a Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia] engineer, just sharper than heck and very capable, Muriel Siebert who everyone knows on Wall Street. She was the first woman to have a seat on the Stock Exchange [New York Stock Exchange, New York, New York]. She's, she's Jewish, and Napoleon Brandford [HistoryMaker Napoleon Brandford, III] who are now, who's the chairman of the board, and for me, it's been a delight. I'm the oldest guy in the, in the firm except Muriel Siebert and me. We have all these young minority--we have a lot of--it's very spread out, female and, and minority young people. And, and for me, it's like a second life. Me, I'm seventy-five years of age, and I have fun--and this is fun for me and interesting and fascinating. And it, and you have political, the political connections help you get the deal. There's no question about it. No one abuses that. I've practiced law, been a lawyer for nearly fifty years, forty-seven years or so. And I've never had one complaint ever filed against me, and, and my reputation and all means a hell of a lot to me. And I'm not gonna go for something, for some money. And so even though it has really tied me up, I can only really be of consequence in the Northwest and Alaska and, and all because that--I know the people, and I can walk into the politician's office and, and ask for (unclear). But it's real fun. We have nineteen offices throughout the nation and nearly sixty employees. It's a fun way for me to be spending my years now. And I've been with them, and I, as I said, I continue to do consulting work. They allow me to do that which takes very little time on my own as a, a attorney even though a non-attorney could do the things I do in, in that environment. Story_ID: 654541 Speaker 1: This is what you--well, you don't have any--do you have any plans to write about some of your experiences that you've discussed today? Speaker 2: (Cough) Everyone is, all the time is asking me to write. But I would like to--I'm not a very gifted writer. I was hoping my brother, Carver [HistoryMaker Carver Gayton], could write something. But if I had some time, I would get somebody to write 'cause it'd be interesting to, to, to write about, you know, what's your experience and, you know, and I have young attorneys that I mentor all the time. And they come up to me--some of 'em say, "I wanna do what you're doing." And I say, "Well, spend about forty years," (laughter), "doing oth- then you can do what I," (laughter), "am doing." But I, I have resigned from a lot of boards and committees so that I can enjoy my work. I, I--and, and where the stress has come over the years has been the outside activities; hasn't been the raising money for this or that, you know. It hasn't been my work. I love my work, and I have fortunately been able to do--if I didn't like it when I first started practicing law after I left the U.S. attorney's office, we, we had a general practice. I didn't like bankruptcies 'cause it was always tough to get your money. And then I represented criminals, and I thought I was too good as a criminal attorney when I had two, represented two people charged with murder on, on two different occasions. And they repeated, and it's the least of all repetitive crimes. I thought I was too good (laughter) to, to be a defense attorney. I (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you got 'em off and they-- Speaker 2: I got 'em off-- Speaker 1: --and they actually killed somebody else? Speaker 2: --and I thought, I thought they should have been found guilty. And, and so it wasn't--it didn't make me feel that good. But I had the highest regard for criminal attorneys and, and I--Johnnie Cochran was a very good friend of mine and I respected him, you know, the criminal attorneys and trial attorney wholeheartedly all the way 'cause I think it's a very challenging--I don't think there's anything more challenging than, than to be in court and trying a case and with the jurors here and the judge here and opposing counsel. It's really fun and exciting. And, and one reason I did not go back into that when I came back from the Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] administration is because my family has a history of hypertension, and I said, well, once--since I'm off the, the whirlwind deal, I might as well stay off it and, and develop in another area because it, it does take a lot out of you. And, and I didn't wanna fight against my genes with hypertension. And, but the--what I'm doing, you know, it's very enjoyable, working with these young people in the investment banking business [at Siebert Brandford Shank and Company, LLC; Siebert Cisneros Shank and Company, LLC]. I'm going up to Alaska next week, and then in two weeks, I'm going over to Hawaii to attempt to put an office over there. So it's, it's a fun time in my life, and I, I just got back from Russia with the chamber of commerce. And the reason those trips were nice because you've seen how, in bond deals, you get, you get rated on every bond deal from Standard and Poor's [Standard and Poor's Financial Services LLC], Fitch [Fitch Ratings] and, and all. And you have to know how a city, how they--how those rating agencies evaluate a, a city as to their transportation, project, you know, all of that type of thing, the park system, how the people get around the city and, and the water supply, you know, and how--and all that. So it's nice. The chamber makes a major trip to, you know, cities outside of Seattle [Washington] every, every year, and I, I usually go on the ones that go to a different country 'cause most of the cities in the United States, I've been to when I ran the Federal Transit Administration [Urban Mass Transportation Administration; Federal Transit Administration]. Story_ID: 654542 Speaker 1: Now, when you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently again, if you could do it over again? Speaker 2: Well, one thing I would do--and I, and I tell the kids, it's just like my mother [Virginia Clark Gayton] gave us books on black history, you don't have to major in black history. And possibly, I didn't have to major in political science, but I enjoyed it so much. If you do it for enjoyment, I can see it, you know. But you--what I should have done, I felt--but I had, but I had to educate myself on it, is business. I should have spent, taken more business courses 'cause everyone needs that. Nearly every M.D. now takes a business course 'cause you have to--you're making money, you've gotta understand money and how it works and how to invest and all that. And that's the only thing I would do. But you can, you can pick it up. I've had to, you know, read a lot and, and I take continuing education courses on it, and also security courses on business and all. But that's one thing I would, I would have spent more time on, is, is business in college [University of Washington, Seattle, Washington]. Story_ID: 654543 Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today? Speaker 2: Well, we, you know, we generally--we have the same concerns. The thing that is, that we have to get a grip on is the young black men. I mean--and I don't know what the answer is myself. It's, it's tough. People have to have pride. I just went--some businessman, a Caucasian businessman just asked me to, to come in and, and talk to them about Big Brothers and Big Sister [Big Brothers Big Sisters of America], you know, because he's worried about the, you know, the group of black young men who aren't getting their education. There's more women get- and they're in the street. They're not, they're, you know, striving. I don't know what the answer is. I, I think these churches and all have to do a better job in directing the, the people. It's not just the deal to--I think--to say you believe in Jesus Christ and all that. You gotta be directing these young people. And it's just too bad that you have all these young people wasting their lives on not achieving anything, you know, they don't--or not wanting to do anything that amounts to anything. It's just too many of un- the one thing as I say, I'm happy about is working with all these young people that I work with now. And they're--it makes you really proud. When I came up, as I said, I had very--all my friends, I didn't have hardly any black friends who were--we were, we were limited. But, gee, now, you know, a good percentage of my friends are these young people. And they're sharp and smart and it's very enjoyable to see that. I've always seen that with the white kids, but having racial pride and all, I would like that same development to really take hold in the, in the black community, and I don't know the real answer 'cause I, I know myself when I go out and speak to these groups, I, I, I've lost a rapport with the young people, you know. 'Cause they figure, even and I--in my own family, I speak with nieces and nephews, they think you've always--I heard one of the, my nieces once said, "Well, I wanna be like Uncle Gary [HistoryMaker Gary Gayton] and have a Mercedes [Mercedes Benz]." Well, that's a false deal. We never, I don't know how you get, thinking like that. I never thought that way as a child. I wanted to be like So and So 'cause they had a nice car? I wanted to be like (laughter) someone because they, they achieved something. I guess it's the way you're brought up or something. I just don't know what it, what the answer is. Speaker 1: Yeah the--yeah, it seems like the--yeah, I hear what you're saying. Speaker 2: You know, and I, and I quit speaking at high schools only 'cause I don't think I reach the kids. I still mentor law students and all. I figure it's just an age deal and all. I don't know how to get to 'em, 'cause I'm, I'm very direct, you know. And if I think a kid is, you know, phony or something, you know, why these kids wear their pants down to their ground and all that, I'd say, straighten up your head--your pants, you know. That's what my dad [John J. Gayton] would say. Get (laughter), get your pants straightened up (laughter). But I don't, I don't--it's a hell of a challenge, but we gotta take it on somehow, but-- Story_ID: 654544 Speaker 1: You don't know how much time you have to live. I said, I, I have no qualms about telling people, you know, I've been on eighty, eighty-five boards and committees. I don't want any more outside activities. Really, I don't. I've paid my--let me have a little time to myself 'cause even when I was an attorney, you know, 60, sometimes I think 70 percent of my practice was pro bono. And my, my--the law partners--one of the reasons I would come, I did have partners, but after a while, they, they said, you know, "Gayton [HistoryMaker Gary Gayton], you're out of the office all the time, you know," and, and what we did was work out a deal in which I just paid for my expenses. So we really weren't true law partners. But because I felt an obligation to be involved in, in things. And, and they said, "You gotta, you know, you gotta do as much as everyone else," and that, which I was really doing anyway, to be honest with you. But, but they, they say, "You bring people in the office and not charging 'em for the deal," (laughter), that gets to 'em, (laughter). But I was always able to bring in clients, you know. As I said, I meant--I, I was the counsel to the guy who, who owned, at one time, 45 percent of the downtown office space. So, you know, controlled it, I should say, controlled 45 percent of the office space. Story_ID: 654545 Speaker 1: Well, tell us about--now, you're, you've been single a long time. You were married once for about a year. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: You don't have any children, do you or? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay, and, and you're single now. But we always ask people about their family. What would you consider to be your family at this point? Speaker 2: Well, my, you know, my brothers and sisters [Guela Gayton Johnson, Sylvia Gayton Wesley and Elaine Gayton Whitehead] and the nieces and nephews. I'm the godfather to about, you know, five or six kids, and, as I say, I'm still close to, to kids I went to kindergarten with. To be honest with you, at times, I, I feel like I got too many friends (laughter), you know, 'cause you feel an obligation (laughter) to be doing different things where the people call at home--if you call 'em at home, you know, there's no answer on that phone, you know. If I don't pick up the phone at home, I, I--I like my privacy. And--but I have as much interpersonal relationship with, with family and friends that I--I mean, really, more than I need or want at this stage. And you do get used to, when you're by your, live by yourself, probably to want to be by yourself even, even more. But what most people--don't think that of me 'cause of my personality. They think that I always want to be in certain places. Several places in town [Seattle, Washington] have my picture up on the wall, you know, the pic- the restaurant down the street painted me, and all. But the thing is, I am an outgoing person, but I, I like my privacy. And I don't see how people have time to do anything. I like, I like so much. I like music, I like to listen to my music. I like politics and this is, this Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] deal just been, you know, that has obsessed me. And I stay, if I stay involved in any activity, it's, it's politics now. And as I say, we've got some great young lawyers in the, in the Loren Miller Bar Association who I, I just like dealing with and young women too. I'm meeting with two or three of them next week 'cause they want me to talk to their kids and, and all. So I, I consider, you know, all the lawyers, and the black lawyers here are a pretty close group. And my relationship with Siebert Brandford Shank [Siebert Brandford Shank and Company, LLC; Siebert Cisneros Shank and Company, LLC], especially the chairman, Napoleon Brandford [HistoryMaker Napoleon Brandford, III], we talk two or three times a day, you know. We've very close. And he's a wonderful guy that's--and he's writing a--he's written a book and trying to come up with a screenplay on, on that book. It's about basketball in Indiana. And so it, it's gonna be interesting. But there's--like today, I've talked to friends, and in Washington [D.C.], I mean this isn't business, in Washington, Hawaii (laughter), California, I mean friends. Some of the--it's a very small world, and all, and so I, I really enjoy the relationships I have with people. Story_ID: 654546 Speaker 1: Just put this on the record, what you just told me about the black musicians. (Pause) Yeah, we're rolling. Speaker 2: Are we rolling now (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes, sir. Speaker 2: Oh, well, I was just saying that, yeah, Quincy [HistoryMaker Quincy Jones] and I knew each other from high school [James A. Garfield High School, Seattle, Washington]. He was a class ahead of me and all, but when I started practicing law in general practice, in the late '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970], he asked me to represent the Institute of Black American Music [sic. Institute for Black American Music] that he had developed. And the idea was to have these fundraisers to give, to raise money for black musicians, youth musicians throughout the nation. And we would meet at the same time as Operation PUSH [Rainbow PUSH Coalition] would have their deal in Chicago [Illinois] every year. And Aretha Franklin, Roberta Flack, all of 'em, The Temptations, all of 'em were involved. And [HistoryMaker] Jerry Butler was a vice president and, and all. And I would go back there for those meeting every year, donated my time and, and donated all my expenses 'cause it was fun for me to be associated with those musicians on. As you may recall, Quincy had two aneurisms and, and one right after another. And right after that happened, this particular thing just sort of went, went down the drain because he was involved in other things. He had to slow down a while. But that was, that was a lot of fun for me. Story_ID: 654547 Speaker 1: One question we always ask is this: when you look back on everything you've done to this point, what today would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: Well, you know, I, I don't--I consider involvement, you know. My--I don't think there's any big statement, I mean, but just a total involvement. Our, our parents [Virginia Clark Gayton and John J. Gayton] asked more or less told us, we should be involved. I felt that when you have grandparents like we had and parents like we had, that you should continue on setting an example for young people and be involved in, in mak- trying to make this city and, and state and country a better place. And I think that, that I've tried to do that. And that satisfies me, and I have to leave it to other people to determine whether there's any main legacy or, or whatever, but I just always wanted to participate. Now, I, I felt that if we're gonna do anything in this city, that I wanted to be part of it. And that's the reason that I enjoyed the fact that this Metropolitan magazine [Seattle Metropolitan], a year or two ago, acknowledged that, that my brother, Carver [HistoryMaker Carver Gayton] and myself, and grandfather [Gayton's paternal grandfather, John T. Gayton]--I think we're the only family with three representatives, were part of the 270 people who, who contributed to making Seattle [Washington]. And that, to me, as I told Carver, I said that is something else, 'cause I think we're the only family with three members. And their--they started with, with Chief Seattle all the way to, to the present, and there's 270 people. And it's not--that's not too many people when you consider all the years, and Seattle has been in existence for over a hundred years. Story_ID: 654548 Speaker 1: Now, another question we always ask is similar to legacy but a little different. Oh, before I ask that, is there anything we haven't discussed you wanna raise before I ask the last question? Speaker 2: No. I think we've, I think we've handled everything. One thing I, I have to enjoy, and that has to do with that picture. And maybe that's the reason I brought it up, is that Richard Jones [Richard A. Jones], Quincy's [HistoryMaker Quincy Jones] brother, a hell of a fine, young attorney and judge-- Speaker 1: (Whispers) Sit back. Just sit back a little bit because you-- Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, I had to say it (laughter). Speaker 2: And, and he came to me and asked me if I would help them--he knew that I helped several people become federal judges. And it was just a thrill for me, not only that he asked me, but to be successful in this administration to get his appointment through because, you know the type of judges they've been looking for. But I was able to help him primarily from the fact that he said, "Gary [HistoryMaker Gary Gayton], I want you to, I want you to be one of my people to recommend." I said, "Richard, the first thing I'm gonna tell you, don't use me" (laughter). I says, "They know that I'm a, that I'm known as a, as a liberal Democrat," (laughter). "And that's not gonna help you. We'll do it this way, and if we're able to go through everything," having--have Quincy, who knew Senator Hatch [Orrin Hatch], to have Senator Hatch help, and had--we had Secretary Coleman [HistoryMaker William T. Coleman, Jr.], the former secretary in the transportation--black former secretary of transportation in the, I think in the Ford [President Gerald Rudolph Ford, Jr.] administration and all talk to the White House counsel, having the real conservative Republican senator who knew one of the--he didn't know him, but one of the Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] close relations knew this Republican senator. I, I don't know why I can never think of his name, but a very conservative guy talk to the White House for him. And all those type of things to get that through was a complete thrill for me in this administration because he's such a wonderful and capable young man. And if anything, the last ten years have meant anything to me was not only getting that through, but having him ask me to speak at his, at his investiture in the federal court. That was just a wonderful experience and to have it be handled so successfully. And at one time, he thought that he wasn't going to--he was gonna withdraw his name. I said, "No, keep it in. We're gonna fight, as we're gonna get this thing through." And, and that was a very satisfying experience for me. Speaker 1: That's Judge Richard Jones, right? Speaker 2: Judge Richard Jones, federal. And the thing is, and the judges knew this. See, I had served as the, as the, the chairman of the advisory board to all the Ninth Circuit federal judges [on the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit]. That was a real honor for me to have that position. And so it, it helped me in being able to advise him 'cause I am very familiar with the, the federal court system. And that's where I started, and that's where I spent most of my time when I practiced law. Story_ID: 654549 Speaker 1: Now, the last question is similar to legacy, but a little different. Sir, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Well, (laughter) I don't--I just would like to be remembered as a, as a political animal who tried to do the right thing. I, I made good calls on, on the people I supported, and a lot of these young guys call me the god- the godfather. I don't consider myself the godfather, but they say that in a deal that I, I help them in different things. And if--it's a conscious deal for me. I do it because I wanna do it, and, and I don't expect anyone--you know, a lot of times people do good things, and they expect people to be thanking 'em for it or something else. I don't even do it--I do it because as I say, like on Richard Jones [Richard A. Jones], 'cause he's, he's an asset to the federal system. And, and, and I told him, you know, that--and I told the audience when, when he was sworn in that, you know, they're lucky to have him. And so for me to help a guy in a position like that, and I've done that with other young people, they're lucky to have good people. And I try to push good people into, and help 'em in different positions. And I just wanna be recognized as a, a person who, who tried to help people when asked or when not asked (laughter). Some people say, "I don't need your suggestions, Gary [HistoryMaker Gary Gayton]. I get the point (laughter)." Speaker 1: Okay, well, thank you, sir. Speaker 2: All right, yes, my pleasure (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, thank you very much. Okay. Story_ID: 654550 Speaker 1: This was taken in January when Richard Jones [Richard A. Jones], Quincy's brother, was sworn in as federal court judge at the investiture. And that's his, Richard's wife [Leslie Jones] is right next to me, and that's Quincy [HistoryMaker Quincy Jones]. And Quincy and I spoke at the investiture, and Richard was, I think, stating that I had dated not only his sisters, but he thinks I may have even attempted to date, date his mother at one time (laughter). Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Next. Speaker 1: Well, I, I like this picture of Carver [HistoryMaker Carver Gayton] and I. This was taken last October when Carver and I were awarded the Garfield High Foundation [Garfield High School Foundation] award of the year for involvement in the community and all. And I, I like that particular picture of Carver and I. And we raised more money than they had raised in any previous year for Garfield High School here in Seattle [James A. Garfield High School, Seattle, Washington]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Speaker 1: That's our nominee for, in the Democratic Party for president of the United States [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama]. He had asked me to hold a reception for him, and I did that in conjunction with his friend, Michael Parham, who's also from Chicago [Illinois]. They had forty people. It wasn't a, it was not a fundraiser. It was forty people he wanted to meet. It was not a political deal. It was a book signing that he'd come in town for. And I had the opportunity to again meet him, and I had the, the reception for him right across the street from Benaroya Hall [Seattle, Washington] where he signed two hundred--twenty-five hundred of his books. Speaker 2: 'The Audacity of Hope' ['The Audacity of Hope: Thoughts on Reclaiming the American Dream'] right? Speaker 1: Pardon? Speaker 2: The Audac- 'The Audacity of Hope'? Speaker 1: Yes...