 Story_ID: 421231 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Neculai Burghelea. Ma'am, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: I'm Barbara, B-A-R-B-A-R-A, Clementine, C-L-E-M-E-N-T-I-N-E, Harris, H-A-R-R-I-S [HistoryMaker Bishop Barbara Harris]. Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: I was born in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], June 12th, 1930. Speaker 1: Okay, and ma'am, what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm a retired bishop of the Episcopal church. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today is February 12th, 2007. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: At my home in Foxborough, Massachusetts. Story_ID: 421232 Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five, lightweight, People magazine-ish type questions that management compels me to ask of everyone and they only require a short answer. The first one is, do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: A favorite food? I guess sweet potatoes (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, now, do, do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Green. Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Summer. Speaker 1: Okay, favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Any cruise ship going any place in the world. Speaker 1: Okay, the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: I have several, but they're not really for publication (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 421233 Speaker 1: Okay now, I'm gonna ask about your family history. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and then your father's [Walter Harris] side of the family. So we'll start with your mother. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: My mother's name was Beatrice, B-E-A-T-R-I-C-E, Price, P-R-I-C-E [Beatrice Price Harris]-- Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: --her maiden name. Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: She was born December 7th, 1902. Speaker 1: Okay, and where was she born? Speaker 2: She was born in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what do you know about your mother's side of the family? How far back can you trace that side? Speaker 2: I can trace back to her grandmother, who was my great-grandmother, who had been a slave on the Brawner plantation in Maryland. Speaker 1: How do you spell Brawner? Speaker 2: B-R-A-U-N-E-R [sic.]. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, are there any stories that are passed down from that great-grandmother? Speaker 2: Oh, yes. As a youngster, she had an encounter with General Grant [Ulysses S. Grant]-- Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: --who came onto the plantation and asked her to pump a dipper of water for him, which she did. And he rinsed the dipper out and threw the water out, and asked her to pump another dipper. And she said, "You did not need to throw that out. The dipper was clean." And he said, "There have been people in this area who would try to poison me and my men." She wore her hair very close cropped as mine is, and he rubbed her head and said, "I've been south fighting for little boys like you," to which she responded, "I don't need anybody to fight for me. I can fight for myself, and I'm not a little boy." Speaker 1: Now, that's a good story. That's an interesting story, that's something. Okay. Any other stories that she--so she was a little girl at the time of the Civil War? Speaker 2: Yes. No, I can't remember many other stories, but she did live with us and died when I was eight years old. She was a very colorful character. I never knew her husband, my great-grandfather who must have died before I was born. Speaker 1: Okay, gee whiz, okay. Story_ID: 421234 Speaker 1: Is there a story as to how the family moved from Maryland to Pennsylvania? Speaker 2: Somehow--oh, I should have said that my [maternal] great-grandmother had a twin sister who was sold south while they were in slavery. And I don't know the details, but miraculously, following emancipation, they were reunited in Washington, D.C. And that is where my mother's mother [Mary Price] was born and grew up. Later my mother's mother and father [Thomas Price] moved to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. Speaker 1: Okay, is there a story as to how they--I guess we could maybe imagine that after the Civil War, a lot of blacks migrated to D.C. [Washington, D.C.]. Historians write about that. I guess from that surrounding community 'cause they saw that as the seat of the government and a place where they could find sustenance and so forth. Speaker 2: Unfortunately, I don't have much in the way family history in that regard. I simply know that they wound up in Philadelphia. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now, did your mother [Beatrice Price Harris] talk about growing up or do you know much about how she grew up? Speaker 2: She was one, one of five children, the only girl and was spoiled by her father and her brothers. She was a music student and studied piano and organ and ultimately became a church organist and choir director. I don't really know much about her growing up except that, except for those facts that she was a, a good music student. And, in fact, the--in our family home in Philadelphia, there is still the baby grand piano which was her sixteenth birthday present. Speaker 1: So her parents were fairly well off, I suppose to be able to give her a piano (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I don't think they were very well off as I remember because I came along during the Depression [Great Depression]. But they sacrificed so that the young people in the family could have opportunities and advantages. Story_ID: 421235 Speaker 1: What did they do for a living? Speaker 2: My [maternal] grandmother [Mary Price] was a midwife but she also did domestic work. And my grandfather, my maternal grandfather [Thomas Price], ran a little seafood house that was a front for a gambling joint (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay (laughter). Any stories about the--there's gotta be some stories about the gambling joint. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, he had a sign in the room where the men used to gamble that said, "Jesus never fails" (laughter). I remember seeing that sign as a kid. And many men who worked for the City of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] as trash collectors used to frequent his little gambling parlor. And he would watch as they were losing money and he would sometimes stop somebody from gambling and give them money back, and say, "Here, get out of here and take this home to your wife and kids"-- Speaker 1: Hm, that's-- Speaker 2: --if he thought somebody was losing too much of their pay. Speaker 1: They don't do that in today's casinos. Speaker 2: No, they don't (laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, which is--that's interesting because I--that was a, and has been, and still is probably a problem with working men today, you know, gambling their paycheck away and that sort of thing, and maybe others too. But I-and maybe others too, but (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, it could, can be a serious problem. Story_ID: 421236 Speaker 1: Now, did your mother [Beatrice Price Harris] play piano and organ in an Episcopal church or did-- Speaker 2: Yes, she played in our home parish, St. Barnabas Episcopal Church in Germantown [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. She also played the organ in the silent movies. And she used to entertain us sometimes on rainy days by telling us what she played for various scenes in the movies when the hero was coming or when the heroine came in, and the dramatic scenes of somebody riding a horse across the screen. And it was great fun listening to her describe these silent movie scenes. Speaker 1: Okay, did you spend much time in the movies yourself? Speaker 2: Well, yeah, but they weren't silent movies when I went (laughter) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, yeah, by the time you went to movies, yeah, they were, yeah. So she, I guess, well, the technology kind of drove her out of business, huh, in terms of the movie business? Speaker 2: Yes, indeed, indeed. But there were--she enjoyed doing that, and it was great fun. And it was, as I say, great fun to listen to her talk about that. Speaker 1: Now, did she play in a black theater? Did she play in a black theater or-- Speaker 2: I would imagine at that time it would have been a segregated theater-- Speaker 1: Yep, (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Since even when I came along, there were theaters in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] where blacks had to sit in the balcony or in the back of the theater. Speaker 1: Okay, now we often think about segregation as being a southern phenomenon exclusively, but-- Speaker 2: Oh, no, no, no. It was very prevalent in many places in Philadelphia. There were restaurants where blacks could not eat and there was one restaurant in particular, if you sat long enough for them to serve you, your food was so heavily salted, you could not eat it. Speaker 1: A deliberate-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --(laughter) attempt to discourage-- Speaker 2: To discourage you from patronizing that establishment. Speaker 1: Okay, now, did your mother have a chance to finish high school and go on to-- Speaker 2: Yes, she graduated from Germantown High School [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. She did not attend college. Story_ID: 421237 Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: My father's name was Walter, W-A-L-T-E-R, Harris, H-A-R-R-I-S [Walter Harris]. And he was born in Richmond, Virginia. Speaker 1: And what's his birthdate? Speaker 2: It was August 6th, and I'm hazy on the year now. (Cough) Excuse me. I can't quite remember the year, but I would say it would have to have been maybe something 1897. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. That's good. And, you know, so do you know much about the ancestors on your father's side? Speaker 2: Very little. I never knew his father [Cornelius Harris]. I did know my Grandmother Harris [Josephine Harris]. But, of course, black males did not live to ripe old ages in those days, and so I never knew my grandfather. Speaker 1: Okay, are there any stories from that side of the family that are passed down that are-- Speaker 2: Well, you have to consider that I'm getting along in years, and if there were stories, that some of them I probably don't remember. I don't really know much about the early life of that side of the family. Speaker 1: Okay, so your father was born in Richmond, and did he grow up in Richmond? Speaker 2: He was a young man when the family came to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. Speaker 1: Okay. Was he still in high school? Speaker 2: Probably about that age, I would think. Speaker 1: Okay, now, what did they do for a living? Speaker 2: I did not hear your question. Speaker 1: I'm sorry. What did his people do for a living? Speaker 2: I don't remember that my paternal grandmother worked. My father worked in a shoe repair place. He also worked in a steel mill. But you have to remember that at that time, there were not a lot of lucrative positions opened to black men. And I do remember that my father, who was very fair of skin, worked at a cookie processing plant where he was mistaken for being Polish. And he was asked to purchase some tickets for a Polish dance, which he refused to do. And when asked why not, he said that he was not Polish, that he was at the time called Negro. And in a matter of two hours, he had lost his job. Speaker 1: So they didn't realize that he was black? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: I wonder, was there any reason why they would think he was Polish instead of some other kind of-- Speaker 2: Well, he was just--he was very fair, and I think a lot of, probably a lot of Polish people worked at that plant. Speaker 1: Um-hm. I know people did change their names to Harris and other names, I guess to-- Speaker 2: Perhaps so. But he was never (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But I don't, you know, I couldn't-- Speaker 2: --asked. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So that's a story. Yeah, that's a story that illustrates the times, yeah. Story_ID: 421238 Speaker 1: Any other stories from your father's [Walter Harris] side? Did they have a tradition of having been enslaved before the Civil War? Speaker 2: If so, I don't know. I do remember asking my father to teach me to play poker. And he took twenty dollars from me, just like that. And I said, "Well, thank you, and can I have my twenty dollars back?" And he said, "Nobody would give you twenty dollars back in a poker game." And he never did give me my twenty dollars back. Speaker 1: (Laughter) That's, that's a tough lesson. Speaker 2: It was. It was an expensive lesson. Speaker 1: Expensive, twenty dollars in those days was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Absolutely, absolutely. Speaker 1: --was like two hundred dollars now. Speaker 2: I was heartbroken. I couldn't believe he wouldn't give me my money back. It was a tough lesson. And I didn't play poker (laughter). Speaker 1: Do you believe that that was his intent at the time, to give you a (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Perhaps so 'cause he didn't gamble. Speaker 1: Okay, but he ran a gambling-- Speaker 2: No, that was my [maternal] grandfather [Thomas Price]. Speaker 1: No, that was your grandfather, okay, grandfather, right. Okay, so he didn't gamble himself at all? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Which is, which is good. Speaker 2: I have to correct that. He did play the horses (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 421239 Speaker 1: Is there a story as to how parents [Beatrice Price Harris and Walter Harris] met? Speaker 2: I don't know. I don't know how my parents met. But it was a small community, and they could have met socially anyway. Speaker 1: It was there Germantown [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. Speaker 2: Yes, because it was a small community, and people knew each other. But I'm not sure how, how they met. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. But did they meet when they were still teenagers or did they meet later? Speaker 2: Oh, I think a little beyond that. Story_ID: 421240 Speaker 1: Describe your parents' personalities for me. Speaker 2: Well, my mother [Beatrice Price Harris] was very outgoing and a rather strong and vibrant personality. My father [Walter Harris] was very reserved, quiet individual, but with a, a depth of thought and spirit, didn't say much, but when he spoke, it was usually something rather profound. And I can remember on one occasion--I was about nineteen years old. And there was something that I thought I ought to be able to do. And my father thought it was not appropriate. And I made the comment, "Well, I'm as much woman now as I'll ever be" to which he smiled and said, "Well, if you are as much woman now as you'll ever be, shame on you." And that was the kind of commentary on life he would make. Speaker 1: Now, when you look at your parents' personalities, which one do you think you take the most after? Speaker 2: I think my mother because I tend to be extroverted. Story_ID: 421241 Speaker 1: Do you have any siblings? Speaker 2: I had two siblings. My sister who was five years older died in May of 2006. And I am still grieving her loss very intensely. I have a brother, Thomas [Thomas Harris], who is eleven years younger than I and who resides in Homestead, Florida. And although we don't see each other often, we talk on the phone a few times a week. Speaker 1: Okay, and what's your sister's name? Speaker 2: My sister's name was Josephine [Josephine Harris]. Story_ID: 421242 Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: Well, I have a lot of childhood memories. Speaker 1: Is there a very first one that you can go to? Speaker 2: I guess my, some of my earliest childhood memories would be from being in church, being in Sunday school and how much I enjoyed that. Speaker 1: Okay, now, we-- Speaker 2: Can I stop for a minute? Speaker 1: Sure. (Pause) Okay, all right, you said you enjoyed Sunday school and the church services at St. Barnabas [St. Barnabas Episcopal Church, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], right? Speaker 2: Yes, I did. I loved church from the very beginning. And it was just a, a great place to be and a loving, several loving Sunday school teachers. One in particular, who was in charge of the little children, a Miss Jones [ph.]. And it was just a joy to be in her presence. Speaker 1: Okay, now, this is unusual in some regard 'cause people remember church, but not many of them have real fond memories of going to church on Sunday. A lot of little kids fidget in church and would rather be doing something else, but-- Speaker 2: Well, I perhaps did my share of fidgeting but I did enjoy it (laughter). And those are, are some of my earliest memories. I also remember that we lived in a, a neighborhood [Germantown, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] where adults in the neighborhood could chastise or discipline any misbehaving child and that, they had license to do that. When you went out to play or went over across the street to play with someone, I can remember my mother [Beatrice Price Harris] calling out to another adult, "If she misbehaves, give her a clap up behind and send her home, and I'll take care of her when she gets here." Neighbors don't have that kind of license today. You cannot discipline someone else's child. You'll likely wind up in jail. But using that old African adage, it takes a village to raise a child, the neighborhood raised us as children. Speaker 1: Okay, now, was the neighborhood, were most of the neighbors or a significant portion of them, members of St. Barnabas too, or was it (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, there were several churches in the neighborhood to which our neighbors belonged, but they were all mostly churchgoing people. Story_ID: 421243 Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Well, one of the sounds of growing up was Sunday morning on the radio. As you walked along the street, everybody's home radio was tuned to the same station [WGAR Radio, Cleveland, Ohio]. And you could hear all of the program ['The Negro Hour'] of Wings Over Jordan [Wings Over Jordan Choir] and the Southernaires singing as you walked to church. You didn't miss a beat. The smells of Sunday morning in my house were hot biscuits or hot rolls and salt mackerel. And the sights were smiling faces mostly of neighbors. Speaker 1: Okay, what about smells? Speaker 2: Well, in the neighborhood [Germantown, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], the smell of chlorine at the local swimming pool and in the summertime, that was pretty much it. We did a lot of swimming. Story_ID: 421244 Speaker 1: Was the congregation at St. Barnabas [St. Barnabas Episcopal Church, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] mostly black? Speaker 2: It was entirely black. Speaker 1: Okay, and were there black music traditions in your church as well as--'cause I know the Episcopal church can be kind of stiff sometimes. So-- Speaker 2: No, there was not much in the way of traditional black music in the church. I, I do know that every year on Good Friday, we sang the spiritual, 'Were You There When they Crucified My Lord?' ['Were You There?']. But basically, we used the Episcopal hymnal which didn't, in those days, have much in the way of traditional black music in it, in fact, if any at all. And, of course, we sang classical, religious music, Bach [Johan Sebastian Bach], Mendelssohn [Felix Mendelssohn], Handel [George Frideric Handel], Mozart [Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart]. It was a typical Anglican parish. Speaker 1: Okay, you had black rector, I take it? Speaker 2: Yes, and a great teacher, great spiritual father, very strict and very stern with young people, but always with our best interests at heart. And he was from the island of St. Kitts and an old-school gentleman who served that parish for forty-nine and a half years. It was his only cure. Speaker 1: That's a long time. Speaker 2: Yes, it is. But in those days, well, that was unusual, but in those days, when a person was called as rector to a church, they stayed for an appreciable period of time. The only reason he did not serve fifty years was because the year, that year, the church brought in the mandatory retirement age of seventy-two. And the bishop would not allow him to stay six months beyond the retirement age on some imaginary idea, if I do it for you, I'd have to do it for everybody. Well, how many people stay forty-nine and a half years in one place. So, it was heartbreaking for him, and it was heartbreaking for us as a congregation. Speaker 1: What was his name? Speaker 2: His name E. Sydnor, S-Y-D-N-O-R, Thomas [E. Sydnor Thomas], T-H-O-M-A-S. And he was a very punctual person. And we always said his initials stood for Eastern Standard Time (laughter)-- Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: --because he would start the service at church if there--on the stroke of 11:00 A.M., if there was only two people present. Speaker 1: Okay. Some would say that's unusual in the black community. Speaker 2: Well, not for him. He was a stickler for time. Speaker 1: Okay, now there was--I would imagine that--I know the Episcopal church in the United States or in the Anglican church has a diverse population that you may--would not necessarily find in a Baptist or the Methodist church. You wouldn't find as diverse a population of black people from various places. So he was from St. Kitts. Were there other--lots of people there from the islands or different-- Speaker 2: Not in our particular parish, but in other parishes around the city, there were large concentrations of people from the West Indies. It--that was not so much the case in the parish where I grew up. There were a few people of West Indian background, but not large concentrations as there were in some other congregations. Story_ID: 421245 Speaker 1: What else did you like to do when you were growing up, besides--or what kinds of things did you do within the context of the church and the neighborhood [Germantown, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]? Speaker 2: Well, I enjoyed studying music. When I was growing up, I took piano lessons and vocal lessons and choral speaking. And that was a great pleasure for me. I know some young people were resistant to music lessons, but I enjoyed them. And I enjoyed singing in the junior choir (pause). I loved movies. I loved dancing. Oh, did I love to dance. And-- Speaker 1: What was some of the popular music out in those days? Speaker 2: When I was a teenager, I guess there were groups like The Temptations and music, [HistoryMaker] Lloyd Price, just great dance music, music you could dance to. And we--there were dances every Friday night and enjoyed going to those. Story_ID: 421246 Speaker 1: I also, as a teenager, wrote a column for the Pittsburgh Courier [New Pittsburgh Courier], the Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] edition of the Pittsburgh Courier which was the leading black newspaper in the East at that time. And I wrote a column called, High School Notes by Bobbi (laughter). Speaker 2: Okay, now, why Bobbi? Speaker 1: That was a nickname. Speaker 2: Okay, that was your pen name for-- Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: Okay, so you wrote that when you were fifteen? Speaker 1: Oh, I probably was sixteen when I did that. Speaker 2: Okay, okay, High School Notes by Bobbi. And you did that for a year? Speaker 1: Ooh, I did it for maybe a couple of years. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I was paid the grand sum of three dollars a week by the editor of the paper. Speaker 2: Okay, three dollars a week, okay. Speaker 1: But better than the three dollars a week, I had a press pass that got me into a lot of things. That's (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So what kinds of places did you get into with your press pass? Speaker 1: Oh, I could get into theaters and dances and that press pass was worth more money than, was worth more than the three dollars I was getting (laughter). Speaker 2: Now, there were--what were some of venues in Philadelphia in those days for black talent? I know there was, a couple of theaters. I can't remember the names of them myself right now, but-- Speaker 1: Well, there was the Pearl Theatre on Ridge Avenue [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], I guess it was. And there was another theater, the name of which escapes me for the moment, but there were live shows. And then, of course, there was the Earle Theatre on Market Street [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] where the Duke Ellington, Cab Calloway, Louis Armstrong, Lionel Hampton, those bands played, along with the Tommy Dorsey's, Louis Prima and the big bands played that stage. Speaker 2: Okay, so did you meet any of the big stars from those days when you were, when you had your press pass? Speaker 1: Not really. I, I met some later, but not then. Speaker 2: Okay, all right. That press pass, though, you know, it can get, you know--it could have, I imagine it could have been able to secure an interview with somebody and things? Speaker 1: Well, if I had been a little older, a little more sophisticated I was, just a, you know, teenager. Speaker 2: So you'd go to the event, then write about it for your column (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah. Story_ID: 421247 Speaker 1: Let me go back to when you were a little kid and ask you about grade school, I mean or going to school in the first place. What was your first school? Speaker 2: My first school was a block and a half from house. It was the Thomas Meehan, M-E-E-H-A-N, Elementary School [Thomas Meehan School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]; went from kindergarten to fourth grade. And it was an all-black school with wonderful teachers who were like extensions of your family and who just brought rich information to you that was not in text books. I can remember getting little pamphlets on people like Countee Cullen, Langston Hughes, other poets and writers and musicians. I can remember one on Roland Hayes, the great tenor. They were not included in the textbooks that we had, but somehow these teachers procured and gave to us this extracurricular material that enriched our knowledge of black history and black achievement. My first-grade teacher, I thought was the most beautiful woman in the world. She was so stylish. And I wanted to--I thought she was tall and regal, and I wanted to look like her when I grew up. Interestingly, the first year of my consecration, I visited a summer chapel on Cape Cod [Massachusetts], which she attended in the summertime. And I was administering communion, and I got to the end of the communion rail. And there was this woman who said, "Barbara [HistoryMaker Bishop Barbara Harris], do you remember me. I was your first-grade teacher." And I just broke down and wept. She didn't look quite as tall, quite as elegant, (laughter) as she did when I was in first grade. But I was still delighted to see her. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you remember her name? Speaker 2: Ethel Eggleston Lymas, L-Y-M-A-S [sic. Ethel Lyman Eggleston]. She passed away, oh, I guess, maybe ten years ago. But I remember her well. Story_ID: 421248 Speaker 1: Now, did you all celebrate Negro History Week [Black History Month] in school? Speaker 2: It was--yes, we did, but it was really an ongoing thing. There might have been some special emphasis that one week. Of course, now, it's a month. But it was, it was an ongoing kind of thing with us. Speaker 1: I'm just thinking that probably, it just sounds like the school was heavily influenced by the Association for the Study of Negro Life and History [Association for the Study of African American Life and History], which would have been an organization pushing that kind of curriculum in the schools in those days. I mean--I'm, you know, thinking maybe that's why. Speaker 2: I think probably when I was in elementary school [Thomas Meehan School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], it was much more informal. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I don't know that it was being, whether the association at that time was as active as it became in later years. Speaker 1: I know they founded the week in 1926 by the Chicago [Illinois], Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], New York [New York], Washington, D.C., pretty active chapters, trying to push-- Speaker 2: Yes, they had active chapters, but what I was saying was that I don't know that they were that influential in the schools at the time I was in elementary school. Speaker 1: Okay, did they have any--did you ever, do you remember seeing a copy of 'African Heroes and Heroines,' by Woodson [Carter G. Woodson] and Wesley [Charles H. Wesley] or anything like that (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, never saw that book. Speaker 1: Okay, and were the works of J.A. Rogers [Joel Augustus Rogers]-- Speaker 2: No, not in my time, not on the '30s [1930s] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, okay, all right, well, that's interesting though that they would push that 'cause that's not, you know, necessarily that common. Story_ID: 421249 Speaker 1: So you went to Meehan [Thomas Meehan School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] until the fourth grade. Speaker 2: Yes-- Speaker 1: And then where did you go (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And then I went to the Edwin H. Fitler School [Edwin Fitler Academics Plus School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], F-I-T-L-E-R, which was my first time to go to school with white children. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And the year that I went there for fifth grade, there were three of us black students in the school. And we were not very welcome. And it sat in a--the school sat in a predominantly--well, in an all-white neighborhood. And we walked to school. But it was, it was difficult going there until some additional black students arrived. Speaker 1: Now, was there a reason why you stopped going to Meehan and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, it only went to fourth grade. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Okay, so was it--how did you feel about--did you feel, I guess you felt unwelcomed, I guess, since you said it-- Speaker 2: Very unwelcome. And I can remember one of the teachers talking about something that a, some achievement of a group of women. And all the little girls in the class kind of did like this (gesture). And I did too. And a white boy sitting next to me said, "Not colored women." And that was my first fight in that school 'cause I beat him up after school that day, and I lost my position on the safety patrol (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, so you were a safety patrol--did they have the flag and a belt and all that stuff to go with it? Speaker 2: Had a little badge that you wore, round badge that you wore on your upper arm. Speaker 1: Okay. You know, that's--did you have a favorite subject in school? Speaker 2: English was my favorite subject. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: And I did well in English. I was lousy at math, and I hated it. To this day, I'm not good at math except for balancing my checkbook. Story_ID: 421250 Speaker 1: Okay, so you were there from, at Fitler [Fitler School; Edwin Fitler Academics Plus School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] from fifth grade through-- Speaker 2: Fifth, sixth and the first part of seventh grade. And then you went off to the junior high school, which was really several blocks away. Speaker 1: What was the name of that one? Speaker 2: That was Gillespie Junior High School [Elizabeth Duane Gillespie Junior High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], G-I-L-L-E-S-P-I-E, Gillespie Junior High School. Speaker 1: Okay, you were there from seventh grade through the, through the ninth or-- Speaker 2: Seventh and eighth grade. Speaker 1: Seventh and eighth, okay. Speaker 2: And then I went to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And that was, I take it, it was an integrated school too? Speaker 2: Yes, it was and there were, there was a balance of black and white there. Speaker 1: Now, how did your--how did you do academically in your schools? Were you--did you do pretty well? Speaker 2: I did fairly well. In the ninth grade, for ninth grade, I went to the Philadelphia High School for Girls [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --which was an all-academic high school. Speaker 1: So did you have to achieve a certain score to be able to go there? Speaker 2: Yeah, you had to have a certain grade average to be accepted there. Speaker 1: Okay, so you were doing pretty well? Speaker 2: Yeah, I guess. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, but again, it was an institution that was not welcoming of, of blacks. Story_ID: 421251 Speaker 1: Are there any stories that you can tell us that illustrate the point? Speaker 2: Yes, the principal of the school [Philadelphia High School for Girls, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] at the time did not want black girls to hold office in student government. And I can remember that one ran for secretary of the school. And we had an elaborate voting process that was to kind of, to prepare you for voting in the real world. And we had polling places according to grade. And we voted and this young woman got the majority of votes, and the next day, we had to vote on that one office over again. And she did not win the second time. Speaker 1: That sounds, yeah, it sounds like some electioneering going on. So that--anything else that they-- Speaker 2: Basically, we were told in so many words, "We don't know why you come here because you're not smart enough to learn what we have to teach." That was, that was pretty much the, the attitude, with the exception of a few teachers who treated us equitably. Speaker 1: Okay. Were you preceded there by your older sister [Josephine Harris] at all? Speaker 2: No, she went to another high school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But there were some very bright young women in that school, black and white. Story_ID: 421252 Speaker 1: When you were there [Philadelphia High School for Girls, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], had you projected like a career for yourself in--did you have any idea what you wanted to do? Speaker 2: I, I thought that I wanted to be a music teacher. And that was kind of my dream, to one day be a music teacher. That never materialized, and I never really pursued that path. Speaker 1: Okay, so at this time now, you were talking about music and vocal lessons and that sort of thing, were you playing in the church [St. Barnabas Episcopal Church, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and that sort of thing and playing otherwise? Speaker 2: A little later I played piano for the Sunday school. Speaker 1: Okay, and were you sort of--did you take a lot of music courses in high school? Speaker 2: No, I belonged to the glee club, but there was an elite singing group called the Treble Clef club [Treble Clef Choir] and I tried out for that, and although I was taking voice lessons privately, I didn't, I was not admitted to the Treble Clef club. Speaker 1: Was it an all-white-- Speaker 2: There--I remember maybe two black girls who were in Treble Clef and one had such an unusual voice that I don't think she could have been denied under any circumstances. And she wound up married to Jimmy Smith, the jazz great. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay, what was her name? Speaker 2: Edna Joy Goins [Edna Goins Smith]. Speaker 1: Okay, now (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She just had an unusual coloratura soprano voice. Story_ID: 421253 Speaker 1: Was Marian Anderson a hero of yours growing up? She's a Philadelphian [Pennsylvania] native. Speaker 2: Yes, and each year on my birthday, my mother [Beatrice Price Harris] gave me a summer, season ticket to the outdoor concerts at a place we called Robin Hood Dell [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. And, of course, I got to hear Marian Anderson perform there on several occasions, and she was, indeed, a heroine. My mother was in some young women's organization with her. I'm trying to think--well, I had other heroines. Speaker 1: Okay, who were-- Speaker 2: Harriet Tubman for one-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --who I just thought was about the most amazing person I had ever heard of. Speaker 1: Okay, did you first hear of her in grade school [Thomas Meehan School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. And I--she just had to be a, just a super human character as far as I was concerned. And my grandmother was one of my heroines. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I just thought she was a neat woman. Speaker 1: Okay, I guess otherwise, in Philadelphia, is that Sadie Alexander [Sadie Tanner Mossell Alexander], I think she was an--yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sadie T.M. Alexander, yes, I knew her. And, in fact, I was given an award a few years ago that's named for Sadie T.M. Alexander, and it's given by Delta Sigma Theta Sorority. Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, she was one of the first black women lawyers, attorneys (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Attorneys, yes. Speaker 1: Yeah, you know. Yeah, in the Philadelphia area. Story_ID: 421254 Speaker 1: Okay, so you were at Girls High School [Philadelphia High School for Girls, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], and you graduated in 1948, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Now, did you have any counseling about, you know, going to college or was anybody trying to help you get into college at that time? Speaker 2: We had, they had college days at school where representatives from lots of colleges would come to the school, bring materials about their college, and I was really interested in Smith College for women [Northampton, Massachusetts]. But college was not in the books for me because my family could not afford a college education for me. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And there was very little information available about scholarships in those days, and I would imagine scholarships were pretty limited. So I did not get to go to college to pursue an undergraduate degree. I did attend the Charles Morris Price School of Advertising and Journalism in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], which awarded a certificate, but not a degree. And I've had a lot of educational experiences subsequently, but never earned a degree. I did some work at, at colleges, but I also did some work on non-degree granting institutions and wound up with seventeen honorary degrees (laughter), including one from Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut]. But I tell people jokingly that I have seventeen doctorate degrees, all honorary. I never earned a degree. Speaker 1: Now, this is becoming increasingly rarer, you know, I mean or more rare that someone could achieve what you've achieved without, you know, having graduated from college. I, my mind goes to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But I said, I've had lots of educational experiences, but never earned a degree. Speaker 1: Yeah, there aren't too many--John Henrik Clarke is one I can think of is another one. And so there are probably others in business, probably quite a few in business that probably have. But it's, but that is unusual, you know, in the people that we interview. But no one in your family had, had attended college at that point, right? Speaker 2: No, younger members of my family have, some who came along after me, you know, cousins and what not. But, but among the wealth of educational experiences that I've had, I went through the executive management program at Penn State University [Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania]. And I was one of two women in that program the year that I went, and I think we were perhaps, if not the first women, among the first women to be accepted in that program. Speaker 1: When was that? That was-- Speaker 2: That had to be 1972, maybe. I remember living in a fraternity house with about twenty-four men (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) In a, in a frat house? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Story_ID: 421255 Speaker 1: What drew you to the Charles Morris Price School of Advertising and Journalism [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]? Speaker 2: Because I had started as a trainee and junior executive with this public relations firm in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. And-- Speaker 1: Which one was that? Speaker 2: That's Joseph Baker Associates-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --Joseph V. Baker Associates. Speaker 1: So you started with them first and then went to-- Speaker 2: --yes, to Sun Oil [Sun Oil Company, Inc.; Sunoco, Inc.], yes. Speaker 1: Okay, so Joseph Baker-- Speaker 2: Associates. Speaker 1: Associates. That's in 1949, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: When you, okay. Speaker 2: And I stayed with them nineteen and a half years-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and spent the last ten years there as president of the firm. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, how did you--how were you recruited for that job or did you--how did you get that job? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Joseph Baker [Joseph V. Baker] lived in my neighborhood [Germantown, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. He knew me as a child. I dated his stepson. And he said to me, when I was nineteen years old, I was working in the x-ray department at Children's Hospital in Philadelphia [Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. And he said, "Quit that job and come to work for me and learn public relations." He said, "I will pay you twenty-five dollars a week to learn because you're not worth anything to me--not worth more than that to me," at this point. And so I went there, and I learned public relations, and I learned well. Speaker 1: Okay, now, was there ever any talk about you doing anything for the Pittsburgh Courier [New Pittsburgh Courier], the Philadelphia edition beyond your high school column [High School Notes by Bobbi]? Speaker 2: No. What I did do, I did do rewrites and occasional articles for the Philadelphia edition of the Afro-American [Baltimore Afro-American; Afro-American Newspapers] out of Baltimore [Maryland] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, okay, all right, so you started with Joseph Baker and Associates in '49 [1949]. Then you went to Charles Morris Price School of Advertising-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, later. So that would be-- Speaker 2: Around 1950. Speaker 1: Okay, 1950, okay. Story_ID: 421256 Speaker 1: So what kind of things did you do at Joseph Baker and Associates [sic. Joseph V. Baker Associates] for the most part? Speaker 2: Well, we--our clients were major industrial corporations and we counseled them at the point of their approach to the black community and did a variety of programs and publications for corporations such as RCA [Radio Corporation of America; RCA Corporation] and NBC, which was a wholly-owned RCA subsidiary at the time, American Tobacco Company, Schenley Industries [Schenley Import Corporation; Schenley Industries, Inc.], Western Union [Western Union Company], Hamilton Watch Company, Procter and Gamble [Procter and Gamble Company], the Association of American Railroads. We had a--United States Steel [United States Steel Corporation], we had a list of blue-ribbon corporate clients. Speaker 1: Now, this is a black agency 'cause it's a--or is this a black ad agency or-- Speaker 2: Yes, it was a black public relations firm. Speaker 1: Okay, okay and he--all right, all right. Speaker 2: And DuPont, E.I. DuPont [E. I. du Pont de Nemours and Company] was one of our clients. We had a whole stable full of top-notch clients. And as I said, I stayed there nineteen and a half years. And we did, we did a lot of publications that were distributed in the black community, nationally. I can remember one we did for Chrysler Corporation [FCA US LLC], for the Scott Paper Company. Speaker 1: So you'd create a publication for the product and distribute it in the black community? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But they, these were, these were informational publications sponsored by these clients. For example, they didn't, they didn't advertise products. They were simply sponsored by a corporation. We did a travel magazine for Chrysler Corporation. We did a, for Scott Paper Company, I can remember a small booklet that we produced called, 'Distaff to History' about black women of achievement starting with Phillis Wheatley and (pause) that was distributed widely. So we, we did a lot of informational things. Speaker 1: Oh, it's surprising to hear that that kind of thing was going on in those days. I had no idea. So these were like publications that would be of interest to the black community? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: It was like a public service (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) to increase the feeling of, I guess to create some affinity with the company in the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, for Hamilton Watch Company, we did a directory of the conventions of black organizations that were meeting around the country. It was called, 'Where They Meet' [ph.], and we would feature something about each organization and give the dates of their convention. And a lot of people found that a handy tool, particularly people who wanted to sell products to people and exhibit at their conventions. Story_ID: 421257 Speaker 1: Now, I'd be remiss if I didn't ask you to give us a little background on Joseph Baker [Joseph V. Baker] and--Joseph Baker, himself and how he got started. He sounds like a really important figure. Speaker 2: He was a very brilliant man. Again, I don't think he went to college. But he was a good writer. He was, I think perhaps the first black columnist for The Philadelphia Inquirer. His rise was in politics, and he was head of the Bureau of Negro Research and Planning [sic. Division of Negro Research and Planning] for the Pennsylvania State Department of Labor [Pennsylvania State Department of Labor and Industry]. And, and he developed his own public relations business [Joseph V. Baker Associates] and interestingly, he, he was physically crippled. He walked on a crutch, and he would never--he was too proud to use two crutches. And so he walked on one crutch and (pause) he built that business into a pretty large and successful firm. He came out of Abbeville, South Carolina. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, that's quite a story. Speaker 2: Yeah, he--and he had, he'd been crippled all his life. His--some childhood accident as a youngster affected his right leg, and it was about the size of a ten year old boy's legs while the rest of his body matured. And so he walked on this one crutch with this one short leg. Speaker 1: Okay. So, how long did he live? Is the company still-- Speaker 2: No, as I said, I left there after nineteen and a half years and went to Sun Oil Company [Sun Oil Company, Inc.; Sunoco, Inc.]. The firm continued for some time after that. And then when he retired, the, he had made no provision of the continuation of the firm beyond his retirement. Speaker 1: Okay, so he didn't have any children that were interested in that? Speaker 2: No, he had a stepson who died several years earlier, but who, at one time also worked at the firm. Speaker 1: Okay, so you were with them until say 19- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Nineteen sixty-eight [1968]. Speaker 1: Sixty-eight [1968], okay, all right. Story_ID: 421258 Speaker 1: You were involved in other activities when you were involved with Baker [Joseph V. Baker Associates] too, you know, and activities around the church and civil rights and-- Speaker 2: Yes, in 1964, for example, I took my month's vacation and went to Mississippi to work with the Delta Ministry to do voter education, voter registration. Speaker 1: Yeah, we're probably stepping probably ahead too fast, but this is important. This is the summer of '64 [1964]. That's Freedom Summer, they call it now, a pivotal point in U.S. history where the big campaign to register black people to vote in the State of Mississippi. Speaker 2: I (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So did you--when did you go down? Speaker 2: That was the summer I went, 1964, August, 1964. Speaker 1: Okay, so you went down there during the pivotal month where they actually went to the convention [1964 Democratic National Convention, Atlantic City, New Jersey], right? Where the--you were there when the group, the Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party went to the convention, at the Democratic convention, right? Speaker 2: I think it was after that, that they went after that. But the, the 1963 was the big summer. Speaker 1: No, in Mississippi, it's '64 [1964] when they went to the-- Speaker 2: Was it '64 [1964]? Speaker 1: --Johnson's [President Lyndon Baines Johnson], you know, nomination in Atlantic City [New Jersey]. Speaker 2: That's right, Fannie Lou Hamer. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: That's right. It was '64 [1964]. Well, anyhow I--that's the summer I was there with the Delta Ministry. I was supposed to go to work in McComb, Mississippi. And Friday night before I was to go--I was to go on a Monday morning, and the Friday night before that I got a call that the office in McComb had been fire bombed. And they said don't come to McComb. We have no way of protecting you. Go to Greenville [Mississippi] instead. And so I went to Greenville and that's where I spent that month working as a volunteer for the Delta Ministry. Story_ID: 421259 Speaker 1: Now, what was that like? Now, had you spent much time in the Deep South before this? Speaker 2: I had spent time in the South, but primarily on college campuses, working on college campuses, and it was a more protected environment. Speaker 1: And those are like islands, aren't there, those campuses (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. So this was a, this was a brand new experience being in the heart of a poor community and it, it was scary. I can remember that the day that I arrived in Greenville [Mississippi], they immediately sent me over to another part of town to see some people. And I was walking and a cab driver pulled up, a black cab driver, and said, "Can I take you where you're going?" And I said that I could walk, and he said, "Yeah, I know. Your bags are still in Paul McKenna's car in front of the Delta Ministry." So I mean everybody knew what was going on in the community. And then there were rallies almost every night at, you know, some church and a lot of singing and praying, organizing. And there was one man who showed up every night wherever the rally was being held. And at the end of the rally, the police chief knew everything that had gone on. And he, he reported to the police chief. And I'll never forget him. I would walk down the street on one side of the street, and he would shadow me on the other side of the street. And he walked with a limp, dragged his foot. And then when I would come back up the street, he would come back up the street on the other side. And he, he was the snitch and-- Speaker 1: Did you think that he knew that people knew? Speaker 2: Oh, yes, everybody knew, and he knew everybody knew, yeah. But he got something like two dollars a week from-- Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: --the police chief. And-- Speaker 1: That was enough, huh (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) that was it. Yeah, but everybody knew who he was. Also, the phone lines were tapped at the Delta Ministry, and-- Speaker 1: How did you know that or why did you think they were tapped? Speaker 2: Because you could--you would make a phone call, and you could hear somebody breathing. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter) I mean they weren't very sophisticated. And I called for--there was one cab company that we used because we knew it was safe. And I called for People's Cab [People's Cab Company] one night, and I came out of the office, and a white cab had pulled up and said, "You called for a cab?" And I said, "Yes, but I called People's Cab." He said, "That's all right, I'll take you where you're going." And just then the People's Cab pulled up, and I knew, you know, it was a setup. If I had gotten in that cab, I might not be sitting here talking to you today. Speaker 1: And so these are serious times-- Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Speaker 1: --with a lot at stake-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --life and death. Story_ID: 421260 Speaker 1: Did you know people that actually were, were hurt by violence down there at that time? Speaker 2: No. I, I didn't know any personally who were hurt, but I knew some clergy who the summer before had been arrested in Jackson, Mississippi because they took a Freedom Bus and went to Jackson, Mississippi and were arrested. And that year of 1964, the Episcopal Society for Cultural and Racial Unity, ESCRU, we called it, of which I was a member, had its annual meeting in Jackson, Mississippi. And I left Greenville [Mississippi] and went to Jackson for that meeting. And the bishop, the then bishop of Mississippi came to the meeting and said, the, that the police, the chief of police had sent a message that if the clergy who had visited there before were not comfortable at the hotel, they could have their old cell in the city jail where they had been the previous summer. So. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that he would come bearing that message, was an insult. Story_ID: 421261 Speaker 1: So you were down there through August of that, of '64 [1964]? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Did you--I believe the convention [1964 Democratic National Convention, Atlantic City, New Jersey] was that August. I don't know. You were there though. I believe it was that August where they took the buses to, the Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party members to Atlantic City [New Jersey]. Speaker 2: I remember that, but I--but I--but that was going on separately from what I was doing. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I mean when Fannie Lou Hamer was heading the Freedom Democratic Party and I know about their going to Atlantic City and demanding some seats, and she said, "We didn't come all this way for two seats." And, but that--I was not a part of that activity. Speaker 1: Okay, but was it part of a general focus of--I mean, I guess I'm trying to get a sense of how separated out things were. I mean I guess--and when you read about it, you have a sense that everybody is working for the same goal and knew that, you know, were backing the group that went to Atlantic City. Speaker 2: Well, the, the Delta Ministry, for example, was an inter-faith, religious-led program which focused on, primarily on voter education and voter registration. I did try to help organize a boycott of some local beer distributors who were exploiting black-owned-- Speaker 1: Taverns? Speaker 2: --taverns and establishments. But the real political activity was going on in the Freedom Democratic Party, and other entities. Speaker 1: Okay. So did you have a chance to meet Fannie Lou Hamer? Speaker 2: No, I did not meet her personally, but I knew so much about her. And, and she was an icon. And I remember that this reporter asked her to sum up the, the Civil Rights Movement. And she said, "I'm sick and tired of being sick and tired." Story_ID: 421262 Speaker 1: Being a part of a denomination like the Episcopalians affords members of the congregation amenities and benefits and organizational capacity you wouldn't get in the average Baptist church because of the connections worldwide, and the organizational capacity. That's my observation, and a lot of committees and national committees and committees focused on--and just talk a little bit--how did you get--when did you start really becoming involved in the organized life of the Episcopal church, beyond just going to church and Sunday school and that sort of thing? Speaker 2: I suppose I began to get really involved through the Episcopal Society for Cultural and Racial Unity, which was an unofficial body, but a church-related organization. Speaker 1: That's ESCRU, we talked about earlier (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: That was perhaps one of my first involvements. Speaker 1: And when did, when did that take place? Speaker 2: That would have been in the, the--I guess in the very, in the late '50s [1950s], early '60s [1960s]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then I was also involved in the life of the Diocese of Pennsylvania [Episcopal Diocese of Pennsylvania]. I served on committees and the Diocesan Council-- Speaker 1: This is prior to, prior to being in ESCRU? Speaker 2: No, I would say kind of concurrently. And just one thing led to another. Then in the early '60s [1960s]--no, I'm sorry, the late '60s [1960s], the Union of--what was then the Union of Black Clergy and Laity was founded. And that then became the Union of Black Episcopalians. And I was active in that. And that led to involvement on national church boards and committees and just a whole host of them and a member of the--briefly, a member of the Executive Council of the national church [National Council of the Episcopal Church; Executive Council of the Episcopal Church]. Story_ID: 421263 Speaker 1: In 1979, I was a lay deputy to general, to the General Convention. And in 1982, I was a clergy alternate deputy to the General Convention. And I have attended every General Convention of the church since 1967 in--not always as a deputy or delegate, but in connection with some organization or some entity in the church, that has had something to do at General Convention, an exhibit or--in 19--following the 1982 convention, I brought--at the time, I was associated with the Episcopal Church Publishing Company. And I brought together about eight or ten progressive organizations in the church to form a, a coalition of groups which we now--we named the Consultation, and it was just that, a consultation of progressive organizations including the Episcopal Women's Caucus, the Union of Black Episcopalians, Integrity [Integrity USA] which is the gay and lesbian organization, the Episcopal Peace Fellowship and several groups of that kind to form a progressive coalition, to advocate and lobby for particular progressive reforms in the church and to endorse people running for national offices for the church so that some progressive people could be elected to things like the Executive Council of the church [Executive Council of the Episcopal Church], the board of the Church Pension Fund, the Board of Examining Chaplains [General Board of Examining Chaplains] which prepares and administers the ordination examinations, things of that kind. Speaker 2: So in other words, every, you know, every significant (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Aspect of-- Speaker 2: --facet of, aspect of the church. Speaker 1: --of life in the church, yes. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And that coalition or that consultation continues to this day. Story_ID: 421264 Speaker 1: I think I skipped the youth organizing you were doing, the young people's organizing you were doing back in the-- Speaker 2: Well, that was just a, that was a parish-based organization that, that dealt mainly with life in the, in the parish. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But that's how I think--well, you know, it starts somewhere (laughter). You start organizing at the parish level, then further and further out, I guess, right? Speaker 2: Well, I think, I think the, the telling point for me was being a part of ESCRU [Episcopal Society for Cultural and Racial Unity]. Speaker 1: Okay. And how did you, how did you become a part of ESCRU? What was the--did someone bring you into it or did you--were you part of the foundation of it or what? Speaker 2: It was an Atlanta [Georgia] based organization. And it had chapters around the country. And I don't remember how I got affiliated with the Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] area group, but I really don't remember how I got affiliated, but I did, and at one point, I was president of the Philadelphia--or Pennsylvania group. And as I said, just one thing led another, and being active in the Union of Black Episcopalians [UBE], I think led to a lot of national church involvement because one of the things that the UBE was about was getting more black people on national boards and committees. And so there were two slots for blacks nominated by or proposed by the Union of Black Episcopalians on the Executive Council [Executive Council of the Episcopal Church]. And I was chosen to be one of those persons, and then I served on the board for clergy deployment, the Coalition for Human Needs [sic. Coalition on Human Needs], a national development committee, the, (pause) GLADD [Gay and Lesbian Alliance Against Defamation; GLADD], a leadership and development group, just one national committee after another. And, and as I said, and also serving at the diocesan level. So, it just mushroomed (laughter), and because some of these national things on which I served, a lot of people knew me. I served both as a lay person and as an ordained person. And some women in Massachusetts approached me during a conference at the Episcopal Divinity School in Cambridge [Massachusetts] where we were talking about women in the episcopate. And I spoke at that conference, and I said, "Well, of course, we're talking about white women because they have the magic ten years in orders and they have the recognition and so we're really talking about white women." And I believe that. And some women came to me later and asked if I would allow my name to go forward in the nominating process for suffragan bishop in Massachusetts. And I said, well, "I would have to really go and pray about this." And I wrestled with it for about a month, and just before the deadline for submitting names to be considered--and it's a long process--I said, "Well, you can let my name go in, but I don't think it will mean anything." Story_ID: 421265 Speaker 1: Let's go back and maybe catch up on the chronology 'cause I think we're kind of--we're out of order. You're telling a good story, but we're kind of out of order. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Now, you were, you worked for Baker [Joseph V. Baker Associates] until, for twenty--until '68 [1968]. Then you worked for Shell-- Speaker 2: Sun Oil [Sun Oil Company, Inc.; Sunoco, Inc.]. Speaker 1: Sun Oil Company. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Sunoco, right, yeah-- Speaker 2: Until '79 [1979]. Speaker 1: Okay, but in the meantime, there were changes going on in the Episcopal church in terms of the ordination of women, right? Speaker 2: Well, in 1974, of course, we had the irregular ordination. I happened to be the senior warden in my parish where the ordinations took place. And the congregation voted that the ordinations could take place there at Church of the Advocate [George W. South Memorial Church of the Advocate, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] because there was a serious question about where these ordinations could occur. Speaker 1: (Pause) Okay. Speaker 2: And I was part of the planning process for that service, along with the rector of the parish and the bishops who were going to do the ordaining and people who were pulling the service together, and especially one of the women who was to be ordained. She had been sponsored by our congregation for ordination as a deacon, and-- Speaker 1: So this is a black woman-- Speaker 2: No, this was a white woman (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 2: --who came out of the, who affiliated with the Church of the Advocate. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, so as senior warden, I led the procession that morning, and, and served as a, sort of the chief acolyte at the, at that service where eleven women were ordained priests. Speaker 1: Okay, now, is--was it around this time that you kind of got the idea that maybe you could be a priest? Speaker 2: No, it wasn't until later. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: At that point, I did not entertain any ideas about ordination. It wasn't until a couple of years later. Speaker 1: Okay, around 1976, I guess? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That, maybe early '76 [1976] when I started wrestling with my own call to ordination. Story_ID: 421266 Speaker 1: We hear people often say they were called to ministry, but in your case, what happened to you? Speaker 2: Well, I was exercising a very active lay ministry at the time. I was part of this St. Dismas Fellowship that went into the county prisons primarily, and I, I spent virtually every Sunday afternoon in the county jail because most of the inmate population was black. And all the volunteers were white. And so I thought that there needed to be a black volunteer that maybe people could relate to. And so I started going to the women's wing of the House of Correction for Philadelphia County [Pennsylvania], and occasionally, I would go to the group that met together in Holmesburg Prison [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], which was another county facility for men. And I, I did that for several years and had been doing that for several years. And there was something tugging at me saying that there was a wider dimension to ministry that I was feeling pulled towards. And I spent a lot of time talking to my parish rector about it, and about my strengths and weaknesses and trying to discern this call. And finally, we had a marathon conversation in my den one night that started about seven o'clock in the evening and went 'til about two in the morning when we stood and prayed together. And he said, "When shall we go to the bishop?" And I said, "I see no further reason to delay." And in the morning, later in the morning, he called the bishop and said, "I have someone whom I think you need to consider as a candidate." Speaker 1: Now, who is this that you had the marathon-- Speaker 2: The Reverend Paul Washington who was my rector [at the George W. South Memorial Church of the Advocate, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Story_ID: 421267 Speaker 1: And then I started the process towards ordination which meant that I had to take my studies where I could get them because at the time, the only two seminaries in the Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]--because the Episcopal seminary [Philadelphia Divinity School] had closed and merged with the seminary [Episcopal Theological School; Episcopal Divinity School] in Cambridge, Massachusetts. There were two seminaries, Lutheran Seminary [Lutheran Theological Seminary at Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and Eastern Baptist [Eastern Baptist Theological Seminary; Palmer Theological Seminary, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. And they did not offer any night courses. Their philosophy was if you're seriously preparing for ministry, then you put everything aside and came to seminary full time. Well, I was heading up the public relations department at Sun Oil Company [Sun Oil Company, Inc.; Sunoco, Inc.] at the time, and with a staff split between Philadelphia and Tulsa, Oklahoma. And so I studied where I could at nights, weekends, vacations. I, I took, for example, Old Testament and New Testament at Villanova University [Villanova, Pennsylvania]. I went to Sheffield, England to study at Urban Theology [Urban Theology Unit]. I, I just did things, hither, fither and yond, having put together an alternative program of study which I had to satisfy subjects in all of the areas in which I would be examined, which every candidate for ordination is examined. And then I took some time at the seminary in Cambridge [Massachusetts] to try to integrate my individual study into the life of a seminary community. And that's where I took the general ordination examinations, and I had access to the library and to--and I could audit classes. And I had access to faculty members. And that's where I took my general ordination examinations in early 1979, January of 1979. Speaker 2: And where was it at, where? Where was it? Speaker 1: At the Episcopal Divinity School in Cambridge (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. Story_ID: 421268 Speaker 1: After you took the examination, then what was the next step for, for-- Speaker 2: Well, got the results of the exams in March. The Standing Committee of the Diocese [Standing Committee of the Episcopal Diocese of Pennsylvania] accepted me as a, as an ordinand and in September of 1979, I was ordained a deacon. Speaker 1: Okay, so you were ordained a deacon. Now, what is a--what is a--explain what deacon status is? Speaker 2: Well, the deacons meant--I was ordained as what they call a transitional deacon. And that's a person who is going to subsequently be ordained priest. But there are vocational deacons and transitional deacons. But basically, the deacon's ministry is under the direct supervision of the bishop, and it's, it's a ministry of serving, of bringing the needs of the world to the attention of the church and trying to take, then take the church's contribution into the world. And generally, deacons work at, in hospitals, in prisons, in some community-based facility. So--and some people do this perpetually. They're the vocational deacons. Transitional deacons usually serve and you're in some assisting capacity in a church for about a year. Sometimes it's six months. In my diocese, it was one year. And so in October of 1980, I was ordained a priest. Story_ID: 421269 Speaker 1: Did you get a lot of attention for--I mean did people--was that a big deal around here with, I mean in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] when that happened? Speaker 2: Well, yes (cough), excuse me. A lot of people I knew were, you know, surprised, but pleased and supportive of my leaving the secular business world and going into ordained ministry. And, and, of course, a lot of people questioned, well, how do you walk away from big bucks, you know, at an oil company [Sun Oil Company, Inc.; Sunoco, Inc.] to go work for the church. And once the decision had been made to be ordained, it was easy. That was the direction in which I felt my life was unfolding. Speaker 1: Okay, I would think at this point, you're spending quite a bit of time in church activities anyway. I mean, really. Speaker 2: All my life (laughter), yep. So it, it was kind of a natural progression, although a lot of my friends didn't see it that way. They were surprised. But at any rate, you know, I, I envisioned my life as a priest, certainly with no notion of anything broader. Speaker 1: Okay, so you weren't thinking about--oh, okay, so that's, well (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Never entered my mind. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So when did it enter--when did you start thinking about-- Speaker 2: Well, as I said, when I was asked if I would allow my name to go into the Massachusetts process. Speaker 1: Now, at this point then, you're rector of a church then? Or are you? Speaker 2: No, I had left--I was priest in charge of a church in Norristown, Pennsylvania. And then I returned to the Church of the Advocate [George W. South Memorial Church of the Advocate, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] as interim rector following the retirement of the rector, and two interims that were not too successful. And so then the people asked if I could be their--the interim rector. And I went there. At the same time, I was executive director of the Episcopal Church Publishing Company. Story_ID: 421270 Speaker 1: You were saying before that you allowed them to put your name in. Speaker 2: Yeah. But I didn't think it was gonna go anyplace. It's, as I say, it's a long, drawn-out process. A nominating committee receives a whole batch of names. They can receive as many as fifty, and then they begin to go through 'em and see who they wanna look at further. And then they ask you to submit some answers questions and some thoughts on various areas, depending on what--and it varies from diocese to diocese, depending on what that nominating committee is interested in, in terms of a person, in terms of their outlook, in terms of their theology, their positions on social issues, et cetera. And then if they wanna look at you further, they will send a team from the nominating committee to hear you preach, to interview people in the, the parish and the community and the diocese who know you. And then if they consider you further, you're asked to come and meet with the committee, with the whole committee. And then, indeed, if they--if you wind up as one of the nominees, you come to the diocese and do what they call a walk-about. We used to call 'em the dog and pony show, but they have now dignified it, and they call it a walk-about where you meet with various groups of people in a diocese who are going to be voting at the electing convention. Well, at each step in this process, I was saying to myself, well, it's nice to be considered, but it's not going any further than here. And then a team came to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], and I thought, well, this is nice. But it's not going any further than this. Then some people wrote letters of reference and recommendation for me, including the then bishop of New York (background noise)-- Speaker 1: Pause for a second. (Pause) Okay. Speaker 2: As I said, at each step in the process I said, well, it's nice to be considered, but I don't think it's going any further. And so I was most surprised when I was asked to come to Massachusetts and be interviewed by the whole committee. And then later, to receive a call, while I was attending an annual conference of the Union of Black Episcopalians, to be told that I was one of the nominees, one of four nominees, and that the slate was going to be announced the next day. Story_ID: 421271 Speaker 1: Now, that must have been a big hit at the UBE [Union of Black Episcopalians] conference? Speaker 2: Well, yes, it was. There was another member of the UBE who was also a nominee, and I don't think my nomination set so well with him. And I'm sure he thought that he had a greater inside track than I did, which in truth, he did. Then a fifth person was nominated by petition, not by the committee, but by a group in the diocese who wanted this person on the, on the ballot. And so it became a five-way race. There was another woman who had been nominated, a white woman priest from New Jersey. Speaker 1: Was she a part of the original group or was she the one-- Speaker 2: Yes, she had been nominated by the committee. So there were two women from outside the diocese, one priest from inside the diocese and a black male priest from outside the diocese. So the person who came in by petition was a priest in, in the diocese. So that was (cough), excuse me. Actually, there were five of us on, on the slate of nominees, and the sixth person was nominated by petition. Story_ID: 421272 Speaker 1: Now, just to set the stage for this, were there any black bishops at that point? Speaker 2: Yes, there were several. Some were retired, but in the months prior to the Massachusetts election, in October of '88 [1988], Frank Turner had been consecrated as suffragan bishop in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. I guess a year prior to that, Orris Walker [Orris G. Walker, Jr.] had been consecrated in Long Island [New York], and was the diocesan bishop in Long Island. Herbert Thompson [Herbert Thompson, Jr.] had been elected in southern Ohio, and, in fact, his consecration was the day that I was elected. So there--and there were some active black bishops--oh, Walter Decoster Dennis in New York [New York], the suffragan in New York. Speaker 1: Was Primo [Quintin E. Primo, Jr.], was he one of the first-- Speaker 2: Bishop Primo had died by that time, I think (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, all right. Speaker 2: I think Bishop Primo had died by that time. I'm a little hazy, but there was Bishop Hucles [Henry Boyd Hucles, III] in Long Island, Bishop Martin [Richard Beamon Martin] was retired. [HistoryMaker] Bishop John Burgess who had been the bishop of Massachusetts, Bishop John Walker [John T. Walker] of Washington, D.C., the diocesan in Washington, D.C., who was one of my co-consecrators, Bishop Clarence Coleridge [Clarence Nicholas Coleridge] who was the suffragan in Connecticut and ultimately, became their diocesan bishop. So there were a number of active black bishops. Speaker 1: Okay. But there were no women at this point, right? Speaker 2: None at all, no. Speaker 1: None at all, whatsoever. Okay. Speaker 2: No women at all. Story_ID: 421273 Speaker 1: And so the, the day that I was elected, September 25th, 1988, I became the first woman elected a bishop in the history of the Anglican Communion. Speaker 2: Now, that includes the Church of England as well-- Speaker 1: Church of England (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not just the-- Speaker 1: Church of England and all of the other thirty-eight provinces that make up the Anglican Communion. Speaker 2: I see, okay. And they're all over, Africa and Caribbean-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --you know. Speaker 1: So, then, even with my election, there is, in this country, a consent process that has to be fulfilled. That is a majority of the standing committees of the dioceses that make up the American church have to consent to the election. And at that time, it was done sequentially, in that the standing committees first had to concur. And then a majority of bishops having jurisdiction had to consent. Now, I think it's done concurrently. And if the election is within 180 days of a general convention, then the whole convention gives consent to the election rather than the standing committees and the bishops. But in my case, it had to be the standing committees first, a majority of them, and then a majority of bishops with jurisdiction. Speaker 2: Okay, okay, so this is--there's a--so there were quite a few black bishops at that time, but-- Speaker 1: But they did not all have a vote in this process because only bishops with jurisdiction-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --a diocesan bishop could vote. And so that would have been Orris Walker [Orris G. Walker, Jr.] and John Walker [John T. Walker]. They were the only two at the time. Speaker 2: So the rest were what you call suffragan bishops. Speaker 1: Yeah, or they were retired. Story_ID: 421274 Speaker 1: Okay, so how did that process--well, I know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, it-- Speaker 1: --it was successful, but (laughter)-- Speaker 2: It was successful, but it was touch and go. And whereas, a goodly number of the bishops consented, I maybe had just a couple of more votes of standing committees consenting. I, I got my majority, but by maybe two votes or something because there was a lot of resistance to, one, a woman, two an African American and three, a person who had, had limited parish experience and who had not attended seminary full time. One diocese ran my picture on the front page of its newspaper with a black slash across my face like a non-smoking ad, with the caption, "The wrong woman at the right time." Speaker 1: "The wrong woman at the right time." Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Now, what did (laughter)-- Speaker 2: Well, that was, that was just one of, of many things because I received a lot of hate mail, death threats. I had to have my telephone number changed a couple of times at home. I got vile mail from church people, and, but one of the priest on the staff of the Diocese of Massachusetts [Episcopal Diocese of Massachusetts] who's been my friend for a long time said, "Don't take it personally, and it gets worse when the Red Sox [Boston Red Sox] start losing." (Laughter) So the day of my consecration, the Boston Police Department offered me a bulletproof vest which I declined to wear. Speaker 1: Now, this is incredible. These are threats from church people-- Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: --who are really the only ones who really care about the Episcopal--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No one can, nobody can hate like Christians. Speaker 1: So this, the threats reached all the way up into the ranks of the Boston Police Department and they offered protection? Speaker 2: Yes, I declined the bulletproof vest, but if you ever get a chance to see a tape of the consecration service, which was held in the Hynes Convention Center [John B. Hynes Veterans Memorial Convention Center, Boston, Massachusetts] because there were just no churches large enough because it was attended by eight thousand five hundred people, there is a woman who walks behind me in the procession, and who sits directly behind me through the whole service who was a plainclothes officer of the police, Boston Police Department. Speaker 1: Now, you know, we've heard stories of Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] receiving death threats for civil rights agitation and Malcom X and other people like that. But to think that--this is the first time I ever heard of someone receiving a death threat for being consecrated a bishop. That seems like that's just the opposite of what you would think. Speaker 2: Well, Gene Robinson [Vicky Gene Robinson] did wear a bulletproof vest at his consecration. Speaker 1: So do you think it was the--you already had black men as bishops, so it had to be the fact that you're a woman, I guess. Speaker 2: That was primarily, that was primarily the objection. Speaker 1: Okay, had any of the black male bishops received those kind of threats when they were consecrated? Speaker 2: Not to my knowledge. I doubt it, I doubt it. Speaker 1: Do you think that things would have been different if you'd been a white woman? Speaker 2: Not much. I think the objection to a woman would have still been strong. Story_ID: 421275 Speaker 1: Were the Episcopals here the first, or the Anglicans, period, the first to consecrate a black bishop of the major denominations? Speaker 2: No, Leontine Kelly [Leontine T. Kelly] had been consecrated a bishop in the United Methodist church. Speaker 1: Is she black as well? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She was on the West Coast. Speaker 1: Okay, now that was before--how many years before you was that? Do you remember or can you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't know, but I did get a call from her congratulating me and giving me her phone number and saying, "If at any time during the night or day you need to talk, call me, because I know what it can be like." Story_ID: 421276 Speaker 1: Well, I suppose things eventually cooled off. Speaker 2: Yes, after I was consecrated--of course, there were still people who objected. In fact, there were--two people expressed objections during the consecration service. The service provides for that. It's kind of like at a wedding when they ask if anybody can show cause why these two people should not be joined-- Speaker 1: (Laughter)-- Speaker 2: --the question is asked by the presiding bishop, if there is any reason or offense by which we should not proceed, it can be expressed, and two--a layman from Chicago [Illinois] and a priest from New York both offered objections, not personally directed at me, (cough) pardon me, but one, that the church's constitution had not been amended to allow for the consecration of a woman. And the fact that Anglican order was being violated in that no bishop from the Church of England would recognize my orders or any ordinations, confirmations that proceeded from me. And the other objection was about the same, violating the, the good order of the church and the communion and that this would do irreparable harm to our conversations and relationships with the Roman Catholic church. Speaker 1: Oh, with the Catholic church. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay, so one objected because of its impact on the Anglican church, the general--in general, and the other on the Roman Catholic. Speaker 2: Well, that, plus the violating the order of the Anglican church. Speaker 1: Well, how did your consecration affect the Anglican church in--now, how--and I guess before we ask, what is the relationship? I mean how is, the Archbishop of Canterbury is over the, just the Church of England itself or is he (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He is head of the Church of England and has, let us say, the moral leadership of the communion, which is made up of thirty-eight autonomous churches, such as the church in Brazil, the church in Japan, the church in Nigeria, the Province of South Africa [Church of the Province of Southern Africa; Anglican Church of Southern Africa], the province of Australia. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That kind of thing. Speaker 1: And all these together make up the Anglican Communion (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Communion, yes. It's a-- Speaker 1: Sort of a nod to the Archbishop of Canterbury as being the origin? Speaker 2: The way you are part of the Anglican Communion is to be in communion with the Archbishop of Canterbury. Speaker 1: Okay, if you are not, then you are not in the communion. Speaker 2: You got it. Speaker 1: All right, okay, all right. Very good. Now, so how did the Archbishop of Canterbury react to your consecration? Speaker 2: Well, Lord Runcie [Robert Alexander Kennedy Runcie] was gracious, if not accepting. But this was the action, an action of the American church over which he really had no control. And, he has no, no authority over the church beyond that of moral suasion. Story_ID: 421277 Speaker 1: So the fears of your--of the two dissenters were not, well-- Speaker 2: Well, there were bishops who would not recognize me. I remember a young priest I had ordained wanted to do, had been invited to officiate at a wedding in, I think it was the Bahamas or some place in the Caribbean, and the bishop there said, no, he could not do it because he had been ordained by me. Speaker 1: I see, okay. Speaker 2: So that was--there was no recognition of my orders. Therefore, no recognition of his orders. Speaker 1: So in this process, there's no authority that can be waived to compel the rest of the members of the communion [Anglican Communion] to recognize any specific person? Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: But it would have helped had the Archbishop of Canterbury [Robert Alexander Kennedy Runcie] been more than gracious and made some proclamation? Speaker 2: I don't know that it would have made any difference to those who are basically opposed to women's ordination. Speaker 1: Okay. They just would have opposed him, too (laughter). Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 1: I see. But did he (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Because I don't think the Archbishop of Nigeria [Joseph Abiodun Adetiloye] would recognize me. Story_ID: 421278 Speaker 1: Which is interesting, and we discussed this off-camera, but the one thing, a dynamic that's going on now in the Episcopal church as well as other African American congregations, is the return to sort of African cultural trappings in one way or another and to reach out in some sort of a Pan-African--in other words, the church is becoming African-like in some ways than they were before or relating more. Speaker 2: I don't, no, it's not like the church in Africa, and churches in Africa vary. I mean there's the, the use of African fabrics and vestments, but it's more of the black experience in this country rather than--because many churches, many of the provinces in Africa more reflect the Church of England than anything else, although some are becoming, have become more culturally indigenous. But for a long time, it was the colonial model of the church. Speaker 1: Right. What I was suggesting is that the African American churches are trying to become what they can--what they see as African--where the African churches (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Afrocentric. Speaker 1: Yeah, where the African churches are trying to become more like the Church of England or more Anglican in their-- Speaker 2: Yeah, they're-- Speaker 1: --culturally as well as just, in terms of just going to church. I mean they want to dress like the Englishmen and have the vestments of an Englishman in church. Speaker 2: Well, we all pretty much dress the same (laughter). Speaker 1: Well, there is a diff- when you go to St. Edmund's [St. Edmund's Episcopal Church] in Chicago [Illinois], the rector is dressed in African material from head to toe. And, you know, though he's dressed in the traditional robe, but they're of African cloth. Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah. Speaker 1: That's not--you wouldn't see that necessarily in one of these conservative Nigerian churches. Speaker 2: Oh, no, no, no, no. Doubtful. Speaker 1: Right, so that, I mean that seems like a paradoxical situation. Speaker 2: Although I would hazard to guess that they would deny it. Story_ID: 421279 Speaker 1: Have you, in your position as a bishop, have you toured Africa or have you (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I have visited in South Africa but not other places in Africa. Speaker 1: Okay, is the South African church more open? Speaker 2: Much more liberal and more, in a relationship with the American church. Speaker 1: And I'll ask you this too, is--do you think that the churches, say in Nigeria as opposed to South Africa, when you compare the two, is one--how do I ask this without making somebody angry that might watch this later, but I'll just go on and say it anyway, is the South African church, because it came out of a struggle for, against apartheid, and is it more people oriented and change oriented than say a church in Nigeria that may have been used to more, can bolster colonial power more? Speaker 2: I would think so because the struggle in South Africa was not just freedom, but reconciliation and so there's much more acceptance of diversity. And it, and there are, you know, there are black Anglicans in South Africa and white Anglicans in South Africa. And that, perhaps, is not the case in other parts of Africa. Story_ID: 421280 Speaker 1: Yeah, we were just talking about maybe the difference in the African churches, the difference between how South Africa approaches-- Speaker 2: Oh, I think the, the church in South Africa, having come through the apartheid struggle, and having both black South African Anglicans and white South African Anglicans, is perhaps more open to diversity than perhaps the Anglican Church in other parts of Africa where this, where the makeup of the church would not be the same. Story_ID: 421281 Speaker 1: I was telling you before there's a poster on black bishops of the Episcopal church that I saw, with people like Absalom Jones, who was not a bishop, but a great leader and advocate for black freedom and dignity. James Theodore Holly, Henry Beard Delany, the father of the Delany sisters [Sarah Louise Delany and Annie Elizabeth Delany]. There's this tradition of service and, and even more, you know, fighting for freedom and equal rights and that sort of thing. What is your--and you come out of that, that tradition too. What is your own theology, I guess? What's your personal theology? Speaker 2: Well, it's certainly the theology of the inclusiveness of, of Jesus Christ who embraced all kinds of people, the marginalized, the oppressed, the, those who lived on the margins, the edges of the society. And certainly, I, I want the church to be as inclusive as it possibly can be. Story_ID: 421282 Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: Well, I'll lament the fact that there are more African American males in prison than there are in college. And I certainly would hope that education and, would continue to be a primary concern of the community, and that we keep young people in school in, and receiving--not just in school, but receiving a quality education, that prepares them to do something with their lives and to live into their fullest potential. And an education that would allow babies to stop making babies and babies to stop having babies. And certainly, the economic wellbeing of the community is of concern, and I think that that can flow from the education, from quality education in the, the community. But when you're not prepared to do anything but stand around and sell drugs that does not contribute to the economic wellbeing of the community, nor the cultural or physical wellbeing of the community. Story_ID: 421283 Speaker 1: Now, when you look back on everything you've done professionally and in the clerical world, what today would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: I don't know that I have a legacy. I certainly would hope that people would recognize that you can overcome odds and that if you apply yourself rigorously, that you can achieve some things. Story_ID: 421284 Speaker 1: What would you consider or what things are you the most proud of in terms of the--or what things do you think are the most important that you've contributed to? Speaker 2: Well, I think the fact that I had the strength to walk this way of being the first woman bishop and, and not having caved in to the objections and what not, has allowed other women to fill this role and some as diocesan bishops and now as the presiding bishop of the Episcopal church. So that whatever contribution I have made to this--now, thirteen women bishops in this church and a few--three in Canada and one retired in New Zealand, whatever contribution I have made to opening that pathway, I'm glad to have been able to do it. Story_ID: 421285 Speaker 1: When you look back at everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could do it again? Speaker 2: I perhaps would be a little less blunt in some of the things that I have said that have been publicly circulated. I might have been a little more discreet. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Is there--can you give us an example of something that you wish you probably could have put--rephrased or-- Speaker 2: There's some things I wish I had not said at all because they do have a way of rising up to haunt you. And somehow people remember something untoward that you said, rather than something important that you said. Story_ID: 421286 Speaker 1: Was there ever a time in, when you were being considered for consecration that you just wanted to just give up and if it was such a time, how did you make it through? Speaker 2: Well, once the, the wheels got turning after the election, I was committed to seeing it through, whatever the outcome was. I never considered giving up. Speaker 1: Okay, now, you retired in 2003, '2 [2002] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Two thousand two [2002]. Speaker 1: All right, okay. Speaker 2: In November, 2002. And since mid-2003, I started serving as assisting bishop in Washington, D.C., part--a part-time position, which you can do as a retired bishop. And I have just concluded that work at the end of January of this year. Speaker 1: What church was it? Speaker 2: The Diocese of Washington, D.C [Episcopal Diocese of Washington]. Speaker 1: Okay, the diocese, all right. Okay, now, tell us about your family? What does your family consists of right now in terms of-- Speaker 2: My immediate family right now is my brother [Thomas Harris]. I have some cousins, and a host of cousins, but immediate family is my brother and sister-in-law. Story_ID: 421287 Speaker 1: Now, is there anything I have not asked you that you think we need to ask before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: Oh, well, I think you've been pretty thorough in covering my childhood and my growing up years, and so feel free to ask your last question. Speaker 1: Well, there's one other thing I need to throw in, maybe. I think we talked about this off camera, but we talked about you participating in the Selma to Montgomery March in '65 [1965], I guess it was, right? Speaker 2: It was only a portion of the-- Speaker 1: A portion of it, yeah. Speaker 2: Yes, not the whole march. I've been credited with, with marching from Selma [Alabama] to Montgomery [Alabama], but I did not make the whole march, only a part of it. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have any reflections on the role of the, of the large denominational churches in Dr. King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] civil rights struggle, I mean the movement (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Would you ask that again? Speaker 1: The role of the large church denominations, 'cause I know he was a Baptist preacher, but there were like, large, I mean the Presbyterians, the Lutherans, Episcopalians, other groups, you know, made a contribution to the Civil Rights Movement. And I just wondered what your reflections are on those-- Speaker 2: Well, I think that we need to--the major denominations need to recapture some of that spirit that was alive when Dr. King was active and that we need to be embracing some of those same things that he was about. We kind of lost that spirit, and I think we need to think about international debt, the Millennium Development Goals, housing, economic justice, justice for all people, despite their race, sexual orientation or what have you, that we just need to recapture some of what was going on when Dr. King was active. Story_ID: 421288 Speaker 1: Just one more little thing here I could think of before I ask the last one was, in this time of increasing religious polarization between Muslims and Christians and in other groups too as well, what are your thoughts? Speaker 2: Oh, I think even more serious than the polarization of Christians and Muslims is the polarization of Christians and Christians, Evangelicals and so-called liberals and those who haven't decided what they are, polarization within denominations and between groups of Christians. I think it's very serious, that we need to be looking at the things that supposedly unite us as Christians rather than the things that divide us. Story_ID: 421289 Speaker 1: My last question is similar to legacy, but a little different. Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: I would like to be remembered as someone who stood up for justice and peace in the society and tried to work to help bring that about. Speaker 1: Thank you very much for spending the time with us. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Okay. Story_ID: 421290 Speaker 1: This is a picture of me, Barbara Harris [HistoryMaker Bishop Barbara Harris], taken in the backyard of the house where I grew up. And I would say I'm about five or six years old at this point. Speaker 2: This is a photo from my high school [Philadelphia High School for Girls, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] yearbook. That was a memento from my fiftieth class reunion. Speaker 1: Barbara Harris at-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Hold on. Go ahead. Speaker 1: This is Barbara Harris at age fifteen with lots more hair than I have at this point. Speaker 2: That's when you were writing High School-- Speaker 1: High School Notes-- Speaker 2: High School Notes from Bobbi [for the Pittsburgh Courier; New Pittsburgh Courier]. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: This is one of my favorite likenesses. It is a photograph of a portrait that was painted of me at my retirement or close to my retirement by Simmie Knox [Simmie Lee Knox] of Washington, D.C. And I think it captures a great deal of my inner spirit. Speaker 1: This shot comes from one of the many joyous services around my retirement in 2002, and that was taken in Trinity Church, Copley Square, Boston [Massachusetts]. Speaker 2: (Unclear) on the town there (laughter). Speaker 1: I am pictured here with two of the bishops with whom I was privileged to work and serve, the diocesan bishop, M. Thomas Shaw of the Society of St. John the Evangelist, to my right, holding the crosier and the, and Bishop Roy "Budd" Cederholm [Roy F. Cederholm, Jr.], suffragan bishop. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): And the bottom one? Speaker 1: And added to this photo, in addition to Bishops Shaw and Cederholm, is my successor as a suffragan bishop in Massachusetts, the Right Reverend Gayle Elizabeth Harris, no relation, but whom I call my sister-daughter. Speaker 2: This is a very recent photograph taken aboard a cruise ship which is one of my very favorite activities, and I am pictured with a close friend, the Reverend Nan- Canon Nan Peete [HistoryMaker Nan Arrington Peete] who is a retired priest from the Diocese of Washington [Episcopal Diocese of Washington]. Speaker 1: And certainly, if I'm not recognized, recognizable, the person with whom I am standing, the archbishop emeritus of the Province of South Africa [Church of the Province of Southern Africa; Anglican Church of Southern Africa], the Right Reverend Desmond Tutu...