 Story_ID: 649287 Speaker 1: So my name is Julieanna Richardson, and I'm the interviewer; Matthew Hickey is the videographer, and we're going to slate the interview. I'd like to have you start out by stating your name and spelling it for us including--do you have a middle name, and if you have a middle name. And give us today's date. Speaker 2: My name is [HistoryMaker] Bethann Hardison, B-E-T-H-A-N-N, H-A-R-D-I-S-O-N. And it's July 15th, 2013. Speaker 1: And your date of birth? Speaker 2: Oh, my dear. September 29th (laughter), September 30th, technically--well, not technically--September 30, 1942. Oh, god, it's getting deep (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) And your occupation? Speaker 2: Oh, now, that's very interesting. I, I'm, I'm someone who--oh, well, I manage talent, and I'm a producer, and I've had a modeling agency [Bethann Management Co., Inc., New York, New York] in the past, so I am a person who's active in fashion. Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: --so, but how do you, 'cause even in your bio, we were struggling with how, 'cause they had-- Speaker 2: How to describe me. Speaker 1: How to describe you. Speaker 2: Yeah, I struggle with that every day. I, I struggle every day with how to describe me. You know, when you actually have a full time job, and you go into an office every day, and you're doing a specific thing, it's much easier to say, this is what I am. But when you are something that's many things and you can, you're free, and there's no particular title, you know, you start giving yourself titles like, well, what, how do we call you? You say, well, fashion activist (unclear). Speaker 1: Well, we--guess what? We did put a fashion activist or (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, because I started saying something like that because I think when I got one award, someone said that. And that sounded good, but, you know, that doesn't tell you really what I do daily. And, and it, truth of it is, as I've always lived, I am an enigma. And I basically have--I, I don't usually follow the yellow brick road so well, so that is the reason why, it's not easy to describe Bethann Hardison, you know. People just, so many, I look at people who would, in social media, who describe you, because they're so proud of what you're doing. So, they look at you in one way, but when I know who I am, and what I do, and what I've done, then it's a couple of things. Speaker 1: But do you ever say former model on top of that or not? Speaker 2: Yeah, I would. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: People do write, and say I was a former model, because actually I was. Speaker 1: Right, a model or, you don't say model now? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, okay. Speaker 2: Gee, I haven't been a model since the day of the flood (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) So, so, okay, so we have five (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There's going to be a lot of laughing, I can tell. Story_ID: 649288 Speaker 1: Five People magazine-ish questions. First, your favorite food, we ask them of everyone--your favorite? Speaker 2: Oh, my favorite food is a food that I stopped eating--pasta. Speaker 1: Okay. Favorite, that's right. Favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Oh, my goodness--April and September. Speaker 1: Favorite color? Speaker 2: Blue. Speaker 1: Favorite place to vacation? Speaker 2: Marrakech [Morocco] in Mexico [sic.]-- Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: --and, I meant, pardon, Morocco, and Mexico. Speaker 1: And favorite time of--I mean, favorite phrase or saying (background noise)? Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Okay. Just finish this, and then we can-- Speaker 2: Favorite phrase? Speaker 1: Or saying, um-hm. Speaker 2: Time is of the essence. Story_ID: 649289 Speaker 1: So, I want to start out by asking you about your, your family. S- so, I want you to, I want to start out by asking about your father. And if you would give his name and put, you know, about his family and his growing up. Speaker 2: My father's name, American name, was Lee Vance Hardison [Lee Hardison]. He--my father's also, his other name was Amir Hasaan [ph.], and he was imam in the Islamic religion. He was born outside of this country, but then, his family came to, was in North Carolina. And I adored my father, by the way. And so, he is someone who--I don't know a lot about my grandmother or my grandfather. I just know that her name was Estell Farmer [Estell Hardison]. And my grandfather's name, I really--I think it was George [sic. Vance Lee Hardison, Sr.]. I never knew that they had American names. My grandmother was American, but my father, no. Speaker 1: So, where was your father born outside of (unclear)? Speaker 2: Outside of Khartoum in, in the Sudan. Speaker 1: So, what can you tell us about him? Speaker 2: A lot of things--I love my father. My father was an extraordinary guy. He was very modern, you know, for someone who was, you know, I think he lived his life as a young man. He met my mother [Sophie Hudson Hardison] when he was, you know, like in his early twenties, I think. And he, basically, they met at a dance, and they became jitterbug partners. And he eventually wind up being someone who, she and he married. And they had me, but my father eventually went off to the [U.S.] Army. And he had to come back because he worried so much about me 'cause he knew my mother was a good time party girl. And so, he got himself out of the Army and came, and got my grandmother [Carrie Hudson] to come up and take care of me. Then, his life begin to evolve. He became, you know, he married this, he married, second time, to a woman who was really the woman behind the man. And he was very determined to accomplish certain things, and he allowed me to live with my mother and my grandmother until I was eighteen. And then, I went to live with him at the age of twelve, and from that point, my journey began. Speaker 1: You mean, and he, he--you lived with him until you were age twelve. Speaker 2: That's right-- Speaker 1: And then, and then you-- Speaker 2: --that's right. I lived with my mother and my grandmother until the age of twelve. Then, I went to live with my dad. Speaker 1: Okay. And so, I want to go back about, do you remember any stories he told you about his growing up? Did he, did he share any of those stories (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Shakes head) No. Speaker 1: No? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 649290 Speaker 1: Tell me, (background noise) how would you describe your father [Lee Hardison] and, and, you know? Speaker 2: Yes, yeah. My father was-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: (TAPE INTERRUPTION) Speaker 1: My father was very good looking, light brown man. I think he was truly a natural ladies' man, but he was very devout, and belief of his, his wife, and the journey that he was on. And I used to go see him as a little girl. They didn't live that far from each other in Bedford-Stuyvesant in Brooklyn [New York], and I would walk at the age of four, believe it or not. This is how times are different. And I, they would tell which to--, "Go down the block, and get to Sumner Avenue, and then cross the street. Someone will cross you, and then walk three more blocks, and then make a right, and you go to your father's house." And I used to do this. And my father was someone that I just, from the moment that I knew him, I just knew that's, I wanted to marry someone like him. My father, to me--I, I, everything with me was, I think, in some way, I, I wind up doing the right thing. I liked being a model manager because everything to me, I guess, even then, was looks. He was so good looking (laughter) that I think I was attracted to him as a human being, and his style, the way he held a cigarette, the way he, just the, his, his whole mannerisms. But the fact that he was very easy with me, you know, was very nice. Of that time, he was with his wife and I didn't, there was no conflict, you know, for me. And then, as time went on, when I went, you know, he, he got my [maternal] grandmother [Carrie Hudson], as I said, to come live with us, so he could be sure that, you know, I was being taken care of properly with my, with my mother [Sophie Hudson Hardison]. Story_ID: 649291 Speaker 1: He felt the need to come and get me at twelve because he felt responsible as a, you know, someone who knows, Islamically, that you have, you have certain duties. And he came, talked me into coming, leaving my [maternal] grandmother [Carrie Hudson] and my mother [Sophie Hudson Hardison], by telling me, the one thing that got my attention was I would have my own room. Yeah, that can mean a lot to a girl (laughter), to have my own room (background noise). Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: So, I wind up going to live with him at that time, and he taught me a great deal. He taught me all about, you know (background noise)-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: (Pause) He taught me about the world. He taught me about politics. He taught me about the differences of, that you can make, even at a young age. You know, he had me send telegrams to the secretary of state. At the time, it was John Foster Dulles. He kept me informed about things that were going on in the world, like with the Suez Canal, and President Nasser [Gamal Abdel Nasser]. And, you know, he was someone who just basically made you aware of so many things. When I went to live with him, I was, I was in a gang as, as a kid, and living in, in Bedford-Stuyvesant [Brooklyn, New York]. When I left Bedford-Stuyvesant to go live with my dad [Lee Hardison], I went to live with him in Crown Heights [Brooklyn, New York]. And when I went to, to be with him, it was interesting because he asked me, "What, so what's this gang you're in?" And I was telling him about the gang. And what I always admired about him is, at that particular moment, he never made a lot of it, like some parents would say, "What do you mean? You can't be in a--," he didn't, he said, "Um-hm, and so what else do you do?" When I explained what the gang did (laughter), he was so cool about it. Of course, within less than a month, I was no longer part of the gang. But the things that he would do--I remember there was once, someone came from, a young white guy came, knocked on our door once, and he was selling newspaper with the Daily Worker. I didn't know at the time it was a Communist Party [Communist Party USA]--I didn't know anything. I was every bit of thirteen years old, fourteen. And my father, I want, you know, the guy--well, when I, my father came home, I told him about how exciting it was that I met this young, blond, tall, white boy who had come into, come to talk to me about, you know, just showing us that there was prejudices against Jews and blacks, and how important it was to stand behind things. And, and I was just so excited to be able to tell my father about this. And my father said, "So, what did, what did this guy want, what was he selling?" I said, "Well, it's, it's this newspaper, and, and we, and I can get a subscription, but it's so great, Daddy, 'cause it's really just, just going up against people who just don't believe in others." And he said, "Baby, that's really nice. I'm very excited for you," (laughter), he said, "but you don't want to get involved with something like this. This is the Daily Worker--it's a Communist newspaper." And, and he's like, explaining communism to me, and what had happened years before, and how people got cited for doing certain things that they weren't even very close to, and it was considered Communist. He said, "That can be a mark on your record. You start subscribing to this paper, you never know when it could pop up in something in your life when you're grown up." It was very interesting to me because I would have never seen that coming, but that was just nice occasions of things that he would, you know, pull your coat to. Well, like I said, when he had me send the telegram to the secretary of state, and saying that I'd be, that, in my statement was that I beseeched him because he should not allow the problems that they were doing with the Suez Canal, showing you that you had some, some sort of power. He used to talk to me about Joseph Kennedy [Joseph P. Kennedy, Sr.], and where everybody thought, you know, that Joseph Kennedy was such a wonderful man. My father had all kinds of information, sharing with me about Joseph Kennedy. He wasn't as nice as he appeared, you know, good family, very good legend of a, of the Kennedys, but, and that was early, you know. He was someone that tried things very early in life. You know, he was, surely, people are doing juicing now. My father was juicing back when, if I was fifteen, sixteen years old, imagine how long ago that was. My father, at one point, decided that we were going to be vegetarian. Well, that lasted two weeks. My father was so sick of that food because it was no way like it is now. Now, you can eat maybe a soy burger, and get away with it. Then, it wasn't, as you know, it wasn't as developed. My father was like, and I came home one day, and my mother was, my stepmother was cooking normal food. I said, "Thank god," (laughter). Story_ID: 649292 Speaker 1: And of course, because I went to live with my dad [Lee Hardison], I began to be indoctrinated into Islam because I had to be; and, you know, I was a left handed person. He had to teach me how to eat with my right hand. My father was someone who was very influential that when Elijah Muhammad came into, wanted to come from Chicago [Illinois] into New York [New York]. The person they reached out to was him. So, my father had to go to, to Chicago, and meet Elijah Muhammad. At the time he introduced him to a young man named Malcolm X. And my father came back, and he had explained to Elijah, he explained to my- my- myself and my stepmother that, that he understood exactly what they were doing. But it wasn't as much religious as it was cultural. And he didn't know what they would really wind up achieving. But he saw that they were achieving one thing, is they were educating many blacks. And that was, he thought that it was important, but he didn't see, he, he didn't, he didn't understand the fact that it was some way they were dividing a country. Eventually, my father was a big influence on Malcolm X, and was explaining to Malcolm when Malcolm wanted to go to, to Mecca [Saudi Arabia]. And my father would tell Malcolm that, more than likely, he wouldn't be able to get into Mecca. And, of course, Malcolm couldn't understand--why couldn't he? He said, "Because you're preaching hate, you know, Islam is about all brothers, and they can be any color. And if you speak about the white man, and you say, you know, 'Down with whitey,' or any of those things, you're not going to be able to get into Mecca." And so, he, he tried, and he never got the rights to be able to come. Eventually, as time goes on, my father was influential and with, with Malcolm because of the fact that, you know, he began to show him the religious part of Islam, and not so much the cultural need to gather his brothers, you know. And that became a great thing for Malcolm, I think, because as he began to have troubles around him when other brothers were beginning to find him to be, you know, he was getting a little softer. He wasn't as eloquent in his anger anymore. And I think it's because he began to feel the comfort of Islam. And I think that has a lot to do with some of the things that my father was suggesting to him--understanding the difference. You can do this way, but you can't be completely religious in that way because it's two different things in a way. Eventually, Malcolm became more gentle and that, that was a good time when those who were around him were finding him to be, not the person he was before, went up against him; and then, you know, we know the rest was history. Story_ID: 649293 Speaker 1: What I learned when my father [Lee Hardison] passed is that--my father died of cancer in 1988, eighty- no, '89 [1989], '89 [1989], lung cancer (laughter). And he was also a photographer. There were lots of things about my father, but anyway, the interesting thing about that is that I learned at the burial--well, when he was buried, it was all on the radio, which I had no idea, how, how known my father was. You know, when you're eighteen, you leave. I left my dad and I didn't go back. I mean, I went every so often, but I wasn't part of his life anymore. I sort of struck out on my own. I went back to live with my [maternal] grandmother [Carrie Hudson] and my mother [Sophie Hudson Hardison], but when I went for the funeral, I, I learned that he was--from the brothers who were, you know, they, we went, we stopped through Central Park [New York, New York] 'cause, interestingly enough, my father died during Ramadan. And it was known that if, if a Muslim dies during Ramadan, it's immediate, you go into, to, to the hereafter, which is, you know, paradise. And my father died during Ramadan. And it's strange that my father also, to say this before the death, the actual death, is going to the hospital when I was called. I had been in Europe. And I was called, and they said that, "You should come because he's not, he's really not doing well here," 'cause he went back into the hospital. And I was walking down the hall, and the hospital, and looking, looking really to see which room he was in, looking from back and forth. And then, someone came out and said, "Bethann [HistoryMaker Bethann Hardison]," and I, I said, "Yes?" And I went back. "Your father's calling you." And my father, in three weeks, I hadn't seen him. He'd--the cancer had just gone through his body so much, he was so changed. I didn't recognize him, but he recognized me, and he said, "There goes my daughter. Please go get her." And he, he, I came in, and we talked. He was trying to finish his writings. He was writing, and he would just get weak, and he'd lay back on the, on the, on the pillow. And then, we'd talk a little bit, and then he would try to write some more. I want you to know my father died that night. But all I could think about is, like I, I--god, I really hope I fell from that tree, because the strength he had to be so weak, but he didn't appear to be, and trying to complete things that you want to put all your ducks in a row. I thought about that so many times. And then, the, after his funeral, which was quick because we bury in twenty-four hours, two gentlemen who had led the procession because they had gone through Central Park, and it was, I, I--it was a big thing because it was a big, it was the Eid there and they stopped. And it was a big thing on the radio, and then we go, and we go take him to, to the burial site. And the two brothers told me that my father was, was the one who had actually organized for some others to go up and get Malcolm's [Malcolm X] body when he was killed. And I never knew that. He said, "Yeah, he contacted myself, and another," and he named the other two guys, and he said and because they left him to die and, of course, being Muslim, you have to be buried within twenty-four hours. No one would touch him because it was threatened, so my father said (makes sound), "We can't leave him, we got to go and get him." Story_ID: 649294 Speaker 1: So what Muslim sect is your father [Lee Hardison]--I mean, and what, you know, 'cause (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Orthodox. Speaker 1: Orthodox. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So that's different from-- Speaker 2: Elijah Muhammad. Speaker 1: --Elijah Muhammad, you know-- Speaker 2: Yeah, that's it, yeah. That was a sect [Nation of Islam]. That was more like, you know, as it was, it was something that was coming out of one person that basically was there to help gather brothers and sisters, or more brothers to, to understand who they were as a people, and give them strength, which my father always said, there was something good about that. But at the same time, it, you couldn't really rest it on being religious. Speaker 1: So, you, so you--he grew up traditional Muslim then? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. And the, and, and in Sudan, but you don't know how he came? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Now he got-- Speaker 2: And he, and he, and he came, he was in North Carolina is what I know. And then North Carolina, from North Carolina is what I know. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know, only later did I--when I went to live with him, that's when I learned that he was originally from (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, okay. Story_ID: 649295 Speaker 1: Now, your mother's side, your mother, her name; and what you know about her. Speaker 2: My mother's name is Sophie and, S-O-P-H-I-E. She's known as Hardison [Sophie Hudson Hardison] because she married my father [Lee Hardison]. My mother's grand- my mother's mother is Carrie Hudson is one of my most favorite people in the world--my grandmother. And my mother came from North Carolina at the age of sixteen, and she started to work as a domestic here in, in New York [New York], and she was a just great chick. She didn't want to be intelligent, she used to say, because it just, it seemed like it required too much responsibility (laughter). So, I always loved the fact that, you know, she was so, you know, you know, she had a lot of words, and she was very funny. And she was a, you know, she was a good time girl, but she was a great mom. And I was--admired her, her neatness and sense of order. There's a film that's out right now called 'About Face' ['About Face: Supermodels Then and Now'], and I talk about my mother in this film. And it, and I talk about my mother, like she was so early in things she did. I mean, she was, she hung out with transvestites. She used to go to the houses up in Harlem [New York, New York], things that, you know, I, when I, in the film, it's very funny 'cause the stories I tell are very interesting in that way; but also how she, you know, she was just, she was just very org- organized. And I think that stays with me very much. Story_ID: 649296 Speaker 1: I was a latchkey kid, which, you know, is someone who basically takes care of themselves with a key around their neck. And at the age of seven, I would take myself home, but I always loved the fact that I would go to my--we lived in a rooming house so-- Speaker 2: Where? Speaker 1: In Bedford-Stuyvesant [Brooklyn, New York]. In fact, they're on every block from (laughter), from Greene Avenue down to Halsey. Speaker 2: You're, oh, many, many different addresses. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, over the, maybe say, the twelve years (background noise). Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Where was I? Speaker 2: Oh, you said you lived on many addresses-- Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: --between (unclear) Greene Street [sic.] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes Halsey Street. And what I loved about my mother is that, you know, I, my life was like, you know, there was money at a local store, that if anything I needed, it was not necessarily money, but an account. My mother left clothes out for me that when I would come, like leave the house in the morning, and come back. The way, our house was always so neat. Our, our room, we lived in a room, and my [maternal] grandmother [Carrie Hudson] had the other little room. And, and, it was a big room. It was like, probably the living room of the house, and but just the way she put my clothes out for me to change. And there's things about her that I just always admired. I think that sense of thoughtfulness. No matter how Sophie [Sophie Hudson Hardison] is a great girl, party girl, most popular girl in town, Sophie was really kind of on point in the things that she would do, coming with me to, to, to like, school events, and the way she would, with me, she would dress us alike. And, if I wanted to do a party, she would have, you know, she'd be happy to do the party, and come down with me, and dance with the boys with me (laughter). She was just great in that way. And, as I was saying being a latchkey kid, what's so nice in many ways is these kind of things could never exist today. I see, but the thing that's interesting about that, that kind of independence gives you a great deal. And everything that I've ever wanted to do, they just allowed me. It was almost like, I was the leader of the family. So, if I wanted to run track, well, I ran track for a while, and I did my best to be successful, from nine years old. Then, I became a child tap dancer, and then I became a famous child tap dancer. My mother used to have to wake me up at, at night to go to dance at these clubs, you know, ten o'clock, and get me dressed and stuff, and, and let me go out, and dance at, for it. I danced on the hoofer (unclear), Duke Baldwin. She, she was just someone who basically just, you know--me. Every time I met a new friend, if they were at a different church, I'd join another church. My, my mother and my grandmother never went to church (laughter), but I was always going, I was always going. And they just allowed me, and I was very, I, I have to admit that I was spoiled. You know, I noticed that, you know, when I think about back, how I was, I just thought I was smarter than my mother, and I just adored my grandmother. Speaker 2: But when you say that you were spoiled, how were you spoiled? Speaker 1: Oh, just because I could tell, when I think back, like the time when the, the three guys would walk in with my mother, and they were going to a room. I, I remember having the TV on, and they would say hello to me, and I'd basically wouldn't, pardon me. I basically wouldn't look at them. I'd say hello; but, you know, just a certain kind of, you just, you know, you have everything there, even though you're not rich, you're basically given many things. Story_ID: 649297 Speaker 1: What--did your mother [Sophie Hudson Hardison] share any of her growing up, or did that ever come up (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --there are things, like the, the person who spoke less is my grand- grandmother [Carrie Hudson]. It seems like in the black community, you know, things are not spoken on. And people don't want to share the memories. It's, it's not, it's not memories you want to speak on. But my mother tell, would tell me things like, when they were living, she was living in North Carolina. Like one time, my mother told me she got shot in her foot, and she was on her way to a dance, and she didn't know it. And her foot was bleeding (laughter). I don't understand how that happened, but somebody shot a gun and, and the bullet went in her foot. And she told me the story about how she, she got, she never even felt it. And she said she was there, and they said, "What's wrong with her foot?" And it was blood all over everywhere. That was one good story. And how she really left home and came up. I always thought that was quite unusual, at sixteen, 'cause, you know, when you're little, sixteen sounds old. When you get a little older, sixteen is like young, you know. And she basically didn't talk too much about her background deeply. I think everyone has shame in some way, you know. But it's, it's, I think her life began when she got to New York [New York]. Story_ID: 649298 Speaker 1: So what is d- you, you, do you have siblings? Speaker 2: I have someone that I, that is gone, that's passed, that I always call my sister. You'll hear--I'll refer as my sister, but she's just a foster sister. She's not blood. Speaker 1: Okay. And what was the difference in age? Speaker 2: Two years. Speaker 1: Okay, younger or older? Speaker 2: I'm the older. Speaker 1: You're older, okay, and her name? Speaker 2: Marty [ph.]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She's Latina (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So--oh, I see. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Story_ID: 649299 Speaker 1: So, what is your earliest memory of growing up? Speaker 2: Oh, my earliest memory is eighteen months in my beautiful, beautiful double wheel, big wheel carriage. And my mother [Sophie Hudson Hardison] says, "There's no way you could remember that." And I do--I remember that. I remember being (laughter), I remember my carriage, I, I just remember. I remember sitting up in my carriage, I remember that. That's my earliest memory. My next memory is three years old, having to--have to dance with people, being woken up, and told to come out and dance, and doing things like that--three and four. Five, six, easy, those years are easy, going to the movies, walking myself over to my father's [Lee Hardison] house, four or five years old. My first movie that I fell in love with was 'The Red Shoes,' then 'Bambi,' you know. I remember a lot of things. I don't remember things now, but I remember a lot of things then. Story_ID: 649300 Speaker 1: What sights, smells, and sounds remind you of your childhood? Speaker 2: Hm (pause). Sounds would be laughter, laughter, lots of laughter, sounds would be laughter and singing. That would remind me of my childhood. And smells, I can't smell anything. I don't want to say chitterlings because I didn't like them. (Laughter) I wouldn't let them make them in the house, but that could remind you of your childhood because there was a time or two they tried to get you to eat that. So, you can remember that, yeah. Story_ID: 649301 Speaker 1: So what about sights? Speaker 2: Sights? Speaker 1: Of growing up. Speaker 2: Oh, g- a guy standing on the corner, a guy standing on the corner (laughter) playing skully. Speaker 1: Skully? Speaker 2: Skully is, is a top, a bottle top that you, you make a diagram on the ground with chalk, and you shoot them into boxes. It's a street, it's an urban--I mean, if you live in the city, it's just what kids do, playing stoop ball, hitting, throwing the ball against--these are things you remember. And handball against a wall on, any wall that you can find, a church wall, any kind of wall that has a wall. Men in their hats. My mother [Sophie Hudson Hardison] coming home from work--her walk. Those are things I remember, so strongly, too. There's a lot of style in our neighborhood [Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn, New York], you know. And even if guys were drunk, they were cool (laughter), it was cool. And then of course we had, you know, the gang fights because back in the day, you know, there was the Chaplains, which was the gang I belonged to, with the Lady Chaplains, with the Chaplains, and, you know, the, the Stompers [Jolly Stompers]. And they were gangs and they just were just territorial gangs. It wasn't like the gangs today, going around shooting people in the street and stuff. They didn't have guns. They had zip guns. It was about, maybe they get a barrel from a gun, and maybe a wooden piece, and try to wrap it together with some duct tape, for instance; but most anything that ever happened, it was really terrible. Someone might have gotten stabbed, but that's about unusual. Story_ID: 649302 Speaker 1: And what, le- describe your home life because it's your mother [Sophie Hudson Hardison], it's your grand- your grandmother from your mother's side, or your? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So but you're, you're saying your father [Lee Hardison] convinced your grandmother-- Speaker 2: Yeah, have them come up to stay, yeah, come, live with, had to come from North Carolina because he had this child. And he was very concerned because my mother was, you know, she was partying, and she was, but she, it, it worked, you know. Speaker 1: So, what age did, did your grandmother come? Speaker 2: Oh, when I was, before I was eighteen months, before, before I was eighteen months. Speaker 1: Oh, so she was there from early, I mean (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) From the beginning, 'cause I, I started to live in North Carolina with my grandmother every summer of my life from eighteen months old 'til eighteen years old. Speaker 1: So you would go to-- Speaker 2: North Carolina with my, to my grandmother's home. Speaker 1: I see--where in North Carolina? Speaker 2: Vanceboro [North Carolina]. Speaker 1: And where is that near, do you know? Speaker 2: Near New Bern, North Carolina. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: It's a small tobacco country--cotton. Speaker 1: Okay. So, so describe your grandmother, and what she was like, and what family life was like. Speaker 2: My grandmother was, you know, the expression we say mad cool, but in this particular case, you couldn't imagine the grandmother could be that, but she was really very sensitive and protective. And I, you know, I think about how she, she and I could travel together. At some point, my grandmother would carry our bags, and you see this woman of maturity carrying two suitcases. And we used to always take the train when I was younger. But when we got, when I got a little older, and it was more affordable for her, we started taking the bus. And, you know, the teachings, you had to learn things like, you know, "Be careful, don't drink that water fountain, don't do this, don't do that," you know. But, basically, my grandmother was someone who was so nurturing in a very easy way. She was very quiet and gentle. And if we got her to like--not me--but if they got her to drink a drink or two, she'd loosen up a little bit. She was religious. She read her Bible, but she never went to church. She never ever adopted any church in the North. When her brother died, she was very, very distraught, Jarvis Campbell [ph.], who's the matriarch [sic. patriarch] of our family. I'm an only child. My grandmother is--my mother is an only child. And my, so I, I don't have a big family. And so, all the family reunions, I never go. I mean, I went once. It doesn't--I don't even eat the kind of food they eat, so I (laughter), so I don't go. But my grandmother was someone who basically, you know, taught me about how a grandmother probably should be. And I think that she represented what I say too many young people--how blessed you are if you ever knew your grandparents. Speaker 1: So what, what's, did she have any favorite sayings, or admonitions, or things that stay with you? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, you know what she used to tell me? From the time I was young, young, young, that I was going to die. She always kept death in front of you. (Makes sound) After about the time I was about eight years old, nine years old, I said, "Okay, okay, okay, enough of the death. Tell me something about life. I mean, you're always talking about death, Mama Carrie [Carrie Hudson]--," I called her Mama Carrie. "Tell me something about life." My grandmother said, "I don't know much about that, but for sure you're going to die," (laughter). "Life, you know, who knows? I don't know what that's going to be, but for sure you're going to die." She always kept death in front, which I appreciated, 'cause then to go live with a father, Islamic father, you know, they live to die. So, it's very interesting that you don't have this feeling about, if someone dies, oh, my god. You know, it's, oh, darn, darn, 'cause you like that person, you're going to miss that person. You have that sorrow. So, she, she was big on that, and also, I used to curse when I was young. And my grandmother used to look at me, and I said, "Well, shit, I don't think that's really right," and I could be every bit of eleven, twelve. And my grandmother, at one point, said to me, "You know, you curse just like it's normal. You don't even sounds like it's cursing when you use it, Bethann [HistoryMaker Bethann Hardison]. I don't know how you do that." (Laughter) 'Cause I used to curse all the time. She would, basically, she always made sure I had a little money; and she always made sure that I was fine. She was, she was really special. Story_ID: 649303 Speaker 1: In your house then, she's really sort of taking care of you in that way so-- Speaker 2: Yeah, my [maternal] grandmother [Carrie Hudson] and my mother [Sophie Hudson Hardison] equally-- Speaker 1: Equally-- Speaker 2: --because by the time I grow up, you know, you know them, they're-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --they both go to work. Speaker 1: So, where are they working? Speaker 2: Domestics. Speaker 1: The both of them were domestics? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Did you ever hear anything about the households they were working for? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, man, I used to go. Oh, Mrs. Gishal [ph.], I'll always remember her. That's part of the reason why going into the garment industry was so normal for me because it's the, you know, I'm going to work in a whole culture of Jewish people. Well, I had already had that growing up, you know, coming before, because my grandmother worked for Jews. My mother worked for Jews, so I was so used to it. And knowing all the holidays, they sending home matzos. And, and, you know, I, I knew so much, and I would go to the households, yes, I've gone. Speaker 1: Okay. And so, you-- Speaker 2: And my grandmother worked for Mrs. Gishal for many, many years, as my mother did for the person she worked for. Speaker 1: And did they, did they ever complain about it? Speaker 2: No. Oh, my mother, well, my mother, well, she was a party girl so, you know, she had to do things at night and the (unclear), and go to the bars, and stuff like that. But I think it was all, it was just a way of life, but my grandmother never did. Only coming home late, she got robbed a couple of times, you know, a young boy snatching her bag, and stuff like that. And she hurt, falling down, trying to hold onto it and, and breaking, breaking her wrist or something. Those kind of things really bothered me, but other than coming home late sometimes, walking from the subway, and you think, you know, this is now. That happened so many years ago, you know; but never did they complain about the work that they did. Story_ID: 649304 Speaker 1: And so, you, so let's look, talk about schooling. So, it's not that--well, I, I want to first also ask you, how would you describe yourself as a young person? Speaker 2: Oh, ambitious, I think, popular, well liked, good in school, athletic, daring (laughter). I was very daring, very organized, yeah. I liked boys from the time I was seven years old. I always had a boyfriend in my mind, and then, I actually had a boyfriend, actually--never was interested in having sex ever as a kid. But as a young girl, I always would come, go meet my mother [Sophie Hudson Hardison] at the subway when she'd come--knowing, I know she's coming home, so I could walk with her 'cause she was so popular, so nice to watch her, everyone say hello to her, and she'd stop. And sometimes she didn't know anyone's name. I would--, "Who's that, who's that?" She said, "I don't know." And I do the same thing now, but I would say to her then, "That's so rude, why did you say you act like you knew them? You, that's just wrong. That's not even honest." I was always teaching my mother. Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: Right. And she'd say, "Bethann [HistoryMaker Bethann Hardison], it's not dishonest. I don't want to embarrass the person or myself. I don't know who it is--they know who I am." But it's funny, you know, it's like stories now. But my, my sense of understanding things; and being brighter than, to me, brighter than my parents--my mother, my [maternal] grandmother [Carrie Hudson]. Story_ID: 649305 Speaker 1: So here you are, what school are you going to then and what, what elementary school? Speaker 2: I went to Public School 44 elementary [P.S. 44, Marcus Garvey Elementary School] in Bedford-Stuyvesant [Brooklyn, New York]. Speaker 1: And you started in kindergarten or the first grade? Speaker 2: First grade. Junior High School 35 [J.H.S. 35; M.S. 35, Stephen Decatur School, Brooklyn, New York], which was then seventh, eighth, and ninth. Speaker 1: And this is in Brooklyn [New York]? Speaker 2: In Brooklyn, Bedford-Stuyvesant, and then I went to Wingate High School [George W. Wingate High School, Brooklyn, New York]. Speaker 1: But Wingate is supposed--that's when you moved with your father [Lee Hardison] because that was primarily white, right? Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: Right. And I, and I, we were, we were the first group bused in. Speaker 2: And so, do you have, do you have favorite subjects? Is school, school captivating your attention? Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, it was great. I mean, you know, I, I, you know, I was always in, we had classes that were like one, the one class. The one class was always the smartest class, so I was always in the smartest class. Speaker 2: So, you were tracked in some respects? Speaker 1: I don't know if I was tracked. Well, I guess you were tracked to some degree because whatever your abilities are, they make sure you're in the class that (unclear) where your, where other people like you are excelling, so you're not in the slower classes. So, I was always in the, the number one class. When I got to high school, it was like 'Glee.' I went for it. I was, I mean I really became (laughter), it's funny. It was like, I just sort of took over--I mean, I became, coming from Bedford-Stuyvesant into a, a white school (background noise)-- Story_ID: 649306 Speaker 1: You were saying in school at the time? You did well (simultaneous)--- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, going to Wingate, yeah. I went into that school, and my fellow busies--I guess you would call them--people came from my school started saying to me, and I, and I was supposed to go to, I was accepted into Performing Arts [High School of Performing Arts; Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music and Art and Performing Arts, New York, New York]. Speaker 1: Wait, wait, wait, wait-- Speaker 2: Yeah, let me (unclear), I was accepted to Performing Arts, but when this (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This is for high school? Speaker 2: For high school, but when this man came to our junior high school [J.H.S. 35; M.S. 35, Stephen Decatur School, Brooklyn, New York], this white guy came, a big auditorium, they had to educate us. That was about busing, but I didn't, we didn't know that, you know, trying to bus black kids into integrating, right? And so-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: Wait a minute, something about high school. Speaker 1: No, you said that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, the guy came, the gentleman came. And (laughter) so, this is another thing. This attractive, youngish, white guy stands on, on the stage, and he starts talking about the school. And they show a picture of the school, and it was a banjo. It was, the architecture design was like a banjo. It was round and long, and they talked about it in such a way that I went home, and told my mother [Sophie Hudson Hardison], I said, "No, I'm going to the school." You know, I, whatever I wanted to do, I did. This is the thing also. My parents didn't want like, "Oh, no, you go over here, or go over there." No--it was just, they followed my lead. So I said, "No, I'm going to go to this school because I really like this guy who came, and it sound really exciting, and I like the way the school sounds." She said, "But you got accepted into this other school. You, you did everything to--." "I don't care, I don't want to go there anymore," (laughter). "I want to go to this school." So I wind up going to this school. And within the months, I just got in with the kids. I became the first black cheerleader. There was, was a girl named Eva Delsar [ph.]. She was very, very, very, very light. You wouldn't even thought she was a dark girl. But she was on the year before me, but I was considered the first black, because I was dark skinned--cheerleader. Speaker 1: Oh, this was George W. Wingate High School-- Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right. Speaker 1: --in Crown Heights [Brooklyn, New York]? Speaker 2: That's right. And so, I got that. And then, there's something we had to call, like Sing [ph.], which is like 'Glee.' You, you produce--each grade produces a, a musical, and it's competitive. So the tenth, eleventh, and the twelfth grade, they compete against each other. And I wind up being this, and they call it Sing, that's what it was, and wind up being the person who's in charge of it. And they voted me to be in charge of it. I'm telling you, the tenth grade, the eleventh grade, and the twelfth grade, I was in charge of the Sings, and we won every year. Speaker 1: So this is-- Speaker 2: And they said I thought, that I thought I was white, and I said, "No," (laughter). The kids in my--that went with me to school, they said, "Oh, you know, you'll think you're white now, you know, but I see how you're acting." I said, "No, I'm in high school, I'm getting ready to have a good time," (laughter). I just took advantage of it. Speaker 1: So, this is a time 'cause we're right now, at this point, aren't we in the late--well, let's see, we will be in the later '50s [1950s]. Speaker 2: (Nods head) Fifties [1950s], that's right. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Story_ID: 649307 Speaker 1: Were there any racial incidents because you don't step to talk about that at all? Speaker 2: (Shakes head) Unh-uh. Speaker 1: No racial incidents? Speaker 2: (Shakes head) Unh-uh, only, except for, you know, my black students, former of Wingate [George W. Wingate High School, Brooklyn, New York]--I mean, of Junior High School 35 [J.H.S. 35; M.S. 35, Stephen Decatur School, Brooklyn, New York], telling me that, showing me the difference that I was beginning to be so with the white kids, and doing so many things that were white. Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: That's about all I ever heard. From the white kids, I never heard. Speaker 1: And (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And, and we didn't know until, I didn't know until I was grown up. A girl who used to go to school with me, she contacted me. When I think about the time, maybe I had Bethann Management [Bethann Management Co., Inc., New York, New York] even. She contacted me and told me, "Did I understand how we got to that school?" I didn't understand. She was a white Italian girl. We had some issue, I think, you know, with the Italian kids, and that's outside of Flatbush [Brooklyn, New York], some issue that, that was going on. We have the little black, white thing, but I, for personally myself, I never had any. Speaker 1: Okay. And this, your teachers are promoting you 'cause this is really right after Brown v. Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] and-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --but are the, what is the socioeconomic level of all the kids (unclear)? Speaker 2: I think mid-low income. Story_ID: 649308 Speaker 1: So you become--are you popular with the (unclear)? Speaker 2: (Makes sound) So popular. I got, I got voted to be the Sing [ph.] thing. I mean, I was very popular. I didn't, and I don't know how even for--to--I, to, to get on the cheerleaders, you really had to compete. You had to learn it--you had to do. And there's no way, I thought I, but I don't know how I, I just believed. Oh, I thought or knew that this was possible, but I had to be good. Well, I was good because I'm athletic, and I'm rhythmic, and I'm a good dancer, and I was like a child tap dancer. I used to tap dance on the radio, so I mean I know that I could do these things. But when they told me, and this is a girl who reached out to me recently, who was my best friend at school [George W. Wingate High School, Brooklyn, New York] , Susie [ph.], a little white girl. And she and I both go on at the same time. We became dear friends 'cause we were so scared. We never thought we'd make it. And we got on, and we would go to Madison Square Garden [New York, New York] 'cause our team was a great team. And as I knew Roger Brown and, you know, a lot of the basketball players who came out of my school. Speaker 1: So, you won, were you ever winning state championships or anything like that, or city (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, we would go, yeah, city. Speaker 1: City champ- okay. So, so you get cheerleading. Story_ID: 649309 Speaker 1: I want to ask about, though, the fact 'cause you've gone to live with, with your father [Lee Hardison], age twelve, so how does that change your life? Speaker 2: Well, it changed greatly, greatly. It changed 'cause my stepmother then proved to me that she was, that she was envious of my mother [Sophie Hudson Hardison], which we couldn't understand. I mean, I can understand. My mother surely couldn't understand (laughter). Speaker 1: Oh, so she did, she-- Speaker 2: She treated me--I, I should have, I felt like, my life there was, I was paying because I was my mother's daughter. When I, when I was little, I didn't see any of that. That's why I mentioned that earlier, but when I got to, when I went to live with them, she was very nice in the beginning. I was punished all the time. I was always--I couldn't do this. I was always being punished. If I went to the store, and she told me to get certain things, and I forgot one thing, I was put, put on punishment for a week. She--my mother and I, I would go to be with my mother and my [maternal] grandmother [Carrie Hudson] every weekend. And I was told to tell, I was told that my mother couldn't come past the threshold of their apartment. So, when she dropped me off, she, she couldn't come in the house. You would think that my mother was the second one. She was the first one and, truly, I guess she must have really realized how much this man must have loved her or something. I guess now, that I'm older, I could think that. But so, my mother would make a big joke. Every time she'd bring me home 'cause she's really a kibitzer, she'd lean, really, she'd put her feet right outside the threshold, and lean all her body in and say, "How's everybody doing?" You know and just, you know, make a point of showing that she hadn't stepped into their house. But she was strict. Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: My--so it changed my life a little bit where, yes, I was, I could no longer eat pork chop, pork chops, which, then, was my favorite food. I could no longer eat pork. But also for the fact that I couldn't be, you know, I, I wasn't and the freedom was gone. Speaker 1: So, do you think that, that helped in school [at George W. Wingate High School, Brooklyn, New York]-- Speaker 2: Unh-uh. Speaker 1: --or not? Okay. Speaker 2: I made it my business to never want to come home. I went to summer school every summer, even though I didn't go to school. I just told them I was going to summer school. I ran--every, every activity I could do, I was being in track anyway on my own, so all track meets, I was always at track meets. I just stayed, tried to stay away from home as much as I could. Speaker 1: So, how does this affect your relationship with your father though? Is it-- Speaker 2: Oh, I was being mad, cool, smart (laughter). I, I learned then, you know, to be politically smart, just not to--there's no sense in telling him anything negative about a person that was the woman behind the man. The one thing I learned, I learned a lot of things from my, my stepmother. She really was a brilliant woman. I learned, yeah, I learned how to be a woman, how to be a woman to a man, and also, even if, I never will find that man to do that for. I know how it goes. And my father also teaching me how to be a queen, but know how to sub- how to be subservient to your man, how to service him. Speaker 1: So, what would he say? Speaker 2: Appear--he would say, remember, no matter what it looks like, you're the one that's most important. You're the queen. You take care of him, make him always think he's it, but in the end, you're the one. And he would always, always, he taught me, he let, helped me--teach how he kept his hair close--bald head. I'll, I'll show you a picture of my father after--bald. And everyone used to think he looked like Yul Brynner 'cause Yul Brynner was popular back in those days, so they look very much alike. And he, he had me shave his head. He, he taught me how to make a tie, basic cooking. My mother, my grandmother, my stepmother was a very good cook, she was very good. She could tell, you know, everything she did was with such class. It was, she was, you know, she was a light brown woman, came from a very--that kind of family. She was more middle class in style, so there was a lot to gain. He, he gave more for being with someone like that. Speaker 1: Did they, did they stay together? Speaker 2: Um-hm, 'til she, until she passed. She passed a couple of years before him-- Speaker 1: Okay. And so (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) many, many years before him. Story_ID: 649310 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, what else is influencing you in high school [George W. Wingate High School, Brooklyn, New York]? Do you know? I mean, are there, are you--you're smiling, but what else is influencing you? Are you-- Speaker 2: I had a, I got to be very close with a lot of people that I liked. And what was great is to become that important-- Speaker 1: Popular-- Speaker 2: --popular was the word, too, but important, sort of changes your whole self-esteem. And you don't even think--you always think you have--well, I never felt that I had low self-esteem (laughter). I never had low self-esteem, but there were times that you could think that, why me? Why should I? I won't probably get, I won't do--but every time you crack that whip, and you, you succeed, it's great. And, you know, what I loved about my school, so that they took us to plays. My English teacher took us to plays. And so, I saw like, 'My Fair Lady' [Alan Jay Lerner and Frederick Loewe]. You know, you saw things when it was then, it was real, and you, you talk about it now. Who was the original, you know, like cast members? And you think about that, and you say, "Oh, my god, I saw that, you know." 'Our Town' [Thornton Wilder], things like that. I mean, it was great. And my teacher, and then, you know, one point, I had this great opportunity to sing at a, in a choir, in a choirs--in a choir, and I had a nice voice. But this particular time, I was so scared at this big performance at a school. And my father [Lee Hardison] and my mother [Sophie Hudson Hardison] came, and I was so nervous that my voice cracked. I couldn't, I, you couldn't even hear me singing. My voice just shut down. And this was the big moment where this, this, almost soprano voice was going to come out. And my voice, (makes sound), and my father was so embarrassed that he (laughter) didn't say, "You did a good job." He didn't even bring it up. We got, we went home--no, it was silence. (Laughter) I was just that nervous. I get, really, yeah, but I think, really, in the, in the essence of it that the, having that opportunity in my high school was really great. My high school was great. Story_ID: 649311 Speaker 1: So you say when you became eighteen, you left? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: And so, what, what is that motivation beforehand? Are you-- Speaker 2: I was going to live, do the same thing I do every summer--go with my [maternal] grandmother [Carrie Hudson] to North Carolina, but I was, you know, I was out of high school [George W. Wingate High School, Brooklyn, New York]. I was going to go to college, but I just didn't want to go back to that house. I was, it was enough, not having the courage to ask my father [Lee Hardison], could I go somewhere with my girlfriends? They would call and say, "Just ask them." I didn't have, just being told no, the rejection, I just couldn't take it. So, I just preferred to just not even ask them if I could go somewhere, 'cause I know that more than likely, they're going to say no. And my girlfriends would say, "Just ask them, huh? All you will, you'll find out, but ask them--," and I wouldn't do it. I just got tired of, you know, just being in that environment, so I was supposed to go back home at a certain time. He was expecting me, and I just never went. And then, one day, he called, and asked my grandmother to have me call him, and I didn't want to do it--I was scared. I didn't want to face it, face him. And then, he just came with my bag of clothes. Speaker 1: And you had--? Speaker 2: I accept my clothes and then, I start to stay with my dad-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --I mean, with my grandmother and my mother [Sophie Hudson Hardison] again. Story_ID: 649312 Speaker 1: So then, what is life 'cause you're now--I mean, you're eighteen? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And so, what is life like now at this point? Speaker 2: Well, it didn't go so well because I, I got influenced by some young man that was my, my family's nephew, my family's friends' nephew. And I, and I became pregnant, so that wasn't so good. (Laughter) That wasn't--it was first time having sex, and I became pregnant. Speaker 1: Right. So, what was his name? Speaker 2: Don't even mind mentioning it (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, okay, don't want to mention, okay, okay. Speaker 2: Oh, oh, don't mention (unclear). Speaker 1: So, so you then become pregnant and you-- Speaker 2: Yeah, it was a bit and not in a (unclear) way. It was a-- Speaker 1: So, your, so it's, you, there's your-- Speaker 2: This, this could have been the end. Speaker 1: Right, that's right. Speaker 2: But, but Lara Croft Bethann (laughter) survived it because I really--and, you know, when you think about your mother [Sophie Hudson Hardison] and your grandmother [Carrie Hudson], they were really--as disappointed as they were, 'cause no one ever saw that coming, 'cause they knew I was never interested in boys like that. I always liked boys, but I was never interested in having sex. I never did. I was always someone they could see, they could see the, the light for me because they saw how I lived my whole time. So, they were stunned by it, very shocked, and so was I. Speaker 1: So, you're--are you nineteen when you're having-- Speaker 2: I was eighteen. Speaker 1: Eighteen, okay. And so, what are you, so, then, do they, that's, that's-- Speaker 2: No. Yeah, but that, that, that, that, that was a-- Speaker 1: Adoption? Speaker 2: No, that was a, that child died. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, it actually died (unclear). Speaker 1: Oh, so that was hard then? Speaker 2: Well, not for me (laughter). I, honestly, at that time in your life, when you're that young, you know, it's like, you know, honestly, it's a terrible thing to think, but it's almost like every man for themselves (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Unclear) for the change. It would have, right (unclear) change. Speaker 2: Yeah, every man for themselves. You know, it, it--I didn't understand certain things. I didn't know. So, I was taking very hot baths. I didn't, I didn't know that my water broke--I didn't know that. Then, I, I was having, you know, like a dry birth. I didn't know my mother came--she was so scared. And I, it was just a, it was something that was the worst thing ever. Speaker 1: Well, they probably all were relieved in some respects--maybe, you never know. Speaker 2: Well, every- we all, well, we all were relieved. It was never, "No, like, oh, my dear." This is not like today, "Oh, I lost my child." No, this is like, (makes sound) (gesture), that's done, you know; and then from that moment, I just (makes sound) (gesture). Speaker 1: Focused. Okay, okay. Story_ID: 649313 Speaker 1: So is that when you start working in the Garment District [New York, New York], or were you also--did you spend any time working as a domestic at all or not? Speaker 2: No, I went, I went from--my first job was American Telephone and Telegraph [American Telephone and Telegraph Company], you know. Speaker 1: So, were you a-- Speaker 2: AT&T [AT&T Inc.]. Speaker 1: --were you a telephone operator? Speaker 2: Telephone operator. Speaker 1: That's when they had the-- Speaker 2: Yeah, they had the, the switch--the, the headsets-- Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: --the headsets. Not when they did this. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I, I was, I was the next--I guess that wasn't the technology-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --where you actually--did we plug in? Oh, yes, I think there was a board-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --there was a board, there was a board that you plugged in, but that, I was on that board. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's interesting, that's interesting. I can barely remember, but I got stock out of that, and I remember that. And, and, then-- Speaker 1: Oh, they gave everyone stock then? Speaker 2: They gave stock back then, yeah. Speaker 1: Oh, 'cause that's very valuable stock. Speaker 2: That's right. And it then, and then it, it, it, and it would split. I remember that--it would split. But the interesting thing about that, too, is that I left that job 'cause I always wanted to work as a (laughter), in law, it's crazy. Speaker 1: In law? Speaker 2: In law. Speaker 1: Oh, you did? Speaker 2: I always wanted to work in some capacity of law. And I wind up dating a guy at the age of nineteen 'cause his mother was a corrections officer. And that just had such interest for me 'cause when I was a kid, there's a film I used to love. That was 'Snake Pit' ['The Snake Pit'] and it was about these crazy people (laughter) who--and that these correction people who would take care of them. But I was always this, I loved that film, 'Snake Pit,' I got to remember the title. And, they weren't well, but anyway, it was like a center, a correction place. And I was so intrigued by the idea of working, possibly in a prison. So, I went, and I applied, took the test, and passed. And I was the first, the youngest officer ever to be appointed in the State of New York--a crazy job to take, crazy. Story_ID: 649314 Speaker 1: So, you said that you went to work in, in a corrections facility? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. I went and it's, it's, it's the, it's the only state prison in the State of New York [sic.]. It's the only prison, state prison in New York. And it's west--wow, okay, that'll come back--went, went right out of my head. But I, I worked in the correction 'cause I was the young--I was, and I had to, I had to wait to be appointed. So, I got, I took the test at nineteen, but I, I, I was appointed at twenty. They couldn't take it before twenty. So, I was a--there I went in the correction facility, but it was that reformatory. Speaker 1: For girls? Speaker 2: For girls, yes, all girls, and for women, same, same thing, so women's state prison. And-- Speaker 1: Do you remember the name? Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm--it'll come. It's just that they split a W. For some reason, I went to say it, and I almost said Wingate [George W. Wingate High School, Brooklyn, New York]. I said, oh, wait, that's my high school. It'll come to me in a minute. But it's the only one in the, in the State of New York, and it's up in Bedford Hills, New York. That may be the name of it [Westfield State Farm; Bedford Hills Correctional Facility, Bedford Hills, New York]. But, anyway, because of my youth, I--my lieutenant was a beautiful, round, almost like, she was like, mixed woman, dark skinned with wavy long hair. She was my lieutenant, and she took me under her wing and she taught me. Every day, I had to come to her office and, you know what she had me do? 'Cause she didn't put me, she didn't put me into houses right away. Instead, she had me work as an assistant to her, but I would arrange flowers. That was the best thing ever. I learned to arrange flowers (laughter), so to this day, I could just clip, cut, and arrange flowers. And she had me do that for weeks I was there with her, wonderful woman, I got to remember her name. And, and then, they put me into the house, and that was no--not easy. So, here I come, not weighing more than ninety-five pounds probably, and these girls in reformatory, tough as anything, gave me a run for my money. And, thank god, I came from Bedford-Stuyvesant [Brooklyn, New York], and I used to gang fight because the first few days was real scary. Speaker 1: And what was your duties, what were your duties for-- Speaker 2: All you had to do is just be in the house, make sure that they're doing everything they're supposed to do. And there were cottages and so, they--you just make sure that they're not two in a room or, you know, if you say, "Come, it's time to go eat," you, you take them, you know, they have to--it's just, it's like being a monitor, you know, God. Speaker 1: Did it pay well? Speaker 2: Pay? Speaker 1: Is that, yeah. Speaker 2: I don't remember that (laughter). Speaker 1: But you, you-- Speaker 2: I was nineteen, so you don't be thinking about money. You're paid decently, but, you know. Speaker 1: But, but you wanted the experience. Speaker 2: I don't know if I wanted the experience. I want- I wanted, I wanted to be in law. I wanted, you know, the idea that this woman was a correctional officer, I thought, wow, that's a way of being in that, you know, like being a police officer. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: You just think that you're going to do, you're going to do something good. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And, and then you go to a prison. And I was always attracted to that film ['The Snake Pit'], as I told you. And this, I meet this fellow I started to date. And his mother was a correctional officer, and that was very intriguing to me. And so, I, I did it, but I had to get, become quote, unquote, gangster to get these girls to, because they were just like (makes sound), just like you would see in, in, in prison shows now. It's exactly in every kind of way almost it. They just gave me like (gesture), "Don't tell me what to do." And you know, you're scared 'cause it's like, maybe fifty of them, and it's just you. You could be wearing a white little uniform all you want, but (laughter), they could just slug you, or push you up in a room or, you know, pinch your breasts or something. You don't know what they're going to do with you (laughter), just (gesture). You know what have I gotten myself into (laughter)? Story_ID: 649315 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, how long did you last in that position? Speaker 2: About a year and a half, two years. The fact of it is that I, I, I, I flipped it. I got, I, I went, I (laughter), I became the actor, and really showed them that I would be something to deal with. And they bought it, and they liked me--that is the good thing. They, they thought to like you, they respect you. And so, that was good, but it was a moment and so, then, I had no problem. You know, they would be in a room, and they wouldn't, they like you 'cause you didn't allow the girls, because they'd go in there and do things, intimate things, sexual things. You're not supposed--they're not supposed to do that. And, you know, you're nineteen years [old], you're nobody. You know what I mean? You don't, you don't want, ever want, ever even, you never, in yours, you never want to ever have sex again. This is where my mind is, so I'm not interested in anything that's lewd, but it was interesting. But I got the strength to come up, and just come real tough, and they're liking me, you know, 'cause you got to have a couple of the leaders to say, "Hey, leave her alone, c'mon," and then, they just all form a line to protect (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, what, what-- Speaker 2: And then, I got taken out of there [Westfield State Farm, Bedford Hills, New York] because one girl start to like me. And then I--and the lieutenant knew this. And the best way to keep from, from being an issue was to take me out, and put me in the prison [Bedford Hills Correctional Facility, Bedford Hills, New York] at night--oh, my god. So, now, I'm now with no pop- no, no, no population in movement. I'm only going in, relieving an officer, when everybody's gone to sleep. So, now I'm, I'm working for nine months maybe with women screaming about the murder they just committed. Now, I'm in the prison, where it's hard core, and that's on the same grounds. It's just, it's just like a-- Speaker 1: (Unclear)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, it's just a little, maybe a half mile away, or something. Yeah, that was, that was, and then I knew it's time to go. Then I went on, and got myself a job in the Garment District [New York, New York]. Story_ID: 649316 Speaker 1: So, how did the job in the Garment District [New York, New York] come about; and-- Speaker 2: I looked in a newspaper. Speaker 1: Just looked in the newspaper? Speaker 2: New York Times [The New York Times]. Speaker 1: And you ended up working with a-- Speaker 2: Button company. Speaker 1: --a button company called Dig- Digit? Speaker 2: No-- Speaker 1: Dig--- Speaker 2: But- no, Cabot Butt- Cabot Button [Cabot Button Company (ph.)]. Speaker 1: Oh, Cab- oh-- Speaker 2: Digits [Digits Inc., New York, New York], Digits is Willi Smith's company. Speaker 1: Oh, that's--okay, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: See, a lot of the, okay. So, so Cabot, but, but that was owned by, by Ruth Manchester? Speaker 2: No, that's a separate company [Ruth Manchester Ltd., New York, New York]. Speaker 1: Oh, gosh, okay, so you've taken it through, because the chronology is sort of-- Speaker 2: I know. And when I saw my thing, it was like-- Speaker 1: It was all, okay, okay. Speaker 2: --like, no, didn't have nothing to do with me, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. So, so when you, so when you went-- Speaker 2: The works--I just went nicely dressed, and went in to this, it was actually a factory. It's just available, (makes sound), and I said, okay, maybe this could be it 'cause it's hard finding a job. It's really hard. I imagine now, it's worse, but then, fine. Speaker 1: And this is what (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And I was lucky. Speaker 1: This is nineteen sixty-- Speaker 2: This could be '62 [1962]. Speaker 1: --two [1962], maybe--no. Speaker 2: No, maybe more, no more. Speaker 1: No, it's more than that-- Speaker 2: It's more than that-- Speaker 1: --because (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) it's more than that, yes, '64 [1964], '65 [1965], like that. Speaker 1: It would be more than that-- Speaker 2: No, '65 [1965], maybe sixty--yeah-- Speaker 1: Wait. Or maybe '60s [1960s]. Speaker 2: Sixty (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Sixty-five [1965], right. Speaker 2: Sixty-five [1965], '66 [1966], like that. Speaker 1: And you, so what, so the Garment District is located where at this point and-- Speaker 2: Between 37th Street and 9th Avenue to Broadway up to forty--40th Street. That's, technically, 41st [Street] max, the Garment District. Speaker 1: So, what were you, what, what were your duties there? And how many people are-- Speaker 2: Well, no, it's just like about four guys. And they just, they just, they actually are a custom butt- button maker, he's a custom button maker, and he actually hand paints. Everything is hand painting the buttons. And then, back in those days, the suit and coat factory, suit and coat manufacturers were big. It was big in, you know, in, in the industry then. That was my first job in the Garment District. And when I went, he, he basically didn't even know how to begin to hire me but, you know, he, he, he said I was too well dressed. And if I was going to work in there--you see all the paint and stuff around here, "You can't come dressed like that." I said, "Okay, I can, I, I, I don't have to wear this." He said, "Yeah, but I like you. Okay, so, let's, let's--," interesting, when you, you have no idea what it's like. Well, maybe you do, but to know each time, someone says, "Come--," it's amazing. It's--you don't even know it, but every time, it's like a thin veil or layer of competence. It, it builds you. And the Garment District for me is coming from my mother [Sophie Hudson Hardison], and my [maternal] grandmother [Carrie Hudson], and my father [Lee Hardison]. The Garment District to me was--it, it was every bit of the best place anybody could come out. I mean, between the people, who taught you basically how to do things right, it was the best place for me. And this gentleman said, "Okay, you have the job." Oh, my goodness, gracious, I don't know. You go home, and I thought I was, you know, coming, you know, the way I should look, and I came in to work the first day. He said, "You're still dressing like a movie star." I said, "No, I really brought it down." He said, "Oh, okay." Because every day, I tried to look less and less, he decided that I was to do this. I was to take all the buttons that they did, and deliver them to the house, the manufacturer. That gave me an opportunity to go and meet with the designers. Do you know what that is? I mean, gee, how does that happen to somebody? I mean, I was like--and so, I would sit there and look, and then, you never knew what was behind those building doors. So, when you go inside, and you go into this manufacturer, and you see exactly what these places were like, you know. You, even if you had to wait outside, you still saw the interior of a showroom and that was a very big thing for me, and meeting with them and, and the, and the--you're given the sample of the buttons. And the designer would come with the fabric of the knit, of the tweed of the, of the cloth for the suit, or the coat. And he would hold it against it, and go up to the light to make sure. And he'd say, "Okay, this is good." Because they would take the, they'd have the same thing, my company, and they'd have to paint the buttons, all hand painted--can you imagine? Those days are gone (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Cough) Real craftsmanship, those, that's real craftsmanship. Speaker 2: Yeah, those days are really gone. Speaker 1: And so, you worked there how long? And then, I just want you to take me through (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah. Then there was, I went--maybe there about a year. Story_ID: 649317 Speaker 1: And then I got, and I met also one of my heroes, which was a model whose name I'll tell you about, that later as well. It was just, it was just a model that really meant a lot to me. Speaker 2: So, who was it? Speaker 1: I'm going, that's what I said, you know, my mind is that, I just, I realize-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --it'll come back to me in a second. On the streets, walking on the streets, I just sort of chased her down like a stalker. Oh, my god, and I carried her bag 'cause she had so much to carry. But she was like the black model of that time that was so beautiful, and she was really like a Dovima. She was like a black Dovima-- Speaker 2: What's, what's her name, Mu-, Mu-- Speaker 1: No, no, that's not anyone. Speaker 2: Okay, okay, okay. Speaker 1: I've just been talking about her (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 1: Lord God bless. They just wrote a whole story on her-- Speaker 2: Right, they did it. Speaker 1: --in New York Magazine. Speaker 2: But, anyway, that was a great thing but, and I had this opportunity also to, I wanted to change jobs because it wasn't really, you know. And I start looking in the newspaper and, again, and I saw a job for Ruth, Ruth Manchester [Ruth Manchester Ltd., New York, New York]. No, no, no--no, no, no--Marty Gutmacher [Marty Gutmacher, Inc., New York, New York]. It was a--we call it a low end dress company. That's like (unclear), but he was really very successful. Another place I learned a lot, I learned to do bookkeeping. I, I went to work for the piece goods operator. He's the guy who, who makes sure, all--they have enough fabric for all of the dresses and all, and I went to work for him. It was Max, what's his name, Max Schultz [ph.], and I went to work for his assistant. And I made so many mistakes, and he was so frustrated (laughter). He liked me so much, but I made mistakes, oh, my god. It's just, it's math, and just deductions, and piece goods, and how much you--but they didn't want to get rid of me. So, they put me into the bookkeeping department where I would do the sales reports for the men out on the road, so I learned to do that. And then, after that, they put me on the switchboard--I learned to do that. I mean, so it was great, but-- the woman, a girl was working there that liked me a lot, a young girl, and her mother had a company called Ruth Manchester. Her, her mother--her aunt was Ruth Manchester. Her mother was Sylvia Courtney. And she told her--them--about me 'cause they were looking for someone, so they asked me to come by and see them. And I went by, and they hired me. So, I left Marty Gutmacher, who I thought was a genius of a man anyway. And I went to work with them; and it was just one thing--(gesture) it was like this (gesture). Story_ID: 649318 Speaker 1: Now, there are not many blacks in, in the Garment District [New York, New York], right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Shakes head) No at that time. Speaker 1: I mean, at that time. And so, what are they seeing in you, and what, is it just because you're well presented? And what is your father [Lee Hardison]--I haven't heard about, you know, what is he-- Speaker 2: We're, we're not talking at this moment, you know, because I got pregnant, and then, all these things happened. He was just-- Speaker 1: He was just upset with you? Speaker 2: Yeah, he was, he was so, he was shocked. I think he stayed shocked for years 'cause he couldn't believe it was me. He didn't, well, had nothing to do with who I was to him, so he was really kind of, like a distance. My uncle, who was the architect--I mean, architect, pardon me--art director, J. Walter Thompson, he was big time art director, my uncle, my father's brother. He took me under his wing and kept, stayed close to me. But we weren't talking so much--my dad and I. I was good. I, I, I was going to prove I, I (audio disturbance), that I wasn't a failure. I guess that was my objective, is just to come on around that mountain 'cause that was just a huge mistake (makes sound). Story_ID: 649319 Speaker 1: I wind up going to work for these, these two women. And they, basically, you know, you didn't see, like you said, many, in those particular areas. And, eventually, Sylvia [Sylvia Courtney], who I'd learned everything to do--how to hang the clothes, where everything, all the, all the clerical work inside on, at a desk. But then, she wanted me to, you know, learn how to sell in the showroom, and that was interesting and, and-- Speaker 2: 'Cause the buyers were coming in, right? Speaker 1: Yeah, when the buyers would come. And so, one time, she just sent me out to this one buyer. And I went out and talked to her and told her, you know, but, normally, people who are used to being serviced by certain people want the same person. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: They don't want to mess around with some little kid. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And so, she told--so I thought to say, "I'm going to show you the line." And she said, "Where is Sylvia?" I said, "She's here, but she's asked me to show it to you." She said, "Well, I'd rather wait." I said, "Well, she's asked me to show you the line." She said, "As I said, I'd rather wait." I said "Okay." So, I went back and I told Sylvia. And she was, she was really my guardian angel. I said, "Sylvia, this, this woman doesn't want me to show her the line. She wants me to--she, she wants you, and she said, she'd rather wait." She said, "Well, that's unfortunate." So, she got up, and Sylvia, whenever she, when she got up, I always loved--she always got, and adjusted her dress, adjusted her top. And she was a very neat bodied woman with a very short pixie haircut, very elegant lady, and narrow body. And she walked out, she said, "How are you?" She introduced herself again, said hi's to Sylvia, "Nice to see you." And the woman, she said--and they chatted. And she said, "Okay, now Bethann [HistoryMaker Bethann Hardison] is going to take it from here." She put me right back, front, and center in front of this woman, in front of her. And the woman had no choice. And she said, "And I'll speak to you thereafter, and I hope to get the order." She took a chance with her business. They could have just gotten up and said, "(Makes sound), well, unh-uh," you know. Those, those are things that, you know. And then I would take, then I start, then they start letting me go out more, too, you know. I would take the samples over to what was Feder-, Federated Stores [Federated Department Stores, Inc.; Macy's, Inc.], which, by that time, owned all the big department stores. And Bernie Ozer [Bernard Ozer] was a man who was head of dress, the junior dress department of Federated. And he used to, to educate his buyers to make--he used to love Broadway, and he loved putting on shows. So, he would have all his buyers from all the stores come to see what he had scouted--dresses, the junior dresses. But he would put on, like a show, like nobody did that before, like have models and music, and, and entertainment. He really did this. And, you know, I walk and heard him talking, and all the things going on. He's a big like, Sydney Greenstreet, big, big, big guy with a (gesture) funny nose with, with hair coming out of the nose here, just an unattractive man, but larger than life. And I watched all this commotion, and all this, it was like a production. And all I was doing was bringing over our samples for him to decide which ones they, they want to use. And when I brought the samples over, he said, "Where are you from?" I said, "I'm Bethann, I'm from Ruth Manchester [Ruth Manchester Ltd., New York, New York]." He said, "Okay, Bethann, thank you. You're just going to leave this right here." And I said, "Yes, where should I put it?" He said, "Just put it right here." And I leaned over to him and said, "If you really want to have a great show, you'll have me in it." He said, "Excuse me, what did you just say?" I said, "Well, if you really want to have a great show, you'll have me in it." He says, "Is that right?" And then, I walked out, went back to my (laughter)--I don't believe it, too, but I was a child tap dancer in me, you know, put on a show mentality. And by the time I got to my office, Ruth [Ruth Manchester] and Sylvia were so elated. "Well, Bernie's called, he wants you in his show." I said, "You're kidding me." "He said--what did you say to him? He said you said something to him." And I told them--they were like family at this point to me, you know. I just told him. They said, "You're too funny. Well, now, you better come up with something 'cause you're in the show." And I only had one outfit, but the girl, who became, like my model mother--Mother Model, we always call each other. She was like the person who gave me advice. She had to leave early 'cause she was like a popular model at the time, and I had to wind up taking her clothes. So, after having that first outfit to tell myself how to do it, my second, third time, two or three times, I was the hit. Speaker 2: So, you were doing, you were (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That was the beginning, that was the beginning-- Speaker 2: That was the beginning? Speaker 1: --that was the beginning. Speaker 2: And do you know what year this is? Speaker 1: It had to be like '68 [1968], '7 [1967] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sixty-seven [1967], '68 [1968] or '8 [1968]-- Speaker 1: --sixty-seven [1967], '68 [1968]. Speaker 2: Okay, okay. Speaker 1: After Kadeem [Hardison's son, Kadeem Hardison] was born. Story_ID: 649320 Speaker 1: So, are you married at this point? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay, you-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Wh- to the art collect-? See, I'm trying to piece everything to- (laughter)-- Speaker 2: I don't blame you. I would try to, especially where I've kept it all these years, like (gesture) (laughter). No, I--the, the first guy, I married. Well, the second guy, I didn't, I didn't marry. He was my best friend, grew up, you know. Speaker 1: No, but the first guy was who? Speaker 2: He was the guy I had the baby with. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, I had to, we had to marry. I don't know, I don't know, I didn't have to marry him, but I didn't know what to do. I didn't know what to do, and nobody forced me. I just--he just wanted to marry. I just couldn't even bear the guy. I, I didn't even know, but that was, that's, that's something that I have under the closet. Speaker 1: Right, right, right (laughter), okay. Speaker 2: And then, and then, my, my best friend, who's my son's dad-- Speaker 1: Now, give his name. Speaker 2: Is Donald McFadden. Speaker 1: Right. And isn't he a well known art collector? Speaker 2: He's a--well, he, he collects things, yeah, he collects things--that's for sure (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, okay, okay. Speaker 2: He, that's for sure, he does (unclear). He, he, he was my best friend since we were twelve and thirteen years old. And he always used to tell me when he was like about eighteen, nineteen, that he, that we were going to have a child 'cause he used to dream. I said, "No way," 'cause we were best friends, but we did. We wind up having this child [Hardison's son, Kadeem Hardison]. Story_ID: 649321 Speaker 1: So, are people telling you all along that you could be a model or-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --you're--no. Speaker 2: No, no, no, no words like that weren't said. Like, you know, when you see this film ['About Face: Supermodels Then and Now'], and you must see this film that I'm in that's on HBO [Home Box Office]. When my mother [Sophie Hudson Hardison], when I tell my mother that I was modeling, my mother smiled and she, she stroked my head, and she said, "Oh, that's nice," 'cause my mother thought that I was a hooker, and that I was just using the word, model, to disguise what it was. Speaker 1: And why did she think that? Speaker 2: Because that's what they were--to someone in her neighborhood [Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn, New York], there were no things called models. If they called themselves models, that's usually just that expression to disguise the fact that they were, they were a call girl, 'cause there weren't models in our world. That, that, that world of fashion model, all that, tiny, nobody cares about modeling. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: This is a facade now that's gone out of control now. But, back then, so it, surely, they didn't think, she didn't think that I was (laughter). So, no one ever said, "You should be," only Willi Smith (laughter). Speaker 1: Only Willi Smith? Speaker 2: Yeah, that's when, you know, doing this thing with Bernie [Bernard Ozer], yeah, yeah. And then, of course, Willi came along, and kept seeing me in the neighborhood of the Garment District [New York, New York]. And he was popular because he was nineteen years old, and he was the designer of Digits [Digits Inc., New York, New York]. And he basically was somebody who would see me then, and thought I had such style. He thought I was a designer. So, he--one of those girls would come from the, the buying houses. They go around, and just sort of like give the orders to the, to the design manufacturers. She came to me one day and said, "This guy, Willi Smith, is looking for you. I know he described--I know it's you. You should see him." Speaker 1: Now, have he--where could he have seen? Speaker 2: He see me in the neighborhood, 'cause we both work in the Garment District. But you, you walk in the street, and he thought I was a designer. And he wanted to meet me, so he arranged a time that we met. So, he and a girlfriend of his met me in the coffee shop. And we talked, and then, he told me, that he learned my whole story, that I wasn't a designer, that I worked in the showroom, and that he was very interested in having me maybe work with him. Speaker 1: And what did he see in you? Speaker 2: Can I do this (gesture)? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Because I'm elegant. (Laughter) Okay, what did he see in me? Well, we, we basically look very much alike. We dressed alike--in the same style, I mean. We had a sim- similar style. And what he saw was that somebody, who we thought, represented his image, you know, someone he, he did, you know, Digits was a very young sportswear company. And he wanted me to come and maybe, you know, sometimes they ask for a model, and he thought maybe I could do it. So, I went back, and told my company, Ruth Manchester [Ruth Manchester Ltd., New York, New York] and them, and they were very excited about that. They thought, wow, this could be so great. They were so always encouraging. I mean, the Bernie O's a thing. They could have said, "What are you talking about?" (Makes sound) No, they--, "Oh, that's so great--good for you." I mean, it wasn't like I was ever saying, I want to be a model. No, no, I never even made--that was never in my mind. Story_ID: 649322 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So tell, tell about his background. Speaker 2: Willi [Willi Smith] was an exceptional person. He, he came out of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]--his grandmother's mother, very important, especially his grandmother. He went to Parsons [Parsons School of Design, New York, New York], didn't even finish, I don't think, I don't think he finished Parsons. He got a job, started working very strongly in the, in the industry, started, he was one of the first young designers because in the Garment District [New York, New York], it's 7th Avenue, which is on 7th Avenue. And then, it's the junior dress side, or just mostly low end dresses--that's Broadway, and we were all on Broadway. Willi was someone, who basically was someone, who basically was someone who, who was already getting, you know, editorial recognition in Women's Wear Daily, being written up all the time. So, he was something that was very special. Speaker 1: So, but when you think about it because he's still being talked about, you know, and, and so, this is, this is really the late '60s [1960s]. Speaker 2: Yeah, yep. Speaker 1: And black is beautiful, but the garment (unclear) industry, so-- Speaker 2: That's fine. Speaker 1: --I mean, I'm just saying there hadn't been a lot that have come, you know, necessarily behind him. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: You know, if it had been loads of people, that would be a different thing but-- Speaker 2: Well, there, there was like, during that time, you know, Scott Barrie came along; John Hagen); [HistoryMaker] Stephen Burrows; Arthur McGee [Arthur L. McGee]. There may have been one other. There were designers that were, that, doing it at that time, right behind him, but they were a little bit more--they weren't junior. He left Digits [Digits Inc., New York, New York], and then started his own company, WilliWear [WilliWear Ltd.], with a young girl, a French girl [Laurie Mallet], and an Indian partner [Om Batheja], East Indian partner. But they, we did have designers that had come along at that time that were happening. And that's when all the Giorgio di Sant' Angelo, and Halston, and it was a moment of style, and just difference. So, it, there was, that's when we started, we started hearing in the newspapers, the black designers, you know, because there were a few, Scott Barrie, Stephen Burrows, and they were talented. And they were, you know, on 7th Avenue, not on, necessarily, on Broadway. Speaker 1: Now Stephen Burrows came out of Fashion FIT [Fashion Institute of Technology, New York, New York]. right? Speaker 2: FIT? Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: No, he came out of (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He came out of-- Speaker 2: No, he actually, he actually started in-- Speaker 1: No, I mean, where did he go to--he came, he didn't go to Parsons-- Speaker 2: Unh-uh. Speaker 1: Unh-uh. Speaker 2: Unh-uh, he didn't. He actually started a company with a bunch of kids and, and they did something called O Boutique [New York, New York], an actual store. And he, he and all those kids used to make all the clothes together--leathers and things. His book, I'll show you his book--I have it here. And he, he then eventually got discovered by Joel Schumacher and Mrs. Reeling [ph.], and they basically start to, you know, put, editorialized his things. And because of that, Joel Schumacher talked to Geri Stutz, Geraldine Stutz, who was the president of Henri Bendel at the time. And they discovered him, so to speak, and opened up a boutique, or for him to come into, to the store, and work as an atelier in the store, and have a boutique in the store. And that's how his, his claim, his strong claim--I guess, claim to fame. Speaker 1: But that's very significant because Henri Bendel was-- Speaker 2: Yes. He was the man at the top. Speaker 1: --one of the top, it was one of the-- Speaker 2: We still have the little short man with the brown suit outside the store. It was--the windows were extraordinary. The style of the store was extraordinary. I still have things from them, you know, like my, my silver beaded necklace and, you know, you still--it was extraordinary, what it was, and then it was so great that he had that. So, whatever he had at O Boutique--that was like right across the street from Max's Kansas City [New York, New York]; but then that whole style was something, but to then go to that store was a big thing. Story_ID: 649323 Speaker 1: I mean, WilliWear [WilliWear Ltd.] wasn't, it wasn't-- Speaker 2: WilliWear was sportswear-- Speaker 1: It was sportswear. Speaker 2: --and they were junior. Speaker 1: Oh, they were junior, okay. Speaker 2: It was junior--it wasn't, it wasn't for a missy. Speaker 1: Right, right, right. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: It wasn't, it wasn't the, the actual clothing that we, that WilliWear did, was more, it was junior sportswear, and that was a whole another line of clothing. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: When he did, even when he did WilliWear, it wasn't junior, but it was sportswear. And that's a whole another business, even though America is known for its sportswear. And that's where our, where, where our meat and potatoes really are. You know, we're really jeans, you know, pants, skirts. Then, you have the dress divisions, and that changes everything. And that's why the designers across the street on 7th Avenue, like a Geoffrey Beene, Norman Norell, those are people who basically do more of the finer clothes. The people on Broadway side, they do clothes that everybody, that the average guy walking on the street is going to put on. We don't need the designer that's on 7th Avenue. We don't need the Chester Weinbergs or the, the Calv- even then, to go forward, then they became a Calvin Klein. Speaker 2: (Unclear). Speaker 1: People don't need--they need affordable dressing. Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: And affordable dressing doesn't necessarily mean, you know, cheap. It just means less expensive than that thing, and that's going to cost you more-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --or you don't need designer wear. That's another type of person, and those people do exist. And that's the reason why our industry can just grow and grow and grow and grow (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Story_ID: 649324 Speaker 1: So Willi, so, he sees you, Willi Smith sees you. And then, he says, you know, I'd like to have you-- Speaker 2: Yeah, come and be my muse--and I still had my job. Speaker 1: Now, talk about what muse means because it's used very frequently in the-- Speaker 2: Yeah--industry. Well, muse, back then, was someone who, who, basically, even to, up until when models stopped being muses. It was just the person that the designer or the artist just related to. And you inspired them, and they would think of you when they either designed something, or they would have you try it on to lend more of your ideas or thoughts, so it became like a vibe of collaboration. It's a, it's a collaboration. Without you even thinking that's the word, but when you're asked, what do you think? You're helping them to see something, have a vision about something, change the way they do it, or when you put it on, you put it on in a way, and you wear in a way that--oh, my god, they see something differently than they saw when they actually line pencil drew it, or then made the garment. So, a muse is someone that represents the company or the designer's vision. Speaker 1: And, and why don't you describe your relationship, and what became your friendship, too? Speaker 2: Willi was someone, once again, another layer of someone believing in you, or thinking that you're special, or thinking that you are something, or you have something to offer. And his elegance--I mean, I don't know who comes close to who Willi Smith was--as a person. His, his, his good manners; his knowledge to know how; his grooming; how to go to lunch with someone; pay for it; an editor or young woman, or a woman; and then send her a note or flowers. I mean, for a young person to do that, and especially a young person of color, you think--well, would that have eluded a person of color--not necessarily--but you just didn't see it a lot. It doesn't mean it doesn't exist, but when it's only a couple of us (laughter), and you don't see the other guy doing it either--the, the non-colored person, you know, but it's just the fact that it was his, his sense, his tastefulness. You go into his home--his sense of art, the idea he goes somewhere, and see something he thought was very nice, that someone might like, and he'd send a little gift to an editor. It was never for to try and gain what some people would do in between those--that journey walk. You do it so you can be kept in their mind. Willi did always because he found you to be equally as precious as he appreciated things. He was a very special guy. Speaker 1: So, talk about your relationship as his muse. Speaker 2: And he, and, and what wind up happening with Willi is that he asked me to, yes, come and work with him sometimes. And, and I still work with my company, with Manchester [Ruth Manchester Ltd., New York, New York], and I'd go, maybe to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] with him somewhere or somewhere, and wear the clothes with him. But then, eventually, you know, we just connected anyway from the beginning. And I think Willi's whole thing was just to have me around 'cause he was inspired from me on seeing me on the street. Story_ID: 649325 Speaker 1: And then, eventually, I, I had a bit of a falling out with Ruth [Ruth Manchester] because of my consciousness about Arab-Israeli war-- Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: --and she's Jewish. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And I made a couple of statements, and she couldn't believe that I thought that way. And I'm raised by my father [Lee Hardison] like-- Speaker 2: That's what I was going to say, you-- Speaker 1: Wake up and smell the coffee, babe. I didn't just get there (laughter). So, you know, I'm telling her that this is going to be coming for a long time, probably beyond my lifetime. She thought I was completely wrong, and that the Arabs were completely wrong. And I thought, no one was wrong, you see, look where we are now? Anyway, so I became a little--she became a little tense. She, she got an attitude, and she stopped speaking to me, and it made it a little uncomfortable. Ruth--Sylvia [Sylvia Courtney], who I was closer to, thought it was very silly, but I, eventually, I just was smart. And, and Willi [Willi Smith] offered me to come be his assistant. And I would just do his bookkeeping and all his fan mail, and I'd go to his house, and work out of his house. I started doing that, and that's how I started. And then, he kept encouraging me--I should really model. And I kept saying, "I don't want, I'm, I'm not a model." I mean, I'm looking at my (unclear), I'm not, and so, he, he--well, he got to know Bruce [Bruce Weber], and Bruce was just starting. Bruce has (unclear) and started with a camera. He got Bruce, and then, even when he, he, he offered the idea of me going to [HistoryMaker] Stephen Burrows, and when Stephen first went to Bendel's [Henri Bendel]. But Stephen saw me, and didn't relate to me at all. But our relationship was--he was really one of the dearest people in my life, and everyone who was close to Willi felt that way. I mean, he, he had artists in his life. I mean, he was--Christo, who wraps everything--him and his wife, Jeanne-Claude, I knew them because of Willi. I mean, Willi had the connections, like in, like in tennis that just went out and reached people, that people. And Christo would have Willi fly all over the world with him, so he could be there to watch these things happen. Speaker 2: Yeah I know one of the, the lawyers, who represents Christo. He's--Scott Hodes. Speaker 1: Oh, yeah. Speaker 2: He's out of, out of Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 649326 Speaker 1: I want you to share some stories of your time together with him. Speaker 2: With Willi [Willi Smith]? Speaker 1: Yeah, two or three stories (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah. Well, you know-- Speaker 1: --you know, that are typical. Speaker 2: Or, or not. Speaker 1: Or not, right, or not, that's right. Speaker 2: Well, one of my stories with Willi is I have--Willi always wanted me to come to India. He--when he went to business on his own with the WilliWear [WilliWear Ltd.], as I said, his, his, one of his partners was East Indian [Om Batheja], and they did all the manufacturing there. The hard thing for, for that business was that everything was cotton. And buyers couldn't imagine wearing cotton in the winter because they were conditioned to believe that you wore wool in the winter, and cotton in the summer. But, of course, we know now, you can wear cotton year round because we would try to prove it, and they would try to talk in the showroom. So, he would always want me to come to India, anyway, because he loved India. And I had no interest at all (laughter). And he was the first person who talked to me always about India, India, India. And he would come home, and he brought me something from Mauritius island, Mauritius, that I still have to this day--a bracelet. His taste is so amazing. One of the times Willi and I, what I, what I--one, one of my favorite things about Willi also was dancing. Willi loved to, he loves music. He knew every word, but he couldn't hold a note for nothing. But he knew every, every, every song, and he loved to dance, and he'd, we'd just dance and dance. Willi was also someone who, as a designer, always liked to have his show the first thing in the morning. And, you know, that always was funny to me 'cause I would think, he's a black guy. The last thing you would think a black guy would want to do anything early in the morning (laughter). Willi liked to have a show at nine o'clock in the morning. He always felt that you, you get, that way, people just are there. You get them right when they're bright. They're early in the heads. There's not a crowd, you know (gesture), it's not crowded. They understand exactly what they're, you know, looking at--do it early. One time, Willi knew--learned that I was close with Jean-Michel Basquiat, and he wanted to, he wanted to be able to see if he could get his paintings outside of the gallery. So, I called Jean-Michel, and when we went down, I took him down to--no, actually, I was at Jean-Michel's, and then I had Willi meet us, meet me there. And he bought like three paintings of Jean-Michel's, which was great because one of the paintings, to this day, I wanted that pencil. I got him to buy it because I liked this one. It was just a black and white, which Jean-Michel normally didn't do. So, that was some of the great things. And Jean-Michel was so grateful. That was his, his side cash money, you know. So, these are things that--and Willi's art collection and style of home--his style. I mean, he was early. I mean, he (shakes head)--it was a great loss for all of us. Story_ID: 649327 Speaker 1: So, what were, what was his creative process? You were able to observe that, right? Speaker 2: Well, it's, it's, it's a general thing. And it's, sketching. He always believed that what's on top, it's, it's either one item, or the other should be large or small. So, if it's going to be small on, on the bottom, the top should be big. If it's going to be small on the top, the pad should be, or the skirt, should be (unclear), or bigger. He was a big sketcher and, basically, like everyone, does the same thing. You start to--then, you start to think of the fabrication and, you know, from that fabrication point of view, then you start to decide what you're going to put with what. It was always, it's always, basically, the same process with every design. And nothing changes too deeply there. Each person has their own style of sketching--that's for sure, and that, that's something that's worth collecting. He always kept a cool head. He was never someone that got flustered, or angry, or pissed off or, you know, he was always that kind of lovely person. But his creative process was generally what everyone, every designer does. And the only difference is that he worked in India, way before people ever did. Speaker 1: And how did he get to India? Do you know that? Speaker 2: Because of the fact that he had an Indian partner [Om Batheja]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --East Indian partner. And that was the deal, that they convinced him that they could do everything out of India. And that would be the way that they did the business and all because the East Indian partner had, had the factory connections there. Speaker 1: But he really was also the predecessor to other designers that would come after--much--I mean, later, more in the, you know, the--he had bold designs, right, that-- Speaker 2: Well, his, his, he was more the, the street wear designer. He was the one-- Speaker 1: Well, I mean, before, 'cause you have the hip hop coming later, the Rocawear, the-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yes, yeah, yes, yes. Speaker 1: --the, you know, Sean John, and things like that, so it was-- Speaker 2: Well, he was prior. Speaker 1: He was--that's what I'm saying, he was prior to that, so that's-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, he was the one that you, when you walked down the street, you saw his clothes. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: You wouldn't necessarily, could say that about the others who came, like, you know, Cross Colours, and all those guys who came really. That was one before even the Sean Johns and the FUBUs, and all those guys. Sean John was way out. Speaker 1: Well, well, right, that's right. Speaker 2: But he was--you, you actually saw WilliWear [WilliWear Ltd.] on the street all the time. That was the phenomenon about that company--you saw WilliWear. Speaker 1: So, how, how, what were his gross receipts at his height? Speaker 2: I have no idea. Speaker 1: You don't? Okay, okay. Speaker 2: No, that I would never know-- Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: --nor would I ever care. Speaker 1: (Laughter) What? Speaker 2: I said, nor would I ever care. I would never (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Laughter). Speaker 2: Yeah, I know. I just know that they stayed in business, you know what I mean? They only went out of business when Willi [Willi Smith] died--went out, yeah. Speaker 1: Right. And he was in business for how long? Speaker 2: Well, he died in like, '88 [1988] or something-- Speaker 1: Eighty-eight [1988], so. Speaker 2: --seven [1987], '8 [1988], something like that. Speaker 1: Okay, so almost-- Speaker 2: And he must have, yeah, must have, took Willi like twenty years, yes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, that's almost twenty years, okay, okay. So, but what's the, who was Laurie Mallet to him? Speaker 2: That was his-- Speaker 1: That was the East-- Speaker 2: No, that was the French girl. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: And it was just three partners, so it was a French girl, and the East Indian partner, and Willi. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And she was the one who, basically, you know, made all sense of it, got the, the money in, and made sense of the business, the day to day. Story_ID: 649328 Speaker 1: So let's talk about Bruce Weber because Bruce is a, a young photograph- you know, he's trying to get started, right, and he, he starts photographing you. He becomes prominent after--I mean, you know, sort of-- Speaker 2: Yeah, he grew. Speaker 1: He grew. Speaker 2: And, and when, when I worked at the company, Click [Click Model Management Inc., New York, New York], in 1981, '82 [1982], Bruce was on his way. He already had, he already had, you know, he, we separated-- Speaker 1: But you, but you met Bruce way before Click-- Speaker 2: Way before, way before (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) way, way before. Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, he, he and I were connected long before I knew his mother, I knew his sister. And then, it's funny, we, you know, you get busy as friends, and you sort of, it's like going like this, and you separate a little bit. And, he, he got with a woman named Nan Bush, and they became connected. And she was a rep, and she started to represent him. She believed in him. Speaker 1: Oh-- Speaker 2: And that relationship has maintained 'til today. Speaker 1: I see, okay. Speaker 2: They live together, work together, you know, they're together. Speaker 1: I see, I see. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 649329 Speaker 1: What is happening with you, though? I mean, you're-- Speaker 2: At that time? Speaker 1: --right, at that time? And where do you, where do you, you go to work for WilliWear [WilliWear Ltd.]. How long are you working for him? Speaker 2: Maybe--I don't know. I did it, you know, while I was still trying to do other things, too. Maybe, a year and a half or two, but I stayed still close, connected. Where'd I go from Willi? I think, I think, then, I got the job, yeah, I did, I got the job with [HistoryMaker] Stephen Burrows. When Stephen Burrows no longer was at--when Ben Shaw [Benjamin Shaw], who was like the, you know, who was the dollar, you know, like the angel of the Garment District [New York, New York], went after Stephen Burrows to bring him to 7th Avenue. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The girl who was his, Stephen's partner, her, you know, his energy partner, who came from O Boutique [New York, New York], who went with him to, to, to do the day to day stuff, too, went with him to Bendel's [Henri Bendel]. She needed, she needed somebody for the showroom when they were going to do--she went to 7th Avenue. And I learned about that, and I went and took the job there. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, so, how does the, how does he differ from, from, you know, as a person? How does Stephen Burrows differ? Speaker 2: Oh, from, oh-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: Night and day-- Speaker 1: The diff- the difference between Stephen Burrows and Willi Smith is night and day, except for the color. The, the things that they had about them that's very similar is they both had great grandmothers. And they both were raised with a great relationship to their grandmothers, so they both were gentlemen. They both were, you know, being so lucky to work with both of them, was a blessing to understand how to be treated. The difference of the night and day between them is that Willi was much more personable, could take people out, talk about anything, had interest in everything, could, you know, you know, actually, you know, wine and dine you, send you flowers, gift (makes sound). He was personable and a person's person. Stephen is shy. He is a total inny [introvert] (laughter). He's not someone who's going out to do anything extra [extrovert], other than he just is working. He's constantly at the drawing board. He's, he, and that, in those days, Stephen, now that he sketched, and also he would cut the fabric, he would make patterns, he would sew, he could do everything. And he never looked at fashion magazines. He was someone who was pure--pure genius. Well, Willi and I, we come up being inspired by everyone. We would look at everything. We would see everything. You being, you, you're inspired by the people, so even your design or anything, you had a touch of this, a touch of that. You just naturally did. Stephen was the opposite. He always just had his head into the bowl. He never looked outside of it. Speaker 2: You know, I, I was just thinking about your story because not, and even though you, you went past modeling, but not many models start--do they, were there many that started in, in showrooms like this or what? Speaker 1: No-- Speaker 2: Right, and then this, they don't usually-- Speaker 1: No, I just so happened to have been a model (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, so, they-- Speaker 1: Models are models. Speaker 2: And they don't relate, they don't under-- Speaker 1: I had a whole, I had a job the whole time I modeled. Speaker 2: Right. But you also, you started, you understood all aspects of the business, too, which, which-- Speaker 1: Yeah, I grew up in the Garment District. Speaker 2: You used to, right, that's right. Speaker 1: That's why, I would say, I grew up in the Garment District. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: And I give the Garment District a great deal of, you know, credit, because often times no one even knows what there is anymore because it's, it's just not hardly even there anymore. So, for me, no, it was great history, and great also teaching. It was like coming out of, I think, publishing, if you would. Story_ID: 649330 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, I had read that Stephen [HistoryMaker Stephen Burrows], he opened his own design studio [Burrows, Inc., New York, New York] (audio disturbance) in 1970. So, you are--is this the time that you're starting to model more, right--no? Speaker 2: (Shakes head) No, no, I mod- oh, yes, okay, you're right, oh, you're right, you're right. This is the time I began to give because I always had a full time job. So, I could, because that model thing--yes, I became one of the well known runway models. And I modeled for other designers, but I had a full time job which no one did. No one's ever, no one does that, and no one did before, no one does now (laughter). I just was that person who didn't believe I could afford to be a model. And you didn't get paid a lot. You get paid forty dollars an hour or something like that. And you, you don't get paid a lot of money. You got to be working a lot of time to be doing that, you know, like others did. So, yes, I began to work with other designers. And I could go off to Paris [France], as long as I was working, you know, like we was, no conflict time. I could do things like that, and I did it, but I had a job the whole time. Speaker 1: Okay. Because by the time, 1973 is that, very well--well, I won't say it was well documented at the time, but it's the legendary show ['Grand Divertissement a Versailles'] at Versailles [Palace of Versailles, Versailles, France], right? Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: And so, I'm just, I'm wanting to understand between 1970 and '73 [1973]--now, are you still, you're still working that whole time? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And that's-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And, but is this be- you know, because you showed me the picture of, of Stockholm [Sweden]. Is Stockholm before Versailles, or Versailles after Stockholm? I'm trying-- Speaker 2: Yes, good, good question. I think that Stockholm is after Versailles. Speaker 1: Stockholm is after Versailles, okay, 'cause I, when you were talking about Stockholm, I was thinking it preceded-- Speaker 2: I, I, I think it does, I honestly think it did, too, because I do think it, but I know also it was after (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: Let me explain why. Story_ID: 649331 Speaker 1: I went, my first, my first serious job as a model was to go to Mexico with Chuck Howard for the International Fashion Fair. Speaker 2: So, let's talk-- Speaker 1: That had to be like '69 [1969], '70 [1970]. Speaker 2: That's before you start working with [HistoryMaker] Stephen Burrows? Speaker 1: Oh, yeah-- Speaker 2: Okay, okay. Speaker 1: --oh, yeah, for sure. Speaker 2: So, let's talk, so talk about the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, go ahead. Speaker 2: No, just talk about that because you had spoken of that, going to Mexico, and that being the first. So, who, you're working with whom at the-- Speaker 1: The, the designer name, Chuck Howard, who was the designer on 7th Avenue. He was a well known American designer at the time. He was selected to go and represent America in the International Fashion Fair in Mexico City [Mexico]. Designers were coming from all over the world. And the requirement was to bring three models, and you would show three garments for each country--myself; another girl, an Indian girl, American Indian girl [Native American]; and another white girl. He--she was trying to do the, the American thing, and brought me. And being there is where I met Sighsten Herrgard, who was the designer representing Sweden. And I also met Luis Galindo, who is the designer representing Mexico. This, the Swedish designer took a personal interest in me, and the Mexican designer had a professional interest in me. So, the Mexican designer offered me to be his (air quotes) muse, and come and be with him in Mexico from time to time when he had to do photo shoots, or maybe the show his clothes or something. You know, you, you know, when somebody comes up to you, and say that they really like you in the mix and I, you like, you, like, whoa. I've never been on a plane before, you know, so it was a big thing to me. Sighsten was a whole another thing. Speaker 2: He fell in, he, he really fell head over heels for you? Speaker 1: I don't know if he fell head over heels, but he definitely made his, his point. And he got over is what I should say (laughter), now as they say (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Was he wealthy? Speaker 1: Wealthy, no. Speaker 2: No, he wasn't, okay. Speaker 1: I don't know. I, I didn't meet wealth until I met Valentino wealth. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Wealth is a big word, yeah. No, he was just, you know, a working designer who lived in Stockholm [Sweden]. He was very popular. Stockholm is a big (gesture) (unclear)-- Speaker 2: I know, but how, where, where is Stockholm in the whole fashion industry? You don't think of Stockholm in that way. Speaker 1: It's not fashion. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Every country has designers. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And this is the International Fashion Fair. Speaker 2: I see, okay. Speaker 1: And they were bringing designers from all over the world to Mexico City. So, it just so happened that he, he was the one who started, created unisex--dressing jumpsuit, women-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --the same jumpsuit, women and men, so he became famed for that. He's famous now because he died of AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome]. And he was the one who came out, you know, and spoke on it in Stockholm when nobody had done that, and he was famous. But going to Mexico was a great moment, too, for me to be able to gain some leverage about modeling. But, at the same time, I always had a job. And I had to, I had, you know, I had to, to pay my rent or something. Story_ID: 649332 Speaker 1: And this modeling thing is just, it, you know, did come and go, and I was very unusual looking for the business at the time. Speaker 2: Talk about that. Speaker 1: It's just that, you know, I was skinny, I was dark, I was big eyed. I didn't have long hair, I didn't, I didn't have any shape. I was like a boy body. I, really thin (laughter) and, basically, they just looked at you as something different. But the few who like me, it kept it going a little bit, you know what I mean? It kept me sort of like in front of people. And then, when I walked because, once again, I was a, you know, a dancer, a tap, I mean, a tap dancer, as a kid, I was an entertainer. I did things that were kind of unique and then, I learned to, to use that whole defiance thing because of the, the experience [at the International Fashion Fair] with Chuck Howard to sort of, like to defy looking at people in a certain way--looking people dead in the eye. You know, a lot of girls didn't know how to do that then so it was, it was a different time. Speaker 2: So, talk about the things that you, you would do, and things that you did that were different. And also, how did you--was, were there, what, who was showing you how to walk the first time? Speaker 1: Nobody showed you how to walk, no. Speaker 2: They didn't? Speaker 1: No. I don't know what. Those kids are getting away showing people how to walk right now. Speaker 2: They are? Speaker 1: It's a business. And also, the things-- Speaker 2: I'm just saying they are now. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's what I'm saying, yeah. No, no, no, you just, you know, you just, you know, you get the hang of it. I knew because I told you my first show was Bernie Ozer [Bernard Ozer] and, you know, I just knew, "You put me in that show, I'm--you're going, you're going to win something," and he did. I mean, I would come out, and the crowd would just go crazy 'cause I just did--wasn't, what was not common. I entertained, so to speak, you know. And so, I think, you then eventually learned, but it's easy when you're sort of a performer, or you're dancing. You know how to make moves, you know how to move your body. And I was, you know, I was lucky to be birthed from two (air quotes) jitterbuggers [Hardison's parents, Sophie Hudson Hardison and Lee Hardison], you know, so I had some natural sensibility about how to move. And I think this is the things that were so great about each thing that kept happening to me, you know. Story_ID: 649333 Speaker 1: Of coming up in the late '60s [1960s], [HistoryMaker] Pat Cleveland was a big, a big, she was--well, she wasn't big, I mean, she wasn't big, but she was an attraction because she was the Burrows [HistoryMaker Stephen Burrows] girl. She was the muse. She was the one, so you knew who she was, you know. Norm [Norman Norell], when he did the show, you saw. Because I went to the first show, I think, at Bendel's [Henri Bendel], you saw [HistoryMaker] Norma Jean Darden in it. You saw some of the other girls, but I just wasn't one. I mean, I wasn't tall enough. I wasn't interesting enough looking, whatever it was. I just didn't get the job, and Willi [Willi Smith] just couldn't understand. He was like, shot stunned. But those girls were all existing there. The girls who were like, you know, like famous to me, you know, who was like, at that time, like (gesture) (makes sound), was, was Naomi Sims. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And she was like--wow. That was, that was the injection that everything needed because she was, she could walk well, and she was, she was like Gisele [Gisele Bundchen]. You know, then you could do anything on the runway. You know, you could do anything you wanted, or you could perform in any kind of way. You can be whoever you wanted to be. It wasn't so standing around, walking, you know (makes sound). It was--you can perform. Everybody, and every girl had their own personality when they walked out, what they did, how Norma Jean used to twirl and twirl, and the way she used 'cause she wasn't a great walker, but she had, she was a great character, you know what I mean? Each person had their own thing, and that was what so great about that time. And some of the other girls, too, at that time was Amina [Amina Warsuma], Ramona [Ramona Pitera], you know, girls who were like the Burrows girls, you know; and there was some good girls around. Story_ID: 649334 Speaker 1: --That was a big deal to even have that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You're talking about, oh, you're talking about Naomi? Speaker 1: Right, Naomi. Speaker 2: Oh, sorry. I thought you were talking about Pat. Speaker 1: No, I wasn't talking about Pat, no. Speaker 2: You didn't say the name. You, you knew what you're talking about, oh, I didn't hear you (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I said Naomi, no, I was saying Naomi. Speaker 2: I'm sorry. Speaker 1: I'm sorry, 'cause I was thinking, I thought-- Speaker 2: No, she was, she was, she, she came along. Speaker 1: Right, she was-- Speaker 2: And she was on-- Speaker 1: --it was a sense of pride Speaker 2: Yeah, it was a, it was the Life ad, it was a Life cover that was a big one. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: I have that. Where do I have it? Oh, it must be somewhere in my archives, but I have it. Someone gave it to me. Speaker 1: Okay. No, I said Naomi (unclear). Speaker 2: Yeah, I thought you were talking about Pat. Speaker 1: Right. No, no, no, no, no, no (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous). But she did do things. No, Norma Jean [HistoryMaker Norma Jean Darden], yeah, Norma, Norma Jean--no, Naomi Sims is who you're, yeah. Speaker 1: Right, right, right. Yeah, 'cause [HistoryMaker] Pat Cleveland and the exhibit that they just have, the Johnson [Johnson Publishing Company, Chicago, Illinois]-- Speaker 2: In Chicago [Chicago History Museum, Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 1: Yes, that they--and that, actually, was a nice exhibit ['Inspiring Beauty: 50 Years of Ebony Fashion Fair'], but-- Speaker 2: I know-- Speaker 1: --she, she-- Speaker 2: It's not over yet, is it? Speaker 1: No, no, it's not over. I was very pleased with it at that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, they told me I should come up and see it. Speaker 1: No, you should-- Speaker 2: I said, how am I going to go to Chicago [Illinois]? I--they'll, they'll give me a reason. Speaker 1: I think you would be pleased (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I would, 'cause that's, that's what I say, you have to come. And Linda [HistoryMaker Linda Johnson Rice] told me, too. She said, "Please try to come." Speaker 1: No, I think they did a really (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) How am I going to Chicago? Speaker 1: I mean, I have, I, I thought they did a really nice job, um-hm. Speaker 2: No, she--they're very proud of it. Speaker 1: I think they should be, um-hm, really. And I wasn't sure how I would feel, but I thought, you know, so. Speaker 2: Yeah, once you saw it, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: It's hard to imagine what someone's going to actually make happen. Speaker 1: Well, you never know. Speaker 2: You never know. Speaker 1: Um-hm, and especially because one, that they had auctioned off, they had an auction. I don't know why they did the auction. Then, they had a-- Speaker 2: I don't understand what they're getting ready to do now because they're getting ready to do the Ebony Fashion Fair, and then making it a benefit. And I don't get that. I didn't know that-- Speaker 1: Why would they be doing that? Speaker 2: --when she talked about--I got to find out what that means. You're in Chicago, right? Speaker 1: Yeah. Subscriptions are down though. I read last--for some reason, something I was reading, that they're like down by 30 per- [percent], or maybe even more than that. I think they're, you know, so maybe they're trying to find-- Speaker 2: For a reason. Speaker 1: --but they had an auction, like a major auction. I would have done that auction later-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --after the exhibit that-- Speaker 2: Not, not ended it, doing, they did it before? Speaker 1: Not, not--they did at the beginning like, like the day after the exhibit opened, and I don't know why they would do-- Speaker 2: They were auctioning off the clothes? Speaker 1: Yes, like $150, and things like that. And I-- Speaker 2: $150? Speaker 1: Well, those were the starting prices. I mean, I don't know, but it was tons of--I mean, I thought, the only reason I know that I was presenting with the woman--god, what's her name? She owns, she's the female, owns the only auction now [Leslie Hindman Auctioneers, Chicago, Illinois]. She used to be, Leslie Hindman. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: She was with Sotheby's before. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Well, she was alone, and then, and so, I was just, I mean, shocked. She had a whole big catalog, but it was too early. Why don't you just let it get some awareness, and then go in, and then you could make more money-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --I would think. Okay, but I don't know that business. Okay, so, let's go on (laughter), so what's my opinion going to count for? Okay, so-- Speaker 2: (Shakes head) Sounds just like me. Story_ID: 649335 Speaker 1: Okay, but 1973-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --how does, how does that show come to be- being? And there are--I mean, the, who, who's responsible for this show in the first place? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Are you talking about the Versailles ['Grand Divertissement a Versailles']? Speaker 1: Versailles. It was a--I mean, that's where we were. Why are you laughing? But then, you can't laugh. I'm in foreign territory. You helped, and help me along. Speaker 2: Okay, I will, I will. Speaker 1: I'm trying (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, you said '73 [1973]. I should have known that's what it was, Versailles, yeah. So, Versailles, Eleanor Lambert was a public relations woman. I shouldn't say it that way, but she was the public relations for most of the designers from 7th Avenue in New York [New York]. And she had a, she was a--well, powerful kind of PR person, and she had this relationship with someone [Gerald Van der Kemp] in France. And she, basically, talked to them about--, "Why don't we do something for the Marie Antoinette theatre [Royal Opera House]?" Which was having its need of some renovation, and it was in the hall of Versailles [Palace of Versailles, Versailles, France]. And she said, "We should do a fashion show, and the fashion show should be five French designers, five American designers. They come, we do a benefit, and that'll help repair the, the theatre." I always thought it was Francois de la Renta [Francoise de Langlade] who was the first wife of Oscar de la Renta, because that's who came to me, and told me the idea at first. So, I go around telling the whole world--no, no, no, no, it was Francois de la Renta-- Speaker 1: That's what (unclear). Speaker 2: --'cause I love her the best. But, maybe, I'm wrong because I don't know the inner workings of another sanctum. Maybe it was that incubated, and then, Francois jumped on it because she's French, and she was married to Oscar. So, because of that, they came together with this idea, and the idea was, let's do it. So, they got who they would want for the French designers, and who they wanted as the American designers. Speaker 1: So, who are the French designers, and who are the American designers? Speaker 2: I may be off when I go to count, but it's, Givenchy, Yves Saint Laurent, Marc Bohan for Dior [Christian Dior]. I think, I think, I think, but I may be wrong. I always thought it was Courreges [Andre Courreges], but no one seemed to mention that anymore. Speaker 1: What about Pierre Cardin? Speaker 2: Pierre, Pierre Cardin. Speaker 1: Dior? Speaker 2: Um-hm, that's right, so I'm right. So, no one--you don't see Courreges on that page? Speaker 1: Unh-uh. Speaker 2: So who, so what, so which of them--I, oh, when I mentioned, I said-- Speaker 1: Givenchy, Dior, Ungaro [Emanuel Ungaro]. Speaker 2: Ungaro, that's right. Speaker 1: Right, okay-- Speaker 2: Why didn't I remember that? I can't remember correct. Maybe he was just in the performance piece. Anyway, that's, that's those--the five. Speaker 1: Okay. And the American designers were (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The Americans were Bill Blass, Oscar de la Renta, Halston, Anne Klein, and [HistoryMaker] Stephen Burrows. Speaker 1: Now, for Stephen Burrows, that's wonderful, really. Speaker 2: Yeah, it was wonderful for each one of them (laughter). Speaker 1: Um-hm, for each one of them, okay. Speaker 2: It was wonderful for everybody because it was like--huh? And they go into the show, and they said, "Oh, that sounds interesting." And, of course, Halston would be there because he was-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --cast me out at the time. The American designers, you could pick and choose. There were a few that they asked, and they wouldn't do it, like probably Geoffrey Beene wouldn't do it, and people like that. But when they settled, those were the ones. And Stephen, of course, because he was very popular at the time, and she represented and, and Eleanor represented Stephen. Speaker 1: Do you know what time of the year it was? Was it-- Speaker 2: It was cold. Speaker 1: It was in the--okay, like in the winter or the fall? Speaker 2: Yeah, it was winter, 'cause I remember I had on a fake, my, my, that wasn't fake, but I had on my little fur jacket, c- coat. Story_ID: 649336 Speaker 1: So, the preparation is--I mean there's a lot of preparation for this show ['Grand Divertissement a Versailles'] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) For this? Well, prior-- Speaker 1: Prior. Speaker 2: --because we knew about it a long time before. They had to select three models. I mean, pardon me, each design- each model had to get three designers to select them in order for them to go. There was a prerequisite, and we weren't just models. There were also dancers that were part of it because they'd gotten Kay Thompson who was going to choreograph it. They had to agree to get Liza Minnelli, who was going to be our only star. Joe Eula was going to do the sets. And it was going to be--I think, you know, I got a wonderful participation, and something that was just going to be a great benefit. But as time went on, what happened is that the press, the American press, thought to feel timid. All the people who thought they were going to come and support us--all of a sudden, Halston wasn't going (laughter). The French designers thought, the French press, not the designers, started sending back notifications out into the editorials that it was the most ridiculous idea, that even the Americans could think to come to Paris [France], to Europe, to Paris, to France, to even, even show their clothes. "They're not designers--they're sportswear people." And they were just putting it all down, like, "Ha, ha ha, they got to be kidding," (laughter). This is going to be such a (laughter), and then because of the tone of it, it became a battle like, "Well, we're going to show you. Well, you know, you're not even going to be able to--," it was no longer the, you know, can we get along, collaboration, to just do a benefit. It became a (gesture), right? And by the time we were going, you know, I almost didn't go because it took up until three days before that I was confirmed. Speaker 1: 'Cause you needed, so who-- Speaker 2: Three-- Speaker 1: --so who was your, you had [HistoryMaker] Stephen Burrows, of course? Speaker 2: Yeah, 'cause I was--by then, I was no longer in the showroom. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: I was his, I was designs, and I also did all the fittings for him. And I had Anne Klein because she called me in because she wanted to talk to me about having some black girls, you know, do it because she was going to do more of a motif of, an African scene in, in textile. And I didn't, I didn't have anyone else. But Halston would send a message over--, "Don't worry, don't worry, she's going to come, she's going to come, even if I have to say, I'll take her, she's going to come. Some way, don't, don't worry--just wait, (makes sound)." And, finally, Oscar [Oscar de la Renta] said yes. And so, I wind up going, and it was good that I wind up going because Stephen needed me to go because (laughter) I wasn't really a model. I believe, I was, you know, his right hand, and I also did things in a different way. But because I was that girl who walked that certain way--when we do the rehearsals, they expected me to really shine, and do the walk, and I was still trying to get the, you know, it, it was a tough trip, it was tough. It was tough because we didn't have anything to eat. We didn't have (laughter), since it's (unclear), we didn't have toilet paper in the bathroom. And when the French would rehearse, they would take hours and hours and hours. And we would have so little time left. It was--I mean, it was just a tough trip, it was tough. In, in the end, it was worth it because we won, which we didn't go there to (air quotes) win, but it became that, you know. And we wind up winning the prize, so to speak. The prize was only the acknowledgment. Story_ID: 649337 Speaker 1: The ones that are with you, though, the, the black girls, 'cause it's you, Pat Cleve- Cleveland [HistoryMaker Pat Cleveland], Alvin Chinn [sic. Alva Chinn]-- Speaker 2: Chinn. Speaker 1: --Chinn, Billie Blair, [HistoryMaker] Norma Jean Darden, Barbara Jackson, Jennifer Brice, Ramona Saunders, Amina Warsuma? Speaker 2: Warsuma. Speaker 1: Warsuma. So, had you worked-- Speaker 2: Charlene Dash. Speaker 1: And Charlene Dash. Speaker 2: Yeah, she's on there. Speaker 1: Okay. So, had all of you worked before together? Speaker 2: Well, I, when it comes down to the, to [HistoryMaker] Stephen Burrows' girls, I didn't work with them because I was never a model in his show per se. I was more, I was more the, the--I worked in the design studio [Burrows Inc., New York, New York]. I ran the design studio, so I wouldn't have maybe been on the same--but Pat, yes. Norma Jean, I think, yes. Barbara Jackson, maybe--I don't know, probably. But I felt like I worked with them because they worked with--if I, if I hired them for Stephen, yeah. And, and Pat was always there, of course. So, we had, we all had a--you know, we had a camaraderie, you know, because we all knew each other, and it was normal during that time. I'm sure, at some point, some of them, maybe--I think Norma surely worked for Giorgio. I worked for Giorgio Sant' Angelo [Giorgio di Sant' Angelo]. And then, Billy Blair and I worked for Clovis Ruffin, so we worked together on that. And we also worked for Issey Miyake because I used to do the Issey show; and then also I would, sorry, I would also produce his shows. So, we--there were places that we would work together. Story_ID: 649338 Speaker 1: Can you describe the, the room that evening and, you know, the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The room of Versailles [Palace of Versailles, Versailles, France]? Speaker 1: Um-hm, and the response. Speaker 2: It was, it was, it was a theatre. It was in the Marie Antoinette theatre [Royal Opera House] and it wasn't a runway. It was a-- Speaker 1: Theatre. Speaker 2: --theatre, so you're on, you know-- Speaker 1: Stage-- Speaker 2: --stage, and it's not banked. It's, it's not like, you know, it doesn't go, it, it doesn't go like this (gesture)-- Speaker 1: It doesn't extend. Speaker 2: It, it goes--no, it goes like that (gesture). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, you, you're, you're going from high to low, right? And it's that, that moment because we didn't have any sets because Joe [Joe Eula], when he did the set, when he imagined them, he imagined them in inches instead of centimeters. Speaker 1: Oh-- Speaker 2: So, that was a big problem because the measurements were given to him in centimeters, but he didn't rec- he didn't translate it in his mind that way. So, we had nothing, but just the girls, and the color of the clothes, and everything. And because our show was so simple, because it was, like America in Paris [France], because that's what Kay Thompson had done with, you know, Liza Minnelli's father, Vincente [Vincente Minnelli]. You know, she did a very simple--and we only had Liza, so it was very simple, where the French had much more. They had everything from the Crazy Horse Saloon [Paris, France] to Josephine Baker to Ru- Rudolf Nureyev. You know, they had so much going on, on the stage at one time and at, and at different times. It just--it was lengthy, where the Americans were just basically simple, clean, and it was just nice. And the audience was, you know, there was royalty, and well to do, of course, you know, French society. Those who were really well, you know, really coming from a very--'cause the, the tickets were expensive, and so, the place was full. It's funny how that was. I guess it was 'cause it was nothing, nothing like that, too. Princess Grace [Grace Kelly]. Speaker 1: Well, someone had gotten everyone out then, though, too, um-hm (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, because it's, it's, and French society that did, but it was just still amazing when you don't know how one part works. And then you open up a new--the curtain opens, and it's all those people. Story_ID: 649339 Speaker 1: So what was the response [to the 'Grand Divertissement a Versailles']? Can you talk about that, too? Speaker 2: Yeah, it was great response for us because-- Speaker 1: A lot of applause? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: A lot of oohs and ahs? No? Speaker 2: No, not oohs and ahs, no, no oohs and ahs-- Speaker 1: Applause. Speaker 2: I mean, wait, I mean, it was more. They were stunned by, I think, by the, by the sheer simplicity. And also, back in those days, no one used music to do a fashion show. And we did music--I mean, [HistoryMaker] Stephen Burrows, you know, did music. So, we were walking to music, too, and the girls flowing, and the things are so elegant. And the mixture of girls of color, and the girls that are not, and the girls that are dancers, and the feeling, the style, the elegance of it all. It was such a good thing in that way. The, the strong reaction is like, as, as it's told and history has it, is when I come down because I was so nervous 'cause during every rehearsal, I just did enough because I was, had so much to be concerned about. And there was so much fighting and arguing amongst the designers. And, you know, I had to go listen to Anne Klein talk. And everybody was just going through such tough times, especially her because, you know, she's a woman. And she feels that she's being treated badly because she's a woman and no one is paying her attention, but she also was ill at the time and I didn't know that. But I had to listen to her, and spend time with her, and I'd go back to my post because I wasn't there to model. I just had to model when I had to model, but I was there also as an assist to Stephen 'cause I worked in his design studio [Burrows Inc., New York, New York]. But that moment when, you know, Halston said, "Well, we can count on Bethann [HistoryMaker Bethann Hardison], you know, we can get--," and every time they kept saying that, I kept thinking--every time I go to the rehearsal, he could say, "C'mon, Bethann, c'mon." I said, "I will, I will, I will," 'cause I didn't have it at that moment. But when he put that yellow dress on me, and that wasn't, you know, that was his couture--the dress--and it was all pinned. And the way he had it, it was, you know, like, instead of everything was knits with him. With my dress, it was woven, and it was underlay, so you had to connect hook and hook, hook and eye, hook and eye, and then, it was wrapped over. It was like, he was dedicating that dress to couture, like French couture, because he had never done anything like that before. So, this dress, you know, we all had long trails with a, with a pinkie holding our trains, you know, on our finger. But when I came out, and I knew it was my moment (laughter), and I knew they were counting on me 'cause I hadn't shown them what I could do. I walked down there--that was another moment of having that moment with Chester Weinberg. I walked down there with such defiance on my eyes, my feeling, the spirit of my body was so strong, and the way I walked, that you see this, and I had, we had twills, all of us had twills. But I'm the only one with no hair, 'cause my hair is cut short, so it's funny how my hair is cut short now, where I had a long dress and hairs before, but this twill. So, here I look more Afrique, I guess, probably than anything-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --with this dark skin, this pure, beautiful, canary yellow dress, but the way I came down, it was like it was (laughter), Bill, Bill Cunningham said it was like, "Watts Bethann?" It was like watts--but when I hit the stage, the center stage, and turned, and stared at the audience in defiance, and threw my train down, and looked at them, they start to stomp the ground, the floor, and then, they threw all the programs up in the air, like Indianapolis [Indianapolis 500], screaming, "Bravo, Bravo!" Boy, that moment, the way they screamed, the way they start, the way the programs kept going up in the air. And I just stood there for so long. At that point, I saw Halston in this, in the wing, the, the left wing of the stage, and him grabbing Liza. And I heard them saying, "Go, Bethann, go." And, then, they said, "Stephen, Stephen, and Stephen's coming." And by this time, tears are coming in my eyes, and I'm like (fakes crying), I was such emotion. It was such emotion, just to be able to then take that one moment, and then walk across that stage where I was supposed to, to let the other girl come through. It was the most un- it was the most amazing moment. So, I missed the big party mostly because Liza Minnelli and I just, just walked around the whole Versailles [Palace of Versailles, Versailles, France], talking and talking. I don't know. When I see the film ['Battle at Versailles'], I don't remember where I was because I don't remember anything. I think, I think that moment was all I needed. And I wasn't one of the models like that. You know, they were really models. I was never a model--I modeled. Speaker 1: I know, but at that point, you're a model. Speaker 2: No, no, I--no, I was never a model. Speaker 1: Right, in the head, okay, I got you. Speaker 2: They were all models. Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: They worked and did nothing else but model. I modeled because I was capable of it, but I was never really a model-model. I was never that girl who just, you know, worried about what the face looked like, what was I wearing and all that. (Makes sound) That was not my way. Story_ID: 649340 Speaker 1: And then I know Josephine Baker from Stockholm [Sweden]. So, she is so happy. Speaker 2: Wait, she, what did you say about Stockholm? Speaker 1: I know Josephine Baker-- Speaker 2: From Stockholm-- Speaker 1: --from Stockholm. Speaker 2: I see. So, Stockholm came before-- Speaker 1: See, so Stockholm was before. That's what I said. Speaker 2: Okay, okay. Well, you--no, you said-- Speaker 1: I said, before, before, I said before and after (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) it should have come before, but I think I said it. Speaker 1: --before and after-- Speaker 2: Oh, before-- Speaker 1: --before and after. Speaker 2: I see, okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, because-- Speaker 2: So, you had met her? Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah. We, we used to go, 'cause we used to go to, yeah, like I said, it's a small place, so we used to go to Alexandra's [Stockholm, Sweden] (background noise) (dancing)-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: Before and after, I said, it seems like it was after, but I said, but it's also before and after-- Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: --'cause Stockholm went on. All right now. So, Josephine Baker, yes, I met 'cause she used to be, she used to come to Alexandra's, which is a club, was a well known club back in the day. And she used to come there and, and we used to dance together, and stuff like that. So, she knew me. And so, when she came backstage to, 'cause there, there was--it was such pride that after all the discord and the, the not eating, and cold, you know, being in this place [Palace of Versailles, Versailles, France]. There's no central heating and you, you know, and we had the show must go on mentality. And, everybody was so elated that, you know, after I--my beginning, that first moment where the programs were in the air, and the stomping, and the bravo was my, was my entrance [at the 'Grand Divertissement a Versailles']. After that, there was much, lots more, "Bravo, bravo, bravo," you know, it was more that, you know. Well, Josie came backstage, and I grabbed her and introduced her to the girls. And she just loved kissing them, and telling them how proud she was, how proud she was to be an American (laughter) because she wasn't, she was French at that time, but by that time, but she was so proud, she was so proud. Speaker 1: I mean, but for her, that would be a big deal, too. I mean, period, because-- Speaker 2: Yeah, she had to perform that night. She performed-- Speaker 1: Oh, she performed that night. Speaker 2: --with the French. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, she had to perform for the French. Speaker 1: Yeah, because I mean, her relationship with the United States was a, a sort of tortured one anyway. Speaker 2: I don't know if hers was a--I know Eartha's [HistoryMaker Eartha Kitt] was (laughter). Speaker 1: No, hers was, too. Speaker 2: Okay. We'll get to that. Speaker 1: Oh, yeah (laughter). Speaker 2: Anybody (unclear)-- Speaker 1: No, no, because, it's just that she never got to get acknowledgment, and when she came back for her show, the one time it was a disaster-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and, you know, she-- Speaker 2: That was different, and even in, it--Eartha, 'cause Eartha was just pure out, we just (gesture) (makes sound)-- Speaker 1: Right, that's right. Speaker 2: Her, she just was not as popular here for no reason. It was just-- Speaker 1: Well, and then she got excommunicated after they could-- Speaker 2: You're talking about, now you're talking about Eartha? Speaker 1: Eartha. Speaker 2: Yes, that's right (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) After, after the relationship with, she said something, Lady Bird which is around this (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) About Lady, with Johnson, Lady Bird Johnson, negative. Speaker 1: That's, that's around this time, right. Speaker 2: Yeah, negative. Speaker 1: Yeah, it was around this time. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But Jo Baker was more--it was a fact that she just wasn't famous here. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: You know, but she never had anybody who was negative about her, just that she wasn't famous here. And she didn't, but she was just proud because, you know, she knew where she came from. That's one thing where, you know, no matter--I got to know Eartha more later, you know. And I was never a fan because I knew how, she played, like she came from someplace else which is cool. Speaker 1: That's true. Speaker 2: You know, she played like she came from somewhere else. Then she, then she wants to be mad when they sort of said, "Okay, so you be over there. And you don't have--," then, she gets mad, and then, she comes back, when she needs to stay, and start saying that, you know, it was terrible how they treat us. I was, at, to be on a TV show with her once with Geraldo Rivera, and she and I were on the panel. And I know better. I mean, you know, she told the story the way she wanted to tell it 'cause it was her moment now because she's back, but that's not how it went down. We all--anyone who was around knew better. And then, you know, ironically, I, I begin to represent her daughter. Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: So, ironically, I wind up being at the daughter's wedding when (laughter) Eartha wouldn't even let the father [John McDonald] walk the daughter down the aisle because she raised her. She's a tough girl, and she walked a little, get off her (unclear)-- Speaker 1: Okay. That's enough, that's interesting-- Speaker 2: --and go back to us 'cause you, you and could have (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) that's interesting. Speaker 2: --a steak dinner and talk and talk. Speaker 1: That's three. No, because we actually featured her-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and so, her daughter just sent me coasters 'cause she's funny. Speaker 2: Kitt [Kitt McDonald]? Speaker 1: Kitt, Kitt, Kitt's lovely (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, Kitt, she's lovely-- Speaker 1: She's lovely. Speaker 2: --always was. Speaker 1: Um-hm. She's lovely. Speaker 2: Lovely girl. Story_ID: 649341 Speaker 1: This--I want to understand the life you're living though, too, because you're talking about working, and you're talking about traveling internationally in places, and but what is the lifestyle like? Speaker 2: Oh, it's interesting you say that. The, the best I could say is my life--I think the most pre- predominant moment that's succulent in my mind is my time in Stockholm [Sweden] in going and leaving one time with a guy I met at dinner the night before, and traveled with him to Ibiza. I think times like that in the '70s [1970s] and the, when the early '70s [1970s] where life was so free, and all the girls on the beach have (unclear), the pieces they wore, like lingerie, and it, it was just so genius. And, you know, you're in a country where there's a king that's oppressing, you know. And I, I think all the kids were, you know, you're just living a life where things are so different when you come, you're a kid that comes from Bedford-Stuyvesant [Brooklyn, New York]. And you just have, you know, where you, you're, you're raised to remember to keep your knees closed, and remember how to be, and how to speak. I mean, I changed my physique--how I walked on the street by looking in the windows of 5th Avenue. I'd go to Manhat- [Manhattan, New York]. I learned to play chess in Washington Square Park [New York, New York]--me and my son's dad [Donald McFadden]. We would do this. I basically learned, even when I was in Stockholm, they wouldn't believe I even was from Brooklyn, New York. I always said I'm from Brooklyn, New York. And they said, "But you don't have an accent." And I think, well, did I also offer that? You just sort of like, bring it up a bit, but still, you still are the shell you are, and to go places and, and meet people, and people like you, and love you, and want you to do certain things, simple things, like meeting, you know, this kid in the dinner and him, need to take his brother's artwork, whose brother is a famous artist, take it to a gallery in, in Amsterdam [the Netherlands]. And he and his friend are going to take the car continually on to Spain to Ibiza. And he, just looking at me, saying, "Why don't you come with us?" You know, people don't do things like that anymore, or maybe they do but, you know, never hardly do. "Come with you? Where?" "To, come with us to Spain, come with us." "When?" "Tomorrow." "Tomorrow, when?" "Tomorrow morning." I said, "I can't do that." "Why not?" And only because I had my Swedish friend with me there who said to me, "He's a cool guy. Arnie's [ph.] brother is really cool--go with him, he's good." And his mother, "Go with my son, he'll take care of you." And he really did. He was like a houseboy, you know, he was so good. So, to go to, to take that trip with these two boys that you don't know, and be good in a place, that's a part of a life that you're beginning to live. It's not glamorous, but it's definitely a place where you're beginning to, you know, have these injections that gives you some sense of wherewithal elsewhere. It gives you culture and another life, and tells you things or people falling in love with you out of nowhere. And they're the most popular boy on, in, in that little town and that little village, and why, he doesn't even speak English. And yet, he wants you to come sit at his table. Things have just happened that just (gesture), you know, and you're not the--to you, you look around, you see, you know, you're not the most beautiful girl there, but there's something (gesture). And these things happen. Story_ID: 649342 Speaker 1: Now, is, is there also a night life component, or does that come a little later? I mean, is there, are you going to a lot of parties, and are you, you know, being entertained, and you're meeting people from different countries, am I-- Speaker 2: (Gesture) That only happened to me once, I went, when I got a little older in time. That happened like, maybe the later '70s [1970s]. Speaker 1: Oh, late, when this is just-- Speaker 2: When I, when I, when I start to work with Valentino. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. But the, that's also the disco? Speaker 2: (Gesture) I live the more bohemian life, no. Speaker 1: You live more bohemian life? Speaker 2: Yeah, I live much more bohemian life. I'm much more, I am still very bohemian, and that said, since I--my life with--when Valentino wanted me to work with them. I got to live around-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --something that you can sort of see, so I can be at a dinner with Elizabeth Taylor or be, but it was never this kind of thing that's happening now. It's much chicer-- Speaker 1: Right, right, it's chicer but-- Speaker 2: --much more intimate. Speaker 1: --but then, it also--well, there, what almost became, you know, but you weren't clubbing. It wasn't the disco age at that point. Speaker 2: Oh, no, no, we had disco with a, with a, with the guys who created 54 [Studio 54, New York, New York], but, but-- Speaker 1: That was later. Speaker 2: --before, it wasn't even disco. And in Paris [France], it was more like it was, it was, it was clubs. Speaker 1: Well, see, that was, it was clubs so big clubs. Speaker 2: We had a club set, but it wasn't like, you know, it wasn't, it wasn't disco-disco. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was clubs. It may--you'd be, Mr. Saint Laurent [Yves Saint Laurent] would be there, Yves would be there. Kenzo [Kenzo Takada] would be there, you know, it would be things like that. Speaker 1: But I think, wasn't Donna Summers [sic. Donna Summer] out with her all that time, though? Speaker 2: Yeah, she came along around that time. Speaker 1: Right by--right. Speaker 2: She came along at the time, but as we say, when it comes down to the '70s [1970s] when Steve Rubell started the Studio 54. Speaker 1: That's a different thing. Speaker 2: That's when disco started. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: They created disco because the disco music had, had that eight beat. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: People could learn to dance because people didn't know how to dance. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: What we used to is go the clubs, dance clubs, and we'd be in these little lofts and stuff in Paradise Garage [New York, New York], a little loft where people just only dance--no alcohol, just dancing. The club, to open up a Studio 54, it was with a bar, dance--we never had things like that. Who can afford that? They didn't give us licenses, and then, the music started with Studio 54 was that-- Speaker 1: Right, right, right. And that was the (unclear) club, but the thing that, so you're saying that you had a more bohemian artistic lifestyle and some artists-- Speaker 2: I, I wouldn't say artistic--I would just say bohemian. Speaker 1: Okay (laughter). Speaker 2: Bohemian is a nice word. It's a word that doesn't, you know, you can say that were, were some artists also part of your life at that time? I could say yes. Were some people who didn't have a job who'd just stood around talking about life? Yeah. Was, was the people sitting around just smoking all day long? Um-hm. It was very bohemian (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) See, and I call that artistic, you know-- Speaker 2: Well that's very nice of you. And your mother would be proud (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter). Story_ID: 649343 Speaker 1: Leon Talley [Andre Leon Talley]? Do you meet him? Speaker 2: Oh, that was in the early '70s [1970s], maybe. Speaker 1: Right, okay. Speaker 2: Because he just (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, he moves to New York City [New York, New York] in '74 [1974]. Speaker 2: Yeah, okay, yeah. Speaker 1: So, you met when he moved here? Speaker 2: Yeah, we met, in fact, yes, because he had just gotten the job with a interview, and we were all being photographed by Oliviero, Oliviero Tos- Toscani, Oliviero, sorry, Oliviero Toscani for a magazine. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And he just, he just picked real people. He had his people. And I was being photographed. Andre is being photographed. And I said, "Who's that guy in that, in that, that scout?" He had like a, with a scout boy's uniform on. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And, and there's a little, in the book, in the little, like, like an Eagle Scout. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And, and, and I went up there and said, "What's your name?" He said, "Andre." I said, "Oh, nice to meet you." He said, "Nice to meet you. What's your name?" That's how we met. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, hold on. Speaker 2: Oh, sorry. Speaker 1: Okay. Have to start again, okay. So, when did you meet Andre Talley? Speaker 2: I met Andre, I think, in maybe 1974, '75 [1975]. He had come to, had just gotten out of school [Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island], and he had the connection with Mrs. Vreeland [Diana Vreeland]. And Mrs. Vreeland suggested him to Andy Warhol to have a job there at The Factory [New York, New York] for an interview. Speaker 1: And what struck you about him? And you were-- Speaker 2: That he was very tall and he had on (laughter), he had on short pants right below his knee. And he was actually wearing a, like a, like a, a uniform for the Boy Scouts [Boy Scouts of America]. And I thought that they was just so funny. And, you know, he hitches, but he was being photographed by Toscani, which I thought was cool, 'cause it, all the cool people were being photographed, all the downtown kind of cool kids. We were all being photographed, so that was kind of cool. And we all had little--and, and it came out, I have it some place, too--little pictures of us, all, you know, for the magazine. And, and it was very nice to, to meet him in that way, to know his history, to know his journey, to be in his life so long. That's, that was very nice, but it's interesting to me, about me, to, to talk, for you to talk to me. Whenever someone interviews me, I learn so much more about me because my mind is sort of, 'cause there's so much that's happened to me. I mean, I would, I don't think I've even put down Valentino. When I was writing this thing, I, it hurt my head to even answer your questions 'cause I, I need you to do, someone to talk to me, and then they'll get it because it's a lot, and I can't remember it all. Speaker 1: Yeah, and you're (cough), to do it right, you probably will have to do a sequence of things, and then fill in the pieces. Story_ID: 649344 Speaker 1: So what i- who is around your circle in this-- Speaker 2: At that time? Speaker 1: --at this point in time which is the, you know, in the early '70s [1970s] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) By this-- Speaker 1: Who, who is in your circle? Speaker 2: I-- Speaker 1: Who are you associating with? Speaker 2: I-- Speaker 1: Who do you consider friends? Who are you-- Speaker 2: I-- Speaker 1: --getting to know? Who are you looking up to? Speaker 2: Definitely, well, I think by this time, Iman comes to the country. She came, she came after (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) She came much later, she comes later. Speaker 2: Yeah, '76 [1976], maybe. Speaker 1: Seventy-six [1976], right, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, '76 [1976]. See, look, I'm learning numbers, I'm getting that. They gave me (unclear). So, in that time, Calvin, because I used to, you know, Calvin, Stephen [HistoryMaker Stephen Burrows], design wise. Friend wise, they--wait, it was all, definitely Stephen. Willi is my friend. Some of his friends, like Rosemary Peck, there's a picture of she and I. And a Willi Smith show, when you see me like this, my face like that, my hair growing long at the time, she's my good friend. I was, I was friends with, you know, I was friends with Steve Rubell because we went to the same high school [George W. Wingate High School, Brooklyn, New York]. But at the time, it just seems like so many people, I can't remember all of them. Speaker 1: Right. So, Calvin Klein, his name is not, that's his adopted name, or his, his-- Speaker 2: No, that's Ralph. Speaker 1: Ralph Lauren, okay, that's right, that's right, that's right. Speaker 2: Yeah, good for you, go ahead and do your homework. Speaker 1: That's another (laughter), that's funny, 'cause what's his name? The answer, Lifshitz [Ralph Lifshitz] on it, okay. Speaker 2: Lip- Lip- something, yeah, yeah, something, yeah. Speaker 1: So, right, right, okay. So, what is your circle like, and what are you, you know, is, are you getting together at each of those-- Speaker 2: It's, it's like, it's like, it's like this. Keith Haring, Jean-Michel Basquiat, Tina Chow, Mr. Chow's, Jerry Hall, oh, my god, Jerry Hall, Jerry, people like that. Tina, I said, yeah. People you come in--Andy [Andy Warhol], god knows, Andy was a huge fan of me, thank you. Speaker 1: He was. Now, speak about that 'cause he was, he's such a huge-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I know. Speaker 1: --one, he's a larger than life character. Speaker 2: Yeah, but he's also shy. Speaker 1: Shy? Speaker 2: Yeah, very, very, you know, talks like this (whispers), talks very low, what, I mean, he's gone now, but he did, you know. I mean, people like that, going to The Factory [New York, New York] for lunch. That's how I got that, that from him-- Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: --because he, I always said, the, you know, he did, he did the Marilyn Monroe, the Liz Taylor [Elizabeth Taylor], of those, those. The series, of the series, the only series I was interested in, was this man because this man went up against the government, fighting for his, for his tribe, and that was in my day. And I loved American Indians [Native American]. I, I just, you know, I'm, got my own heritage with that, but the fact of it is, I told Andy, you know, the series I love the most, you did. And he said, "Which, what, what's what?" I said, "The American Indian series." He said, "You're kidding me." I said, "Yeah." He said, "I think I have one of those--you want one?" I said, "Would you really?" And then, he said, "I, I don't know if I have one, but I'll look." And one day, I came back to The Factory, and he told the guy who worked with him, Hughes [Frederick W. Hughes], to give, to, "To call Bethann [HistoryMaker Bethann Hardison], make sure before she--don't, don't let her leave after she leaves, has lunch, make sure she waits for me." And he came out, and he gave it to me. And he had signed the (unclear). Speaker 1: Aw-- Speaker 2: Man, I was like, only because I loved this whole, I loved that poster series. Speaker 1: Okay (laughter), you can't be (laughter) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm sorry. Speaker 1: (Unclear) (laughter). Speaker 2: Yes, yes, I'm still, I'm still impressed. Yeah, I am, I am, 'cause I loved that man, I mean-- Story_ID: 649345 Speaker 1: Give me one of your favorite Andy Warhol stories 'cause he was such, literally, an icon. Speaker 2: My favorite Andy, 'cause I often tell people when people say, back in the day, not now, because time has passed. But say, the '80s [1980s], the early '90s [1990s], they say, "God, Bethann [HistoryMaker Bethann Hardison]. You have such great skin, what, what do you do for your skin? How do you get such great skin?" And I said, "My [maternal] grandmother [Carrie Hudson], and Andy Warhol." And they go, "Your grandmother," (laughter), "Andy Warhol?" And then they can see on the two things, we're together. It's 'cause Andy (laughter), you know, Andy was always telling you, like, "You should fix this, you should do a little of this." I go, "Do what?" "You know, put a little something here. You don't need to have--," that is not my style at all. I'm going down the way it goes down, you know what I mean? And I never forget he, he sent to me, to my office, Shiseido, it's called Shiseido B 24 [sic. Shiseido B.H. 24]. And, and I didn't know what it was. And he said, you, and he put a note on it. He said, "You will thank me after," and it was two vials. You put this liquid on in the, in the morning, and little, little, like, it was a serum, a serum. And at night, you put the other one on. It was--I had no idea, and then when I finished using it, I wanted to go buy more, and it was like a hundred dollars a bottle. I mean, for me, that's like crazy. So, I used that for years, so I would always tell people, and my grandmother, 'cause my grandmother had things and I inherited the skin, but if anybody helped me, probably it was Andy Warhol. Speaker 1: But what was he like as a person though, too? Speaker 2: He always wanted me to represent him, and that was a thing I wouldn't do. So, Fred Hughes [Frederick W. Hughes], which is his business partner, would call me and beg me, "Bethann, please, Andy really wants you to represent." I said, "To do what?" I had a model agency [Bethann Management Co., Inc., New York, New York]. I got dumb kids that, that are like my ages, that I'm training, that really are snobs in their own right, you know what I mean? They're not going to know, know what to do with Andy Warhol, and I basically don't want to get stuck trying to do something and fail. I don't know like to fail. I--what am I going to do? I don't know his take on him. He just talks about it all the (laughter), I don't know what to do. But, then they try to con- convince to take on C.Z. Guest. That's the other thing they want me to take. I said, "What am I going to do with these--?" 'Cause I was so popular, cute, cool kid downtown doing a nice business, but I couldn't just do anything. So, those are some of my stories about Andy. He was very quiet, it's true, he was odd, very odd, and when you know all the stories of things he did, that he lived it, fantasy, more and I said, and did things with other people, and that he could have been mean and not giving and (unclear). All of that could have been true, but I know when he died, I was really one sad girl. Speaker 1: But you never had that experience with him. Speaker 2: Oh, no, he was not like that in general. Speaker 1: Yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But maybe, with some of the transvestites and the things and the whole--they were counting on, and they would, they thought he was going to give them this or give them that. I don't know what they thought. Maybe they think he's making a lot of money because he became known. But he was, you know, he was, he was special, and I think that Jean-Michel [Jean-Michel Basquiat] knew when he wanted to, you know, have Jean-Michel work with him. Jean-Michel knew he had arrived, you know, that if he wants me to, you know, 'cause the, the art business is so up and down. And Andy was someone who basically was kind to me, but he was also very quiet. I never knew he really wanted me, you know, ha, ha, ha, the way he laughed, he, he was scared. You know, he was kind of, if, in a way, if you thought about it, if you didn't know any better, you would think he was kind of spooky, okay, 'cause of the way he laughed, the way he looked, you know. But I didn't know, even until I was with, one night, we were in a little, had just gotten to this club--myself and, and Keith Haring, and I didn't know that Andy (laughter), now I'm laughing 'cause I remember the moment, when Keith is telling me that Andy--he said, "You know, and that wig he wears--," and I said, "What wig?" He said, "The wig he wears." I said, "What wig do--who wears?" He said, "Andy." I said, "Andy wears a wig?" He said, "Oh, Bethann," (laughter), I couldn't, (laughter), I didn't, I didn't imagine that what, I, I never think anything is not real. I think that everything's real, even it looks completely a mess. I thought, so that was my stories about Andy, learning that, that was a wig all the time. He said, "What else did you think it was?" "I don't know, just thought it was just a weird haircut." Want more (laughter)? No, no. I don't know much more to tell you about Andy (audio disturbance). Andy was--you know, having those luncheons [at The Factory, New York, New York] in the afternoons was very nice. Story_ID: 649346 Speaker 1: We'd always go to The Factory [New York, New York] and that's right down here (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This--so talk about The Factory-- Speaker 1: The Factory was just a space. Speaker 2: --and its significance. Speaker 1: It was just and, and it was, it was I guess, actually, a, a studio, a loft, a space, huge space, right on Broadway, right there at the corner, where his--is his statue still there? I guess, maybe. And, you just, you know, go there, and that's where they worked out with their office, and they called it The Factory. And I guess, a lot of things was created out of it. And it was nice to be invited to come up, and have lunch with them for a day, or something like that. It was always nice. And I, you, you know, you don't think anything is so, you know it's cool, but it's even cooler later. It's the, you know, it's like in hindsight. You look back over, you go, you know, that was really a cool moment that, but at the time, it's just, you're just part of the cool, you know. You know, one of my dearest friends that I don't hardly even speak to any more, but I have to get that together is Jerry Hall, and she was--she doesn't even know. We were close in a very interesting way, and she was the first one that turned me onto yoga. That was in '72 [1972]. I mean, you know, over the Yoga Institute [Integral Yoga Institute, New York, New York] on 13th Street that it still exists. You know, she was someone who had the funniest lines, was the greatest. She told me her secrets, you know, when she was with, you know, when she, when she first met Mick [Mick Jagger]-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and she wouldn't tell nobody who it was. And, and she was already with the other musician and, you know, she, we just were so close. And that was all--we were all part of that time, you know. And Antonio [Antonio Lopez], they were all close, Antonio, like Pat and-- Speaker 2: Pat-- Speaker 1: --and Jerry and Cleve- Cleveland. Speaker 2: --[HistoryMaker] Pat Cleveland. Speaker 1: Pat Cleveland and, and Jerry Hall. I was never close to Antonio. But now, Jean-Paul Goude tells me, "The reason why is because you're black." (Laughter) But I never thought that. So, (unclear) said, "Well, that's the reason why they tried to, trying to give Antonio the credit for Grace Jones." Well, it's--the credit goes all to Jean-Paul Goude. He said, "But, you know, I tried to tell this guy he was--," he called me on the phone to have me talk to him about all this. His friend, this German guy, saying something about, "Antonio did things with Grace," and it was just funny because he said, "This great--Bethann [HistoryMaker Bethann Hardison] is crazy. He's a Puerto Rican guy, didn't even like black kids, you know, he didn't like, you, were you close to Antonio?" I said, "Well not really." He said, "That's right, because you're black," (laughter). I never thought of that, I mean, we were, you know, we were close enough, but I never really was part of his scene. Story_ID: 649347 Speaker 1: Were you ever a part of Grace Jones' scene? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause she came on with a vengeance. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. No, Grace was--we, she started to model in--I think, the very late '60s [1960s] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Very late '60s [1960s]? Speaker 2: Yep, disappeared, and then went off to France in the early '70s [1970s]. Speaker 1: And then really set, established her career there, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, and then on, and then, she started singing. Whenever we go to Paris [France], I always be with her, so a lot of times, 'cause we all sort were like in the same clique in a way. And then, she, and then Jean-Paul, pardon me, and then Jean-Paul Goude, when she-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: And so, Jean-Paul, this is not about Jean-Paul, isn't it? Yeah, Jean-Paul was basically the person who basically started her career--well, made her known to all of us because she was singing in Paris at the time. But she worked for Saint Laurent [Yves Saint Laurent] and she, you know, did a few shows 'cause she's small. She's not the tallest, you know, she's not like, and maybe she's my height now, you know, where she was like 5'8", 5'9". She's not--that wasn't very tall. But, no, she, she's a, she's a crazy girl, and I love her very much for her madness. And we were together, like maybe four years ago, three years ago, for Naomi's [Naomi Campbell] birthday. And she performed in the South of France at the, the Hotel d'Carr [ph.] and Antibes next to Cannes [France]. And she was crazy, you know, there was, there was a great party. I mean, it was a great celebration. And, at one point, Grace is at the tables. This is after everybody's performed, and now, we just had a deejay play. And Grace is at the table and (laughter). And all of a sudden, Grace was sitting at the, standing at the table, and pointing. And all of a sudden, Grace is gone. They said, "Wasn't Grace just here?" And I said, "Where'd she go?" I said, "I don't--did she walk away 'cause we were talking for a moment?" And me, knowing Grace, I go down, and look underneath the table. Grace is sitting underneath the table, quiet, just with her legs across, just quiet (laughter). Speaker 1: Her moods go-- Speaker 2: She, she said, and, and she said, you know sometimes, you know, "I just sometimes need quiet," (laughter). She just went underneath the table--all her, all her glamour. Speaker 1: She was underneath the-- Speaker 2: --underneath the table, sitting underneath the table, where we all were standing around laughing and drinking and talking--and dancing. She's underneath the table sitting. Yeah, that's, that's her, but I adore her. And her brother [Noel Jones] used to spend time with me in Brazil. I mean, not with me, but I, I (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But she's American born, right, is she? Speaker 2: She's Jamaican, Jamaican. Speaker 1: Jamaican, okay, okay, I see, okay, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, Jamaican. Speaker 1: Now, she still has a following though, right? Speaker 2: Oh, she's got--absolutely. Speaker 1: Yes, she's, right, right. Speaker 2: She can, she can book a room. Speaker 1: Yep. Speaker 2: And, and I still am close to Jean-Paul and their son. They have a son together, Paulo [Paulo Goude], yeah. Speaker 1: And then, she lives where now? Speaker 2: She was living in London [England]. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, (unclear), so that's, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, she's special. And she's very good and then, she's really good. And now, Paulo's doing, playing the percussion with her. She's really still good, very, very good. I mean, she has a huge gay following. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: I mean, you can't, you can't knock that. Speaker 1: You know, when you're saying she's short, I think that she comes across in pictures as larger than life. Speaker 2: (Unclear) like an Amazon, yeah, Amazon (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Right, right, um-hm. Speaker 2: She's, she's small boned. The body, she, she had her body painted. It's just like yesterday. Now, she's easy sixty--well, no, maybe not. Yeah, easy, sixty something, amazing, and just walking around. Nothing is moving. Everything is, everything's tight--amazing. This is when you're really envious, you know. Speaker 1: (Laughter) That's right. Speaker 2: That's amazing. She's good. Story_ID: 649348 Speaker 1: The other person I wanted to ask around that time period is Beverly Johnson. How well do you know her 'cause she's a different-- Speaker 2: She's a different person. Speaker 1: --she's a different ilk. Speaker 2: She's not bohemian (laughter)-- Speaker 1: No, she's not. Speaker 2: --she's not bohemian. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Very, like, very classy. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, she's more commercial. Speaker 1: Like the girl that, girl next door. Speaker 2: She's commercial, she's commercial, yeah. Yeah, Beverly came along right at the time when Grace [Grace Jones] was in New York [New York] with me. And I remember her coming along and meeting her. She'd just come down from school. I think she was in school in Syracuse [sic.], or somewhere up there, so she went to college up, up north [Northeastern University, Boston, Massachusetts]. And then, she came down to do a photo shoot. They had discovered her already, and she was doing something, maybe for Vogue or Glamour, one of those magazines. And then, she went back to school, and then she became a hit, and she came back, and start to work. And she went through a journey, you know, really a serious journey. Speaker 1: So, could you talk about her journey a little bit? Speaker 2: It's not my right to-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --but I definitely will talk about the, that she was someone who really--not only was she considered the most beautiful girl that it was quotes from non-women of color saying that, that's what they want to look like. If they could only look like her because that's how beautiful she came across. She was the, she was a brown girl with all the right things in place. Speaker 1: She had the chisel, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, with, you know, which was so appealing 'cause she was so pretty in that way. And she was cool and she worked. She even did shows, and she wasn't, per se, a runway model, but, you know, when, when Calvin [Calvin Klein] was the one who created that moment where runway was no longer just to the runway models. The girls who were actually print girls, he used them, and that's how it started, print girls becoming on the runway. Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: Otherwise, it would have just been nothing. He kept (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So-- Story_ID: 649349 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Calvin Klein is, is-- Speaker 2: Responsible for that. Speaker 1: --he's responsible, okay. Speaker 2: As he is, as about most things that you see today. And people don't know where it all comes from, that free energy of being able to market the way he does--well, they, done in the ads that they've done. It all alludes back to you, remember the Calvin Klein ads. You remember the Marky Mark [Mark Wahlberg]. You remember the Brooke Shields, you know, "Nothing comes between me and my Calvins," you know. You know, those kind of things, you know, that, that were so unique--the boys that were in their underwear. You, you remember things that he did, you know, the, even Christy Turlington had commercials with him. But Calvin was someone who was a visionaire, oh, truly, and he could, you know, he, he would take a chance. And one day, he just decided that he wanted to get the editors' true commitment to having his clothes on those pages. And the only way he thought to do it was to take the girl that was on the page, and put them in his clothes, and put it right in front of the editor's face to walk that runway. And, and at that time, there was a business that was just, you know, a commercial model agency, and that began to put those agencies out of, out of business. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I was with a commercial, I was with a runway model agency. Even though I, you know, worked right next door at 550, around the corner from him, with [HistoryMaker] Stephen Burrows, I still had a rep. And he, basically, doing that, I was the last model he used that was runway, and to a point, he got rid of all the girls. He kept me and, and I did, even to the point that I just did one outfit. And then, that was the end of me, and that was the end of that. He just slowly moved it all into editorial. Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: And that's how that all, all began because up until then, it was, if you were designing, you'd book runway girls. And, and if, you know, if you would do Vogue or something like that, they went to Ford [Ford Modeling Agency; Ford Models] for, you know. Or, Wilhelmina [Wilhelmina Models] for the print girls or commercials, or, you know, catalog, or that's what you did. But for designer, showroom, fittings, it was all with one, with an agency. They did, they managed all of that. Speaker 1: And then, the agencies became not relevant at that point? Speaker 2: Any more. Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: Like things are happening in our life, you know. Speaker 1: Right. So, things were direct-- Speaker 2: Like I, I still, I still want to go to a Virgin record store. I'm still missing that. Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: I don't, I don't care about iTunes. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: I'm not trying to save my nickels and dimes. And I mean, I mean, I just, I think it's offensive that people, you know, rub off people's music. I think that's, you know, 'cause I come from the artists-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --going back to bohemian (laughter). Yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, that's right, that's right, that's right, okay. So, now, that, I mean, that was fascinating just now. So-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 649350 Speaker 1: What happened to Bever- [Beverly Johnson]? I mean-- Speaker 2: Beverly? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: She basically, she, she did very well. Speaker 1: She did very well. Speaker 2: She did very well, but she had problems, you know, the journey of a model, a girl, you know, I think she went through her own substance situation, too, and tried to get her life in, into some sort of perfect gear but, you know, it's so normal and so typical. It's not even unusual, and then you, it's just a matter of time. Time eventually changes everything. You know, no matter how beautiful you are, and no matter how good it is, the market changes. Speaker 1: But what-- Speaker 2: Even, even when Iman came along, I think, she was after 'cause she was after Beverly Johnson-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --and then, that becomes the next new girlish-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --what is, many other girls, too, you know. Speaker 1: Right. But that--I mean, Iman and Beverly were two, 'cause Iman is exotic and, and-- Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: Right-- Speaker 2: And the other one is commercial. Speaker 1: --right, but so, but how long did her career last then in the, the heyday of it, from-- Speaker 2: Oh, you're talking about Beverly's? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Hm, that would be a good question. I guess, I don't think, I thought, it's hard for me--maybe ten years, I'm going to guess, maybe ten years. And then, still in and out a little bit, but, you know, she'll do, you know, she's doing interesting things. I mean, when you see her in, like the film, like the, the, 'About Face' ['About Face: Supermodels Then and Now'] film that I'm in, the HBO [Home Box Office] thing. You know, you should look, and people say, "Oh, my god, look, she looks exactly the same." Say, well, when you see her in person, 'cause she's such a good looking woman. She has a, a bone structure where things just don't, or not--it's not going anywhere. Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: You know, and she's just a, she's healthy looking. Story_ID: 649351 Speaker 1: So, now, Iman, let's talk about you meeting Iman and how-- Speaker 2: (Background noise) I met Iman after she had arrived to America on the--being carried into America on this suspect story created between, you know, what's my boy's name? Speaker 1: His name is-- Speaker 2: It's over there in the book. I can't see it--Peter Beard. Speaker 1: No, I have it, right. Speaker 2: Peter Beard and Wilhelmina [Wilhelmina Models]. Speaker 1: Peter Beard, right. Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, that she was found in the bush and (makes sounds), you know. And, of course (claps hands), she was a college kid (laughter), university [University of Nairobi, Nairobi, Kenya], walking down the streets of Nairobi [Kenya]. But the way he told it, you know, he was shooting a spare one day and pop ups this beautiful, long leg, long neck girl. And, of course, bringing her to America caused all kind of controversy in our city because Essence magazine editor and chief was not having it, you know. It was a negative, negative, negative that they should go all the way to Africa to bring some black girl, African girl, to this country when there are so many beautiful girls of color around you. Speaker 1: Now, who was the editor at that time? Was it Marcia-- Speaker 2: Marcia, Marcia Gillespie [HistoryMaker Marcia Ann Gillespie]. Speaker 1: Marcia Gillespie. Speaker 2: And, you know, she had a point and, you know, she made her point. And so, Iman came in on a, a hard stick to ride, so to speak. And they put her down (gesture), you know, laying in front of all this huge press conference, and they don't know what to say. All they could do is take pictures of her 'cause they think she doesn't speak English 'cause she's supposed to be (makes sound) or something, you know what I mean (laughter)--so crazy. But, anyway, hype is a wonderful thing. She was a beautiful girl anyway, but it went forth. And then, all of the designers, of course, wanted to meet her. And so, Stephen [HistoryMaker Stephen Burrows], of course, said, "Bethann [HistoryMaker Bethann Hardison], I think we have to meet her. Okay, we have to meet her." So, I asked the agency to send her to us, too, like Halston wanted to see her, and different people wanted to see her. And she came to see us and this--oh, she had only been here maybe two weeks. Speaker 1: And you're at, where are you now at this-- Speaker 2: I'm at Stephen Burrows [Burrows Inc., New York, New York]. Speaker 1: You're, yeah, that's fine. You're still, okay. Speaker 2: I'm at Stephen Burrows on 7th Avenue. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And so, I have a--'cause that, by this time, I'm no longer showroom model. I've advanced--I'm now heading the, I run the design studio with Stephen. And I now have showroom models, you know what I mean? So the showroom models just--when the designer, when the editors or the, the retailers come in, they put on the clothes, and go out and show, and then, that's, so, because our clothes needed bodies, you know 'cause it's all knit, matchers. And so, she comes, and the two girls are in the room in their, their bathrobes waiting for a client to come. And Iman comes, like a trembling bird, trembling. And we tell her to put on the dress and put on, you know, she's scared, nervous, you know. And she puts on a--I told her to put on the shoes. And when I come back, I could see that she hasn't put on the shoes yet. She's gotten the dress on, so I come back and I say--I look at her face, I say, "Do you want me to help you?" And she goes like this (nods head). And I get down on my knees, and I start to put her foot into the shoe. And the two girls that I have are girls of color that, there's, no matter how light they were, they were girls of color--see me doing this. And they say, "I don't know why she's getting down on her knees to her. She ain't no queen, and she ain't no princess either, and why is she getting her knees down, and I don't know why she's doing." That's mumbling. (Gesture) You could just hear them. And I look up at Iman, and she's just so scared, and her little foot is trying to get into the shoe. And I had to place her feet steady 'cause she was nervous, and stick it in the shoe. And I said to her, "You understand what they're saying, you understand English, don't you?" She went (nods head). So, I got her into the shoes. She never walked in heels. She's trying--it's good. But because of that, she considers me her Statue of Liberty [New York, New York], and that locked me into her life forever because I stayed in her life also. So, that was our first meeting. Speaker 1: That's a wonderful story. Story_ID: 649352 Speaker 1: --With Iman, is in 1975. I mean, that first meeting, I had said '76 [1976], but it's (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, I think-- Speaker 1: --'75 [1975]. Speaker 2: --yes, I think it's actually that (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right. But then, she, in 1976, had her first modeling assignment with Vogue magazine, I think, right? Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Does that sound right? But in (laughter)-- Speaker 2: I know she came, I know she came after Versailles ['Grand Divertissement a Versailles']. It was either '75 [1975] or '76 [1976], something like that. Speaker 1: Yeah, she says '75 [1975] in an interview. So, are you with [HistoryMaker] Stephen Burrows when he receives the Coty Award [Coty American Fashion Critics' Awards]. Are you still there? Speaker 2: Yes-- Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: --yes. Speaker 1: So, can you talk, and you're still in the same position at that point? You're-- Speaker 2: I think when he won the Coty Award, I think I was, I, I think I was maybe, 'cause I don't remember times. I'm not very good at remembering dates and times when things were. But I could have either been a, a design assistant--I mean, running the, I had the design studio [Burrows Inc., New York, New York] where I could have been just really a, I could have been showroom model. Speaker 1: Okay. I think 'cause it said-- Speaker 2: What date, what date did they say (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It says, it says in 1977, you become the creative director. Speaker 2: Hm-- Speaker 1: Does that sound right? Speaker 2: No-- Speaker 1: (Makes sound). Speaker 2: --'cause by the time I went to Versailles [Palace of Versailles, Versailles, France]-- Speaker 1: What is-- Speaker 2: --by the time I went to Versailles, which is '73 [1973], I was already working--was I--yes, he was already fitting on me, he was fitting on me. So, it was kind of like, it could have been earlier. I don't know. Speaker 1: But, wait a minute, creative director, he's not fitting on you at that point. You removed it-- Speaker 2: Yeah, but that's what I'm saying-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --but at that time, when we went to Versailles, he was fitting on me. That was '73 [1973]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He would, he could fit on me any time any time he wanted to because I had the body alignment to do so. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: But then, I became, during this, running the design studio. And so, that could have been '74 [1974], '75 [1975]. I just wondered when he went to, went back, went back to Bendel's, [Henri Bendel] and I have a feeling that was seventy something. Speaker 1: Okay, you do? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. So, when he went back to Bendel's, did he close his-- Speaker 2: He had no choice. Speaker 1: Oh, so they brought him totally. He-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --why would he do that? Speaker 2: Well, he had no choice. It was a business thing. He left 7th Avenue because his clothes weren't selling-- Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: --in the, in the retail market because those clothes are kind of special. You know, you can't--they're not hanger clothes. And if you don't see them on, and at that time, also, that matte jersey at that time, because he was the one who developed, helped to develop matte jersey. He was the one to start using it before anyone that used it with Jasco jersey. He started putting it into shape and using it as dresses, but what would happen is if you hang it on the hanger long enough, it starts to, it starts to grow, and it starts to grow, and as it grows, it shrinks this way. So, when you, if it, if it, a dress stayed in the, say, on the floor, maybe weeks, it was no longer fitting. Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: So, they could make, with all the possibilities that he could have been more successful, on 7th Avenue, he didn't last very long. He didn't last maybe, maybe, maybe three years, if, I think, four maybe. And then, that woman, I call her that woman 'cause I didn't like her. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: Pat Tennant, she came back in his life and said, "You need to come back." And Ms. Stutz [Geraldine Stutz] was, Ms. Stutz, I don't think was there then. I think she had stepped away, but Pat Tennant was there, and told him to come back to, to Bendel's and he did. It wasn't, it wasn't successful at the first time because he got--walked away from Bendel's the first time by the 7th Avenue-- Speaker 1: And what happens after that then? Speaker 2: And then, he disappeared for thirty years. Speaker 1: Oh, he did, ooh-- Speaker 2: He was doing, you know, quietly doing, you know, clothes for people, and doing little small, you know, people would give him money to get enough for a small boutique. But you didn't hear from him for like thirty--you didn't hear anything about him for like, a long time as a designer. And then, a guy who wanted to do a book on him started talking to him, and he got behind. And all of a sudden, once again, Bendel's wanted him back. And the, the, with the whole, with the new owner, Leslie Wexner [Les Wexner], the new owner to people. And then, got him back on, got the new guy who was taking care of that business, got him back into-- Speaker 1: That's a wonderful story-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --when you think no one has that kind of story. Speaker 2: No, that's why I want, that's why it was so important for me to get him that exhibit ['Stephen Burrows: When Fashion Danced'] at the museum [Museum of the City of New York, New York, New York]. Story_ID: 649353 Speaker 1: So let's talk about Valentino. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. So, how does that happen? You, so, is it that Stephen [HistoryMaker Stephen Burrows], is it him going into Bendel's [Henri Bendel] that opens up another--trying the wrong time (laughter) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, no, I'm just looking 'cause I'm just looking. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, I mean, when, what do you do after he goes back into Bendel's? Is that-- Speaker 2: I tried to stay, I tried to stay with him a little while, but the woman [Pat Tennant] just hated me, and she wanted me away because she knew that I had influence on him. And he was just like, you know, he just, he's not, he doesn't, he, he-- Speaker 1: He was torn. He had-- Speaker 2: He doesn't have, he doesn't, he's not someone who's strong. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Like I said, he's the opposite of Willi [Willi Smith] and I. He's just, he's humble, quiet, you know, so I just left that. And then, I wind up doing--I guess, maybe going to Europe and that, I think, bounty, enough for sure came after. Speaker 1: So, tell, so talk about that. Speaker 2: Do you hear something when I do that? Speaker 1: Huh? Speaker 2: No way-- Speaker 1: What? Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Valentino, going to Valentino's because I went to Rome [Italy]. I would go to Rome and stay with his girlfriend that I met in Mexico, Danka [ph.], a German girl, and I would stay there in the summer times. And my friend, Carlos [Carlos Souza], whom I knew from Brazil, I stayed in Brazil a lot back in the early '70s [1970s]. And he was with--I know too much--and he was basically working with--close, he was close to Valentino. And in living in (unclear), not even working at that time, just being with him and living in Rome, so wherever I'd go, I'd be with him, spend time with him. And eventually, Giancarlo [Giancarlo Giammetti] started talking to me about working with him in some capacity. And so, I, you know, said, yes, of course, because I liked him. And then, you know, I just used to move around with Giancarlo and watch how he did business and watch out he talked to people. He taught me a lot, just observing him. Speaker 1: What did he teach you? Speaker 2: Just how to be, you know, how, he taught me how people can, how tough somebody can be, how someone can get some, other people to do what they want them to do. I can't do that. That's not my style, but I learned it exists, and watching it first hand, Giancarlo was something else (laughter). He--that film ['Valentino: The Last Emperor'] should have been on him, you know, but of course, you have to do it on the titled person. Speaker 1: So, so, what was that, so what do you work, what do you do with Valentino and what did-- Speaker 2: Well, the time they wanted me to do, something to do in marketing, PR [public relations], and stuff, and I didn't want to do PR. I don't like PR, the idea. Speaker 1: But PR in, in the United States. Speaker 2: In, in Europe, in Europe (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In Europe, okay, not, not, okay. Speaker 2: --at first. And then, because I wouldn't, I wouldn't commit to go there and live there-- Speaker 1: Because your son [Kadeem Hardison] is like, no way-- Speaker 2: Yeah, he don't, he don't want to do that. And I didn't know, did I want to do it either. So then, they tried to find something for me to do. So, I did some of the marketing things, like if they did photo shoots, I did a whole wonderful shoot with Deborah Turbeville. And then, afterwards, I wind up doing, coming back to America. And then, they tried to have me do, like marketing or something to do, anything with the brand. If, if somebody needed something, "Bethann [HistoryMaker Bethann Hardison] has to be involved, or Bethann will take care of it--," it's like that. So, I did a little bit. It wasn't really panning out properly really great 'cause it wasn't, it was harder to do from a distance. And it wasn't that much that they did it because Giancarlo controlled everything. He did everything from Rome per se, but he was trying to find a way to keep me, keep them connected to them. Story_ID: 649354 Speaker 1: And then, eventually, I just wind up leaving, and starting to work for other designers, and helping them with their lines and doing other things, little by little by little. But, what wind up happening, one of their licensees-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: But I wind up--there was a gentleman who owned a manufacturing company [Concorde Fashions Corporation (ph.)] in Cos- in, in Como, and they're Como in Italy. And he was one of the people who manufactured the, the swimsuits for Valentino. He wanted to open up a showroom in America because he, he represented a few Italian lines. And Valentino told them to get me. "If you're going to do that, you need to have her. We, we could, we--you need to have her because we wanted you to make sure you hire her, and then, we could say yes to that." So, they hired me to come and work in the showroom, and I helped to sell the line, and show it to people, and stuff like that. I hired a showroom model, which was Marguerite Lathan now. Speaker 2: Hm-- Speaker 1: And she was a model at the time. And I wind up doing a swimwear line because of it 'cause I like--they had this swimwear line that he did with no design or any particular thing. You should take the things from that called Ibiza. And I had gone to Ibiza, and I liked Ibiza, and I had great memories of Ibiza. And, and it had no particular style, so I asked the gentleman if I could--, "Could I design the line?" And he said, "You really want to design the line?" And I said, "Yes, I know I, I can do it." He said, "Okay." And I would go to, to Italy and I'd go the factory. And, meanwhile, I'm working in the showroom and doing that. And I just did the first--met the people who would do all the ideas I had, and I would show them the idea. And I had this young kid that used to work for me at Stephen [Burrows Inc., New York, New York]. I had him do the sketches for me. And then, I'd show the women in Italy and I, and I start doing the line. And the line did very well, so it was on Sportswear Illustrated covers [sic. Sports Illustrated] and (laughter). And the woman who runs Sportswear Illustrated used to come to the showroom and say, "Bethann [HistoryMaker Bethann Hardison], why don't you just put your name on this? You know, this thing would really go." And I wouldn't do it--no, no, no, no, I'm not going to put my name on it, and don't ever put my name on it. It's just Ibiza. It was--I was designing it, but just for the fear that it would begin to fail. Yeah, I don't like to fail--I'm not good at that. You know, I'd just rather, just not do something. But the idea that my name would be there, and then suppose the life that going like this (gesture), you know what I mean? And I liked the name, Ibiza, you know, so, it, it became very successful. It was in, you know, like GQ and oh, it did really nice. And sometimes, I see, like if I see a guy using that picture, like one of the models, and I see my swimsuit, and who knocked it off was Anne Cole, they knocked it off. No one did this, this suit. They--people knocked it off. It was just such a nice line idea. Speaker 2: But you never thought of doing another line like that? Speaker 1: No, you need a manufacturer. Speaker 2: Right, right, right, that's true. Speaker 1: You know, things, things happen organically. I never wanted to be a designer. I was already that because I did it with other people. I worked with Willi [Willi Smith]. I worked with Stephen [HistoryMaker Stephen Burrows]. I know that I was influential. I was a collaborator. But the, the swimswear thing, I had that, I knew that it was time for something new and I knew I could do something nice. And I did that. Story_ID: 649355 Speaker 1: So, now, Click [Click Model Management Inc., New York, New York], wh- how does Click come, you know, does that come with Frances? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Frances Grill. Speaker 1: So is that after the-- Speaker 2: That's right, good nose. That was after Valentino and after Concorde Fashions [Concorde Fashions Corporation (ph.)] which was the showroom that represented these Italian lines. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I would work with Bill Kaiserman, who was a well known menswear designer, to help him with his menswear line. And he was so riddled--oh, I don't want to say that, that's not right. Speaker 1: Riddled--? Speaker 2: With, on coke [cocaine], I was going to say, Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: --but (laughter) that was one wild ride (gesture), whoa. One moment, he was loving you. One moment, he was cursing you out. Next moment, he was loving you. Next moment, he was cursing you out. I said, "Maybe, I should have some with you. I don't know. We got to even this off. We're going to see you stop screaming." He's like, like, this (gesture) little spitters coming out of his mouth, (makes noise) (gesture), but he was a talented man. I had to get out of there. And so, somebody wanted me to do a magazine, and I don't remember the name of this magazine but this is a--you know, when people just are like when they say that people are just, in those days, they call it when they're con artists. But it's another word, when something is make believe, and this guy cannot--all these people leave their jobs because he was doing, he had this money behind this magazine, and he didn't have the money. I didn't have a job. Speaker 1: Now, what magazine was this? Speaker 2: I can't remember, that's why I can't remember the name of it. It never (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It was a fashion magazine? Speaker 2: It was going to be a fashion lifestyle magazine. It was so cool--the idea. Everybody went for it. People stepped away, blah, blah, blah. I didn't really have a real job. I was freelancing at the time, so was no problem. But he called me and called me, called me. He had everybody calling me to be the editor-in-chief. It took me a long time to say yes. And after I said, yes, three weeks later, we found that it was a scam--that's the word. It was a scam. I think maybe he thought, too, with whoever he was saying, he was talking big to make sure we were all in--I guess so he could sell it. And then, that's how I then went to, to Frances because she, I knew her, once again, my fellow from Stockholm [Sweden] was the good friend. Speaker 1: Oh, that's how you met Frances, oh. Speaker 2: Well, that's how, you know, even though I knew her first, she became more connected to me because my fellow, Sighsten [Sighsten Herrgard], was a good friend of her, her then husband. He was young, but she had a husband, young, a Swedish guy. And he told her, "Yeah, I know Bethann [HistoryMaker Bethann Hardison]." And so, she wanted to talk with me because she knew people in the industry knew me, and she had this model agency because she had heard about this magazine that I was supposed to be doing, which, of course, was, you know, a good idea. The guy had a great idea, but it wasn't real. Speaker 1: What was the idea? Speaker 2: I don't know. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was just a better idea than most people had. It was, it was a diverse. It was men and women. It was, you know, fashion, yet, at the same time, lifestyle. It was gonna have good writing. It sounds like, all too good to be true anyway. Story_ID: 649356 Speaker 1: So, what does Frances Grill say to you (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So-- Speaker 1: What does she say that she wants to do? Speaker 2: She, she had me come to see when she thought I was going to be the editor. And she had, she had like, six black girls and, and four white like, like, no, maybe it was only more. Maybe she had like seven black girls, and like, these three cute white boys, and this was her agency [Click Model Management Inc., New York, New York]. And I said, "Well, where, where you going with this group?" (Laughter) I couldn't imagine it was going to go anywhere. And she just, did, she just liked those girls. And she had these cute little white boys and it just didn't make a whole lot of sense. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Well, it did-- Speaker 2: But she wanted me to help because she heard I was going to the editor of this magazine, and I can get the girls to work. They weren't that good. The boys were cute, the three white boys were cute, but the girls weren't that good. But she really believed in these black girls. She was a white woman, Jewish, and then, we disappeared from that moment. And then, what happened is she met a young man who took great interest in her company, and went to work with her, and turned the whole agency around. And the next time I got a call, you know, she had, she was a photographer's rep [representative], so she had Bruce Weber. She had a lot of photographers. She had Toscani [Oliviero Toscani], Bruce Weber. She started Steven Meisel. She had a lot of photographers. So what wind up happening is, you know, I went by to see her. And she said, "You really got to come help me with my agency." And I met the guy who was a long haired guy, looked like a hippie, but he always wore a jacket and a tie. And he was working, and her son, Joey [Joey Grill], was running the accounting department. They said, "Come work with us." So, I called up a couple of friends who knew her, and they said, "Yeah, you, that would be great with you, Bethann [HistoryMaker Bethann Hardison]. They, they could use you." I don't know what I even had that was even something that they thought could bring, but maybe because I knew people, and I was popular, so I just went and did it. It changed my life and it changed theirs. Speaker 1: But it took off-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: --and it filled the need and-- Speaker 2: --oh, yeah, it was different, it was different than anything ever. It competed with all the top mo- agencies. Speaker 1: So, talk about who the top agencies were at the time. Speaker 2: It was Stewart [Stewart Modeling Agency], Ford [Ford Modeling Agency; Ford Models], Wilhelmina [Wilhelmina Models], Zoli [Zoli Management, Inc., New York, New York], and--those are the top agencies. Speaker 1: So, who, black is represent- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Elite [Elite Model Management], Elite had, Elite had-- Speaker 1: Elite-- Speaker 2: Ford had, at that time, Ford had lost one key person that went and started Elite; so Elite had just started. Story_ID: 649357 Speaker 1: So, who were the black models represented by those agencies? Speaker 2: Nobody (laughter). Speaker 1: No- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) Sorry, sorry-- Speaker 1: But I thought they were. Speaker 2: --I'm kidding. Who was it? Well, I mean-- Speaker 1: Iman-- Speaker 2: Wilhelmina [Wilhelmina Models] was Iman, who was at--well, this time, she's coming to an end. Her career is almost coming to an end--not yet, though. Beverly Johnson is still at Wilhelmina. Ford [Ford Modeling Agency; Ford Models], they have the sprinkling of a few girls, but they're mostly commercial. Ford models are almost, always commercial. The men, the men, Zoli [Zoli Management, Inc., New York, New York], they had a lot of good guys, white guys, black, a few black--Renauld White was with Zoli. He's a black guy, top black model, male model. Maybe even--no, he wasn't, no, he wasn't. I was thinking of somebody else. And then the girls, see, Wilhelmina, Click [Click Model Management Inc., New York, New York], oh, no, no, Wilhelmina, Stewart [Stewart Modeling Agency]. I don't remember who the girl, I don't think there was anybody black there, maybe commercial, 'cause they were a commercial agency, too. So, we didn't have a lot of-- Speaker 1: Is Naomi Sims out or (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Naomi was with Wilhelmina-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --Wilhelmina, too. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Well, that's right, Wilhelmina, but she had began to, just at that time, begin-- Speaker 1: To, to-- Speaker 2: --to just, dropped off. She's had problems, too. She was that, well-- Speaker 1: It's a hard life. See-- Speaker 2: Well, I don't know if it, it, if the--you're right. Speaker 1: It is a hard life. Speaker 2: I think freelance work, any kind of way, is a hard life. Speaker 1: Right. And then, the lifestyle that goes along with it, too. It can be-- Speaker 2: I don't, you know, it was, it was different then than it is now. Speaker 1: Right, but still people think of you not having a brain-- Speaker 2: No, I think, I think you come damaged and you don't know. No one notices it until it's a moment. I think these people come damaged. They're not, it's not, I don't think the industry does it to them. I think they're already that way. I think Gia [Gia Carangi] was always, you know, a, was an addictable person. She always--she was going to have an addiction. She was going to go out. I didn't think she was going to die, but she was a heroin addict. And an, an addiction is--a person already has it. Speaker 1: Oh, Gia-- Speaker 2: This--Gia was a, was a, was famous model-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --a dark haired beauty. And I mean, Donyale Luna, I mean, why do these people jump off the bridges? I, I don't know what they did. They jump off, out the window. I thought they, I thought she jumped out of the window, but I think maybe she just died of an overdose. That's what--a couple of people jumped out of windows in Italy. I mean, they used to jump out of windows. I mean, but Italy was, you know, they were rampant with cocaine and stuff. People just, they just, they're already those people. And then you get involved with a world that just is, so that (gesture), you know, there're a lot of us who, basically, was right around that world. And we just, just, just bounce right through the, the tunnel. So, I think that it's, you know, some people have mental problems, but they don't know it, and they have breakdowns. I just--a girl right now, it's a lady up, up north. She's a model, and she's a, she's a yoga teacher now, but she was a model a long, twenty years with Ford. And I just go there and my friend tells me that, "Patricia [ph.] just had a breakdown." I mean, it's just, it's just, it's just waiting and happen sometimes, you know. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: But the girls, there weren't that many girls of color, you know, as you could say, so many, but there was a little bit of, at Ford. I mean, there was always some girls. It was never like, oh, my god, now, it's just happening. There were girls who worked, especially back in the '50s [1950s], and the '60s [1960s], and '70s [1970s]. There were girls who worked, the girls of color, and especially because of the commercial work, too, that existed out there--the advertisings, you know, the ads and all, there were people. Speaker 1: Well, that's more, like '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right, that's right. Speaker 1: --(unclear) I mean, okay. Speaker 2: But when we start going into editorial, it's different. You're right. Speaker 1: Right, right. Story_ID: 649358 Speaker 1: So now, how, how does Click [Click Model Management Inc., New York, New York] take off? And what, what are Click's accomplishments during its years? And what is your role with the agency? Speaker 2: Click took off because of--well, my role was, we were all agents. We wouldn't call ourselves bookers because we were such snobs. They also, at, at the agency, worked because they had three Jews and, and a Negro, and I'd say, "Right on, I agree," (gesture) (laughter). I didn't mean--there's no, there's no better combination (laughter). Well, they did say that, and I did agree. And they had, and what we had was a combination of Allan [Allan Mindel], who never went to the bathroom. He worked nine hours straight. He never got up from his chair. He never--and we had, and, and we're in, we're in Carnegie Hall [New York, New York], the, you know, the studios, and Frances [Frances Grill] is so cheap that we never had the phone system. So, you had each phone rang, and you had to pick it up, and it'd roll over to each other, so you had to, you never want to hear a phone where you had to figure which one it was. So, we had them lined up against a wall on a desk on a, a board desk like this, and we sat up against it, and, and-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: Okay. So, what wind up happening, I think it's that by having Frances, having the connection to the, the edit- pardon me, the photographers, we start to look for whoever they were shooting, and tell them we wanted models for the agency. Bruce was the supplier--Bruce Weber, 'cause by this time, he worked-- Speaker 1: Oh, Bruce comes, oh. Speaker 2: He comes back. Bruce is now shooting for Calvin Klein and Ralph Lauren. So, all those boys on the beach, all the real kids, all the surfers and, even kids that were clam diggers out in Long Island [New York], east Long Island, you know. Speaker 1: He's doing all of that. Speaker 2: Whatever he's discovering, he's sending to us. So, we start to build this agency, just young, great boys and (unclear), so some of them would be, maybe volleyball players. Some of them would be, you know, snowboarders--no, at that time, it wasn't snowboard. What's the thing that--yeah, that's what he did, the boy who was the Ralph Lauren boy, snowboarding. All these athletic kids--surfers, he was finding those kids and photographing them. And then, we would represent them. And then, any other young kids that, like that, then we had to start finding the girls. And maybe, there'll be some girl he would find, but he wasn't great on girls. Isabella, we got. Rossellini [Isabella Rossellini], but there were a couple of girls we start to find on our own because some of the model, the editors would find a girl that would come up, and they'd say, "You should go to this agency," 'cause they liked us. We build so fast, really fast. Speaker 1: How fast? Speaker 2: Like, in a year. Speaker 1: Well, so, really, Calvin Klein helped you grow on the male side (unclear)-- Speaker 2: No, not Calvin. Speaker 1: I mean, but Bruce. I'm just saying that, remember, you said Calvin-- Speaker 2: He, he photographed, he photographed (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, right. Speaker 2: So, if he found the guy, he'd send them to us to represent them, because these kids didn't have representatives because they weren't models. They were all being found from the time that they were being shot, so the fact of it is they didn't have any agencies. And we were the new kids in town with people that, that Bruce liked, you know. And so, they liked us, so they would send the kids to us. And that's how we--and then the girls, we just begin to find the girls, the right girl, and the word begin that it's word of mouth, "Go to Click. Well, see this, see this person over there at Click," yeah. Story_ID: 649359 Speaker 1: So Click [Click Model Management Inc., New York, New York] then, how large does your, your--so what are, because you, your reputation is based on who you place and, you know, and what kind of jobs they get, and all of that, right? Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes, no? Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes, it is, it is that, but it isn't so much, you remember, this is the beginning of the game. This is that first, this is like the first, this is like the first league. Click was the beginning of model agencies starting small agencies. The big agencies existed, but boutique agencies, small ones, didn't exist before us. Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: And we became the competitor to the big agencies. We no longer would, like had to have, like a Christie Brinkley. We could give you a girl who was different than her, and she would work. So, we started changing the game. And then, the European agencies start looking at us, and thinking that we had something because the European girls were different. So, an agency like City [City Models] had just started, and we had a same kind of style. So, we became popular amongst the editors, amongst the photographers, and then amongst the, the magazines. And we moved very quickly, and it was only, basically, because we're just finding girls. It's not about reputations and all of that. Now, it's all that, but back in the day, it was the beginning. Speaker 1: But, now that, so you've hit your stride really with this. This, I mean because are, are you a part- are you a part-- Speaker 2: No, they didn't make me--that's a good question. Perry Ellis and Calvin [Calvin Klein] thought I was a partner of the company, and they were happy to be working after they start working with us, too, you know, calling for shows or calling for advertising, and making the deals to us, but because Calvin didn't like Frances [Frances Grill] and them. He just thought they were too Jewish for him (laughter), but they loved me. He always thought that I was a partner. So, there was a girl that we had called Josie Borain, and Josie was someone who Ralph [Ralph Lauren] wanted to be put on the contract, as well as Calvin. It was only at that time when Josie was going to leave to go with her boyfriend at the time. They were going to travel around the world on their bikes. And she wasn't going to be available. I think it was right around that time that Calvin found out that I wasn't a partner because he was saying, you know, "The only reason why I'm even working with this agency is 'cause you're a partner there." And I said, "I'm not a partner," (laughter). I'm just the only one that's not a partner. I mean, they were going out in the hall divvying up the money, and coming back and smiling, and I was just working hard. The great thing that I liked about what I had was that if I said, "You know what, I'm tired. I'm going to go take a break, and I'm going to take off for a week." They'd say, "Okay, Bethann [HistoryMaker Bethann Hardison], you go do what you need to do," 'cause they didn't want to lose me and, at the same time, I could just leave. But, at the same time, I wasn't making the bucks [dollars]. They was, they were making the bucks. I was, you know, I was having girls come to my home, like Elle Macpherson, she--downstairs, I lived downstairs when I first came in the building here. So, she, basically, was someone, too, that I had to go to the airport, disc- you know, pick ups, so as far as she's concerned, I'm her mo- I was her mother agency in a way because I was the one who discovered, you know, who took care of her. But in the end, they weren't really sharing the money with me-- Story_ID: 649360 Speaker 1: They were just doing their thing; and that's when someone contacted me, a, a French agency, who was our--who we loved, City [City Models], and she wanted to come into America. And she asked, would I open with her? And I was scared to do that because I knew what I had. I didn't know what I--another one saying, you're good, you're good. And then, you know, I had somebody who told me, "Please, let, you know, Bethann [HistoryMaker Bethann Hardison], you need to get away." I was at a party at Jerry Hall's house with Mick [Mick Jagger], and I met this lawyer, and he said, "I've heard a lot about you. I'd like to talk to you sometime." And he called me up and told me that a friend of his that told him that I was working to the point that I barely ever ate, and never caught my breath, that you never call her at the office 'cause she's always so busy, and I know she's not getting paid. He said, "I want to talk to you," and that was the beginning of changing my life. The agency wanted me in Paris [France], so when I went to Paris, I went and met with the woman. I came back. I didn't tell my agency. I considered it, and I knew I had this agent, this, this lawyer who believed in me. And then, I said, "Well, maybe I should do this because she's going to give me an opportunity to be an owner and I love, we love her girls." I mean, she has the best taste, the best eye, and I said, yes, but this crazy woman thought I was going to be a plan- that she thought, she was the plantation owner. I was going to be the slave, or in house Negro. She told me, "Well, that's not what you're supposed to be. You're not supposed to be--I never said I--you'll be my partner. Where do you get off thinking you're going to be--," and I had left my agency. This is when I got tough. And the reason why I left my agency is because I knew I was overworked, but I had gone--my, my owner, Frances [Frances Grill], wanted me to go to est [Erhard Seminars Training]. You know, what est is? Speaker 2: est, yes, est, the-- Speaker 1: She didn't want me to go for me. She wanted me to go, so I could tell others around us to go. I need est, like I need a hole in the head--I had my father, and when you have my father, you don't need est. All these new books being put out and all this new world, nonsense, I had Lee Hardison. I don't need, I don't need est. So, what happened is she begged me to please go do it. "Please, because if you go, then you could tell Kezia [Kezia Keeble], she's--Kezia owned KCD, which is Keeble Cavaco and Duka. You could tell Bruce [Bruce Weber], you--they would listen to you, they would listen to you." Speaker 2: Why would she want that? Speaker 1: Well, est, you know, is she had it. She loved it. Speaker 2: Seemed, I know, it seemed like a good, I've got people who are (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, I went, and I'm telling you, what she got out of it is the life shows right then and there--that man told me to leave that company. So, I was there for three days, came back one week, and Joey [Joey Grill] said, "You see what you did? Now, Bethann's leaving because the man said, you know, I was scared to report anybody's else's wave." He said, "As soon as you, as long as you're not afraid to do that--if you're afraid to do that, you'll never get anywhere." And I said, "Okay, that's it, that's the answer." So, I wind up doing this, but I wind up doing it on, wind up going off, but that thing with Fra- Paris really didn't work out, and I had to really pull it together. Speaker 2: You had to go deep inside yourself that was 'cause-- Speaker 1: So, thank god, I had that lawyer who believed in me. Speaker 2: Okay. Oh-- Speaker 1: And he, he helped, he talked his whole firm into taking care of me for no money. And I just looked every day in the newspaper for a space. And Bonnie Berman, the model, who was the top model of our agency, was my girl, a little white girl from Princeton University [Princeton, New Jersey]. She said, "Go find a space, and I hope, I'm going to try and find the money." She quietly stayed there. Talisa Soto, who's an actress now, but she was my little girl. She, she, she and Bonnie pushed me to do it. I didn't want to do it. But between Steven Meisel and a couple of other people, you got to, you got to. And then, I wind up, you know, going out here, looking for a space. And I found that place on North Moore Street. Speaker 2: And you set up Bethann [Bethann Management Co., Inc., New York, New York], (unclear) that's right. Speaker 1: Nineteen eighty-four [1984]. And I'd been with Click [Click Model Management Inc., New York, New York] since 1981. Story_ID: 649361 Speaker 1: One's from (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Simultaneous) You have speed. Speaker 1: --Washington Irving, and the other one is, you know, the other, they all, all to do with American families. And I went to meet his parents and they liked me, and they said, "We want to give her the money," and they gave me--it was just, it was the smallest amount of money made such a nice little agency happen. And then-- Speaker 2: So that, so the lawyer never won against Click [Click Model Management Inc., New York, New York]. I mean, I don't know, at this-- Speaker 1: No, no, no, the, my lawyer that wanted to take care of me, no, what he did, is he just basically--Click did nothing wrong. It was that company [City Models] in Paris [France], this woman who said she wanted to start-- Speaker 2: I see, okay. Speaker 1: --she wanted to, you know, start an agency (unclear) with me, but what she wanted me to do is just to be another worker. I can have been a worker with Click-- Speaker 2: That's right-- Speaker 1: --and done very well, and happy, and I was good with them. Speaker 2: --that's right, that's right. Speaker 1: But I was not just going to go be a worker for somebody that I don't really know. She was--I--she offered me partnership. And so, then, I had to just pull back. So I, my same little Bonnie [Bonnie Berman], my model, got me an accountant, and I had from the meeting, I had the lawyer and they just thought to, to put the energy and help me--this setup, I didn't, never did a company. I don't know how to do any of that. Speaker 2: So, you have, you have a lot of luck though. I mean, not, well, I wouldn't call it if you want something-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --you know, so, let's talk about that. So, it was 1984. The--what, I mean, you know, you had talked previously about Studio 54 [New York, New York]. It already started; that whole thing is going. Andre Talley [Andre Leon Talley] is moving up so, you know, in the, in the fashion world because I think he had become--he joins, he joins as their fashion news director. So, I think he had his own column-- Speaker 1: He was at Women's, Women's Wear Daily. Speaker 2: Women's Wear Daily, okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. He was the editor. He was actually the, the director, editor, director, editorial director in Paris [France], out of Paris. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But he was--first, he was first an editor at the magazine, and then they made him, they gave him a title in Paris. Speaker 2: Okay, okay, Speaker 1: What about it? Speaker 2: No, I'm just, and what else is happening with (unclear)? So, then, you start, and what are you thinking you're going to do. Speaker 1: I was panicked. I was scared to death. I had the offer when, when they heard that I was leave- left Click, Johnny Casablancas [John Casablancas] called me and said, "You, now that you, now that you let me know that you really want do this business, you need to come work with me. I need you work with me [at Elite Model Management]." And I said, "Johnny, I don't, I, I, I really appreciate that--," 'cause they had been so, he's always been a fan. But I really wanted--, "I think I got to do this by myself." And he said, "You're kidding me, right?" So, he tried to talk me out of it. He'd tell all the downsides of it. No. I told my son [Kadeem Hardison]. He was laying in the bed there. I'll never forget. And he said, "You going to do this on your own when this guy is offering you a job? You sure you want to do that," (laughter)? I said, "I got to try." I don't know why, but I should go ahead, but I did. And then, that was the good news because it was a struggle for a second, but everything fell into place. Story_ID: 649362 Speaker 1: For a second, how long a second? Speaker 2: Like, you know, walking down the street, not knowing--I found the place. Everything was so weird (audio disturbance), like I went to this realtor downtown in a neighborhood [Tribeca, New York, New York] I had never been in my life, but I knew to go down there. I wanted to be place where there was no fluorescent lighting. That's all I kept thinking--no, so lost, no fluorescent lighting, and I went all the way downtown. And this guy took me around. And I described what I was looking for--I had never seen it before. And this man said, "So what kind of business?" When I--and I said a model--and looking like me, this guy could have said, "Oh, this sounds like a bordello." You know what I mean? It didn't--why would he believe me? And he took me to a place, the last place we were going to. He was, he, he showed me, he was close to what I was talking about what I wanted the place to look like. And then, we were riding back to his office, and he passed by some place on North Moore Street. He said, "Wait a minute, here's a place right here that sounds like what you're talking about." He said, "Let me go get the key," and he went and got it, and it was it. The price was right--everything was right. Bonnie [Bonnie Berman] had got the family to give me $130,000. All the models said they'd wait, 'cause, you know, in that business, you know, the agencies pay in advance. After you work, you get paid weekly, weekly. I couldn't afford that [at Bethann Management Co., Inc., New York, New York]. I didn't have that kind of money. We get--all the models agreed they'd wait for the money with me. That's major. They said, "You don't have to pay us until you get paid." Speaker 1: That's shows major respect. Speaker 2: Yeah, they really believed. They wanted it to happen, and they were sitting--five of them were sit- was it four or five--five of them were sitting at the agency, at Click [Click Model Management Inc., New York, New York], but they were my girls, and they knew it. They were the girls that when I would go on holiday, they would take a holiday. No one took care of them but me. And Bonnie was the biggest one we had and Ariane [Ariane Koizumi]. Ariane was a Eurasian girl. She was half-Dutch and half-Japanese. And then, Bonnie was the All American Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey] girl. And, and the two Puerto Rican girls, and I had one boy, one boy, and another girl, a girl from Niger, Niger and French. Story_ID: 649363 Speaker 1: So what do you build then (unclear)? Speaker 2: Just little, little, this little pocket of diversity (laughter). I started that way and I believed, and I got the kid, Nick Kamen to agree to come with me, a boy, and he was famous in, in London [England]. And, and I had a girl that was working that was treated very badly that I had hired at Click [Click Model Management Inc., New York, New York]. And she stayed, she was still there after I had left. And I told her, I wanted her to come with me, and I just wanted to get everything set up and she said okay, and she was my assistant. And then, the girls went in--I had Tahnee Welch, too, Raquel Welch's daughter. That was the first one, but she wasn't really a model so much. She was just a beauty, and she wind up coming with me to start the company [Bethann Management Co., Inc., New York, New York]. And she just went and called them and she, and they were scared of her anyway 'cause it was Raquel's daughter. And Rocky, Rocky was top, Rocky got her, Rocky is the one who gave her to me. And so, what wind up happening, the other girls, one by one, went into the office and said, "I got to go. Bethann's [HistoryMaker Bethann Hardison] called, and I got--," they just said it, just like that. They all had the courage--it was amazing. And they, as much as those people love me, when I set up, they were gunning for me. They started saying that Bonnie [Bonnie Berman] had gone back to school, so when people called 'cause no one knew I had opened and you have to let people know. You have to give a, you know. Bonnie went back to school. Ariane [Ariane Koizumi] was pregnant--they just lied. And I didn't know, but I was moving fast. Things were happening. Then, Josie [Josie Borain], the girl that I was mentioning that, you know, that Calvin [Calvin Klein] wanted, and Ralph [Ralph Lauren] wanted to be their model, and that's when Calvin knew that I wasn't a partner. He tried to get Josie. When he found out she was leaving the agency to just go on this trip with her boyfriend, he wanted her for his, as his, his ad, spokes model. And he asked if he could do it maybe through me. She said, "Well," he said, "I'd actually have to do with you just alone, but I would prefer if anybody do it, with Bethann. I don't want to do with that agency." And so, she winds up doing it on her own, but what happened is that they sued her--the agency. She had the right. She wasn't wrong, but they sued her anyway and went with a really tough lawyer. And they, then, asked me--Josie asked, and Calvin--would I at least, 'cause I witnessed it all, would I be their, you know, at least tell the truth? And I said, yeah, I would. And Frances [Frances Grill] heard that I was going to be a witness, so she told Bruce [Bruce Weber], and she made up a lie about something about me in regards to them, and Bruce believed it, so Bruce turned on me. That was a hard break. I didn't know what happened 'cause he was so happy to have me working. He was so glad for me and he was supportive, and he was doing, and then, they told him the story, and he just--I didn't know one day. I just, if I would try to call Bruce's office or he, he wouldn't see the kids, and then I found out, maybe, maybe (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That was a long term relationship. Speaker 2: Yeah, but, well, it was off, you know, off and on, but always deep because I was the first one--his first friends. And then, they told him the story and stuff and it was tough. It was, anything, everything turns around, and all the things that you think, oh, my goodness, or can I, I need to do it, like I want, kept wanting a partner, and my lawyer would say to me, "Bethann, you used to be so happy, you don't have a partner. I have partners--you don't want a partner." "Yes, I do, yes, I do," 'cause it would be so easy for me, to have such balance. I was doing it all by myself. I'd never done a business before. And I was strict, and I had a great accountant, you know, good old Jewish accountant. He was on it, you know, (makes sound) (gesture). And so, it was great. Story_ID: 649364 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, talk about, 'cause you had, you got, during this time period, isn't it Veronica Webb and--? Speaker 2: Veronica came to me, yes, and she (audio disturbance), she was actually after I had left Click [Click Model Management Inc., New York, New York] and years ago, a year, within the year, she went there, thinking--this guy told her to go there 'cause I was there. But by the time she got there, she didn't know I wasn't there anymore. So, she stayed a few months, and then she left, and then, she came over to see me and then, I helped her career. Speaker 1: Okay. And then, who else? You had, you had Naomi [Naomi Campbell], well, did Naomi-- Speaker 2: Naomi was someone that I discovered and, and had discovered and went to, to London [England] to meet her and her family at the agency. And she was just, she had just turned fifteen. Speaker 1: Now, when was, was that earlier, was that-- Speaker 2: Yeah, that was in the early '80s [1980s]--I mean, my '85 [1985], '86 [1986], '87 [1987], something like that. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. And, but, and I, and I was supposed to represent her, but to Talisa [Talisa Soto] , the same young girl, the, the little Latin, one now is an actress, American Benjamin Bratt, that's who she's married to now. Her mother always resented the fact that Talisa was so devoted to me. And because Talisa was under age when she was supposed to come with me to the agency, her mother blocked her from coming. So, I didn't have Talisa. I started with Bonnie [Bonnie Berman], without Talisa, but Talisa and Bonnie were the ones who got me to start the agency [Bethann Management Co., Inc., New York, New York]. Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: Well, what happened is that Talisa--Naomi met Talisa through me, and Nick [ph.] came and all the London crowd, and when she was going to come to London, she called--I mean, to New York [New York], she called Talisa to tell her, but Talisa wasn't home, so she started chatting up her mother. And the mother discouraged her from coming to my agency, still having resentment the fact that Talisa was ready to defy her, she resented me. So, I didn't get Naomi, which was a blessing, 'cause I got her in other ways, you know. She--I still took care of her in certain ways. She still relied on me. She still would--if things weren't going right at her agency, she'd call me and things like that. So, I was always in her life. Speaker 1: Right, right, right, right. And she's come, she's come-- Speaker 2: Well, she's, she's, huh? Speaker 1: Come back, I mean, in many--I mean she-- Speaker 2: She never leaves. Speaker 1: I know she never leaves, but (laughter) she never left. She uses (laughter) (unclear), I mean-- Speaker 2: She's just consistent. I mean, she doesn't have the same, you know, she doesn't work like she used to as a model, but she'll always want to be--people always want to photograph her. She's always going to find, you know, there's going to be something that people going to want of Naomi. Speaker 1: 'Cause she's running, she has a show, a reality show, doesn't she? Speaker 2: Well, now she has a television show-- Speaker 1: Right, show, right, right. Speaker 2: --called 'The Face.' Speaker 1: Right, okay. So, then, what about Tyson Beckford, too? Speaker 2: And Tyson was someone who came into the office. This is--I used to represent boys and girls. And then, eventually, I stopped representing guys and just focused all on girls. And this was the time when I decided to go back with guys. And there was an agent that I had brought into my company, young, she met him, and we don't take, we never allowed people to come in, walk ins and stuff like that, or people submitting because we were so small and so busy. So, what we wind up doing is, you know, I, this girl broke the rule, luckily, and met with this guy. And she liked him a lot, and she asked me to please meet with him. And because she was being given a hard time around the board 'cause agents can be really be kind of (unclear), like that, I decided to support her and said, yes, of course, I'd meet him, of course. And met him and liked him, he was just a nice looking kid, nice, and he answered, and I like to interview the models, like two or three times, at least three times before I take them on. I like to know who they are a little bit, see if I really like them, see if I can do more with them, that they're not going to get stuck being a model. And I don't want that because I didn't like having a model agency, so I had this whole snob attitude about it. And so, in the end of the day, Tyson was someone I took on, and it was a, he, within a year, from the time I took him to the year later, he was already being offered the Ralph Lauren deal. It was fast and it was un- such, so incredible because everybody wanted him--everybody wanted him. It was amazing, but he got pulled out of the industry so quickly before it could happen. So, Ralph Lauren [Ralph Lauren Corporation] just bought him out of the industry. Story_ID: 649365 Speaker 1: So, was that, was he, who was your, who was the most popular [at Bethann Management Co., Inc., New York, New York]? And you're based on bookings, right? Isn't the revenue of an agency based on bookings? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: That's right. The revenue of an agency is booked on bookings, and how much you literally earn. Yes, it's true. But, you know, I wasn't, I wasn't driven by the dollar because I was developing. And when you're developing models, you know, all you want to do is, you know, you hope that you get to this point so then, you can start to make money. Speaker 1: But you liked the development process. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, much more-- Speaker 1: You do. Speaker 2: --much more, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, and the fact of it is, the good news is that I had a strict business, so that I never owed anyone. Models didn't, you know, you never could say, oh, she owed me money and then, no, mostly because I was of color and because that agency that I left had told some of the kids that I, that was still there, that I was not to represent anyway. And one of the boys, when the white kids came down to see me, who loved me a lot, and he told me what they were saying. "Well, how is she going to make it? She doesn't have any money and she's a black woman. There's no way she's going to make it." So, I said, "Okay, here we go," (laughter). Speaker 1: This is, this is, that's, that's the wrong thing to say. Speaker 2: That's all, I guess I needed. That's all you need to tell me. He said, 'cause he said, "So, Bethann [HistoryMaker Bethann Hardison], do it. Don't fail us now," 'cause he wasn't with me. He stayed with Click [Click Model Management Inc., New York, New York], but he came and told me, and there was kids who wanted to come. I didn't take anybody who wasn't mine in the company. The girls that they knew, I took care, and there were girls who wanted to come and I didn't take, 'cause I knew that would be not appropriate. Speaker 1: And so, right, right, right, right. Speaker 2: So, yes, we did, we, we did well with, you know, making sure things were in order, making sure that, that, that we managed. I didn't overdo anything. I made sure that, financially, we stayed within our lane, you know, that it wasn't going to be, like, way over here spending too much, giving too big a salary that you couldn't count on 'cause you don't know what you're going to get. And, and the problem with developing, see, there was not a lot of small agencies behind. Then, little by little, agencies started opening up 'cause they saw that I was doing it. Then, it became really good. And the great thing I had was Johnny Casablancas' [John Casablancas] support. I had Elite [Elite Model Management], they supported me. Any questions that I had, anything I needed, no, did I join the, the, the federations of agencies. He said, "Don't waste your time, don't waste your money, anything you know, I'll call you and tell you." I mean, if I had any problems, anything, because I was always good to them, too. A lot of their girls like me. If they had problems with their girls, I can get on the phone, talk to them, whatever, meet them so we had this great kind of relationship. And I knew that if I had to be careful because as I start to grow, these other little agencies, if you develop a kid, and the kid starts to take off, a bigger agency with more to impress them with would come and steal the (unclear), the kid. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And that started happening to me for sure. Story_ID: 649366 Speaker 1: Now, your son's career takes off at this point, too, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right. Speaker 1: So, are you involved with that, wouldn't you be? Speaker 2: Yeah, but, but lightly. I mean, I didn't want to ever represent my son because I didn't want to be responsible for that tragedy (laughter)--I thought it would be. So, I just basically let someone else do it. And then, I thought, you know, if it, if it comes, you know, I never even thought I had to. I thought I'd just keep my eye on the person who's doing it, but I didn't want to be responsible. It was LL Kool J, and his mother [Ondrea Griffeth Smith] and I and Kadeem [Kadeem Hardison] were doing a TV show together, and it was LL who said that really motivated me, or made me feel responsible to do it. "So, why are you taking care of other people's children? You know, you can do it for your own. You got to keep that money in the family. You got to keep it all in." I said, "Yeah, I know." He said, "No, you got to, mom, you can't be letting that happen, don't be letting other people--." And that's what made me open up to, okay, and as long as I had somebody else, too, you know. Speaker 1: Well, that makes sense. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, because that series--I mean, that just became, it was-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --you know, the two of them together. Speaker 2: Yeah, it was a major, it was a major-- Speaker 1: It was a major hit. Speaker 2: --and it was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And it went on for how many? Speaker 2: Six, six years. Speaker 1: Six years? Speaker 2: And it influenced all of the educational system for black colleges [HBCUs]. Speaker 1: That's right, so 'A Different World' playing then. And [HistoryMaker] Jasmine Guy-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --(laughter), they became the couple. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You know, that every, really, every black, you know (unclear), I mean, any, even if you were, were out of college, you identified with that-- Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Speaker 1: --because it related to the experience and everything and so-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yes, for sure, for sure. Everyone said that. He, he was a great, you know, the great thing that happened to someone in your life, like a Bill Cosby to come along in all our times, was he gave us something. Speaker 1: He did. Speaker 2: He gave us something. And, you know, he gave us something (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And something that hasn't been replicated. Speaker 2: And it won't be because that's what I said about a lot of things and people, you know. You know, sometimes, it's just, you're never going to get another, you're never to get another Andre Leon [Andre Leon Talley]. You're never going to get a Naomi Campbell. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: You're never going to get another Tyson Beckford. You're never going to get another [HistoryMaker] Bethann Hardison. You're not going, there are certain people just not, you're just not going, you're not to see that coming again. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: Because it's just not, I just, it's just not going to happen. Speaker 1: But our community needs more of those things (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, for sure. Speaker 1: I mean it would be-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --you know, good, but you know, those were the halcyon days. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I mean, really brought a whole different perspective. Speaker 2: I mean, look at the, 'The Cosby Show,' I mean. Look what a phenomena and the production. The production company he was with [Carsey Werner Company; Carsey Werner Company LLC] was so good and for him, you know, he had the power. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: He had the power to say, "I want to do this show." They just back right up, and that worked. Speaker 1: Right. But he did it, he did it right 'cause, you know, he had Alvin Poussaint [HistoryMaker Dr. Alvin Poussaint]. Speaker 2: Yeah, he did it right. Speaker 1: You know, I mean, (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, he, he brought it and he made sure that it was right. Speaker 1: He, he did right. Speaker 2: Yeah, he, he never see what he was doing. Speaker 1: And then, you know, and then that gave black people, you know, ones who were like (unclear), you know, that's my family or that's, that's a different representation of black people. Speaker 2: That's right, that's right. Speaker 1: So, it was-- Speaker 2: And what was so great about it, it was appreciated by all races because when they went to Europe, they, they, 'The Different World' [sic. 'A Different World'] was great in Holland [the Netherlands]. It was good in England. It was good everywhere; and, and the, 'The Cosby Show,' of course, was the, the, you know, was the leader of the pack, you know. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: It was great. Story_ID: 649367 Speaker 1: So now, Willi Smith dies also around this time, right? Speaker 2: Willi dies, I think, '88 [1988]. Speaker 1: Seven [1987]. Speaker 2: Eighty-seven [1987], was it? Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: Oh, that's the same time with my--that's the same time my mother [Sophie Hudson Hardison], same time my mother died '88 [1988]. Speaker 1: Oh, I thought your mother died in '88 [1988], too? Speaker 2: Yeah, 'cause that's the (unclear), you, you found. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, if he, whenever he dies, it's the same year my mother died. He died-- Speaker 1: Well, that's a lot of loss right there, huh? Speaker 2: Well, you know, like I said, I was raised and believe in death more than life. So, (laughter) (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's true. I forgot about that. Speaker 2: I, I don't get like (unclear) about losses yet, you know, I mean, you know, you got to keep it moving. That's what I think (laughter). You said, you must have been devastated about losing your child. I was out, (makes sound) glad I made it. What I'll do, it's like one of us had to go. It's a terrible way of looking at things, but, you know, I, you know, I don't like the fact that Willi died because I was so scared to go see him when he was sick. When people get very sick, I, I don't want to see them. And I remember Madonna saying that to me once that she has that same thing, that I thought it was me, but she said she's the same way. She'll do something, she'll help them, she'll take care of them, but she has a hard time when she knows you're really sick. She has a hard time, you know. And I, you know, he was a--my office [of Bethann Management Co., Inc.] is on North Moore Street [New York, New York]. He was on Lispenard [Street]. He was not far. And he, he came back from India, he was fine. Then, all of a sudden, he got sick again. I said, "What are you talking--?" He said, "I don't know." And he went so fast, you know. And so, yeah, he, he died in April. My mother died in April because his funeral was in--my mother died, I remember it was April. And my mother was like that--she died like that. She got sick. I went to the house. I got to the hospital to the doctor. The doctor said, "She'll be fine. Get her to the hospital. She's going to be fine." And I get her to the hospital--she died in twenty-four hours. And she, and I was telling her that I was supposed to be at Willi's funeral right then when I was putting her into the hospital. But she was sitting up on the bed and she, she kept touching my face, saying what, and trying to (unclear) she'd never done that. Speaker 1: What beautiful skin. Speaker 2: Yeah, she kept saying, "You have such a beautiful face, look at my beautiful daughter. You're such a beautiful girl." I said, "Okay, so if, you're now tripping." (Laughter) I said, "No, where is that coming from?" She was getting ready to die. So, that night, you know, the next morning, the doctor called me and told--well, I had a call from one doctor saying she was talking out of the head. And he had said, "Could you understand why that might be?" And I didn't have any idea. And then, the next day, the guy used all kinds of terminology that I hadn't heard. I wish he'd just said, you know, I couldn't understand it, but that was the same time. That's why I knew it was a same time 'cause Willi was--I couldn't get to Willi's funeral. So, it was eight- so they say '87 [1987]? Speaker 1: Yep, '87 [1987]. Story_ID: 649368 Speaker 1: And then, so, eighty--so does this sound right because in '88 [1988], you formed Black Girls cl- Coalition [Black Girls Coalition], so that all sounds right, right? Speaker 2: (Nods head) That sounds right. Speaker 1: But now, I, so this is what I (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, it had to be a little before 'cause it--Willi [Willi Smith]-- Speaker 1: This is what it says. Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm--don't mind what things say 'cause then, you know, if I can't remember and they can't remember-- Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: --no. (Unclear), no, you know why, 'cause Willi did something for my first exhibit. Oh, no, was it exhibit? He did it for my first, for my first event. He did a sketch for me that I think I still kept. I still have it in storage, and that had to be before he was, say, it must have been a year before, so maybe he died eighty--you said '87 [1987]? I think it was-- Speaker 1: Eighty-seven [1987]. Speaker 2: Okay, all right, cool. Speaker 1: But so-- Speaker 2: We'll find that out. Speaker 1: --so you celebrate the--you, you start this organization. Why do you think there's the need to do so? Speaker 2: Oh, 'cause it was so many girls of color working at the time. And I was so impressed with it that I thought they, they would never know how this was the first ever. And at that very moment, our city was stricken with homelessness, and it really bothered me. And I always believed I could be homeless. And I saw so many beautiful women on the street and people with so much style. I thought it was all, everything was hom- everything was (unclear), the way the women looked. And I decided to do something about awareness of homelessness, so I started this idea of doing this celebration for the girls, but to make it be a benefit for awareness in our industry about the homelessness that was around us in New York City [New York, New York]. And instead of doing it for all the fancy organizations that most people would do it, do it for obscure agencies, and do it for organizations that support homeless children 'cause I thought the children were double victimized. They never had a chance to make any mistakes--they just coming up in the shelters. And so, that's what we did. Speaker 1: And that was, that brought everyone together. Speaker 2: Yeah, and that-- Speaker 1: And, and in a positive time-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --for a celebration. Speaker 2: Yeah. And then, a lot of people came mostly 'cause as, as one girl, Coco [Coco Mitchell], Coco said, this model, she said, "Yeah, I was so nervous that anybody was going to show up." She said, "Bethann [HistoryMaker Bethann Hardison], with all these beautiful black girls, you think that nobody is going to show up?" I says, "I don't know." And Iman was, I was with, Veronica [Veronica Webb] wrote the piece to ask the designers for, for things. We wanted to sell things, auction things, and they all--and Iman and I were doing the invitations. I'm writing, and she's licking the stamps and said, this is just us and me in my office. So, you could have seen that scene. And then, we just told the girls to show up. We're black, and I brought belts with little pockets so that they can collect, go around, and sell tickets, and that's how we do it. And then, they would get a raffle, and then we'd set the signs. It was great. So, everybody showed up. Michael Jordan showed up. Bob De Niro [Robert De Niro] showed up. Everybody showed up. I mean, it was, it was amazing and, and, and at M.K. [New York, New York], and they gave it, gave me the place every time for free. It was great. And that's how I got that painting from, from Keith Haring because he wanted to give me a jacket, and I said I wouldn't wear a leather jacket. "I won't, I won't wear it." So, he had me come by his house, and that's when he wanted to tell me that he had AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome]. And he said, "I wanted, I wanted to give you one of the paintings that I just did in the last show." And, of course, I won the Muhammad Ali painting and he said, and of course, "You're crazy," (laughter). (Unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You just asked-- Speaker 2: I figured he might be just delusional enough to say--, "Here." But he said, this is his favorite and then he said, "This is my favorite." I don't know why I never, so 'cause this is actually him in the, the picture, right. Speaker 1: Oh, he's, oh-- Speaker 2: That's actually him as a little boy. Speaker 1: I--wow, that's special. Speaker 2: Yes, so I, that's why I really loved it 'cause that's the baby. The baby was what launched his career, the little baby. Speaker 1: Oh-- Speaker 2: So, it was just it, it has a lot to say a lot of things--the green, he knows green was one of my favorite colors. Speaker 1: That's a valuable piece. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, it was really good; so that was one of my good, the good things at that time. It was a lot of good stuff during, in that time period. Story_ID: 649369 Speaker 1: So, eventually, everybody, the coalition [Black Girls Coalition] became known for standing up for girls, standing up for, you know, racial issues in the industry. That was far later. It was never about that. It was really to celebrate-- Speaker 2: It was celebrating-- Speaker 1: --celebrating them for them to see as young women with their, with their, their, with their celebrity (air quotes) quote, unquote, but with their people knowing who they were, how they could--and that's the only way you could be part of the coalition. You had to be editorialized. Then how did he, need you, where you were known. And so that you would see that you could do things with that, learn that you can take what you do, and do something for others. That's what I was just trying to teach me. That was on the subnote, and how they could get along with each other--just doing this, how they could together, but they never had to be together other than to the evening. We'd do one meeting or two meetings, maybe one meeting for the whole event. I did everything and the show-- Speaker 2: How many, how many would usually be there? How many, how many models? Speaker 1: As many as you see there. Speaker 2: Right, okay. Speaker 1: Without Tara [sic.]. Speaker 2: Without Tara? Speaker 1: Yeah--Tyra [Tyra Banks], sorry. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: I can't even say her name. Yeah, she wasn't really part of it. She came that day, but she, and she got photographed that day, but she, she let us know, 'cause she was so anti Naomi [Naomi Campbell] and (makes sound), that she didn't, really wasn't gonna be there. She was not a fit, but she--that day, she came and sat on the panel and used us, but then, then I knew right then, she--I said, "This girl is going to be successful," 'cause this girl is a really, as a young girl, she's a hustler. She saw opportunity (makes sound), that was her, you know. The others are models and nice (laughter) was. She was a mover, doer. I always appreciate it. Speaker 2: So, so how, how many years did you run the-- Speaker 1: The coalition? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: From '88 [1988] to '93 [1993]. Speaker 2: Okay, okay. So, now, what, during this, oh, '83 [1983]. Speaker 1: Ninety-four [1994], maybe. Speaker 2: Ninety-four [1994]? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Maybe in the '90s [1990s] because we did our last event in '93 [1993], it was a press conference (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. Story_ID: 649370 Speaker 1: Now, is, is discovering or, or meeting Roshumb- Roshum- Rosh-? Speaker 2: Roshumba [Roshumba Williams]. Speaker 1: Is that significant? Speaker 2: Yes. Everything, every girl was, especially when they were a good girl, they were, you know, she picked me up over Ford [Ford Modeling Agency; Ford Models]. That was significant. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She had, you know, she had met a few agencies, and her two choices were Ford and myself, and she chose to come with me. That was really big for my, for my business [Bethann Management Co., Inc., New York, New York] at the time. She was a girl who had worked between Europe and America. She was a girl who, looking like she did, she start doing catalog, and I knew what catalog used to pay because I had been there in the early days at Click [Click Model Management Inc., New York, New York], and she started making as much as the, her white counterpart. You know, she, if she was the experience of seeing how things could be in our industry. So, she was really, really worth it (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So-- Story_ID: 649371 Speaker 1: We were talking about, well I think we finished talking about Roshumba [Roshumba Williams], right? We, we finished-- Speaker 2: Yeah, she was great. Speaker 1: Okay. But, let's look at the hiring of blackface white models by Prada [Prada S.p.A.]. Was that--do you see that as a-- Speaker 2: Oh, this is a recent thing? Some are current? Speaker 1: Nineteen ninety [1990]. Speaker 2: Oh, oh-- Speaker 1: No, that does, okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This has just happened again. Speaker 1: But, but why does the decade begin that you talk about, where there are no hiring of black models? When does that decade begin? Speaker 2: Ninety-six [1996]. Speaker 1: Ninety-six [1996]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They were hir- okay, 1996 was the-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: Nineteen ninety-six [1996] was the change, things start to change. I change, I left the industry in 1996, but '96 [1996], '97 [1997]. Speaker 1: But now, why, why do you, because the other thing is Veronica Webb does well, too, you know, in that period of time right, because she, she starts working with-- Speaker 2: Revlon [Revlon, Inc.], and things like that, yeah. Speaker 1: Right, um-hm um-hm, but why do you, what, what is happening in the early '90s [1990s] as it relates to the, the--are those still very positive time period and lots of people working, Naomi Campbell, Iman, I mean, everybody is-- Speaker 2: Iman is not. She's no longer, she's not modeling anymore. Speaker 1: She's not modeling, okay. Speaker 2: She didn't want to model anymore. She wants to do something else. But, no, they were models that were working. Speaker 1: But she got married. Speaker 2: Yeah, when did we [sic. she] get married? Speaker 1: Nineteen ninety-two [1992]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: With David Bowie. Speaker 2: I need to remember this. You know, I was the matron of honor at the wedding. Speaker 1: I was wondering-- Speaker 2: And you would think that I would know this, but I don't know the dates of anything. Nine--I think '92 [1992], '92 [1992]. Well, you asked the question about when did--the death of it so become (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, right. I mean, what, so this is, so is your agency [Bethann Management Co., Inc., New York, New York] then doing really well then? Speaker 2: My agency did well until I decided to, to walk out the door. I always did well because I did well enough. I just never wanted to do it, and I did it because it was a--I guess a means to the end because everybody wanted me to do it. I never wanted to be a model agency. Speaker 1: But did, bud did you get tired of the management of it, this-- Speaker 2: I got tired of it, very tired. I didn't want to, I don't want to do it, I don't want to do what I'm doing right now, whatever that is that I'm not sure of (laughter). I don't want to do anything anymore. I just want to lay in my hammock, but I got to finish talking to you first (laughter). So, with that said (laughter), I was really, I, I, I, when they gave me the money, I said, "Okay, I'll do it for three years." And Bonnie [Bonnie Berman] said, "Make it five, Bethann [HistoryMaker Bethann Hardison], five, five years." I said, "Five years, okay, all right, five years." Five turned to seven, seven turned to nine, nine turned to eleven. By the time I got to twelve, I was like, "Okay, I got to, I got to get out of this." I was doing so well I couldn't get out at long time periods, you know, I couldn't, you know, what was I going to do with this kid? This kid was getting to do well (unclear). I don't want to leave that person though. Oh, I got to get, you know, it was like that. But when I start watching the, the, the agents in my office, how they began to change, and how the business was going to slightly beginning to twist around this way; I said, I don't want to be part of all this (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But can you-- Story_ID: 649372 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Can you talk about that? So, the agents started-- Speaker 2: Agents, the agents, they just, you just meet certain characters that really are good at being agents to the point that it's, it's not, it's no fun. They're just, they're, they're devious, and they're determined, and it's all about the win and the model. And I didn't get in the business to do all that stuff. It was, I was coming to bring something else. I was trying to educate young people. If we're going to do a model business, let me tell you what else you could be doing. Maybe, did you ever thing about dancing (laughter)? Did you ever think about acting? Did you ever think about maybe electronics? I mean, I just was trying to broaden the mind of a new young person whose child I was, had in my-- Speaker 1: But weren't you doing that just anyway within your agency [Bethann Management Co., Inc., New York, New York], or are you saying that you have agents, and so they're also handling whoever they bring, you know? Speaker 2: No, no, whoever I brought in is who they handled. Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: It's who I bring in. Speaker 1: So, but what are you say- but you're doing that anyway. You're, you're broadening them. You're doing that. Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm doing that because that's where I choose to do it. But if you start having agents that's wearing you down, and you're not really sitting on the board all the time because you have to be responsible for other things--it, what, that the travel, and then I was married for a little while. So, I had to go, my husband lived in the Caribbean as well, you know, we had to go back and forth from time and time. And then, it, I'd had to go to Paris [France] and, you know, you're, you're not really in the office all the time, so you don't know what little things are going on sometimes. And then, you know, I, like I said, I never wanted to do it from day one, but once you start becoming successful at something, and you help to change the landscape of something, you keep going on. And then, you have certain kids you don't want to leave when you, when they're doing well, and they're coming up. So, I hung in there. Story_ID: 649373 Speaker 1: But do--what if you had not done it [Bethann Management Co., Inc., New York, New York]? Do you look at those eleven or twelve years and say, what if I had not done this? Speaker 2: I have never done that, but I could do that, and I think that's an interesting thing. If I'd never done it, things would be the different, would be different all around for everyone. Speaker 1: But, but what would have happened? Speaker 2: I think what--well, you wouldn't have had the diversity issue. You wouldn't have had people, someone educating other people about trying to, can't we all get along and see that, you know, like talking to Brides magazine, who would say to Brides magazine, you do know that black people get married, too? I mean, who was going to say that--only Bethann [HistoryMaker Bethann Hardison]. Well, who could say to Calvin [Calvin Klein], "Calvin, that's very nice. I'm very happy." "Well, Perry [Perry Ellis], I'm glad you want, you know, you want me to find you a black girl, but how many girls are you using again--thirty-five? And you want me to find you one black girl? Yeah, great, right?" Who else could say that? And then, you notice that, that sounds, how racist that sounds. "Oh, my god, Bethann, how could you say that to me?" I, you, who else could have those conversations with and, and so organically, in that the person doesn't take total offense and get angry 'cause you're not doing it that way. You're just educating them as you, as they speak, you speak. I mean, who could have done that? So, in a way, yes, it's true. It, it had to set, it set a precedent, it set a bar, even if it slipped all the way back, at least it existed at the time. You know, I find myself when I'm doing Pinterest or, even now, they taught me how to do Insta- Instagram. I noticed that mine is so blackened in a way, you know, flowers, interesting places, but, girl, I'm educating constantly, you know, even when I'm doing something on Twitter, I'm talking, I'm saying something. I'm challenging something, or if I get longwinded on Face- [Facebook], I'm, I'm also talk- . It ain't about, "I like this ice cream I ate today," not, it's, it's always addressing something. So, who else would do those kind of things, I think, in that way? Who would have the, the courage, and also been the person who's been sort of surrounded and knowing that, that you're good, you're good. You know, you have been everywhere with them and so, it's never coming from a (gesture) downward whitey. It's always coming from a place of educating even those who speak. That's why we went to do the film ['About Face: Supermodels Then and Now']. It was always to educate the other guy, not to educate the people who I'm talking that it's affecting, but the person who doesn't even know it's affecting, because of the way they think. So, I think in the twelve years, I couldn't have--it wouldn't have been the same, you know what I mean--we, not to even have the coalition [Black Girls Coalition]. It was a fun moment, especially in the times of the, the late '80s [1980s] and the '90s [1990s]. It was so celebratory because there were so many girls that were working. I mean, look at this. You, you know you could pull together, and it was more working. That was just the ones we editorialized, but look at that. To gather the girls like that together, you, you can't get that many together, or we probably wouldn't even want to be together because they've gotten so trained by the other guy that to feel, to feel different than them. I'm telling you, these model agencies, and this whole casting director thing and, and style has decided who should be with the model. There, there are no muses anymore because the model agencies can produce a model, but the designers are not there taking that relationship with the model, like it used to be. We have casting directors and, you know, and stylists saying, "No, you don't want that girl. You want this girl." It's a different ballgame. And, like you said, me be lucky, me be special, me be--how would I have known that this is where it's going, but I knew. Just like I say now, I know 2014 is going to be a different Bethann. I got to figure out to make sure nickels and dimes keep coming in, and I don't take on too many things, even to say I know what you and I talked about is important to do because it should be documented. Who would ever think? Speaker 1: It's absolutely critical 'cause it won't, it may not exist. Speaker 2: Someone needs to know, someone needs to check. Look at the little kid. Was it you that said this to me? Look at the little kid, the little white kid, Chad [sic. Cam Perron] who discovered the Negro League. And this kid has changed the life of these ball players. He started doing this at fourteen years old, going to see--I mean, this is, this just warms your heart. It just, you know, and he's discovering because he's so committed 'cause he's (laughter) such a baseball fanatic, but he's hung up on the Negro--and now he hangs out with them, like he's one of them. During the '70s [1970s] and '80s [1980s], he's every bit of-- Speaker 1: Or older-- Speaker 2: Yeah, right, and he's like, nineteen (laughter), but he's so computer savvy, he's, he's getting them their pensions. I mean, all because they existed, you know. So to make it a little easier, and it's wonderful that we have an opportunity, so I say, "Yes, I'll do that." Well, I say to myself, "Bethann, where are you going to get all this (laughter) energy" (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Or the time? Speaker 2: You know, you just have to start to decide what's is. I don't, I just want to be-- Story_ID: 649374 Speaker 1: I said that to a young coordinator 'cause I have to cast this fashion show coming up. And I said, "No, 2014, I'm not doing that." He said, "You're serious this time?" I said, "I'm serious because I want to be free in September, in August." I don't, I don't want to think about, I got to get back early 'cause I got to start casting in August. I want to be free in September, you know, I want to live somewhere else. I want to be in Croatia or some place in September. I don't want, you know, not live, but, you know, go. I want to go somewhere. Speaker 2: You've got your granddaughter [Sophia Hardison] though, too. Speaker 1: Yeah, but (laughter), I'm just trying to make my--them come here, and they're going to wreck my apartment--these two disorganized people unless her father [Hardison's son, Kadeem Hardison] take care. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: You know what I mean? Just get them going, but some things, you just want to do in your life. It doesn't have to be 2014, 2015, but if you're still healthy, 2016. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: You just have carving out--what is really important to do (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That is true, that is true, that is true. Speaker 1: And what, and, and everything has been, you know. Speaker 2: That's true. Speaker 1: And how, ways you can make it. So, Target [Target Corporation], I, I work with them sometimes and how do I, how do I really make myself really be relevant to them in a way? I need to get on the phone and ask them, "How do I, what you," (laughter)--? 'Cause I don't, I don't know you better than you know yourself. You can never think these things about, you know, well, if I have to go around the country having dinners, get paid for that. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: You know, and then, you can do this. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: But you don't have to be, and then, you know, just try to put these things in place for Tyson [Tyson Beckford], so that, that I can make money while I sleep. Story_ID: 649375 Speaker 1: What other things, though, are you proud of that you did with your agency [Bethann Management Co., Inc., New York, New York] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, with the agency? Hm, I'm proud that I helped us, you know, discover Tribeca [New York, New York] before anybody else did (laughter). (Unclear) proud of that--help bring a neighborhood alive. I'm proud that, that I succeeded and left clean--no debt, owing no one nothing, paying all my kids, putting them in places. I didn't just break. I put everybody in place. The only one I couldn't put in place was Tyson [Tyson Beckford]. I placed them, so they wouldn't be without an agency 'cause I knew I was going to do this. And then, you know, I had Ralph Lauren wanted more time with this, so that I got stuck with Tyson. That's why I'm still with Tyson 'cause after all I did with Tyson, I don't want to-- Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: That's the one I was ruined what we've done. And then, the other things are just--I think the fact that everyone walks away feeling that they had a great experience with us, that I, that I did so well in my way of doing that they felt that it was a special journey for them, and, and everyone regards it that way. Speaker 1: And then, you were also a safe haven 'cause in the case of Naomi Campbell, you became a safe haven when Elite [Elite Model Management]. Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I mean-- Speaker 2: Yeah, when she, whenever she had any problem, she could call me up and say, you know, like, "I don't like this. This is what this is doing," 'cause she was someone who came as a young person. She always looked out for herself. She always was wise about what should be and shouldn't be. She was a real buffalo soldier. I mean, and still is. She's, you know, I always say, she's fighting on arrival and fighting for survival. She, she was very smart as a youngster about what she should be paid, if they were getting paid, and always seeing the difference. And, "Why is she getting more than me?" And, you know, yeah. So, you're always that person for that person. If I didn't have an agency, probably would have never known Naomi in this way anyway. And that's an important thing, too. Story_ID: 649376 Speaker 1: Now, who, agency wise, has replaced you? Speaker 2: Oh, none, there's been, no, because some people think that I had a black model agency [with Bethann Management Co., Inc., New York, New York]. Well, nah, that's not true 'cause I wouldn't have been successful if I had. I had a white model agency, and I was a black owner. But the fact of it is that there's no one who's come along that actually could--that mattered that you had diversity in such a good way, but you had the right kids. You had the right kids that you knew that no one could deny the beauty of the kids. And I have a good eye and I, I didn't know how much I had a good eye until Steven Meisel kept saying, "You have a good eye, Bethann [HistoryMaker Bethann Hardison]." And that's great because I've discovered some great kids. But there's been nobody that is going to come along that's after you have many agencies, but they're not looking out for, trying to make sure that the world sees things as we walk down the street. Story_ID: 649377 Speaker 1: You know, and let's talk about this. So, everything fell off, and why did it fall off, you know, with, with more, you know, of people of color? Why did that fall off so dramatically? Speaker 2: You mean, the models? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: I think it's, it's, basically, was just the timing, you know, Miuccia Prada at, at one point with all the super models situation and even with Calvin [Calvin Klein] super model. Speaker 1: Well, talk about Miuccia Prada. Speaker 2: Well, I'm going, yeah, I'm going to speak about, I'm going to go back. I think that all had gotten to this place of believing that we don't want to pay that much money. And we, you know, they had exhausted the girls anyway, you know. So, they wanted to make something new, both the visionaries. Calvin start looking for, you know, like street kids. And Miuccia, what she did is she just basically hired girls who were more Eastern European looking, nothing you would notice or remember. And then, basically, they all pretty much looked alike, not recognizable. And so, when you do that, you don't really want to have anything recognizable. If you have something of color, it's recognizable. It stands out. You know, it's like having a Linda. I said to many people, "Linda Evangelista couldn't have worked at that moment because she's a glamour girl. She's somebody who would have stood out." So, you, you do it in that way because you're doing some sort of--it's a, it's a creative editorial move. So, people see things differently and, unfortunately, it caught on to a point that has not caught off. It's still going. And so, people begin to think in their own way that this is the right way, and they just, all the way. And the only way they're going to find out is not the way is to be called out on it, you know, and say, look, you could think this, but even though you think you're not that person, this is the bottom line. Bottom line is that it's racist. If you continue to use thirty-five girls--well, Miuccia is not doing that anymore. She's moved on, but there are designers, young designers, that will come up doing that same thing because they want that editorial recognition from the editors, from whoever, because it's what you do, and it's got to change somewhere, and see if you cannot have it do. So, those are the things, I think, that helped to make it become something where the girls just disappeared. And it became, like a trend, and the Eastern European girls were coming in all left, right, and center. They were--that was, first of all, had never existed as, as it is now. I mean, surely, you had a Paulina [Paulina Porizkova] in there, and you had another little girl, that's one that's an actress now--I can't think of her name, model, who turned actress. But those girls came from Eastern Europe, but, you know, one out of ten days, ten years, and know, you know what I mean? But then it became the, the walls were down, so to speak, and the, and the scouts were all over every little tiniest Estonia, every little tiny Eastern European country bringing models. And those models would come and go. They'd flush them out like waves. They're young and they're skinny, and they have the body, right body alignment, and they want to work. They're not too, "I don't feel like doing this." They don't have no attitude. And then, they, they become the one you want. And it doesn't matter what the girl looks like any more. It, it doesn't matter. It doesn't seem to matter anymore. The girls are not good looking. The girls are not model types. They're model types by their body alignment. That became popular because as designer systems and designers, we sketch those bodies. That's what we want--the long, long line, narrow hip, so that became a habit that's now become the habit. And it's become normal, and-- Story_ID: 649378 Speaker 1: And like now, we have casting directors. We wouldn't have casting directors before. They start deciding what they want. Speaker 2: Now, how did the casting directors come in? They're such a par- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Shakes head) God knows-- Speaker 2: Is it because-- Speaker 1: It's like roaches. One day, they're just there (laughter)--I swear. Terrible way to put it, but I'm going to use that 'cause that's how I look at them. You just want to put a hand grenade in the room and just blow them up. I have no respect for casting directors and that's why when they say, "You know, Bethann's [HistoryMaker Bethann Hardison] our casting director." I said, "I'm the head of--." I just change it somewhere. I can't even stand to be called a casting director. I don't want to be a part of them, just like I didn't want to be part of the model agency business when I saw it going (gesture) (makes sound). So, they came out nowhere. I mean, all of a sudden, they're casting. Where, I don't know they got to be where they are. I mean, they're really like ants, you know, how ants are. You just don't see them, and all of a sudden, they're there. You didn't put anything down. There's noth- they're there. Speaker 2: What are their backgrounds usually? Speaker 1: God knows. That shows you how uninterested I am in them. I have to be a little bit now 'cause I'm getting ready to call the industry out as, you know, wrong. And I'm naming some of them, but the fact of it is that I don't know how they got where they're going, where they are, because they, they start to help one person. And then, the other person, you should do it with this one, or you'll tell them, this is what I just did. And then they, they take their show on the road. And now, they're just doing it for this one and that one, and this one and that one. And they're important houses. And those houses represent images and how things are. So, you have a few of them-- Speaker 2: So-- Speaker 1: --and stylists, too. Speaker 2: --so-- Story_ID: 649379 Speaker 1: What made you want to really speak out 'cause you had done your--not to say you weren't speaking out, but you had done your agency [Bethann Management Co., Inc., New York, New York], and you had sort of, and then-- Speaker 2: Oh, Naomi [Naomi Campbell]. Speaker 1: Huh? Speaker 2: Naomi-- Speaker 1: What? Speaker 2: --Naomi and Andre [Andre Leon Talley]. I think they start calling me and telling me when I went away to Mexico, I started hanging into the, to my hammock, and having my tequila. I was just feeling very comfortable about life, and thinking I had given up my agency, and I didn't have to do that, just do a little few things on Tyson [Tyson Beckford] and they would--every time I come back to New York [New York], she'd say, "You know, Ma, you're really going to do something. It's terrible out there. You have to see what's happened with the black models. That's not gun-gun." She kept moaning about it for a few years, maybe about four years. And by the fourth year, 2007, I said, "Okay." Speaker 1: And what was Andre telling these things then? Speaker 2: Well, just a simple thing, you know, you see the same this, you know, get the, you know, "There's no models out there. You need to do something. I don't know, you, just bad out there." But I, you know, heard that in '97 [1997], you know, and '98 [1998] and then, you know, you, I can't be totally, constantly responsible. I just figured, it'll get, it'll get together. And then, it wasn't getting together. Speaker 1: And this-- Speaker 2: And I have one girl, and then I have one girl, and then I have one girl for a couple of years, and then try another girl, but they really weren't, it wasn't like girls, it wasn't just a balance. Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: So that made me sort of say, "Okay," and then, I organized it--the, the first press conference. Speaker 1: So, talk about the first press (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) September, 2007, I did a press conference at the, at the Bryant, Bryant Hotel [Bryant Park Hotel], and across the street from Bryant Park [New York, New York]. And, and, you know, just a, did it in the media room, a eight hundred seat theatre, and just invited a mixture of the industry and invited some press people as well. And just talked about, you know, system, what, what I was seeing and how it was, and talked about ten things I didn't like about the industry at this point. And, you know, and called a couple of people up to speak about their experiences; and that was the start of it. Story_ID: 649380 Speaker 1: But you said that you were, you weren't sure how it was going to be received; and you, but you were very clear. You spoke your mind and you were very clear that day. You were backing things up with examples, and that people really heard you that day. Is that, is it-- Speaker 2: Yeah. I never know how things are going to be received, but I always think it's going to be successful because I'm always successful at these things. I just, I don't know what it's going to happen this time 'cause this one is going, what I'm getting ready to do next, I really, I got to get it together and do it, but I never thought it wouldn't be. I just knew, you know, you just pull them together, a small production, and you just want to hope it rolls, rolls away--you, you hope. You hope that people show up. And the people surely show up. And then, you do another one, you know, the next month, at the public library. They give you the entire two rooms and you get well over three hundred people, and they're sold out in one room, and have to put them in the other room just to look at the monitors. And it's another thing, and it goes all over the newspapers, and you get cover stories and, you know, it's, you know, people say, "Do you think you can make a difference?" I always felt I'm going to make a difference 'cause I know that when you, when you say this to people, they become so uncomfortable, something is going to change. And the one thing that clearly changed was that they stopped saying, "No blacks, no ethnics." When the casting people would ask for models, they stopped. That never was said again after September 2007, so that completely changed. The other thing that changed is 'cause I agreed that I thought the problem was that model agencies less the, I didn't worry about the casting directors, I could change that. But the model agency, so they had to improve the girls 'cause I didn't think, the reason why they don't want these girls is 'cause they're not, they already seen them, and they're not that great. But the model agencies think they are. That's another thing that was, where I'm missing because you can get a good girl once in a while, but what I was able to do is had a lot, I had a lot of great girls, you know, and that's something that was amiss. So, when you have a dark girl, you really got to make sure she's a right girl. Don't just put her out there 'cause she's dark 'cause it just hurts us. Just, she's got to me competitive to a white counterpart and that, and each agency, they have good girls. They do 'cause there are a lot of agencies now. It wasn't like that before. And so, the fact of it is, is to try to really turn that around. And we're turning it around, little by little, but why it always slips back is what disturbs me. Why you go, you know, so many, you know, steps forward, and then so many steps back? Why does that always happen? And that's what you want to talk about it and document. You see that happening now. When can you get it to be permanent? When can it just be? What's the problem, you know? I know we don't have enough girls to compete with the girls they send out for white 'cause they have so many white girls, so many. I mean, it's easy for me to cast white girls, but they don't want to even give you the black girls because, you know, if you're an agent, if you're a designer it's not the top designer, 'cause you got to look out for, 'cause you don't want that casting director to think that the girl's going down. I mean, they're in such a political restraint nowadays. I don't want to, I, I, after the last season, I said, I would never, ever cast another female show, ever again, and I'm not. I'm only doing this one menswear show. I'm not doing--I did four, five show, four to five shows before. I'm only doing one. Speaker 1: It's just because of all the people involved in the personalities and the-- Speaker 2: No, it's just that it, the, the industry, it, it's hard to get the girls you want. And it, when it becomes that hard, then it just becomes like, why, why? Story_ID: 649381 Speaker 1: So, do, what about the programs like 'Top Model' ['America's Next Top Model'] and things like that, what are, what effect do you think those programs have overall on the industry? Speaker 2: Nothing. Speaker 1: Nothing? No, no effect? Speaker 2: (Shakes head) Unh-uh, none, none. We don't affect them and they don't affect, they don't affect the industry--no. They, it's, it's a reality show (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, it's two separate-- Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely, absolutely. No, you'll find--there's been a girl or two that's come out of those, of those things. But it's, it's out of, just the luck of the Irish. The fact of it is, what I've always said to people, and some people, you know, will say, "Really?" Well, that's because the ignorance of them think- because it's nothing to do with models. It's a reality show and the quality of the girl is not going to be what's in our agencies--never. But the great thing about it what it is, it's a reality show that gives you a chance to look at girls fight and tussle, you know, I mean, it's one of the first ones that really showed you how it could be if you put a bunch of people together. All of the other shows have come after that. They set the, the bar. Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: But it's nothing to do with fashion. Speaker 1: You know which is interesting because if you looked at 'American Idol,' those people have gone on to have, you know, (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, 'American Idol' is just, that's a competition, that's a competition that I don't consider--it's not a reality show. Speaker 1: It's, oh, I see. Speaker 2: It's a competition show. Speaker 1: I see, okay, that's fair enough. Speaker 2: It's like, it's like, it's like a variety show. It's quite different. Speaker 1: That's fair enough. Speaker 2: Every one of those people will do well because of the fact it's a music business and those people really can sing. And they do, we, we, the people choose those we like, the way they look, the way they can really sing, and if they'll really, really, I mean, if they're a large size person, then they really, they may not have the same career that the other guy is going to have, but they still have something. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So, where are you now in, in your, you know, in, in, 'cause you've spent--I got a long--you've been in this industry a long time. Speaker 2: A long time, no. Speaker 1: A long time. Speaker 2: Is it forty years yet? Speaker 1: (Laughter) You've been in the industry longer than forty years. Speaker 2: Oh, well, let's not bring it up. I'll just, I'll just talk to Matthew [Matthew Hickey] (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) Sorry. You know, we do to-- Speaker 2: Let's talk about black birds again (laughter). Speaker 1: No, but I'm just thinking that-- Speaker 2: It's, it's a nice ride to see what it is. That's why you can always look at it, and go say, "Okay, cool," you know. Story_ID: 649382 Speaker 1: When you, do you think back about working in the button, you know, with the--I mean, in the-- Speaker 2: (Shakes head) I only (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) Garment District [New York, New York], and you, did you envision, could you envision where you would be now? Speaker 2: Oh, no, not at all--no, definitely. I don't think anyone, maybe, some people have ambition. I don't have, I'm ambitious in a different way. I'm not ambition with a (gesture)--I'm going to get over there. That's not--I'm, I'm not ambitious like that. I'm just one foot in front of the other ambitious. I mean, I will put the foot in front of each other, and I will do well when I'm doing it, as, as best I can, but, yeah, I would have never (cough), pardon me, I would never have, ever, imagine anything 'cause I never imagine anything. Like, I don't have any, I don't have any conscious ambition. I'm not like one says, one day, I'm going to (makes sound). That's not me, 'cause, actually, I don't want to do anything--never have. I'm someone who really could have been lazy. I could have been, like really been the president of the lazy club, but seeing like my body and my spirit didn't understand that. Speaker 1: Well, I mean Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: What do you think made you though in many ways because I keep thinking about your father [Lee Hardison], you know. Speaker 2: And, and Sophie [Hardison's mother, Sophie Hudson Hardison], I give her credit, too, because, because they let you believe in you. You know when someone just doesn't stop you for, because I was a good kid, but I, obviously, was on the right track, you know. And I think that they didn't--Sophie, meaning, Sophie and Mommy Carrie [Hardison's maternal grandmother, Carrie Hudson]--they didn't, they let me do, which and, you know, and I was lucky that I was the right person doing it. And then, my father just, like he said, he had to tweak some things. And he always said that--you have, had to tweak some things. And I would say, that when people say, "Oh, you're a Libra. I would never have thought you were a Libra." I said, "Well, yeah, but I'm a adjusted Libra 'cause I understand my father got a (unclear), so it's like, start tweaking things, you know." But I, I think, I don't know if it all comes from that. I do believe people come here with a certain stack, a deck of cards. I do believe that, you know, people come here sometimes with just, they just don't have it. And we have to understand how certain people's brains work, and other people's don't. You can't say to a kid, "I don't understand why you don't understand that." Well, he doesn't understand it. It's because his brain doesn't work the way yours does. And I try to keep that always in my mind when I deal with people, right away to watch how they work and watch how, at my point, certain things I don't understand about myself, or I don't have the ambition to do. Everyone used to say to me when I was coming up--this is when I was in the Garment District--you know how many people offered me jobs and money, that they would put money behind me if I would just say what I wanted to do. And because I had not a clue what I wanted to do, it made me feel very self-conscious because I had no idea. But they would tell me, "Bethann [HistoryMaker Bethann Hardison], you--," and some people who were like mentors trying to be mentors to me, would say, "you've got to know, you've got to come up with some thought of what you want," because they saw something in me that I didn't even see. So, you know, like it was a guy named Michael Coady. He was right underneath John Fairchild [John B. Fairchild] for Fairchild Publications [Fairchild Publications, Inc.; Fairchild Fashion Media]. He ran the newspaper with him. He's executive. He stalked me for a year to try to come get me to work for Women's Wear Daily. I kept saying, but he would take me out to dinners. He had me meet at the Goochie Brothers. He--anything, lunches, come by, meet me over here, just showing me what I could be doing, and I could be rolling. And I would say, "But I don't know how to write. I'm not a writer." He said, "Don't worry about that. I'll get someone to write your column." What is that? And it wasn't like he wasn't coming on to me. So, was it a--it's something they see that you didn't even know, so I could never have imagined the button company [Cabot Button Company (ph.)] here, just like it's always so nice that I at least worked in that button company, as I look back, you know. So, I, I don't, I don't even know or think about where could I have gone? Where would have I been? I, I, I'm just impressed myself with the things that I've, I've achieved and survived and still living as my doctors always say, "God, gee Bethann, you, oh, you're really up, keep doing what you're doing, whatever that is, you know." Speaker 1: But, you know, I was thinking also about your father and the Muslim background, the Malcolm X. I mean it's almost as if you, you had, you knew your place. You know, you were talking about the models and how they, you know, maybe they're, sort of got addictive personalities, but sometimes they don't know their place. And you knew your place-- Speaker 2: (Nods head) Right. Speaker 1: --and so-- Story_ID: 649383 Speaker 1: I want to know, then, given that, when did you go from muse to fashion leader, commentator, mentor? When did that happen because we--remember, you started-- Speaker 2: Shift, as a shift. Speaker 1: --you, you started as a muse. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, you, you, you-- Speaker 1: But when did that, when do you, when can you think back and think that the-- Speaker 2: Nineteen eighty-four [1984], absolutely, 1984. When you, when you, when you walk out there with a, you know, with a spear on your shoulder, and you go out there and you have a machete in one hand, the spear on the shoulder, and you're (unclear) the, the walk where you're going to be--it was when you put your name on a door. I think that was the beginning. The muse thing was a muse because I inspired others, but I still had a job, I still had a way of paying my way. I wanted to be an actress. I knew I was an actor, so I went and studied acting. I got put out of my class by Earle Hyman. He used to play the god- the father [Russell Huxtable, 'The Cosby Show']-- Speaker 1: Oh, yes. Speaker 2: --yeah, the father, Bill [Bill Cosby]. And it hurt, broke my heart, but he explained to me, "It's because you're afraid of success, Bethann [HistoryMaker Bethann Hardison]. I don't want you in this class. You've been in my class three years. There's no reason. You could be, you could be working as an actress," but I couldn't afford to be working as an actress. I'm as, ambitious as I am, I'm not ambitious enough. I could dare think that I should have done, or could have done, or would be doing better, or could have made more money. But it takes a certain personality to do some, some of those things. It takes a certain personality to understand money, to understand certain things. Like people say, that it was written up about me in Women's Wear Daily recently, and they said, you know, "How do you get a chance to even do these things? You own four homes," and the little girl who works on my film, and she read it. And she said, she called me, she said, "You own four homes?" (Laughter) I said, (unclear). Well, yeah, you do know it. You all know I do. You just don't think about it because, yes, I live in New York City [New York, New York]. I don't own this, but I have Woodstock [New York]. I have, you know, Mexico, in the mountains. And I have Mexico in the beach, so it's four places. And she was only saying it to how, you know, to be such a concerned person about this issue--how do you find the time? Well, the good news, I'm glad she wrote that 'cause it shows that, obviously, I don't need to be doing this. It's because it's a calling, right? Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: It's a calling. Something you know that calls you to do it because you don't really set up--I wouldn't go out there and do--I listened to a girl on the radio the other day, someone who's a poacher, I guess you'd call her people. And she's someone who wants to be sort of what, who I am. And she got herself on the NPR [National Public Radio] news talking about, not exactly what I'm doing, but similar, but she said that she was a model and she's in Vogue. And this is how they--and I had to, who is this person? I thought it was a girl, like a white girl, I know. It's this girl, the African girl, and she just talked about how she has this organization, but it's all bluff 'cause when they, and the person says, "Well, who are your partners? You're--who are some of your sponsors?" She never answered the question. She said, and what we do, she's all like, you know, 'The Wizard of Oz.' She's just standing up there turning and making things look like it's happening. And I thought to myself, see, these are people who really are ambitious. I could never even take the time. I've never had a publicist. For all that you get when you get, you know, you don't know how these things come about. Speaker 1: Are they, are they ambitious or are they opportunists? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. That, there's a difference though (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There's a difference-- Speaker 1: --there's a difference. Speaker 2: --there's a difference. You're right, that's very right. Speaker 1: But, the thing that, the thing that-- Story_ID: 649384 Speaker 1: I want to ask you your hopes and concerns for the black fashion community? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. There's--you have to be hopeful because, well, I don't like that word anyway. There's never been a good hope word, but that's the word that people use. You want to believe that things could turn around, so you keep, you keep the faith that things could turn around. But, on the real note, it just doesn't seem anywhere possible. I mean, really, you have these little companies like Harlem Row [Harlem's Fashion Row], you know, doing these little things, show course--showcase the little black flat design companies. It's not fashion. You can make clothes, as I said, to many people, just 'cause you sew a button on a short don't put you in the fashion business. Everybody's in (air quotes) fashion now. The fashion business is Anna Wintour (laughter). You talk in that world, you go in that, then you're talking--you're in the game. Everything else is, it's a hard one because we don't have back freeze. We don't have that in our background. That's why the Asian kids can come here, no matter what the--I mean, what division or property of Asia they come from, they come from that a little bit. And the way they learn, and how they work, so I don't know how, who is going to be the person who can teach us because many of these kids don't even want to go work for other people. Many of these kids don't even think that being an apprentice is chic. I think it's chic. I think saying the word is chic. They don't think that. They want to be Puffy [Sean Combs], like tomorrow, and you can't get there like that. You got to be like Edward Wilkinson--god bless him--you know, you work for Donna Karan long enough. You put up with enough nonsense long enough. Eventually, you know that you got something, and somebody else sees it, too, and they need a business opportunity and they need a designer, and they go get you. And now, he's just floating and dull. You don't, may not know, everybody may not know his name, but does it really matter in the end? You got to get over that stuff. You know what I mean? And I think, he, he's smart to have done that. But they're not enough. I'm going to try and do something like that now. I got to figure that out. Speaker 1: So, but so, you have hope, but you're not sure what it's based on. Speaker 2: You have hope. I believe there's a possibility things could change around. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I believe-- Speaker 1: What do you think will be necessary for it to turn around? Speaker 2: Hm, it's grim. I believe (unclear), I hate to say, but's it's a grim ex- to, to explain. You'd have to have people who really come from an industry that are marked that people who really basically understand what it is to develop and manufacture. And today the business is so big, and just like the music business, we have big corporations owning the big labels, and it's very hard. You've got to be good looking--I really mean this--you got to be good looking if you're going to be of color, and you better be talented. And you'd better rub up against somebody until they see what you're doing, and you do it smartly. You've got to find somebody who's not loud, who's respected, and has an understanding, and you got to find somebody who's not the color of you, but someone who's non-colored. Get them to see what you do, and get them on your side. Every dark person who has talent better find a white person who's going to take care of them. That's a fact. Now, forgive me community, but that's a fact, if you want to be outside of the community. Now, if you want to stay in the community, and help things, and go to Harlem [New York, New York] and build schools, and--yeah, that's good, then you're right. Story_ID: 649385 Speaker 1: So, what about Anna Wintour? What role could she play in all of this (laughter)? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Go ahead, hang me. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay. Speaker 2: Go ahead, give me the noose (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, but I mean, 'cause, no, but she, she's the, she's the entry point. Now, it's almost like-- Speaker 2: She's the empress, yeah. Speaker 1: She's the empress. So, what role could she, I mean, what about, when you take more, less work to educate her? Speaker 2: No, you can't do that. No, this is a serious Brit [British] girl. No, she's, no, you can't do--some people, no, they, they know what they know, and they know what they like and, hey, and I was trying to get her, if I was trying to represent some basketball players, or some athletes, or some tennis players, some, some guys, she'd be right there, 'cause that's, she likes that. You could see she likes that. But she's not someone, I'm telling you, you got to be good looking. If you're good looking, from head to toe, good looking, and you're talented, and you get someone to, you know, you ease up on somebody who can get you this, somebody who's of that, in that world, and get them over to see you, and just do something very smartly, (makes sound), cleverly, just a few clothing just to show what you're doing, and be charming, be like an old Willi Smith, then you got a chance. But just being anybody and being brown, and think you've got it going on, and you think you, you, 'cause you just want to make clothes, you got to come like--when I say gangster, I always mean gangster by meaning clever, smart, you know; you got to come like-- Story_ID: 649386 Speaker 1: So Bethann [HistoryMaker Bethann Hardison], if you were coming along, coming along now, where would you go if, and assuming the person has the talent, would it be in manufacturing? Would it be runway? Would it be print? Would it be well, okay, while I guess, what do you call it when it's, there's print (unclear) label, there's (unclear). But anyway, would it be--where would, where do you think the highest potential because I ask that because a lot of the people who, after the prime years, are looking to put themselves in some kind of business, you know, whether it's cosmetics or, but if you were coming along now, and you were advising someone, let's say, you have it all going and you were coming back to this sort of, what area would you choose, and what would be your after prime? Speaker 2: So, you're, and let me just be clear. You're asking if, if somebody of a mature age-- Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: No? Speaker 1: I'm saying, if I'm starting over my career again, and-- Speaker 2: Starting over your career, how old are you? Speaker 1: No--I'm sixteen-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --okay. Speaker 2: Starting out? Speaker 1: Right, I'm starting out, but let's say someone were advising me, you're going to have (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Where would you want to do--as a designer? Speaker 1: No, where would you put some, and I meant, and I'm black, I'm colored-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --okay, colored. Where would you advise someone? Let's say, you know, they can be talented all kinds of different ways, but where would you, where would you place-- Speaker 2: Suggest? Speaker 1: Yes, what is the most lucrative and has the longest standing potential? Speaker 2: I can only suggest, based on their, their desire, like if they're, if they, if they're say, twenty-two, I mean, sixteen is young, but twenty-two, and they sort of lean towards a certain direction, then you could sort of tell them something according, based on the direction. You could sort of say--well, because there's no thing, you're saying you named four categories, I think you said. Speaker 1: Well, I know, but I'm saying, what is the highest potential right now because it, can you still make, lots of money as a model? And, and, and have the billing to live for a lifetime, you know, after-- Speaker 2: After it's all done? Speaker 1: --after, you know, your prime has, 'cause the prime is very short. Speaker 2: It's very hard for me to tell anyone to be a model. That's number one because I, I know how rough it is. It's hard for me to suggest it, but sometime you see something that's really, you say, "Wow." As long as you're encouraging, I, I would encourage them to say, you know, listen, this is going to be a short run, but while you got something, so why don't you try and do this for the next maybe couple, you know, couple of years, but don't get stuck, you know, go to school. I have a godson that's a white kid, a godson who's eighteen years old, who's coming to Cooper Union [Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art, New York, New York] and he's a beauty. He's tall, skinny, chest like, he, he can model, easy. Yeah, but long as I'm saying to him, "You're going to go to that school full time." Now, his parents, because he's coming all the way here, it's going to make me really responsible. I got to make sure the right agency, and that he still goes to school. I said, "It's better to say that you're at Cooper Union as an architect student than to say you're a model." He wants to take off four years--I said, "Don't do it. You'll get more girls saying you're an architect student and you model a little than to say I'm a model." But I don't know what, what, what's lucrative in some way because (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But, but I mean even, even white-black designers. I mean, that's why I'm saying--look, how difficult that is. Speaker 2: That's what I was talking about before. That's what I was talking about, you better be good looking and very talented, and you got to know how to play a game that, you know someone has to discover you and say, "Hey, listen," and bring you, and find you the right Virginia Smith that works at Vogue. Don't go to Anna [Anna Wintour], see if she would find it interesting. If she finds it of interest, then she maybe can give you 'cause she's a nice gir- girl. And she might be able to do something (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But-- Story_ID: 649387 Speaker 1: Then why is this an industry to go in? Speaker 2: Is this an industry to (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Why, why is this a professional industry? Why is this something that people of color should aspire to in any, in any capacity? Speaker 2: That's right, yeah. Speaker 1: I mean, I'm just say- whether it's (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Because you know why, you know why, 'cause it's popular, part of popular culture now. It is not something I suggest. I would suggest that people go in as stylists, and stylists to celebrities. If anything, do that, you know, go dress Mary J. Blige. See if Beyonce's [Beyonce Knowles] stylist has broke, broke his ankle or something, you know, or try to have him break his ankle, something, just do this (laughter), sorry, but, you know, be a celebrity stylist. Don't, you know, be in the game, but don't go--less heartache, the better--because getting into trying to make clothes, and trying to get them seen and shown and people want to--go around the stores, do your homework. It's lots of clothes everywhere. And guess what--what you see today, they're getting rid of in another month, and they're bringing more, so why would anyone pick you? And then, they say, well, I want to have my own store. Oh, Lord, who's educating you? That's the hardest thing in the world to do because then you got to try to make the clothes and then, you're going to supply the clothes, and how are you keep it rent up? It's, it's (adopts French accent) impossible, you know, it's like that. So, if anything, I would say, if you're really interested, be a writer, fashion writer, someone who basically just likes--because they like to write, but they like fashion. They can go in and become an editor. That's interesting; and if you're a good writer, they don't care what you look like. Story_ID: 649388 Speaker 1: Where's the next Leon, Leon Talley [Andre Leon Talley]? Speaker 2: There aren't any more. I told you before. Speaker 1: Okay. So, the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I keep telling you. Speaker 1: So, the next-- Speaker 2: That ship sailed. Speaker 1: Okay. But the next question-- Speaker 2: Because he's an editor, you're right about that. And he was someone--it came along at a, you know, like I said about timing, it's like, when we came along, it was so different. And, you know, who, how many, how many--when I sit around and talk about, oh, yeah, I, I--Truman Capote. You knew Truman Capote? I mean, how many people are going to sit down with anyone of importance, a simple girl, a simple boy anymore? Not anymore, unless you're a blogger, you know what I mean? So, it's very hard. Who, people, people supported us. You didn't have to have money or be from a great family or anything. If you had style, people got behind you, liked you, wanted to help you around. You could sit and be with anybody, you know. I mean, I was around a lot of interesting people for no reason. And it didn't hold my attention like, oh, my god, I couldn't believe I was with Salvador Dali who always used to ask for me, you know, or Woody [Woody Allen], I mean, I mean, you just think about, you think about people who you just think, oh, my god, never. Those things don't happen too often anymore unless you're, you know, you're trying to come on, you're trying, like you said, what was the word you said? Speaker 1: Opportunists. Speaker 2: Opportunists? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: So, it's very hard in that sort of sense to become the Andres again. It's really hard because it's a, and he also, he automatically, he learned French, he speaks it. I mean he lives and he could, he, he, he has such a knowledge about how he sees things. He has such a desire for chandeliers. He can go and shop chandeliers--who does things like that? He is, this, this brings a certain authentic style and knowledge other people want to be around. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: And so, a society woman would want to hang out with you, you know. These kids don't come up like that anymore. They got their iPhones, missy, (laughter), not their BlackBerries anymore. They've changed the game. So, they're stuck in a, in a technology. I really do, I really would suggest that, I would suggest anyone if they're interested in the word (air quotes) fashion, then let's go behind the scenes. Let's try and see if you could maybe consider being a stylist. If you really love, don't go knocking yourself out making clothes 'cause it, 'cause it, there are a lot of kids out there now doing that. And I don't know how lucrative is. I just don't want, you know, it's terrible to say this, and maybe the reason why I want to even document those that are there, or I keep discovering even more people that are around is, like people who even cast things that are dark, you know. I mean, I just said to my casting coordinator--I said, "I want to make sure I interview you, too, for--," 'cause he's a lovely Panamanian boy who's, who's determined to win at this, but it, in general, it's kind of a difficult game. And I don't, and what I want to say is that I don't encourage anyone to come into this industry. I think it's completely (makes sound) hard core. It's a hard game, and they're going to come anyway 'cause you can't stop them, you can't say, "You do this," (gesture). They're coming faster, so the fact of it is they want in. They're so impressed with it all. They really are. I mean, it's, it's, you see it. I look at a lot of reality shows right now, especially 'cause I'm curious, you know, I've always looked at a lot of television, but I look at a lot just to see how they, all are repositioning themselves and it, and how they become famous just 'cause they're on TV, you know. So, and, and it's real interesting, like the basketball--not the basketball, that's, that's a horrible one--'Hollywood Exes,' now that's a good one and it's all women who've been married to somebody. And they're all nice girls. They're not trying to hit each other (laughter). I don't know when it has to happen at some point, I guess, 'cause they think it all--but I'm just saying how it all--this is what's going on now. Everybody, and everybody feels they can be on TV. Speaker 1: Right, that's right. But, yeah, and everybody likes to be around things beautiful, too. That's true, that'll never change. Speaker 2: And it's true. And you're so right to say that-- Speaker 1: That'll never change. Speaker 2: --because everyone feels that way, and they feel that they feel that they need to really do it. Story_ID: 649389 Speaker 1: So what do you want your legacy to be? Speaker 2: Oh, no, that's not the question. You know, someone asked me that once--oh, no, you didn't Julieanna [Julieanna Richardson]. No, I have to say, honestly, that--wow. That's a--I've never been able to answer that. I, I, you know, that's a, I don't think you, I honestly don't think, and maybe it's incorrect, but I don't honestly think that you think what your legacy would be. I think you just do and there, your legacy is. You know, I, I mean, but there are people because they're more corporate than I, that they know what their legacy--they want it to be. And some people, when they hear that, they think it means a certain thing and they just give you their words. I don't know what that is. I just think you do the, you do the work, and it shall follow. Story_ID: 649390 Speaker 1: How would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Oh, definitely, I just want them to remember. I, I just (laughter), I just, I'd like them to remember, just if they could, and if they don't remember, it's no problem (laughter). I mean, you know, you just want them to remember that, you know, I know they'll know that, that, you know, you tried to make a difference. And then, you wanted to make sure that the world was round, not flat, and that the world as you see it, you see the people that you walked on the street is in it, and businesses that you, that you so happened to appreciate. I'd like for the young women learn how to cook, and how to take care of their men. And I want the young men to understand that she's going to get very upset by a lot of things, try to figure out how to make her not upset (laughter). I'd like to teach the world how to really just go through the motions of getting along with each other. But definitely, I would want to be remembered for the fact that I definitely made, tried to make a difference. I mean, I know that'll happen because I've been doing it so long, but trying to make a difference, or standing up when there's reason to. You know, there's no, like I'm not going to get anything out of it, you know. I'm not going to get money, or my models are not going to work more, or, you know, that's what Iman always tells me. That's, that's why she never understands why I do it because she always appreciates that I do it when other people are doing it with me. They're models or they're model agencies, like they have something to gain, she feels. But I have nothing to gain, she always says to me--well, when I think I have the gain, is that it'll be different. So, you know, you just hope. I don't, I don't have a good answer for that--I wish I did. I, I, I never was able to figure out how you want to be remembered, or what is your legacy. Those are two things that are so big to me--that's bigger than any question that you asked 'cause it's, it's when you become shy, you know, you don't know how to, because it's almost setting something up to be and-- Speaker 1: But you answered it. Speaker 2: I did? Oh, good (laughter), good. Speaker 1: (Laughter) It's okay (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Is it? Speaker 1: --the way you did. Speaker 2: Well, good. Speaker 1: You know, because you said that you don't have anything. It's almost like leaving the planet in a better way, you know. I mean, you don't have, you know, not agendas, no opportunism. Story_ID: 649391 Speaker 1: You're supposed to give the, the--if you can name that. Can you name that? If you can't (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, shoot, I can do my best-- Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: Oh, this is horrible. Speaker 1: (Laughter) I'm sorry, this is (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Why did I bring this picture out? Speaker 1: No, this is not the place to be. Speaker 2: Okay, let me see. This is like, okay, oh shit. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): I'm getting rid of some glare here. Speaker 1: Oh shit, oh, what's her name, oh, dear. Okay, let me go real fast--Cindy, Cynthia [ph.]-- Speaker 2: No, from left to right or front to back. Speaker 1: From left to right, Karla-- Speaker 2: Or front to back. Speaker 1: --I'm not, some things, I may not--Karla Otis, Kersti Bowser, Veronica Webb. Speaker 2: No, but are you at the top or the bottom? Speaker 1: Oh, the bottom, fuck. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Start here. Speaker 1: Yes, that's where I started, that's what I want. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: Okay. Bottom is Karla Otis, Kersti Bowser, Veronica Webb, Karen Alexander, Naomi Campbell, Cynthia Bailey. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, second row. Speaker 1: (Unclear), okay. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Unclear) across the middle. Say, I don't remember. Speaker 1: I, I, it'll come to me in a little while, but I don't remember for the moment--Tyra Banks, Roshumba Williams. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, and in the background. Speaker 1: I--it'll come to me in a minute (laughter). Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: Phina Oruche, Gail O'Neill, [HistoryMaker] Bethann Hardison, Iman, and Peggy Dillard [Peggy Dillard Toone]. Speaker 2: Okay, keep (unclear). Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: That's a crazy old picture. Why I put that up there, that means, I really (unclear). I don't know why I did that. Speaker 1: The year? Speaker 2: No, that's Bethann Hardison. You can take that away right away (laughter). Speaker 1: Tell me year. Speaker 2: Oh, the year? I'll make something up--1974. Speaker 1: You know, that's-- Speaker 2: You could take, can you take that to pass it off at? Speaker 1: Yes, I can, you know, that's history. Speaker 2: Yeah, I forgot (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Unclear) that's why we have it. That's why my dates were (unclear). Speaker 2: That's right. I forgot. That's the whole point, right? Oh, my gosh. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): That's right in here. Speaker 2: Oh, my goodness. I'm making things up as I go. Well, you see, where that, where that was, right? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Unclear). That's as it-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah man. Okay, let me see, that had to have been, oh, man, what's six years from now? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Two thousand seven [2007]. Speaker 2: Okay, 2009. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Oh, and that's really tough, right. I'm going to say that's '65 [1965], '66 [1966]. Speaker 1: And taken by-- Speaker 2: Bruce Weber. Speaker 1: Ninety [1990], 1992, taken by Telford Gunderson [ph.]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): I keep getting-- Speaker 2: Glares? I think I'm making up-- Speaker 1: So, no, no one is, has done it, and I don't think anyone's (unclear) to do it. Speaker 2: No, 'cause, you know, someone, I, I don't think anyone cares enough, and people are too busy. Speaker 1: But-- Speaker 2: It has to be someone's issue, you know, like it's your issue. Speaker 1: In spite of (unclear) to get them. No, because that, that, isn't that a travesty? Speaker 2: And that's, and that is-- Speaker 1: And then, people start making things up, too. Speaker 2: What's--1965, I guess, the same thing. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Looks like the same shoot. Speaker 2: It is. That's Bruce Weber. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And look on the back of that one. See, I think it says something. Speaker 1: This is '87 [1987]. Speaker 2: Oh, thank god, I would have guessed anything. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): It's the same by (unclear). Speaker 2: That's Bruce's brother's name on the back of that? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Um-hm. Speaker 2: Oh, far out. Are you mixing all that now? Speaker 1: Me? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Am I mixing them? Speaker 2: I think-- Speaker 1: Oh, should I not? I mean-- Speaker 2: I don't know how you would--you had a system before, I don't know. Speaker 1: I do know that I started the (unclear). Speaker 2: Oh, Lord. Speaker 1: I did mix them (laughter). Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I thought I could put the (unclear). (Laughter) Fine, when you were just saying that. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Oh, we're done. Speaker 2: I think, I think I'll do this. Let me help you (laughter). Speaker 1: I got to give up to sit and talk. Speaker 2: Okay, that's true. Oh, that's same time as that other photograph I just, the one with the (unclear), Telford Gunderson. That was the same day, 1992. I'm going to guess. I like this camera. That was for a magazine. That's up there. Speaker 1: Did you connect? Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Oh, this is Stockholm, Sweden--here you go. This is me and Malou [Malou Hansson]. Speaker 2: M-A--- Speaker 1: M-A-L-O-U, and Bethann. Speaker 2: It's in Stockholm, Sweden. Speaker 1: In Stockholm, Sweden in nineteen ninety--1973, '4 [1974], '5 [1975], something like that, your guess. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: It's in the street of New York [New York]. This is Bethann, of course. And it's Charles Tracy photographer, and that had to be like '65 [1965], '66 [1966]. Speaker 2: Well, I put '71 [1971] on there, look at that. That's not true though. Speaker 1: Nineteen seventy-four [1974]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): You and-- Speaker 2: Right, you have to-- Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. That's Bethann Hardison. I was waiting, I'm sorry, Bethann Hardison and Andre Leon Talley in New York. Speaker 2: Oh, my god. That's got to be, tell me, there's a date on that one. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): There must be (unclear). Speaker 2: They'll never see (unclear). Speaker 1: October something by the top. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): October 1974. Speaker 1: There you go. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): So, that would have been shot in what--August? Speaker 1: No, but why not, what was this, this was a cover? Speaker 2: Cover of Essence magazine. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Unclear), I'll get another shot for this (unclear). Speaker 2: Oh, so you're just actually being accurate about when it was actually shot? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Ah, yeah, that's right. Usually, it's three months, right, three months before. Oh, and this is, this is the actual panel discussion that we had talking about the, the invisible, the invisible consumer. We had Mark Green [Mark J. Green] who was the--do you see him over there? Speaker 1: You want to go down the line? Speaker 2: Do I need to? Speaker 1: Yes, you do. Speaker 2: Okay. That's Tyra, shocking us all, as you tell by looks on our face. Have to take an opportunity--Kersti Bowser. Behind Kersti is Phina Oruche. Next to Kersti is Roshumba. And next to Roshumba is Gail O'Neill, then Bethann Hardison, then Naomi Campbell, then (laughter) look where everybody is so shocked, Veronica Webb. Then, it's Mark Green, who was the commissioner of consumer affairs at the time, and Iman at the end. At the top is Phina Oruche. Next to her is Cynthia Bailey, and next to the next girl up, her name will come to me which I don't know why, once they--next to that is Karla Otis with the hat on. And the next girl will come to me, so there's two names that left me. And then, Karen Alexander. Okay, I'll figure that out. Speaker 1: This is the, the Mirabella magazine, Bethann Hardison. Is any dates on this (laughter)? Speaker 2: That's 1986 [1986]? Speaker 1: I wrote that? Yeah, that's true. Speaker 2: Oh, it says '87 [1987] or '88 [1988]. Speaker 1: Yeah. That's Mirabella magazine. That's when Grace Mirabella left Vogue and started her own magazine. Speaker 2: That was a, that was the last WilliWear [WilliWear Ltd.] show. Speaker 1: Oh, really? The, the-- Speaker 2: And that was his best friend and me. Speaker 1: Ohh, okay. That's my best friend, one of my best friends right now, Rosemary Peck. Speaker 2: Well, see, but he wasn't sick then? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: Do you know what year? Oh, 1980. Speaker 1: There you go. I must had the right to stand for a reason. Speaker 2: Your (unclear) marked nicely on the (unclear). Speaker 1: Yeah, because that wasn't because of you. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: That was somebody else needed that information. That's in Brazil. Speaker 2: Okay, oops. This is 1976. Speaker 1: Okay. That makes sense. Bethann and that was in, in Leblon, the beach of Leblon [Leblon Beach] in, near Copacabana, in Rio de Janeiro [Brazil]. And that's, that's me and Magic and Cookie and Audrey Smaltz [HistoryMaker Audrey Lavinia Smaltz]--Magic Johnson, Cookie Johnson, and Audrey Smaltz--me being given an award that's up there. I don't know what date. It's up there somewhere. You see any, you see any date in the back of that one? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, I'll tell you that. Whenever I got that, wait, I'll go get it. Oh, yeah. Well, anyway, I'll tell you after, should I? Okay, I'll tell you. Maybe I should get that at the end. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Where is it? Where's your (simultaneous)--? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, it's up there. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): I can have a look. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Unclear). Speaker 1: It's the one that's-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): In the frame? Speaker 1: No, the one that's right--see that, the, the--not that one, it's not that one, wait. It's, it's that, yeah, it's next to the, it's next to the big ball, crystal, and the one that's all the way in the right. It's the one in the middle. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): This one here? Speaker 1: No, go all the way down the middle, go all the way down, keep going, you know. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Behind the ball? Speaker 1: Behind the ball, but look on the right hand side. Move your, you see it's another crystal one. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Yeah, this one? Speaker 1: Yes, I think that's the one. Do you see a date? It's hard to see. Does it say? Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): No, no date. Speaker 1: Yeah, it's on there 'cause I wrote it for somebody. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Yeah, there's no year (unclear). Speaker 1: I think they didn't. I think I made it up when I was writing for your, your thing. But that's, that's the Magic Johnson one, right? Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Right. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, I thought that I had--I remember going up there and saying, oh, my god, they don't have a date on that. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. (Unclear). Speaker 1: Okay. This one (unclear). Okay, just can't see it. Speaker 2: Oh, you have it in your bag? It should be. Speaker 1: No (laughter). Speaker 2: No? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Go on, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, 'cause you just, you're just using it. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And this is, this is, this is, oh, Bethann Hardison and Kadeem Hardison, thank you, I'm sorry, think of the name where it was, and it's-- Speaker 1: K-A-D-E-E-M. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. And that was his, winning his first award for 'A Different World' and that was the er- what is that--the New York, what is it? Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: NAACP Awards [NAACP Image Awards]. Story_ID: 649392 Speaker 1: You can turn that on the back 'cause Bill Cunningham--I just noticed that last night, he wrote on the back of that, and he put the date. That was at Michael Jackson awards (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Simultaneous) February 1984. Speaker 1: Yeah, that was the Michael Jackson, that was the Michael Jackson thing. Speaker 2: This is the Stockholm. Speaker 1: Stockholm, Stockholm, that's Sighsten Herrgard on my right, and Bethann in the middle, and the gentleman whose name I don't recall, but if you look at, yeah. Do you have a date on that in, in the back? Did I write any dates for any reason? Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Unclear). Speaker 1: We used to send me, oh, a choice on the thing. Speaker 2: And that's Bethann photographed by Pamela Hanson at Naomi's [Naomi Campbell] twenty-first birthday. Now, she's forty-two now, forty-three, so how many years were those. Well, look on the back to see if I wrote a note on that. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Oh, it was twenty-one years ago. Speaker 2: Twenty-one years ago is 1987? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Ninety-seven [1997]? Speaker 2: Ninety-seven [1997]. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Ninety-seven [1997] (unclear). Ninety-two [1992], you're right, (unclear). Speaker 2: Yeah. So, that's, that's [HistoryMaker] Bethann Hardison in Paris [France] in 1984 photographed by Arthur Elgort in (unclear). And this is also by Arthur. Speaker 1: That is 1985. Speaker 2: Okay, that's what I said (laughter). And this is by Arthur Elgort, Bethann Hardison. Look on the back of that, look and see in the back of that for the date. Any date? Speaker 1: No more date, oh, wait a minute, '90 [1990]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Oh, '90 [1990]. Speaker 1: Ninety [1990]. Speaker 2: Okay, 1990. Speaker 1: And that's Leblon [Leblon Beach] in, in Rio de Janeiro in, in Brazil and it's the same time the other one, which was about 1973, '74 [1974], (unclear), I, you could pick a date (laughter). I was living there between those three years, back and forth. Oh, this is really hard. See, how skinny I was, like it was totally not cool. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): That (unclear). Speaker 1: I tell you, I'm a baby. That was Bethann in a Clovis Ruffin show, gee whiz, help me. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Nineteen sixty-eight [1968]. Speaker 1: Yeah. That one had to be like 19--1970-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Nope, '68 [1968]. Speaker 1: No, that one, yeah, I'm sorry. This is Bethann Hardison, unknown photographer, 1968. I was going to give her, I was going to give you a date for the other one. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Yep. Speaker 1: Oh, this is so great. I just can't believe that I even liked this photograph, but I do. Speaker 2: You don't like that? Speaker 1: I like it very much. I've never shown it to anyone but you and my assistant-- Speaker 2: Oh, no (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) 'cause I'm going to use it for the future. Speaker 2: You should--it's beautiful. Speaker 1: Yeah, which is, a Ger- a girl who lives in Germany came and photographed me for a show, and I made the show. Speaker 2: Oh, oh, that's-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE). That's 2011. Speaker 2: Okay. At least you know that, huh? She put a right answer. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Yeah. Speaker 2: I said, crazy picture. I don't know why I put that one in there either. That's, I was looking for the--that's Bethann Hardison in Paris, photographed by Pelito Gonzalez [sic. Pelito Galvez]. Speaker 1: How do you spell that? Speaker 2: P-E-L-I-T-O Gonzalez, G-O-N-Z-A-L-E-Z [sic.]. Speaker 1: Okay. Did you do this-- Speaker 2: We did this already. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, sorry, I just repeat accidentally. Oh, is that okay to put those little ones in? Speaker 1: Yep. Speaker 2: I got to put more then. Oh, this is Bethann with a family of Dudu, D-U-D-U in Brazil, from a wedding that we were in. We were all attending at his, his parents' house. That had been looking in the back of that. I think the mother wrote something to me. See if she put a note, a date, a date on it. Speaker 1: Yeah, there's-- Speaker 2: I don't know. I'd be guessing, seventy something, anywhere between '72 [1972] and '75 [1975]. Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But did you see who was in it? Speaker 2: Well, the people is Dudu and his mother and his brother and his girlfriend. But Dudu, I didn't say who it was. You're right. Speaker 1: How do you spell it? Speaker 2: Dudu, I spelt, D-U-D-U. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She, she--we didn't do that yet, we didn't do that one yet. Speaker 1: Oh, you didn't also? Speaker 2: No. That's Bethann and Tyson [Tyson Beckford] in the early days of Tyson, so that had to have been twenty-two years ago when I had discovered him. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): In '93 [1993]. Speaker 2: Yeah, you think? Yeah, that's about--don't, don't, yeah. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Unclear). Speaker 2: Yeah, that's about right. Speaker 1: Oh-- Speaker 2: Yeah, oh, yeah, because Leonard's [ph.] on that film, oh, yeah, great, thank you. That's about right. And that's me, my son, and my son's dad at his high school graduation. Thank god, we got him out! Speaker 1: Wait, your son's and his, his-- Speaker 2: His father. Oh, my son, this is Bethann Hardison, Kadeem Hardison, and Donald McFadden. And the year of his graduation which is high school. Shoot, I don't know. And then, that's Bethann Hardison sitting in a bar in Brooklyn [New York], thinking that if I put my friend's, my mother's glasses, my brother's girlfriend's glasses on, that they would think I was a grown up. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Laughter). Speaker 2: And they snuck me in the back. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: Could you believe that I believed that in my storm coat? Speaker 1: That is cute (unclear). Speaker 2: I was seven years old. Speaker 1: What, seven years-- Speaker 2: No, I was nine, seven, between seven and nine, I think. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): So cute. Speaker 2: I told--my mother [Sophie Hudson Hardison] said she was a (unclear) man 'cause we, we ain't going home. Now, don't, that you got, well, you have to tell the story with these photographs. Speaker 1: Yes, you do. Speaker 2: This is a story, this is the, the, this is a photograph of myself dancing with the president, Gerald Ford [President Gerald Rudolph Ford, Jr.], who came to ask me to dance at this--oh, god, I was a wreck. I couldn't believe how scared I was, but what's so interesting about it, the secretary sent it to [HistoryMaker] Judith Jamison, and she had been there the year before, assumed it was her, sent it to her, and it was in the belongings of, of-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION). Speaker 2: --the belongings of Alvin Ailey (background noise). Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Is that it? Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: One more, oops, I'm sorry. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: It's good timing, fellows. Okay. Now, did I, I, I didn't talk properly about something. She's moving fast. Anyway, it doesn't matter. Speaker 2: (Unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I don't know, something happened. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): President Gerald Ford. Speaker 1: Oh, you should tell the whole story. Speaker 2: Yeah, but that's right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And Alvin Ailey, the phone rang. That was the air condition people. Yeah, how they thought it was Judith Jamison, so they sent it and they, and the, one of the heads of the Alvin Ailey corporation [Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater] found that amongst Alvin's things, that Alvin had already passed. And she knew me, so she sent--, "That's not, that's Bethann." But over there, it was confusion but that's nice. That was a great, that was a great night. I was--they opened to start the whole dance, the first time we've ever gone to the president. Of course, nobody goes there but once. He come, as it goes into the, they walk into the big room, and then he, he just starts walking towards me, so. And, and I remember (unclear) told me, she'd gone two years before and she said, you know, I, they gonna, "He's probably going to ask you to dance." I said, the president, wasn't President Ford then, "He's not going to ask me to dance." He walks right towards me and I couldn't believe. I said, "Well, he's got to be calling to a lady behind me." Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Laughter). Speaker 2: And he said, and he took my hand and I said this, as he's pulling me and I've tried to keep my heels in the, in the ground, I said, "No, no, no," (laughter). Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Unclear). Speaker 2: He just act like he didn't hear me, yeah. That was great. Speaker 1: (Unclear) I think, yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But what about her, her-- Speaker 2: The last one? You put to put my granddaughter in? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Those are the little, oh, that's cool, that's--I've used that picture. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Yeah, we can see it. Speaker 2: Yeah, that picture's cool. That's a little, that's a little picture of Sophia [Hardison's granddaughter, Sophia Hardison]. I took her to San Diego [California] to La Jolla to learn to surf so that had to be when she was nine years old (simultaneous)...