 Story_ID: 611867 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Adrian Jackson, observing is Scott Stearns. Ma'am, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Yes, it's Lynn, L-Y-N-N, Jones, J-O-N-E-S, Huntley, H-U-N-T-L-E-Y [HistoryMaker Lynn Jones Huntley]. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: One, twenty-four, forty-six [January 24, 1946] in Petersburg, Virginia. Speaker 1: Okay. And, ma'am, what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I am the president of the Southern Education Foundation [Atlanta, Georgia], and a lawyer by training. Speaker 1: And what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is the 26th of August, 2005. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Which has been an issue today for-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) We're at the offices of HistoryMakers in Atlanta [Georgia], 515 Auburn Avenue. Speaker 1: All right. Thank you. Story_ID: 611868 Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight, ice-breaking questions we normally ask, and they only require a short answer. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: The first one is, do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Yes, barbecue of any type. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Blue. Speaker 1: A favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: I think Christmas. Speaker 1: All right. Do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Hilton Head [South Carolina]. Speaker 1: All right. And the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Well, one of my favorite phrases is by a Brazilian woman, whose name is Benedita da Silva, who says, may my enemies live long so that they may know my victory. Story_ID: 611869 Speaker 1: Now I'm going to ask about your family history. I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Lawrence N. Jones] side. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But we'll start with your mother's side. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Yes, my mother's name was Mary, M-A-R-Y, Ellen, E-L-L-E-N, Cooley, C-O-O-L-E-Y. And she was born in Marion, Virginia. Speaker 1: What is the year of her birth and or birthdate? Speaker 2: Let's see. She died in 2003, and she was eighty-two at the time, so whatever that is by subtraction is her birth year. Speaker 1: Okay. Nineteen twenty-one [1921], I guess, yeah. Speaker 2: Nineteen twenty-one [1921]. Speaker 1: Okay. Now what do you know about your ancestors on your mother's side of the family? How far back can you trace those ancestors? Speaker 2: Well, I think my mother would be able to trace her ancestors back probably to her grandfather level and not much beyond that. My mother's grandfather, I believe, was a white man who married a, a Native American woman. And then my mother's mother [Rosa Bruce Cooley], no, that's my grandfather's side of the family, excuse me. My mother's side of the family can only go back as far as her grandmother. We don't know who the father of my mother's mother was. And so her, my mother's grandmother was a washer woman who lived in Roanoke, Virginia. And my mother's father [Charles Cooley] came from Virginia also, and I just started to tell you a little bit about his genealogy but there are gaps in this as you can see. Speaker 1: Okay. So, as far back as you can go is your grandmother? Speaker 2: On my mother's side (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) On your mother's side? Speaker 2: --as far back as I can go is my mother's grandmother. Speaker 1: Oh, your mother, okay. So this is your great-grandmother. Speaker 2: My mother's grandmother whose name was Rosa Bruce-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and who lived in Roanoke, Virginia. I do not know-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --who my grandmother's father was. Speaker 1: Okay. So Rosa Bruce was your great-grandmother (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Correct. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 611870 Speaker 1: Are there any stories that are passed down from that side of the family? Speaker 2: Oh, yes, there are wonderful stories about Rosa Bruce. Apparently she was a very proud woman who was very active in her church and very outspoken. And my mother [Mary Ellen Cooley Jones] tells the story of how, when they were walking down the street, her mother would say, her, her grandmother would say, "Pull your shoulders back, you don't have anything to be ashamed of." And so, she instilled a great sense of pride in them. They also tell the story of how she was trying to get a new boyfriend. And she apparently had met some man through the mail and he was going to come and visit her. And but she didn't know exactly when and she was cleaning up the house and she had always worn men's clothes around the house and men's shoes, smoked a corncob pipe and that kind of thing. And so this man came to the door and he said, "I'm here to see Miss Rosa Bruce." And she said, "Well who are you?" And he told her. And she said, "Oh, just a moment I'll get Miss Bruce." And then she went upstairs and pinned on her hair and put on her dress and came down stairs and said, "Hello, I'm Miss Bruce." And so she was apparently quite a character but a very, very much beloved person in our family. And my brother's [Rodney Bruce Jones] middle name is named after her, Rosa Bruce. And here's an interesting coincidence, her name is Rosa Bruce and my father's [Lawrence N. Jones] grandmother's name was Rosa Bruce. Speaker 1: Two, just two different people with the same-- Speaker 2: Same name. Story_ID: 611871 Speaker 1: Are you related to any of the famous Bruces, like Roscoe Conkling Bruce or John Edward Bruce or-- Speaker 2: Not that I'm aware of. I--that part of the family is really, I don't know what the genealogy would be. It-- Speaker 1: Blanche K. Bruce is another. Speaker 2: Yeah, it is, it is reputed that the, the Cooley side, which is my [maternal] grandfather's [Charles Cooley] side that you'll remember there are a number of people who are Cooleys who claim to be descendants of [President] Thomas Jefferson. Now whether or not that is true remains to be seen, but it's interesting that one of the principal people whose name is Cooley who has claimed relationship to Thomas Jefferson is someone we've never met. His name is Thomas Cooley [ph.], but it's not that common, uncommon a name rather so-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --who knows? Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Any other stories? Speaker 2: About Grandma [Rosa] Bruce? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Now she was, she was born, I guess, do you know when, when she was born? Speaker 2: I do not. Speaker 1: Was she born, I-- Speaker 2: I don't think that she had been-- Speaker 1: --well she, I know she, she, she hadn't been a slave, right-- Speaker 2: I don't think she had been a slave. Speaker 1: She was probably the generation after (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But on my father's [Lawrence N. Jones] side-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --there is a memory of his grandmother having been a slave. But I'm not aware that Grandma Bruce was. And again, because I don't know her mother and father's story, that it's-- Speaker 1: Yeah, I think she's the generation after that slave generation. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I, I just don't know. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My mother [Mary Ellen Cooley Jones] wrote a lot of this material down as best she could, but there were lots of gaps in it. Speaker 1: Okay. Any stories about your grandmother [Rosa Bruce Cooley]? Speaker 2: Well, my mother's mother died when I was an infant. So I really didn't get a chance to meet her. By everyone's account, she was a very kind and generous woman who worked hard in the household, had graduated from normal school which was quite remarkable for African Americans in that generation. And she had four children, she died of a massive stroke when she was a relatively young woman, and all I know is that she was much beloved and apparently a very kind and good mother. Story_ID: 611872 Speaker 1: Did your mother [Mary Ellen Cooley Jones] talk about growing up, what life was like for her when she grew up? Speaker 2: Oh, yes. My mother, and matter of fact my father [Lawrence N. Jones] is really the, the historical memory of my mother's hometown because apparently there were lots of people who were great characters in her hometown. Marion, Virginia is a small, very tiny place. And it is among other things home to the state insane asylum [Southwestern State Hospital; Southwestern Virginia Mental Health Institute, Marion, Virginia], or at least it was at that time. And so my mother can recall, you know, people talking about the insane asylum up the street and what would happen if someone got away. She also talked quite a bit about race relations in the town. You know, they lived on a fairly integrated street, but still the color lines were very well observed. And apparently when one of my mother's brothers was born, a white woman, whose children played with my mother and her brothers and sisters and all that, came and brought her child and told my [maternal] grandmother [Rosa Bruce Cooley] that they were there because she wanted her daughter to see the baby's tail. So it shows you just how ignorant, even though people could have interpersonal relationships as children playing, the old racial mythology was still very deeply entrenched in that time. My mother went back to her high school reunions that they have had every year. She went to Pendleton High School [ph.]. And she had three brothers and sisters. They had a very good, apparently happy childhood. Her father [Charles Cooley] was a brick mason and all of her brothers became brick masons, although they later went on to do other things. They lived in a house of which they were proud, right in front of a, a creek, but they owned their house. And I don't know it was apparently unremarkable but happy childhood. Speaker 1: Okay. Now did your mother have a chance to, now, now did she have a chance to go to college, too? Speaker 2: Yes. My mother graduated from Virginia State [College for Negroes; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia]. And, as a matter of fact, one of her brothers, James B. Cooley, who went on to be a school principal and to head up one of the Prince Edward [County, Virginia] Freedom Schools, during the time when the schools were closed down there because of the reaction to desegregation, went and worked at Saint Paul's [Saint Paul's College, Lawrenceville, Virginia], as well, the historically black college [HBCU]. My uncle, Charlie Bruce [Charles Bruce Cooley], did not go to college. He was a brick mason and lived in Washington, D.C. My mother's sister, Rosa Jean [Cooley], went to college for one year, but she did not graduate. She worked for many years in the post office and then retired and lives in Washington, D.C. My mother's brother, Douglas [Cooley], was a school principal in Charlotte Court House, Virginia, all of his life. And presently I only have two, oh, my mother's younger brother, Vassar [Cooley], there were six of them, my mother's younger brother, Vassar, passed away, but he served in the [U.S.] military with distinction, and he also graduated from Virginia State. Speaker 1: Through World War II [WWII], right, I guess? Speaker 2: Yeah. Oh, Korean War. Speaker 1: Korean War, okay. Story_ID: 611873 Speaker 1: Give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Okay. My father's full name is Lawrence, L-A-W-R-E-N-C-E, Neale, N-E-A-L-E, Jones, J-O-N-E-S. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: And he was born in 1921 as well in Moundsville, West Virginia. Speaker 1: Okay. And what do you know about the ancestors on your father's side? Speaker 2: We can't go back very far in that ancestry either. We do know that my father's mother's, whose name was Rosa Bruce, mother's mother, so her grandmother, my father's great-grandmother, was a slave. And they do tell that apparently in Mooresville, West Virginia, they do tell the story of how after slavery was, the Emancipation Proclamation, that the master of the plantation where she was working told her that she could stay on, and her daughter, and that he would pay them wages. And she was reputed to have said, "The top rail is on the bottom, and I'm taking my daughter home," and they left. And, but, my grandmother really was very quiet all of her life about her lineage, I don't know who her father was. It's reputed--it may have been some white man from a neighboring farm, but no one's knows, she would never talk about it. And she was a very lovely woman, who also graduated from normal school. I don't know the name of the school but she was well educated for her time. And she lived all of her life in Moundsville, West Virginia, which is a small town, home to the West Virginia State Prison [West Virginia State Penitentiary] and the great and famous Indian [Native American] burial mound [Grave Creek Mound]. Speaker 1: Thus the name Moundsville. Speaker 2: Moundsville, hence the name. And it was a mining town, coal mining town, for industry for most of the, the time. It was near Wheeling, West Virginia. Story_ID: 611874 Speaker 1: My father's [Lawrence N. Jones] father was orphaned and raised by his--young--and raised by his sister. And he also graduated from normal school, don't know the name. He worked as a traveling salesman, selling vegetables on circuit, apparently, in West Virginia, before he met my grandmother, and they married. And when they married, he managed to save enough money to open up a grocery store, which was one of those old time grocery stores. I have fond memories of it with the Easter flowers in the window, and big barrels of beans and other kinds of things. There was a side that had candy that I liked to go and visit and take candy, and put it in a bag and he never fussed at me for stealing his candy out of the store. So my grandfather operated that store all of his life, but he really supported his family by doing income taxes and being a notary public for most of the small businesses in the town [Moundsville, West Virginia]. So he had high intelligence. And even when I went to law school [Columbia Law School, New York, New York] and was very proud of what I was learning, I was taking an honors course in income taxation, and I went back to West Virginia, and I was talking with my grandfather, there was nothing that I could tell him about the Internal Revenue Code that he didn't know just from his years of practice doing taxes for people in the town. Both my mother's--my grandmother and my grandfather were very devoted members of the church, was an A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church, I can remember it with the light bulbs on the, the cross in the, the church. It was a low income church plus again it was a fairly small black population, there weren't very many churches there. But I can still see my grandfather in my mind's eye leading Sunday school. And we had lots of fond memories there in the summer times going and spending time at, at their house and going to the store and going to the Dairy Queen and going to the movies and running around. And I started first grade in Moundsville [West Virginia] at a one-room schoolhouse. Story_ID: 611875 Speaker 1: Well tell us about your father [Lawrence N. Jones], and what did he say about growing up and, and where did he go to school and-- Speaker 2: Well, my father had a wonderful life because he had great parents and he had three wonderful siblings. He had a brother whose name was Eugene [Wayman Jones]. He had a sister named Helen [Jones Duffey]. And he had a sister named Mary [ph.]. Helen, Eugene, and dad all went to West Virginia State College [sic. Eugene Wayman Jones attended Bluefield State Teachers College; Bluefield State College, Bluefield, West Virginia], and all of them graduated. My Uncle Eugene wrote the school song and, I believe, it is still the alma mater for West Virginia State, although it has been transformed from a predominantly black historical institution now almost to a predominantly white historical institution, but at that time it was definitely an all-black institution. And dad was the, fortunate to be there when Dr. John W. Davis was the president of West Virginia State [College; West Virginia State University, Institute, West Virginia]. And, of course, he is a very distinguished and well regarded historian and educator, and I had the pleasure years later of working with and getting to know Dr. Davis as well. But my dad's brother, his eldest brother, Eugene, got his doctorate in education from Temple [University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], lived in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] for most of his adult life, fought in World War II [WWII], was a musician and choir director by training, worked with low income kids on the South Side of Philadelphia for most of his life. And ultimately created an organization called Heritage House [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], which was designed to try to help the poor kids in his community have some sense of their history and culture. He organized a debutante ball for black people in Philadelphia. He had a great choral group. He really had a great artistic flare. He was a painter. And I still have some of the paintings that he did. A tremendously creative person. So that was my father's brother, and they were very close, but again very different because my father ultimately became more of a scholar and a theologian, so different strains, I guess, of talent. My father's eldest sister, Mary, married a man who was a sports coach at a high school in Wheeling [West Virginia]. She did not go to college. She had seven children, all of her children graduated from college. And she worked as a domestic but she had a beautiful, beautiful singing voice, was really involved in a lot of civic organizations in Wheeling. And worked for a number of years as the kind of nanny for a very wealthy, white Jewish family in Wheeling that, at her funeral, came and cried harder than the rest of us, they really had come to love my Aunt Mary, but she was a lovely woman and very, very pretty woman. Her, her early pictures the long curls that she had, she was just pretty as a picture. My Aunt Helen also graduated from West Virginia State at the time that dad was there she was there, they were closer in age. And she married a man who was a dentist, they moved to Toledo, Ohio. He was from California. And they lived there all of their lives and apparently had a very happy and good life. They had four children, one of whom is Eugene Duffey, who lives here in Atlanta [Georgia], and he has a sister named Kathy [Duffey Espy] who is a teacher, and Rosemary [ph.], who is a dentist, and Frankie [ph.], who is a social worker. And they were, my cousin married Ben Espy, who later went on to be a member of the state senate in Ohio [Ohio Senate] and ran unsuccessfully for mayor of Columbus [Ohio], but Ben Espy and Kathy Espy are my cousins, and we're very close. Story_ID: 611876 Speaker 1: My dad [Lawrence N. Jones] was the baby of this family. And he liked to play baseball when he was a kid, apparently for hours on end. He was always accused of rummaging through drawers and taking things apart. He was a very inquisitive little kid. He had a deep, deep sense of honor. If you talk to my father today, he will tell you that the guiding force in his life is that he always wanted to do things that would bring honor on his mother and his father. Particularly his father, who was a very moral and very kind and generous man, who treated everyone he met with great respect and dignity, and who embedded in my father the belief that every person, irrespective of station in life, is entitled to respect and regard. And so my grandfather was really the apple of my father's eye, and it shaped his character and his, his upbringing. Dad worked in the store during his summer times to earn extra money. And every day he carried his father's dinner up to the store, 'cause of course the store was kept late. Dad went to West Virginia State [College; West Virginia State University, Institute, West Virginia], he majored in American history. He played on the basketball team. He graduated with the highest average of any student who had gone to West Virginia State at that time. He got a scholarship, a Rosenwald [Fund] scholarship. Dr. [John W.] Davis told him one day that he had someone in his office he wanted him to meet. And dad came in, and there was this elderly woman sitting there and she talked to him for a little while, and she finally said, "Well I'm Lillian Smith." And he said, "Oh, I know your book, I've read your book 'Killers of the Dream' and everything you've written, Miss Smith, I have read." And they had a little conversation. And later on he--he learned that she had been there scouting for people to receive a scholarship. I believe, it was a Rosenwald scholarship, and dad went to the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] and got his master's degree in American history. Story_ID: 611877 Speaker 1: Then he [Huntley's father, Lawrence N. Jones] went to West Virginia to teach in a high school. And one of the--he probably would kill me for saying this--but one of the funniest stories we've laughed about for years is, my father was an English teacher and if you were to meet him today he speaks very well and he writes beautifully, he's just got clarity of articulation and capacity. And he said at the--he taught high school English, very poor, all segregated, black high school. And he really loved his students and when they, when he was getting ready to leave to go into the [U.S.] military, some of his students presented him with a gift at the assembly. And they came up and they, this one girl who was in his class, now this is the English teacher she's speaking to, she said, "Mr. Jones, we want to give this to you for all you have did for us." And my father said he felt like weeping, for all you have did, but he knew that the feeling was earnest and he had tried his best to help these students whom he, he loved. He went into the military, he was in the ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps], and that is how he came to be in Virginia State [College for Negroes; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia] in the ROTC program as one of the instructors. And it was there that he met my mother [Mary Ellen Cooley Jones] who was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Is this during the war? Speaker 1: Well, this is 1945. Speaker 2: Forty-five [1945], so it's right towards the end of World War II [WWII]-- Speaker 1: Well, he met her earlier than that, but they were married in 1945. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Because I was born in 1946. And then they fell in love, got married, I was born, then my father was shipped to Germany then, now the war is definitely ended. He was shipped to Germany. He was a captain in the Quartermaster Branch. And we later, my mother and I, joined him in Germany, in Baumholder, Germany, where I started first grade in the military school which was a newly desegregated school because of [President Harry S.] Truman's order desegregating the military. Story_ID: 611878 Speaker 1: After his [Huntley's father, Lawrence N. Jones] service in the [U.S.] military, we moved back to West Virginia while dad thought about what he wanted to do. And he decided to go into the ministry, he was about thirty-six years old. And so he started his education over again. And we moved to Oberlin, Ohio, where he ultimately got his bachelor of divinity degree, he was then admitted to Yale Divinity School [New Haven, Connecticut]. We were in New Haven [Connecticut] for two years. Dad worked at the National Biscuit Company [Nabisco] at night to support us. He had a scholarship, but it was not sufficient, and my mother [Mary Ellen Cooley Jones] worked in a nursery school. And then dad, we ran out of money, we moved to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], and my father worked for two years with the Student Christian Movement. Then he saved enough money to finish his dissertation, we went back to New Haven and lived there for another two years. And he got his doctorate in African American church history and has just written, at eighty-four, a tremendous book ['They Overheard the Gospel: The African American Religious Experience Prior to the Civil War,' Lawrence N. Jones] about the black religious experience in colonial America. And then dad went from there to-- Speaker 2: So he got a Ph.D. from--in African American church history (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) History from Yale. Speaker 2: --from Yale Divinity School. Speaker 1: Yale Divinity School. Speaker 2: About what year was this? Speaker 1: Oh, I would say it was in the late '50s [1950s], early '60s [1960s] because it was from there that we, Dr. Stephen [J. Wright], who was the president of Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee], his name has just slipped out of my mind, it'll come back to me, Dr. Stephen Wright, was then the president of Fisk, and he asked my dad to come and be the dean of chapel [Fisk Memorial Chapel] at Fisk. Story_ID: 611879 Speaker 1: Okay. So we left your father [Lawrence N. Jones] being invited to Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee]. Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Speaker 1: We were on 1961, I guess? Speaker 2: That's correct-- Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: --around 1961. So he went there to be the dean of the chapel [Fisk Memorial Chapel]. And, of course, that was in the real heyday of the civil rights era. And I'm sure my dad could tell you lots of stories of what was going on at the time. I have only impressions because I was a girl in high school for most of that time. I went to Pearl High School [Pearl-Cohn Entertainment Magnet High School], which was the segregated high school in Nashville [Tennessee] for two years. But back to my father's story. So dad was at Fisk for four years, and then he was asked to be the dean of students at Union Theological Seminary in New York [New York]. And he stayed there for a number of years, later becoming the dean of the faculty and then the acting president. And people often said to him, "Well, Dean Jones, why would you, when you were at the, one of the premier mainstream seminaries of the United States, why would you leave that to go to Howard Divinity School [Howard University School of Divinity, Washington, D.C.] after you had been at Union for like twelve years, why would you leave to go to Howard?" To which my father's reply that I've heard him make often is that he got tired of trying to put black people on the agenda at Union, at Howard they were the agenda. And so he went to the divinity school there, which really was a very small institution with very few students, and he managed to build it to the point where it had to move twice, now it has a beautiful new campus in Washington, D.C. I believe he was the dean of the divinity school, he raised millions of dollars to purchase the new property, he brought in, and really invested in the education today of some of the leading theologians who are African American through Howard. And he retired at age seventy-two from that position, and he lives in Washington, D.C. where he continues to write, he just completed a manuscript called 'They Overheard the Gospel[: The African American Religious Experience Prior to the Civil War,' Lawrence N. Jones] which is the story of black religious experience in colonial America. And we hope that that will soon be published. He's still doing counseling and preaching. And he is wiser and stronger and more powerful, I think, than at any other point in his life. So my dad has had a remarkable life and is still doing remarkable things. Story_ID: 611880 Speaker 1: Now he's [Huntley's father, Lawrence N. Jones] influenced a lot of people. You say he's, he was a teacher of [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr.] Calvin [O.] Butts and some of these-- Speaker 2: Calvin Butts. Matter of fact, dad spoke at Abyssinian [Baptist Church, New York, New York] just a couple of weeks ago, and Calvin acknowledged that my father was the person who introduced him to Sam Proctor [Samuel DeWitt Protor] and got Sam Proctor to accept Calvin to come and work there. Dad also has reached out and been a leading source of guidance for a lot of activist kinds of clergy like [Reverend Dr.] Gerald [L.] Durley or Paul Saddler [ph.] or Mark Dennis [ph.], there are a whole cadre of, of people. My father is a minister's minister. He's been interested primarily in the life of the church and in the religious education component. And so, he's not been interested so much in the theoretical aspects of religion as in the application of religion to life and community through the church, and that's his real passion, is the church and leadership. Speaker 1: Okay. Now what, what denomination is, is he associated with any particular denomination? Speaker 2: Well, my dad grew up in the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church in West Virginia. But after he got out of divinity school [Yale Divinity School, New Haven, Connecticut] he was ordained in, into the Evangelical and Reformed Church, which later joined with Congregational [Christian Churches] and other denominations to become the United Church of Christ. So dad is now a United Church of Christ affiliated pastor. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But he's not much one on strong doctrinal differences, he's really ecumenical in his, his outlook. Story_ID: 611881 Speaker 1: When you look at the personalities of your mother [Mary Ellen Cooley Jones] and father [Lawrence N. Jones], who do you think you take after the most or, or what aspects do you take after both of them? Speaker 2: Well, I think I take after both of them as a pretty good blend. My work ethic, my interest in things intellectual, my aspiration for education, and a kind of Type A personality, I guess, to try to always compete against your own personal best to do the very finest work you can in whatever place you find yourself, I probably take from my father. But my mother, whose story I haven't yet told, was a teacher in elementary school, and later she worked at a head start program in New York [New York], she also was a nursery school teacher. So my mother was a very perfect, warm, kind, nurturing mother. And she had deep compassion for poor children and a lot of love in her spirit, like my father, but she was not an intellectual by anyone's standard. She was very down to earth, very plain spoken, had a wonderful sense of humor, great wit. And I'll just give you an example of my mother's sense of humor so you will appreciate this. My brother [Rodney Bruce Jones] was interviewing my dad on tape and asking him to tell his life's story. And when they finished he said to my father, "Well, Dad, if you could spend the day with any person, living or dead, whom would you choose to spend the day with?" So my father thought for a moment, my brother thought he was going to say Jesus Christ or [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.], or Mahatma Gandhi or some great spiritual leader, and my father looked at him and said, "I'd choose to spend the afternoon with my father." So my brother said, "Really?" He said, "I thought you were going to say Jesus or," my father said, "I have Jesus with me every day; I miss my father." Now that was my father's reaction. So then my brother was interviewing my mother. And he said, "Mama, if you could spend the day with any person living or dead, whom would you choose?" And he thought she might say someone like Eleanor Roosevelt or Sojourner Truth, or Harriet Tubman or something like that. My mother thought for a moment, she said "Judge Joe Brown." He said "Judge Joe Brown?" She said, "Have you looked at Judge Joe Brown?" And which was so cute, it's typical of my mother. Story_ID: 611882 Speaker 1: Once in a restaurant, and it was a fairly fancy restaurant, and just my mother [Mary Ellen Cooley Jones] and father [Lawrence N. Jones] and I having dinner. And in the middle of the dinner, my mother said, "Free James Brown." I jumped, we turned, and we laughed, and I didn't even know she knew who James Brown was. And so later on, when James Brown got out of jail, I called my mother up, I said, "Well, Mama, I guess, you're happy, your boy got out of jail today, and James Brown is free." She said, "James Brown may be out of jail, but he is not yet free." So my mother had a kind of incisive wit and humor, and I hope that I have qualities of that. I look like my mother. If you were to see a picture of her, you would think that you were talking to my mother. And our hearts were broken when she died of a heart attack. She had--in 2003. She had not worked for a number of years but she was very much beloved by the people in her church, and she had a wonderful close circle of women friends. She was a mother to everyone in the family. And her youngest brother, my Uncle Vassar [Cooley], who had been ill, mentally ill most of his life, my mother took care of him, cared for him most of his life, and kept him really from a life of destitution and, and despair. And so she's a wonderful woman. And my Aunt Rosa Jean [Cooley], who still lives in Washington [D.C.], is very much like her. They're, they're a family full of good humor and lots of wit. So I think I take after both of my parents. I have a kind of, no respecter of persons, style inside of my personality that comes out on occasion. But I'm also like my dad. Story_ID: 611883 Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: I have a couple of early childhood memories. I don't know which would be the earliest. My earliest childhood memory is probably swinging on a swing, and swinging so high that I felt I was going to fall off on, and my friend and I were playing. And I also can remember getting my legs switched by my father [Lawrence N. Jones] when I was a child for leaving the yard, maybe I was around three or four, and we were going to go out, and he told me not to leave the yard. And I went down the street to see my friend, Joyce [ph.], and he came and got me and he switched my legs all the way up the street. And I can remember going into the house and running up and grabbing my mother [Mary Ellen Cooley Jones] around the, the legs and I looked up at her and she had just put some powder on her face and she looked so pretty, I do remember that. Others, early, early memories, I had a traumatic memory. When we were in Germany, and I was starting first grade, the [U.S.] military had only recently been desegregated, and we were living in integrated housing, and there was a little white boy whose name was Tommy [ph.] something. I would have been about six, six and a half because I started a little late because of the falling of my birthday. And we were coming home from school and he was chasing me calling me nigger. And he, I got to the front of the building where we lived, and he had a Coke bottle, and he threw the Coke bottle at me, and it crashed up against the thing, and I was terrified. Now that I remember very well. So for earliest memories, maybe they all had to do with trauma. I was afraid of falling off of the swing, my father switched me, and this kid threw that at me. I hadn't thought of the trauma element until just this moment, but maybe that's right. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 611884 Speaker 1: You lived in a variety of places, but what were some of the sights, and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Well, it's important to note that I was an only child until I was eleven, and then my brother was born. Now my brother is a very different personality too, talking about blends. My brother's name is Rodney Bruce Jones and he is a jazz musician in New York City [New York, New York], and he has had a very illustrious career. But for my early childhood, I just remember going to a lot of different schools because we moved a lot because of my father's [Lawrence N. Jones] pattern of going back to school and running out of money and going back to school. So I went to a variety of different kinds of school. I think the combination of high expectations that I would do well in school, and the fact that school became a kind of constant where I could do well and be accepted, made me love school. It was the kind of, sort of anchor for me as we moved around that I could go to school and I could do well and I would make friends and I would enjoy learning whatever it was, so that was a strand in it. But I had a typical kid's growing up. I looked forward to summertime when you could jump rope and ride a bicycle and play hopscotch for hours when we lived over in Oberlin [Ohio]. And I liked to join the library reading club and see the stars next to my name for reading all of the books that were on the assigned list. We always had an emphasis on going to church. So going to different kinds of churches all of my life and the music of the church has been an important strand in it. My mother [Mary Ellen Cooley Jones] is a great old Virginia cook and not a whole lot of fancy dishes, but a lot of good food, and so I was always blessed to have lots of good food. And I always had good girlfriends. And I liked when, you know, I got the right age I started liking music and boys and going out on dates and everything else. So I really had a happy childhood. Story_ID: 611885 Speaker 1: Now my personality is very different from my brother's [Rodney Bruce Jones], because the moving business was very disruptive to my brother. He was very unhappy. My brother was born in New Haven [Connecticut] when my dad [Lawrence N. Jones] was in graduate school [Yale Divinity School, New Haven, Connecticut]. I would have been a girl of eleven at the time. And I can remember him when he was an infant and what a cute and sweet little child he was, but then later he became a complete brat, was always meddling in my affairs, he talked, he made messes, he played, he was a typical little boy but for a teenage girl he was the bane of my existence. And so my brother, when my dad left Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee], my brother the, the fraternities gave dad a present. They had a big program. And one of them gave him an acoustic guitar, remember that was the time of folk singing also. And so they gave him an acoustic guitar. And my father brought the guitar home and he said, "What am I going to do with this?" And my brother said, "Could I have it?" And my brother has never taken his hand off of a guitar since. He's now a man in his forties, he's had a very illustrious musical career. He actually left college to start playing with Dizzy Gillespie when he was a young man. He's been Lena Horne's road manager with Ruth Brown, George Benson. He's played at Broadway shows, he's played on records, he's under contract with Blue Note [Records], he has his own group. My brother is just an artist par excellence who is every bit as committed to his art, which was guitar and music, he was taught at Manhattan School of Music [New York, New York], as I was to my books, but we were very different personalities. So as I became a teenager I would say that my otherwise idyllic being the apple of my parents' eye was interrupted by my brother who was always there making a mess and trying to follow me around and, you know, tease me about boyfriends and things like that. And but he's done very well and I love him and we're very close today now that we're grown. Story_ID: 611886 Speaker 1: I had a happy childhood. Lots of fun, summer camps. And we never had a lot of money. When we were--when I was at Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee], and I guess that's really the sort of cusp to adulthood, I wanted like a lot of the girls there to have fancy clothes. Of course, my father [Lawrence N. Jones] had the dean of the chapel salary and my mother [Mary Ellen Cooley Jones] was not working at the, the time. And so we didn't have a lot of money. But what I would do is go and work up on campus. When the girls would leave, I would go and help clean out the dormitories and then you would get all kinds of clothes and shoes and bags. And then I would come home with all these new clothes because it was unbelievable the things that people do not take with them (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They just leave them? Speaker 1: They just leave them. And I would come home with bag of clothes and stuff. And then I'd tell my mother, I'll be walking down the street, and it'll be like Cinderella, they'll come and say, "That's mine," and (laughter) she (unclear), you know, but I, I had good values instilled in me and, and I had good friends. I, I had a good time. Story_ID: 611887 Speaker 1: Let's go over some of these schools, now, you started school where? In (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I started school, for the first half of first grade in Baumholder, Germany, I don't know the name of the school. Then, I finished first grade in Moundsville, West Virginia, in a one-room, segregated school, grades one through eight. Where to the best of my recollection, I was the only kid in the first grade. And I have an interesting story to tell about that. My teacher's name was Miss Ethel McClendon. And every day I would walk from my [paternal] grandparents' house past the brick school where the white kids went to school. And they had a playground and, you know, you could see them running around, they had a paved yard to play in. By today's standard it would be nothing, by a little child's standard it looked fabulous I wanted to go over there. But I obviously was not allowed to go over there, I was told go straight to my school. So I'd walked past this brick school house, and then go on to this little, little thing on like cinder blocks, little small building, where my father [Lawrence N. Jones] had gone to school and all of his brothers and sisters. The little bolted down desks, the, you know, the circa Brown [v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] stuff that, you see, I was one of the kids that Brown was written about if you want to think about it that way. And the kids, because I had light skin in my school, would tease me and call me the little white girl. And sometimes they would chase me home from school. Now remember I'm just a little kid, so I'm scared, these were older kids. So my father told me he said, "Well you go and tell Miss Ethel McClendon what they're doing," that was my teacher. And she was--all little kids, first grade, love their teacher, so I went and I told Miss Ethel what they were doing. And I never will forget Miss Ethel stood up in front of the class, I think this is the root of my racial identity, she stood up in the front of the class, and she said, "Now I understand that some of you have been calling Lynn [HistoryMaker Lynn Huntley Jones] the little white girl," she said, "I just want you to know that all of the white children go to that brick school house around the corner, everybody who goes to this school is black, you're all black." She said, "And I don't want to hear any more teasing Lynn. You're all black." And I thought, yes, I belong. And but I was there for a year, for that half a year. Then we moved to Oberlin [Ohio]. I went to second and third grade there, I was in the grade school (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What was the, I'm sorry, but what was the name of school in Moundsville [West Virginia]? Did they-- Speaker 2: I would think it was like, it might have been called Clinton Avenue, I could find out from my dad. I don't really remember the name of it. I don't know that it had a name. Speaker 1: I know some of them are called the colored school, or whatever (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, it, I know it was the colored school, but I can't-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --I don't think it had a person's name attached to it. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: It may have had a street, Fourth Street or something like that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Actually my father told me recently he found some stuff that my mother [Mary Ellen Cooley Jones] had saved with all of my old report cards and stuff that no one even knew were in existence, so it's probably in that stuff. Story_ID: 611888 Speaker 1: Then we moved to Oberlin [Ohio]-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and I went to Pleasant Street School [Oberlin, Ohio]. I liked the name of it. My, my mother [Mary Ellen Cooley Jones] taught fourth grade at Pleasant Street while I was there. And then after two years there we moved to New Haven [Connecticut], where I went to Edgewood Elementary School for two years. Then we moved to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], where I went to, let's see, [William C.] Bryant [Elementary] School [W.C. Bryant Promise Academy] for sixth grade. And then Sayre, Augustus Sayre Junior High School [sic. William L. Sayre Junior High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] for seventh grade. And then we moved back to New Haven, where I went to Troup Junior High School for two years, eighth and ninth grade. Now there's an interesting story there. I have always, since I've been an adult and a lawyer, been preoccupied with the devastating negative impact of tracking on the shaping of young students. So here was my story and experience with tracking. I had a straight-A report card coming from the Philadelphia schools to the New Haven schools in the eighth grade. They had so called homogenous groupings and grades numerically arranged so everyone knew what, that the big numbers were the dumb classes and the small numbers were the smart kids. And they had divisions one through fifty. When I was assigned to my school in the eighth grade to my class, as a transfer student from Philadelphia, they placed me in Division 49. Division 49 was an all-black class. The Jewish kids and the, all of the white kids were in the low numbers. So it was really in-school segregation. I was in forty-nine, and I kept on saying to my mother and father [Lawrence N. Jones], the kids in my class can't read, kids in my class can't do math. And I can remember being embarrassed because they were cutups, they were kids that had disciplinary and other kinds of problems. And I can remember when we would go into assembly where they'd play the music and the various classes would come in, when our class, homeroom would come in, the kids would laugh and I can remember walking down feeling very embarrassed, ashamed. And so my homeroom teacher whose name was Mr. Chaisson [ph.], who was a white man, called me up to the front of the class one day after class and he said, "Lynn [HistoryMaker Lynn Jones Huntley], you shouldn't be in this class." He said, "I tried to get you moved, but the principal said your parents will have to come down to get you moved." So I went home and I told my parents. Dad came down to the school with my mother and that same day, they moved me from Division 49 which was all black, to Division 1 where I was the only black. Now that was an adjustment also of a different type. But it's interesting that I would say, I had no social life with the kids in my class. I still--all of my boyfriends and kids were from the churches and the, the black community but I was much beloved by my white classmates. I was elected the editor of the newspaper. I was the, by the time I was in ninth grade, I was president of the, the class. So I continued to do very well in school, and I made the adjustment from being in all-black to being in all-white, maybe it's because I had gone back and forth before and just saw people as people. But that was my story about that. So I was there. Story_ID: 611889 Speaker 1: Then my dad [Lawrence N. Jones] moved to Nashville [Tennessee], and that's when I went to Pearl High School [Pearl-Cohn Entertainment Magnet High School]. And I was at Pearl for tenth and eleventh grade. And in the tenth grade, I had taken the early entrance exam to go to Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee], because I could go tuition-free as one of the faculty perks, but my father felt that I was not socially mature enough to be in college, so I stayed in high school through the eleventh grade, and then I left and went to Fisk as an early entrance. So I entered there in 1961, no 1963, I was there from '63 [1963] to '65 [1965] at Fisk. And by that time my parents had moved to New York [New York] to go to Union Theological Seminary. And I went home on a spring break, and how are you going to keep them down in Nashville after they've seen New York? Once I saw New York, I wanted to transfer, and it so happened that, because Union Theological Seminary is part of Columbia University [New York, New York], they had the same arrangement for tuition remission if you could meet the qualifications. And I applied to Barnard College [New York, New York], which is a women's college associated with the Columbia and was accepted. And so I finished college, my last two years with a degree in sociology. I was an honors student from Barnard College in 1967. And I'm almost finished with this soliloquy. I started dating a guy who was in law school while I was in college and became captivated with the studies of law, and my parents always said I liked to argue and insisted on having the last word, I should be a lawyer. And so I decided I'd try law school and see. So I went to Columbia Law School [New York, New York] in 1967. I was the first African American woman to be on the Columbia Law Review. And I graduated in 1970. Story_ID: 611890 Speaker 1: I wanted to go back to Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee]. Now you're, you're a teenager at Fisk University? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: In '61 [1961], I believe they started the Freedom Rides. Now what--did your family discuss those civil rights activities out of Fisk? Because there are so many great civil rights leaders and among the students and the teachers at Fisk in those days. Speaker 2: That's true. But see in '61 [1961] I was still in high school [Pearl High School; Pearl-Cohn Entertainment Magnet High School, Nashville, Tennessee]. So while we lived on the campus of Fisk and I can remember seeing the kids coming back from demonstrations, I didn't participate in them. I was a high school kid. By the time I got to Fisk, it's a, it's an interesting question. I got to Fisk from '63 [1963] to '65 [1965], which would have been a heyday of a lot of that. I can remember participating in one or two marches, but I was really not actively involved. And I don't remember--I know that my dad [Lawrence N. Jones] went to a lot of meetings and things, but I don't really remember Fisk as being a cauldron of that by the time I started there, I just don't. I think that it was a wave of activism that occurred at Fisk while I was in high school, and I was not actively involved in it. And by the time I got to Fisk there were still demonstrations and sit-ons--sit-ins, but it wasn't, it wasn't the, the focal point of the, the campus (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It had started to wane. I know-- Speaker 2: It started to wane. Speaker 1: --the Freedom Ride, I think, started in '61 [1961], sit-ins maybe a year earlier. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: I can remember people going to the sit-ins. Speaker 1: Did you ever meet any of the activists that are, well like-- Speaker 2: Well, [HistoryMaker] John Lewis and some of the others they had been to our house, have had meetings. But again I was a high school kid, and I don't have any, the relationship would have been with my dad. Speaker 1: Okay. Was your father involved in any of the civil right activities (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't, I don't, I don't think that he was involved in the marching. I know he did a lot of counseling. And I can remember him talking about his relationship with John Lewis, but I don't know the details of that. So-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --sort of a blur to me. It made an impression because I've devoted my life to civil rights but I can't really say that I was a big activist during that period. Speaker 1: James Lawson basically came, came up with the rules for-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yes. Speaker 1: --nonviolent direct action, you know, at-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --at Fisk. Speaker 2: Yeah. But my first real-- Speaker 1: But he wasn't at Fisk I think he was at one of the seminaries [American Baptist Theological Seminary; American Baptist College] right there in Nashville [Tennessee]. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. My first real sense of being part of the Civil Rights Movement, came at the March on Washington. Story_ID: 611891 Speaker 1: Now I did go to the March on Washington. Speaker 2: Okay. So, 1963? Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty-three [1963]. Speaker 2: Did your parents [Mary Ellen Cooley Jones and Lawrence N. Jones] go or did you go (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) My father and my uncle and I went. I was at camp up in New Hampshire, I was a junior counselor. And I left camp early so that we could go to the March on Washington. And I thought it was one of the most powerful and exhilarating experiences that I would ever have. It just, the, the call for justice and seeing the masses of people, it just, it, it just lifted your heart. It was, it was inspiring. I will always get a shortness of breath when I think about just the feeling that, you know, we, we could, we could fight back and we could, we could deal with the lack of justice in, in this country. And it was tremendous, it was tremendous. It was hot as blazes. You were crammed in like you know what but it was an exhilarating experience just to be there. I think there is a role, sometimes when you have global forces or huge problems and you're only one person, and what can you do about them. There is such a thing as just witnessing. Just witnessing against, just using your body or your spirit to say I am against this. This is what I stand for. And I guess at that stage of life that was about all I could do as a young person or so I thought, others did much more. But just witnessing I think, gave me a sense of what that power of individuals could be. Speaker 2: I know for those who have, us who watched it on television, I mean it was a-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --and I got a chance to do it as a kid. It was-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --impressive to see Lena Horne and [HistoryMaker] Harry Belafonte-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --and other black-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --stars, you know, and, you know, marching and then-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --to hear, you know, [HistoryMaker] John Lewis and then, of course, Dr. King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --I Have a Dream speech. Speaker 1: Yeah, see I don't remember the speeches. I, I remember them now from watching them on television after the fact. What I remember was the exhilaration of the mass of people who were there. And seeing buses from all over the country pulling up and literally thousands of black people, and some whites, but the black people pushing back on this terrible system of racism. Which, by that time, I had not only my own personal experience with it, although I had had integrated and segregated experiences, but I had a deep sense of the injustice of, of this and how wrong it was. It was wrong, it was morally wrong, and I wanted the system to, to change, and I wanted to help. So that was the sort of exhilarating moment that made me want to do more and to figure out how to do more to fuel this battle. Speaker 2: Are there, there, is there a story about that trip to [Washington] D.C. that you remember? Any, anything, any particular incident or-- Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: --anything that pops out? Speaker 1: No. I just remember going with my uncle, Charlie Bruce [Charles Bruce Cooley], and my dad and being part of the mass of people and seeing all the buses and realizing that we had power. We had some power to do something about this inhumanity and this, this cruelty, this system of cruelty that kept so many people in deep poverty and, and had ruined--so many lives and created such suffering. That was my impression of it. Story_ID: 611892 Speaker 1: At Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee] you also had, at that time, it was, and I think it may have slipped in status some these days, but in those days it was, Fisk and Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] were the premier black universities-- Speaker 2: Uh-hm, um-hm. Speaker 1: --in the, in the country. You had people there at Fisk. You had Arna Bontemps was there, and you had (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Correct. I, I went to high school [Pearl High School; Pearl-Cohn Entertainment Magnet High School, Nashville, Tennessee] with his son. Speaker 1: --Aaron Douglas and-- Speaker 2: That's correct. Speaker 1: --you know, just a lot of, you know, a lot of people that, I mean, who were some of the professors and teachers at Fisk that you remember that really were important when you were there? Speaker 2: Well, let's see. They brought in a man whose name was Dr. Lenine [ph.]. I can't think of where he had come, one of the more progressive white schools. They brought him in to head up the honors college at Fisk. And I was part of the honors program there. And he--[HistoryMaker] Ramona Edelin was one of my classmates. I just remember it being a time of great intellectual vibrancy, reading and trying to understand Plato. Trying to learn about what is existentialism and [Albert] Camus and [Jean-Paul] Sartre. I mean, it was a time of great intellectual stimulation through the honors seminar that I took with Dr. Lenine. I don't really recall, I don't really recall much of my other professors at Fisk. I was there for two years, I was taking the basic courses, a lot of them were big survey courses. I didn't know what my major was going to be, I thought it was going to be English. I don't really remember much about those first two years at Fisk. I was too busy being a socialite and trying to join a sorority and have boyfriends. I didn't have time for-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Although I, I graduated my sophomore year with the highest average of any student at Fisk. But I was--I had a boyfriend and I was in love. Story_ID: 611893 Speaker 1: Was it difficult to move to New York [New York]? Speaker 2: No, I loved New York. As soon as I saw the range, the breadth, the variety of people of--the cultural life, the shops, the possibilities, the freedom--see Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee] at that time was still a sort of the old model. Girls could not wear anything but skirts all week and only on Saturday up until five [o'clock] were you allowed to be seen on campus with a pair of slacks on. It had a kind of southern, restrictive, cultural overlay to it, which had its graceful and wonderful qualities and attributes, I'm better for having gone there, and I got a good grounding because it allowed me to be me without worrying about whether or not I was not doing well or doing well because of color. And I had tremendous classmates with great talent to learn from and to bond with. But, New York just, it's a singular city. I will always love it. I lived there for twenty-five years in total. And if I had the resources, I would still be in New York, but I've come to love Atlanta [Georgia], and so, I would keep a place in Atlanta, too. But I, I always loved New York from the first time. And the adjustment was hard. When I went to Fisk in my sophomore year, junior year, I was cocky because I'd had like a 3.9 average my sophomore year. My first semester at Barnard [College, New York, New York] it dropped to 2.3. And I was crushed. And my dad [Lawrence N. Jones] said to me, "These are kids who have gone to some of the best private schools in the world, been exposed to lots of things that you have not seen or been able to, to learn. You have just as good a mind, if not better than most of them, you just have to work harder." And so, I did work harder, and I think at the end of my first year, and then, you know, lots of Jewish and Asian girls at, at Barnard at that time, but by the end of my first year my average was still only 3.7--2.7. But, by the time I graduated, I had gotten my cumulative average from my time at, at there up to 3.4. So I worked, I worked to catch up because it was not in my nature to let these white people do better than me. If they thought that because I was black I was not going to be as good as they were, I was determined that I would be just as good and better, and in some classes I was far better than most. But I had a wonderful time at Barnard. It was the time of the anti-war era. It was a time of social activism and a major intellectual center of the, the country, Columbia University [New York, New York] and environs. I had wonderful teachers there. I decided to become a sociology major and Mirra Komarovsky and Gladys Meyer were two of my professors who really motivated me. And I had a professor named Phoebe [H.] Cottingham, who taught government. And her favorite statement whatever it was, was she would say, "They said such and such, but in a pig's eye is that the case," and then she'd go on and hold forth on some subject. It was also my first time to take a course in poetry. I've always loved poetry. I memorize it as a hobby. And I had a professor named Barry Ulanov who introduced me to the world of modern poetry. And I will always be a great lover of poetry. And that was the first time I had ever been exposed to a systematic study of William Butler Yeats. And I love Yeats, I love modern poetry, and that's a lifelong gift that I got from Barnard. So I, I had a wonderful time there. I had classmates. I was part of an African American community there. And my boyfriend at the time as I said was at Columbia Law School [New York, New York]. And so I began to think about law school, but I had a great time in, in New York. Story_ID: 611894 Speaker 1: What was law school like? Speaker 2: Law school was a tough bear. You know, I had worked my summers in college. I worked as a children's librarian at the Countee Cullen Library [New York, New York], which is now connected to the new Schomburg [Center for Research in Black Culture, New York, New York] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Schomburg, right. Speaker 2: --facility. So I had always an interest in the black community and in trying to do things. And by that time Thurgood Marshall was on the [U.S.] Supreme Court. My passion for civil rights and social justice and against the war was at its crest. And I really wanted to go to law school in order to be a civil rights lawyer. So I went to Columbia [Law School, New York, New York] with that in view. And it was tough. There were out of a class of three hundred, ten blacks. I think five of us graduated. It was, although it was a period of social activism there was also a lot of stratification. There were lots of kids who were there because they intended to go to law school to make money, they were elitist in their frame of mind and exclusionary, they viewed us as affirmative action legatees, and that we surely could not compete with them. I was a woman, there were only like twenty women in my class of three hundred at the time so I had the double barrier. And I'll tell you what I did. I studied day and night and night and day. I was terrified, I was afraid I was going to fail out, I mean it was that rigorous and that much of a shock. Now Barnard [College, New York, New York] had helped me move along the road toward really rigorous study, but Columbia Law School, a professional school where everyone is studying the same thing rather than a variety of different disciplines and was completely different kind of thing. Students were competitive. They would do the things that they showed in 'The Paper Chase.' If you had an assignment, they would hide books. I mean it was, it was really, you know, getting the highest grade so that I could get the best job, so that I can make the most money was the ethos of most of my classmates. But there was a social justice, civil rights component, and there was a black component, there was a more liberal component. And my first year at Columbia Law School was the year of the strike at Columbia [University, New York, New York]. Story_ID: 611895 Speaker 1: When the school [Columbia University, New York, New York] was shut down by the students from SDS [Students for a Democratic Society], we shut down the law school. I sat-in the dean's office. The, the Black Law Students Association, BLSA [National Black Law Students Association (NBLSA)], had study-ins in the dean's office. We were locked in and refused to leave because we wanted them to increase the admission of African American students into the school. And I can recall, it was then Dean [William C.] Warren saying to me that the problem was that Columbia [Law School, New York, New York] had standards, and it could not lower standards to admit more African American students. Speaker 2: Now, now is this BLSA that shuts down the law school? Speaker 1: Well BLSA, BLSA was-- Speaker 2: Or SDS? Speaker 1: No, BLSA participated in the sitting-in of the law school. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: It was Columbia University, not necessarily, the law school that SDS students shut down. But the point is no one could come in or out of the campus at that point, so the law school was effectively shut down for all students. And as a consequence, my first year of law school, the second semester-- Speaker 2: Now this is what year, this has to be, this is '68 [1968]? Speaker 1: Nineteen--this would have been 1968. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Sixty-seven [1967], '68 [1968]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Because I graduated in '67 [1967], started the fall of '67 [1967]. The second semester the school was completely shut down. We got pass fail grades, we had to write essays. And so we only had our first semester's grades to go on. But, you know, BLSA was new. It hadn't been around for very many years. James Meredith was one of my classmates at Columbia. U.W. Clemon, who's now a federal judge in Birmingham [Alabama], was one of my classmates. And we were activists. We tried to push the envelope from within the, the law school. And there were some incidents which, I can remember one of my professors said, "Ms. Jones [HistoryMaker Lynn Jones Huntley], I didn't see you in my civil procedure class," this is in front of the whole class. And I said, "I'm not in your civil procedure class." It was that kind of thing where black students were sort of under a microscope. You know, if a white student cut a class no one would notice because after all they were the mass of the students. But let a black student do something different, or not do something, that the others were doing, and you were really under a magnifying glass. I was very well aware of that. But I studied like a horse. And when the grades came out, I had done very well and was the only African American they, I think they invited the top thirty students in the class to participate in a writing competition to be part of the Columbia Law Review. And I wasn't going to go out for it, a friend of mine persuaded me I should do it. And so I did and I was selected. So I was the only black on the Columbia Law Review during my entire tenure there, which was quite an accomplishment because that's the sort of creme-de-la-creme publication for the top students in any law school on the school's law review. But my years in law school were basically years of thinking and learning and making good friends and having fun. And I did have my first summer after my first year, I worked for, with another student for a man whose name was John W. Nields, who was a professor at Sarah Lawrence College [Bronxville, New York]. And he had us doing an interesting study. All summer I went to the library and researched labor law legislative history looking for examples of where the legislators did not know what they were doing. And so he had a kind of quirky thing, he was trying to get the students to see the legislative process is fraught with all kinds of problems. And I really enjoyed, even though it was boring, I enjoyed reading the legislative history and finding all of the absurd things that people would do or say and underscoring them and documenting them for him. Story_ID: 611896 Speaker 1: Then at the end of my second year of law school [Columbia Law School, New York, New York], which I still wanted to be a civil rights lawyer--I've not changed my mind one iota about that--but, I'm trying to find jobs. I worked for one of the premier law school--firms in New York [New York], called Cravath, Swaine & Moore [LLP]. It had no black partners. It had one black associate. I was the only black summer associate. They put me--I wanted to be in the litigation department, the partner who hired me said he did not think I had, quote, enough instinct for the jugular, little did he know I could have pulled his jugular out at the time. He assigned me to the corporate department where I worked on railroad financing contracts and public offerings for a couple of corporations and reading corporate minutes. It was very boring, terribly boring. At the end of the summer, just to show you how I knew that I would never go and work at one of those firms, the partners and associates in their group, had a luncheon for me at the Wall Street Club, which was very fancy white club there in New York, up in a skyscraper. And I'm sitting at the head of the table and, you know, they're all on either side of this table. I could think of absolutely nothing to say because I had nothing in common with the people with whom I was working. And so finally Mr. [James H.] Duffy, and these people had been perfectly pleasant to me as supervisors. I mean, I can't fault them that way, they were cordial, formal. Mr. Duffy said, "Well, Ms. Jones [HistoryMaker Lynn Jones Huntley]," he said, "I have a study--funny story to tell you." So I, "Really?" And he's trying to bring me into the conversation. He said, "Yes, my wife and I went to the Caribbean to recruit a maid," now my ears have perked up. And he said, "We were talking to these girls," they've perked up now twice, "and there was one I really liked because she had a lot of spunk." He said, "None of the others even asked us how much they would be paid if they came to the United States, but when we finished the interview with her, she said, 'Well if I come how much will you pay me?'" And he said, "I asked her, 'Well how much do you make now?' And she said, 'Two dollars a week.'" And he said, "I told her I thought we could match that." And then they all laughed except for me because I was thinking about these people are laughing in exploitation. So I knew I would never be, not only was I bored with the substance of it, but these were people--and when I got ready to leave the, the managing partner said, "Well, you've done very well, and we'd like for you to come back after you finish law school." And I told him, no I wanted to be a civil rights lawyer, I appreciated the honor of being extended this opportunity but no I was not going to do that. And he said to me, he said, "Well," and he said, "but what you have to understand, Ms. Jones, is, if you come and work here, you have a chance to really affect the structure of society, because you'd be working for some of the biggest and most powerful firms and companies in the country." And he said, "If you go and work for one of these civil rights organizations, you'll be involved in band aid operations." And I remember saying to him, "I was of the impression that the work Cravath does is on behalf of these corporations is really to uphold the status quo, so I think I'll be better served with the band aids." And that's exactly what I decided to do. But I always wanted to be a civil rights lawyer. And law school just exposed me to the, the great opinions of legal scholars and advocates for justice and fairness and those ideas enlivened my spirit and just, so I, I had a great time in law school, although I worked very hard. Story_ID: 611897 Speaker 1: You came out in 1970, right? Speaker 2: Correct. Speaker 1: And now what happened when you graduated from law school [Columbia Law School, New York, New York]? Where, where did you go? Speaker 2: Okay. Just a tidbit along the way, Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] had been killed in '68 [1968]-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --and-- Speaker 1: Can you remember what you were doing when you found out or where you were? Speaker 2: I can't remember where I was but I watched the funeral all day and cried all day, I remember that much about it. But I guess all I'm saying is I don't want to be, appear to be a shallow person, yes, I was a law student, and I was doing all the things law students do, but it was against the backdrop of major social change and turbulence. And I, I was part of that generation that was participating in that, whether it was anti-war marches or trying to take progressive positions or having political arguments, I mean these were all part of also the law school experience. But, in 1970, I had applied for a clerkship with a [U.S.] Supreme Court justice, Justice [Warren E.] Burger. But I had also applied for two federal clerkships. One was with Constance Baker Motley and the other was with Judge [Marvin E.] Frankel, who was known for his progressive views on the, the bench, a prominent Jewish jurist. I did not get the clerkship with Burger. I had a terrible experience getting the clerkship with Judge Motley but it's, it's hilarious. The judge is a very imposing woman. Now here's a woman who's argued sixteen cases before the United States Supreme Court, been emeritus council, just an icon, worked at the civil rights, at the helm of the civil rights community, been the first black woman to be on the federal bench in New York, the first black borough president. She also is by appearance and personality a stern no nonsense, not a whole lot of smiling person. So I go in for my interview thrilled to have the chance possibly to work for this great woman. And she was very stern, she asked me some questions, don't really remember much, they were formal questions. And at the end of maybe a half hour she said to me, "Would you like to be my clerk?" And I said, "Oh, yes, Judge Motley, I would love to be your clerk." And she said, "Well, okay, you will be hearing from me." So the next week I had my interview with Judge Frankel. Now he sits in the same court as Judge Motley. I went to the interview with Judge Frankel. I'm sitting in--he sits down, he said, "Well, before we get started," he said, "I was talking to Judge Motley," because they were friends, "and she told me that she had offered you the job of law clerk to her and that you had accepted it. So why are you here for this interview with me?" Story_ID: 611898 Speaker 1: So Judge [Marvin E.] Frankel said, you know, "Why are you going forward with this if you've accepted," and I said, "What? She offered me a job?" He said, "Yes, Judge [Constance Baker] Motley told me that she had offered you a clerkship." And I said, "Oh, my God." I said, "I had no idea, I thought she was just inquiring whether in light of my having had an opportunity to meet her I really wanted to work for her, it never occurred to me that she was offering me the job." And, and he said, "Well, what do you want to do?" And I said, "Well, I will accept the job from Judge Motley if she has offered it, I'm appreciative of your taking time." He said, "Well, I think you better go talk to Judge Motley because she knows you're here." So I had to go and talk to Judge Motley and explain how I had misunderstood her intention, and how thrilled I was to be her clerk. And it's funny because the day before I was to report for work, I had a dream and in the dream I went into the judge's office and there was a big vase full of beautiful roses on her desk. And she asked me to get a piece of paper on her desk, and I reached over and I spilled all the water all over her desk. That was my anxiety dream before I started working for this great woman. But I learned a lot from her. One of the things that she did, was she had an unerring sense of fairness, even on the smallest of things. We had a case one time where, and I had a co-clerk by the way who had also been at Columbia [Law School, New York, New York] with me, who is now a very distinguished civil libertarian, civil rights lawyer as well, so she picked two people who were definitely like her in terms of aspirations and values. Speaker 2: Who was the other one? Speaker 1: Michael Ratner is his name. And he is now the head of the Center for Constitutional Rights [New York, New York] and also a professor of law at Yale Law School [New Haven, Connecticut]. And he had been my classmate. And he also worked for a number of years for Bill Kunstler [William Kunstler]. So it was against that backdrop that all this was occurring. Story_ID: 611899 Speaker 1: The judge [Constance Baker Motley] had a case [United States v. Matthew Massimo, 1970] involving mail fraud. Apparently the post office has all kinds of cameras and stuff, and monitors whether or not postal employees are stealing mail. And they had apprehended a young black man who worked at the post office and accused him of stealing three letters that he had put in his pocket or something. And he hadn't been able to make bail so he had been in jail for a couple of weeks. Well, all of the judges hated these mail fraud cases, and mail theft cases, because there were a lot of them, they clogged up the system, they were minor offenses in the scheme of things, and here you have all these poor slobs coming before the court eating up time and making it impossible to get to the really significant cases. So this particular day this young man, who was an African American man, was standing before the judge. And his, his lawyer, his legal aid lawyer named Murray Mogul [ph.], was really arguing passionately please to let this guy out on his own recognizance, because he had been in jail for three weeks, and he didn't have this money to make this money bail, which was like five thousand dollars or some de minimis amount, and it's no purpose in keeping him continued to be locked up and the minor nature of the offense. And the U.S. attorney vehemently opposed this application--that mail fraud was a very serious crime, that people had to learn a lesson, and that he might flee because he didn't have real strong roots in the community. And so this just went on and on. So finally the judge, who had been listening to all this patiently, said--well, she had the young man come forward, she admonished him that he'd better show up if she let him out. And then she ruled that he could be released on his own recognizance. I was so glad I was sitting on the side. And then before he got ready to leave the U.S. attorney said, "Well just a moment, I'd like to have him fingerprinted and photographed." So legal aid attorney objected, he said, "Your Honor, when he went to work for the post office he was fingerprinted and photographed, they have these materials on record, when he was taken into custody he was fingerprinted and photographed, at the jail he was fingerprinted and photographed. This is nothing but a needless harassment, it's unnecessary, they have his fingerprints and photograph, there's no reason to delay and have to take him back to the Tombs [Manhattan Detention Complex, New York, New York] again. He ought to be able to be released to be with his family." No, the U.S.--assistant U.S. attorney beat the judge down that this was their standard procedure. So the judge said, she said, "Are you telling me that under all circumstances in cases like this there must be one more additional fingerprinting and photographing?" "Yes, Your Honor." So she said, "Very well, and the defendant will be remanded for fingerprinting and photographing." Story_ID: 611900 Speaker 1: Now fast forward. About three weeks later, the judge had a big Wall Street case coming before her where these very wealthy partners were accused of stock fraud, or insider trader, or some such thing. Each one came in dressed to the nines in the suit, each one with a distinguished lawyer and a lackey carrying two bags, and you get the, the picture. And when the bail application came up, the--they asked that they be released on their own recognizance and the assistant U.S. attorney readily agreed. And there were about ten of them to be arraigned. So the judge granted the release on their own recognizances, and they got ready to turn away, she said, "Just a moment. Mr. Assistant U.S. Attorney, do you wish to have the defendant fingerprinted and photographed?" "Oh, no, Your Honor, that's not necessary." I could see the judge's brain working. She said, "What is your office procedure?" "Well, you know, when they were taken into custody first they were fingerprinted and photographed it's not necessary, we have that on file." So the judge said, "Well three weeks ago, I had a young African American defendant before me who had stolen or was alleged to have stolen a letter from the post office," she recounted the whole scenario. And she said, "I was told then that your standard office procedure is this, now you tell me that it's not necessary, that in fact there was a misrepresentation made to the court." She said, "Well I don't know what your procedure is, but there will be equal justice in this courtroom, and the defendant shall be remanded for fingerprinting and photographing." And she went through that ten times. Each one that came forward, they said the same thing, she made the same point, and the U.S. attorney would object, and each time she remanded them. By the time the fifth or sixth time she had done this, I had gotten so tickled on the side I rushed into the robing room and I called up Michael [Ratner], my co-clerk, I said, "Michael, you've got to come down here, you won't believe what the judge is doing." And when we, when she came off of the bench, I was so proud of her, and I said, "Oh, Judge Motley [Constance Baker Motley], I was so proud of you, you were so amazing." And she looked at me, she hadn't cracked a smile, she looked at me and she said, "Draft a memorandum to the assistant attorney general, I want to know what is their procedure." And that's all she said--went on about. But the fact that she would have thought of a detail like that showed the kind of balance and the meticulousness with which she discharged her duties. And I have always thought of her as one of the great jurists of our time for being forward-looking. Story_ID: 611901 Speaker 1: It was also during my tenure with her that a case, a landmark case that shaped my life and the course of jurisprudence as it relates to prison and jail litigation was decided. Judge Motley [Constance Baker Motley] had, the year before I had worked with her, decided [sic. heard] a case called Sostre versus McGinnis [Sostre v. McGinnis, 1971], Martin Sostre, S-O-S-T-R-E, versus McGinnis. And in that case, she had held that the conditions under which this prisoner, who was a black Puerto Rican man, had been incarcerated in the state prisons of New York [New York State Correctional Facilities], was cruel and usual punishment within the meaning of the Eighth and Fourteenth Amendments to the [U.S.] Constitution. They had literally kept Sostre in solitary confinement for almost a year. They'd given him no blankets. They had him defecating in a hole. I mean he had really suffered. And he refused--it all arose because he had written a letter and the warden demanded to know his, Sostre was a black nationalist. The warden demanded to know, what did the letters RNA that he had put on the bottom of the letter mean. And Sostre had said something like, Republican New Administration, which made them furious. Well, Sostre was in because at the time of the Buffalo [New York] riots in '68 [sic. 1967], he had had the only African American bookstore [Afro-Asian Bookstore] in the City of Buffalo, and he was accused of having fomented the Buffalo riots. And, and a particular guy claimed that he had bought heroin from Sostre in the bookstore. Sostre maintained that he was being framed by the authorities, but he refused to defend himself at the trial. He had, he had no counsel. He called the judge, Mad--Dog Marshall [Frederick M. Marshall] and that this was a lynching court, and he was not going to defend himself. He didn't put on a single witness. They sentenced him to, he was fifty-four years old at the time, they sentenced him to, I don't know, it was like ten consecutive sentences. He would never get out of prison is the point, never get out of prison. On each count he was--so Judge Motley, by handing down this decision that this controversial political prisoner had, as he called himself, had been treated in a cruel and inhuman equivalent of torture in a U.S. prison, was a landmark, the first major big prisoner rights case. And it was up on appeal when I came in as her law clerk, and it was decided while I was her law clerk. And it really changed the course of prison and jail reform litigation. Story_ID: 611902 Speaker 1: But here's the interesting tidbit and how I became involved with [Martin] Sostre. Judge [Constance Baker] Motley appointed a woman named Kristin [Booth] Glen, who's now a judge in New York, to be pro bono counsel to represent a man who had written to the judge saying that he had lied when he said Sostre sold him the heroin. That he had now recovered from his addiction. He realized he had been manipulated. He didn't care whether he had to spend the rest of his natural life in prison for perjury, he had to wipe the slate clean and confess that he had framed Martin Sostre all those years ago. And so, I got that letter, the judge appointed the counsel and then by that time my clerkship was over, but I was deeply involved in trying to understand what happened to Martin Sostre. So I went to work at the NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc. [LDF], which is where Judge Motley had worked all of those years. I had been trying to get a job there ever since I went to work for the judge. Speaker 2: How--what, what year is this? Speaker 1: This would have been 1971-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --that I started work there. Which was just three, I started work there about two months before the bust of Attica [Correctional Facility, Attica, New York], which is my first entry into a prison. But so Judge Motley was a tremendous influence. I wanted to work there. Jack Greenberg, who was one of the lawyers who argued Brown versus Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954], was then the director council of LDF. And Jack told me, he said, "Look, Lynn [HistoryMaker Lynn Jones Huntley], I really would like to hire you but I have no job." So I had accepted a job working at legal aid in White Plains [New York] in the criminal defense area, because LDF had no job. And right before I was getting ready to take my job at White Plains, I saw a former classmate of mine at Columbia Law School [New York, New York], serendipity, black people do help each other a lot of ways. I saw this guy who had been a classmate of mine who was working at, at LDF, and he said, his name is Bill Robinson [William L. Robinson], he went on to be the dean of the UDC law school [David A. Clarke School of Law, University of the District of Columbia, Washington, D.C.] and Bill said, "Oh, Lynn, when are you going to come and join us?" I said, "I'm not because Jack said that there is no job." He said, "What?" He said, "I'm going to speak to Jack." The next day Jack called me and said, made one of the classic Greenberg statements, he said, "Well, Lynn, I have no money and I have no job, but if you want to come and work here you can." And so (laughter) with that I started working at the Legal Defense Fund in the summer of, right after I finished my clerkship with the judge-- Story_ID: 611903 Speaker 1: Well, did you get paid? I mean, how did they-- Speaker 2: I was paid. I think they offered me a job paying me $11,000 a year. And I was hired to work on cases involving the abolition of the death penalty. And I met two people who became my dear friends and lifelong colleagues. One of them is Elaine R. Jones [HistoryMaker Elaine Jones], who recently retired having been the director council of the NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund [Inc. (LDF)], but at the time, she was one of the three people on staff working on death penalty cases. And Anthony [G.] Amsterdam, who at the time was a professor at Stanford [Law School, Stanford, California], who is now the head of the clinical law programs at NYU law school [New York University School of Law, New York, New York], and who is a certified constitutional law genius. So I was part of that trio working on cases involving the abolition of the death penalty. LDF had an effort to try to document where every person under sentence of death was, make sure that he or she had adequate quality representation, that the right kinds of arguments were being brought to assist local council, many of whom were not well qualified in presenting the best arguments to engage in strategy and planning to try to defeat the, the death penalty. And I had been there just a couple of months when Attica occurred. And, of course, the inmates had held the guards hostage and then a lot of people, including guards and inmates, were slain and it was a terrible, terrible-- Speaker 1: It's Attica Prison-- Speaker 2: Attica Prison (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) uprising, basically-- Speaker 2: Correct. Speaker 1: --in '71 [1971]. Speaker 2: The Attica Prison uprising. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: In Attica, New York, upstate New York. Speaker 2: That's correct. In Attica, New York, upstate New York. The first prison I ever went into was Attica therefore because I volunteered to be one of the lawyers in the Attica case to try to find out what was going on with the inmates. And so three days after the riot, when you could still have your eyes burned with the tear gas aftermath, I went in together with [W.] Haywood Burns, who later went on to be the, one of the founders of the National Conference of Black Lawyers, and who had also been Judge [Constance Baker] Motley's law clerk, and who died just a couple of years ago, tragically. But anyway, Haywood was part of that group, there were a lot of people from the National Lawyers Guild, and we formed organized teams to go in and interview inmates. That was my first side--inside a prison. It was a terrible time. The violence, the brutality that had been inflicted, the beatings of the inmates. And we divvyed up the work. So the first lawsuit I ever filed on my own was a case involving conditions of confinement of four hundred inmates who, in the aftermath of Attica, given the destruction of the prison, had been transferred to Green Haven Prison [Green Haven Correctional Facility, Stormville, New York]. And that was my first lawsuit, inmates of Green Haven versus [John L.] Zelker, who was the--the head of the prison, so-- Story_ID: 611904 Speaker 1: Back to Martin Sostre, because he's not been forgotten in this. While working on prison and jail cases and inmates of Green Haven versus [John L.] Zelker was a real eye opener. Because what they had done was brought these four hundred inmates, kept them in solitary confinement, fed them one sandwich a day, there were beatings going on. My lead plaintiff was a man, they had taken his artificial limb, thrown it into a bonfire, I mean, they were just being cruel and harassing. And I did win that case. But meanwhile, the Sostre case is going forward on another track [United States ex rel. Sostre v. Festa, 1975]. And I don't really have any relationship with it, but I'm interested in it. So I volunteered to work on that case with a man named Herman Schwartz and Paul [G.] Chevigny. And the upshot of it was that there was a hearing held in Buffalo, New York, before a federal judge, on whether or not this inmate, who is now recanting his testimony, was telling the truth such that Sostre should be retried. And I participated in that hearing. And it was really a tragic thing because this brother got up, and he testified what he had done, and why he had done it and he was an addict at the time. And the judge ruled that he didn't know whether the inmate was telling the truth the first time or the second time, and therefore he couldn't say that Sostre was in prison wrongly, and therefore he could not be released. So this case continued to progress through the court but we figured there's no way of getting Sostre out the [U.S.] Supreme Court is, and the Court of Appeals--the Second Circuit Court of Appeals [U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit] are not going to free him on this legal issue. That is when I became Sostre's lawyer personally--for clemency. Meanwhile, Sostre had become involved in organizing a prisoner labor union at, at the prison where he had been sent after the, the decision was handed down. And so I had the opportunity to meet him. Now this was a remarkable man. He was well read. He was earnest. He was a political prisoner. He had been framed. But he was a man of indomitable will, and looked up to by all of the prisoners. And what we did was we helped organize a letter writing campaign with Amnesty International so that the then-governor [Hugh L. Carey] began to receive stacks of letters saying, "Free Martin Sostre," from all over the world while I worked on his petition for executive clemency. And I told Martin, he didn't, he said, you know, that he had given up, he was never going to get out, and he was going to continue to stay and do his organizing work in prison. And I kept on saying to him, "But let me file this petition for you and see." And my first happiest achievement as a lawyer was at Christmastime when I received word that the governor of the State of New York had signed the clemency papers and Martin Sostre would be freed. Martin was a man, I used to have a poster of Martin in my office, and it had a, one of his statements was, "I refuse to submit even to the most minor of injustices. That is how entire peoples fell into slavery." Story_ID: 611905 Speaker 1: But he [Martin Sostre] was a tremendous influence in my life, and a better lawyer than I was, although he had never gone to law school. But I learned a lot from him, from representing him, and from getting to know him, and from talking with him. And he gave me a lot of good advice, because I told him one day when we were working on the, the prisoner labor union case, and I was so frustrated by the courts and the, just everything, soon as you say Your Honor the matter is effectively out of your hand in court, and he said, "Lynn [HistoryMaker Lynn Jones Huntley]," he said, "if you've ever noticed a caravan," he said, "the, the riders sit on the backs of the camels and the camels and the riders have their eyes fixed on the horizon line. And they come into the oasis and the dogs bark at them and the people pull at them but they keep moving on, they have a destination." And he said, "That's what you must do in your work, you have to have a destination, and you don't let the petty things that pull and detract from you ever keep you from keeping your eyes on that destination." And it's funny, I hadn't thought about that until this moment but I just wrote a report for SEF [Southern Education Foundation, Atlanta, Georgia] for our annual report, and the title of it is 'Moving Toward the Horizon Line.' But Martin was a tremendous man. So-- Speaker 2: And he, he had a bookstore [Afro-Asian Bookstore] in Buffalo [New York] and-- Speaker 1: He had a bookstore in Buffalo-- Speaker 2: And (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) There's been a documentary ['Frame-up! The Imprisonment of Martin Sostre']-- Speaker 2: --apparently he was a, a member of the RN--the Republic of New Afrika [RNA], I guess (unclear)-- Speaker 1: That's exactly correct. Speaker 2: Yeah, all right. Speaker 1: He was a Black Muslim, and he, he definitely was a revolutionary, but I don't think he was involved in any criminal behavior. He was advocating, like so many people did at that time, fundamental changes in the oppressive structures of this country as they related to race. And he was a tremendous man. Speaker 2: How long was he in prison? Speaker 1: I think Martin was in prison, I, I don't really remember. I'd have to go back and look. Let me not speculate because-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --he had been in prison before, but not for anything related to this. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I, I don't want to speculate, I don't remember. Speaker 2: And when was he granted clemency by the governor [Hugh L. Carey]? Speaker 1: He would have been granted clemency maybe in '73 [1973], '74 [1974] [sic. 1975]. That would be my recollection, because I started work at '71 [1971] at LDF [NAACP Legal and Educational Defense Fund, Inc.]. Speaker 2: And, and you say there was film made about him? Speaker 1: There was a film made about him. If you google Martin Sostre, and his name was Martin X at the time, we probably could find out more about Martin. I only saw him once after he got out of jail. I think it was too painful for him to see me because I represented what he had been fighting against, and he was trying to get on with his life. He worked as a paralegal at a legal services office, and he had married and had children, and so I was, I was happy. He was a man in his late fifties by that time. But at least he didn't spend the rest of his life in--prison. So that was one of the major achievements, I think, to free an innocent man and a man of great courage and integrity because you, you had this little pen and a brain and you worked hard to try to do it, so Martin Sostre. Story_ID: 611906 Speaker 1: Around this time now we are bringing the lawsuit called Furman versus Georgia [Furman v. Georgia, 1972]. It's on its way to the [U.S.] Supreme Court and Aiken versus California [Aikens v. California, 1972], this is 1972. So I have been working on this death penalty brief and doing research with my co-counsel. And in '72 [1972], the Supreme Court held, in Furman, that the death penalty was cruel and unusual punishment and saved the lives of 635 of LDF's [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.] prison inmates who were under sentence of death. And it was a time of great celebration and elation because I had met, I had been to death rows, I had met a number of these men who were under sentence of death, and to realize that they were now saved was a high point of a career that I don't think I'll ever replicate again. And we had a big party at LDF and I can remember [HistoryMaker] Elaine Jones and Jack Himmelstein and I were--had--hands held and we were jumping up and down shouting the names of inmates whose cases we had worked on and whose lives had been saved. It was just an exhilarating, exhilarating thing. So-- Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: --that was exciting. Speaker 2: So their sentences were commuted to life or to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) their sentences were commuted to life. And then in a number of cases we went on to litigate them. There's one fascinating case, where I was a minor actor in, but it has a compelling story for purposes of this. The case of Wilbert Lee and Freddie Pitts. Wilbert Lee and Freddie Pitts were two African American men who, in the late '60s [1960s], lived in Panama City, Florida, the Panhandle, which was very racist and very violent at that time. And they had been out on a date with their girlfriends and another soldier from a neighboring base. They went to a gas station. The gas station attendants wouldn't let the women use the white people's toilet. They had an altercation, and then the five of them drove away. The next day, the two gas station attendants at issue were found a couple miles from the gas station shot in the back of the head in a wooded area. The police, having learned about the altercation that occurred, immediately went looking for Pitts and Lee and their colleague. They didn't get the colleague because he had gone back to the base at the time this must have occurred. But Wilbert Lee and Freddie Pitts were rounded up, together with their girlfriends, and held incommunicado for almost thirty days, beaten, threatened. And finally one of the women involved in the car confessed that she had seen them kill the gas station attendants. Pitts and Lee were represented by a formerly disbarred lawyer, who told them that they had to plead guilty or else their kids would be taken away from their families and, and they would never get out, they'd get the death penalty. And so they pled guilty. At this, this penalty trial the woman who had framed them got up on the stand and was allegedly hypnotized by a shyster, and then claimed to relive the shooting while on the stand. And they got the death penalty. So in '72 [1972] their lives were saved, this is before I was at LDF, '72 [1972] they were two of the inmates whose lives were saved by Furman but we were still working on their case because they were innocent and trying to get them out. And I had a call one day from an enterprising newspaper reporter, whose name was Gene Miller with The Miami Herald, and he said, "We need somebody to go to upstate New York and interview the wife of one of these two men because we're trying to put on a hearing to get them a new trial, and she was one of the witnesses." Story_ID: 611907 Speaker 1: All right. So we were in the middle of another case here with the Wilbert Lee and Freddie Pitts case (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And Freddie Pitts. Yes, well the upshot of it was that I got this call from Gene Miller saying that the wife of one of the defendants was living under an assumed name in upstate New York, and also the woman who had framed them was living in upstate New York, and they needed us to go and see could we persuade them to come back to Florida to testify about what had happened in the Wilbert Lee and Freddie Pitts case. And so Drew [S.] Days [III], who later went on to be the United States solicitor general, and who is a professor at Yale Law School [New Haven, Connecticut], but was then working at the Legal Defense Fund [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc. (LDF)] with me at the time, and I got in a car and drove up to this little town in upstate New York and met with the woman who had claimed to have witnessed the shooting. And although she was a young woman, she was very haggard, and worn and very defensive, very argumentative, obviously herself on drugs. And she would never say that they did it but neither did she agree to come back and testify that she had lied. And she kept saying, "I've got people down there, I can't go back, I've got people down there. Why don't you all just leave me alone?" Of course, the state [Florida] came and got her a couple of weeks later, and brought her back down, and she repeated her testimony. But it was clear to me that she was lying out of fear, and that really, in a sense, she was another victim because she, she was a very sick and unhappy woman. Meanwhile we found a white inmate who was serving a life sentence in another prison in Florida who confessed to the gas station slayings, but he refused to testify in court to that effect, although we had a tape of his confession, unless they would ensure that he would not get the death penalty. So now you have a major miscarriage of justice. Everybody knows who did it, it's this white guy, Wilbert Lee and Freddie Pitts have been in prison for years on death row and now in general population. And they can't get out because you can't admit this testimony because the guy won't testify to it unless, and the state won't agree not to give him the death penalty. So a real miscarriage of justice. It was at that time that efforts to get clemency for Wilbert Lee and Freddie Pitts were mounted, and ultimately they were freed. And here's, here's my one recollection of, I think, it was Freddie Pitts who said this, after Furman [Furman v. Georgia, 1972] was decided, I went to Starke Florida Prison [Florida State Prison-East Unit; Florida State Prison, Bradford County, Florida] to see him. And I was asking him how were the guards treating him, what was going on, since he had been put in population after years on, on death row. And he said, "Well, when they see me, they call me dead man--dead man walking." He said, "But since I've been in prison, I've read a lot, and I've thought a lot." And he said, "They're just ignorant, they've never been anywhere, they've never seen anything, so I forgive them." And I thought, here's a man who has been wronged, wronged, wronged, and yet he is showing compassion for those who are tormenting him. Tremendous, tremendous story. But anyway they're now free. And I don't know where they are. I did go back to Panama City [Florida] a couple of years ago to speak at a community center celebration, and a lot of people remembered Freddie Lee and Wilbert Pitts, but they're just another example of the many nameless people, particularly African Americans, who have been falsely accused, framed, and there are many stories of that type I could tell, but I won't continue to ramble. Story_ID: 611908 Speaker 1: Do you find that prosecutors are really, I, I've often thought in, in Chicago [Illinois], in the Chicago area that prosecutors often were compelled by ambition or whatever to put somebody-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --away for a crime. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm, I'm sure that that that happens. I think there are too many documented cases of that happening. Not to think otherwise. It's a very vicious system and the lack of quality representation and investigation means that a lot of people really are abused by the, the system. You know, after years of doing prison and jail litigation I've talked to a lot of people under sentence of death, people who are in--serving life sentences, people who are in and out, people who have been raped, people who have had mental breakdowns, people who are dying, people who have been stabbed, people who have been beaten, people who have been put in solitary confinement, it--it's a vicious, vicious system. And I don't know how we think that those who do get out are not marked for life in ways that often make them worse than when they went in. I know we've given up as a society on rehabilitation as a goal, but the lack of education, the lack of rehabilitative services, means that the recidivism rate, which is about two-thirds will continue unabated. And it's a tragedy all the way around for those who will be victimized by criminals in the future, and for people who might have, given a chance, been able to turn their lives around. Story_ID: 611909 Speaker 1: Why are you against the death penalty, because some would argue, well, you know, we got the serial killers, we have like, people who are, who act, who treat each other like beasts out here, and they're doing horrible things, invading people's homes, and, you know, killing innocent women, children, other men, babies even, you know, why shouldn't these people be put to death? Speaker 2: Well, the criminal justice system is administered by human beings. Human beings make mistakes. And the pressures on the system are such that too many people who are innocent are put at risk and, history will show us, have been executed. I believe that there is no evidence that the death penalty really deters the kind of vicious crimes that you've just mentioned. Serial killers are going to be sick and commit their crimes whether there's a death penalty or not. There's no evidence to show cause and effect (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So they don't think-- Speaker 2: --in terms of that. Speaker 1: --what you're saying is well known in criminal justice that-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --that it doesn't-- Speaker 2: Doesn't deter. Speaker 1: --severity of punishment doesn't deter crime. Speaker 2: No. Not only that, but there's some evidence that suicide by court is a phenomenon. That people who are suicidal commit crimes in order to be put to death. But the--bottom line is I don't think that there's any place for this kind of penalty in this day and time. And, and it's just an inhumane, uncivilized response. It debases the society and puts us on the same level with the people whom we're executing. Moreover, not everyone who's on death row is a person who has actually killed someone. There are other than capital crimes that are punishable by the death penalty. So there are many reasons why I would be against it. The absence of deterrents, the racism and disproportionate impact on poor people and on minority group people, it's not evenhandedly applied, can't be evenhandedly applied, the absence of quality council, the waste of resources that goes into litigating these cases over time, it just doesn't make any sense. Story_ID: 611910 Speaker 1: How long did you work for the NAACP Legal Defense Fund [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc. (LDF)]? Speaker 2: I worked for the NAACP Legal Defense Fund for two years during the death penalty and other cases, Sostre [Sostre v. McGinnis, 1971] and the like. And then I went for a year and a half to be the general counsel to the New York City Commission on Human Rights when Eleanor Holmes Norton was then the chair. And that is a local administrative agency designed to enforce the antidiscrimination laws, which are civil laws, of the City of New York [New York]. And I was there for a year and a half. Speaker 1: And where, where does that place us, '75 [1975], '76 [1976]? Speaker 2: This would have been 1975, correct. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I, I wanted to go there, one for the opportunity to work for and with Eleanor Holmes Norton, whom I very much admire. And two, because if you can't make antidiscrimination laws real for ordinary people at the local level, then you haven't achieved much when you pass all these laws and write them in lofty language after all. So I wanted to see whether or not I could help enforce, at the local level for ordinary people, basic prohibitions against discrimination in employment and housing and education and public accommodations facilities, that kind of thing. And I was there for a year and a half, I was very frustrated. We had inadequate staff, we had a terrible caseload, we were underfunded. And after I thought I had done all that I could to help strengthen the institution by writing new rules of procedure and hiring some new people, I went back to the NAAACP Legal Defense Fund where I stayed for another several years working again on cases involving prison and jail reform litigation, I was no longer doing death penalty, prison and jail reform litigation, and also cases involving the desegregation of institutions of higher education. So I stayed there for three years doing those cases. Story_ID: 611911 Speaker 1: The case [Guthrie v. Evans] involving the Georgia State Prison in Reidsville [Georgia] is one of the most significant of the cases in which I was involved in [at NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc. (LDF)]. And it, we brought a case on behalf of 1,800 black inmates in the Georgia State Prison who were, at that time, in racially segregated housing and work assignments, and it was one of the most vicious institutions you can imagine. The lack of medical care--they had a former prisoner who was the director of medical services, and he was involved in all kinds of inadequate and abusive practices. You had guards with nicknames like Claw Hammer Spence and others who beat inmates. There were people who were killed under suspicious circumstances. The conditions of confinement, heat, light, ventilation, terrible, no working conditions that were adequate, no real health care, it was just a zoo, a zoo. And after we secured the desegregation of the prison, we, we basically litigated for many months the case involving conditions of confinement at Reidsville, which also included conditions of confinement on death row. Speaker 2: Now, are we talking about a desegregation of the prison, I mean, how-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --the prison was segregated-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --in the sense, in the sense that-- Speaker 1: Racially segregated. Speaker 2: --all the prisoners were black? Speaker 1: All the black prisoners were kept in one part and the whites were in another. Speaker 2: Okay. All right. Speaker 1: One of the most (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Any, any black official, prison officials? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: Or guards? Speaker 1: There were a few guards, low level guards. All white senior administration. Joe Hopper [Joseph Hopper] was then the, the warden. And the State of Georgia went out and hired Griffin Bell's law firm, or Griffin [B.] Bell, Jr., I shouldn't say Griffin Bell. Griffin Bell's son and his law firm and paid them handsome money to litigate this case. And when it was finally over the Legal Defense Fund got almost a million dollars in attorneys' fees because the case was settled, they were defending the indefensible. Story_ID: 611912 Speaker 1: But there are many things that went on at the Georgia State Prison [Reidsville, Georgia]. I'll just give you an example of the, the cruelty of the, the place, the shocking cruelty. There was, the, they have classification systems in prisons. And the classification system by type of crime, violent, those kinds of characteristics. The Georgia State Prison had a policy of placing the young inmates, the first offenders, in with the homosexuals, because they said they didn't fight as hard as the older prisoners, and it was a way of pacifying the population. So I got, this is outrageous, I got a letter one time, an anonymous letter from someone who said there was a young inmate who had been viciously gang raped in the dormitory and that this inmate was writing to say couldn't we help to try to get this kid out. So I called for the--an opportunity to meet this young man, and he came out, and he was not as big as I am, he looked like he didn't shave yet, little young, in for car theft, first offender. He was obviously, mentally, completely out of it. I mean he couldn't, he was having hallucinations because every time I talked to him he was doing this, looking around, he was hearing voices. I talked to him for about an hour, trying to get him to say anything. The only thing that he said, I said, "If I could get you out of here, where would you want to go?" And he finally said, "Home." So I wrote on a yellow pad a temporary restraining order application, I served it on the warden, and then I appealed to him as a human being. I said, "Look, you know, we can go and try to torture the judge into having a hearing, and, and do all this and get the lawyers involved." I said, "But surely you don't want a young man just to be viciously gang raped over and over again in your institution, under your own humanity. Won't you please move him?" And so they moved him, but listen to what happened. They moved him from the open ward, where he had been victimized, to the hospital floor, and they locked him in a cell so that nobody could get to him. Now this is inhumane for somebody who's mentally deranged and, and needs help, but he's at least protected from people being able to get to him, so I thought. I learned about a week later when I came back to the prison, that at night the inmate orderlies had the keys to the cells, and that they had victimized this young man while he was up there in the hospital floor for his own protection. Now to me--we later got him sent to a mental hospital. And I hope that they were able to do something to restore him to sanity. But to me, that is a classic example of the kind of vicious inhumanity and disregard for people. And any system that would treat young people that way, or have a classification system like that, is an abomination. Story_ID: 611913 Speaker 1: So when we hear things about prisons and conditions in them, it may be to say, well, there are a lot of bad guys, there are a lot of bad guys, I've met a lot of them. But there's so much more than that that is at issue and at stake, and it's--not only the treatment of individuals, it's the kind of society we insist up on having and we've got to fight back and push back because look at, look at what this is doing to black people, the increasing numbers of women, the disproportionate impact on our young men. It's, it's a vicious, vicious system. So that's one example of the kind of suffering that I saw. Here's another minor example, because I had just, I've, unfortunately a mind full of these stories, which is a terrible thing to carry around in your head to remember them. But I went and talked to, because there was an outbreak of tuberculosis and so we had filed to try to force the prison [Georgia State Prison, Reidsville, Georgia] to test everybody to see did these inmates have tuberculosis. There was one very handsome, tall, young brother whose name was Eugene X [ph.], he was a Muslim, and he was found with tuberculosis. And he had been coughing and hacking, he looked so pitiful and frail when I first met him, and they did get him some treatment. A couple of weeks later, I was talking to another inmate and I said, "Well, you know, at least they got Mr. Barber [ph.] some care for his tuberculosis, and everybody has been tested, and so I feel better about that." And he looked me in the eye, he said, "What?" He said, "I was his cellmate for a year, they never tested me." So you see the indifference with which human beings lives and wellbeing. I don't think that we put these people in prison so they can develop tuberculosis or be gang raped. It's, it's, they may have done things that were wrong but there's vicious cruelty. Story_ID: 611914 Speaker 1: Now my life, I think, was saved by a death row prisoner. This is an interesting tidbit. This is a white man. His name was Troy [Leon] Gregg. He was one of the lead plaintiffs in a case called Gregg versus Georgia [Gregg v. Georgia, 1976], in which the death penalty was upheld with standards, and this must have been in 1976. Troy Gregg was on death row at the Georgia State Prison [Reidsville, Georgia]. He was in there, I think because of felony murder situation. Meaning that he, that he and somebody else had robbed, the other person killed whoever it was, but Gregg was held equally liable for the death as the one who pulled the trigger, and so he also got the death sentence. He was a poor, low income guy, lived in a trailer, and sort of fit the stereotype of the, the poor southern white. But he was willing to testify about the harassment and treatment of black inmates on death row, and also about the conditions of confinement under which he suffered. I'll skip to the chase. On the day before a hearing that we were going to have on conditions of confinement and death row, I had insisted to the judge that the death row prisoners be transferred from the prison to the courthouse in, in order to have the hearing, that it was inherently coercive to have this hearing at the prison, and that they, like everyone else, should be brought to the court. And the court had ruled with me, although the defendants sorely objected. So we had the hearing. And but, before the hearing, Troy Gregg told me he said, "Listen, Lynn [HistoryMaker Lynn Jones Huntley]," he said, "I know that they're planning to take the death row prisoners to the courthouse--to Tattnall County [Georgia] courthouse." I said, "Yes." He said, "Well, I'm going to tell you something that could get me killed if it got out," he said, "But you seem like a nice person, and I know you're just trying to help us." And I said, "Really, what is it?" He said, "Don't take the death sentence prisoners to Tattnall County." He said, "Something is going to jump off, and you could be really hurt." And so I took his advice, I went back to the court, said I changed my mind in view of their delays and blah, blah, I would have the hearing for the death sentence prisoners at the Georgia State Prison. Fast forward it's now four years later, I'm working in the justice department [U.S. Department of Justice] in Washington [D.C.] again in a trial section involving prison and jail litigation. I'm reading Corrections [Today] magazine one night, and there is an article: Troy Gregg and two other inmates had escaped from prison, from death row, and he was found murdered and drowned in a pond not too far from the prison. Now I don't know whether he was part of a conspiracy to escape at that time or not, but something tells me that when he told me that that's exactly what he was doing. That he knew, although he was under sentence of death, or life in prison, will never get out, that he saw something in me as a person and his humanity was touched, and he told me the word that perhaps had kept me from being in harm's way. So that shows you the complexity of doing this work. These are human beings and they have faces and voices and handwritings and names and not all of them are the, the vicious animals that we are portraying them to be. Many are people who have simply gone the wrong way, and it's a vicious system. Story_ID: 611915 Speaker 1: Now what year was--were you with the justice department [U.S. Department of Justice], and in what capacity did you serve? Speaker 2: Okay. I went to the justice department in 1978, and I was there from 1978 until 1982. It was during the era of the [President James Earl "Jimmy"] Carter [Jr.] administration. And then I was there for a brief period of time after [President Ronald Wilson] Reagan came in. I was brought there as the head of what they call the Special Litigation Section, I was the section chief, the youngest section chief in the Civil Rights Division. And my trial section was responsible for litigation involving conditions of confinement and the rights of people who were in prisons, jails, mental hospitals, mental retardation facilities, nursing homes. I also had enforcement responsibility for discrimination in places of public accommodation and facilities. And also the office of, of Indian [Native American] rights litigation. But it was called Special Litigation, and the heart of it was really the rights of institutionalized persons. Highlights of that, I guess, are two I could list, there are many, three I could mention. I won't go into the details. One of them was a case called Pennhurst [Halderman v. Pennhurst State School and Hospital], which we litigated which resulted in the closing of a major facility for the mentally retarded where the lack of care of cleanliness of, of medical attention was just profound. And where many of the people in that institution could have, with support, lived in less restrictive environments which is what the law required. And so we helped to get a lot of those people deinstitutionalized and given appropriate placements in the community. The other big case, which was a landmark, was a case called Ruiz and the United States versus Estelle [Ruiz v. Estelle, 1980]. It was a conditions of confinement case challenging every prison in the State of Texas, 18, 20, 25, 30 prisons, I don't remember the number; it was a huge number. And it was the longest litigated trial in the history of prison litigation. We were at trial for a year, every day before Judge William Wayne Justice. Much like the conditions of confinement in the Georgia State Prison [Reidsville, Georgia], overcrowding, lack of medical care, lack of basic hygiene, violence and brutality, classification systems, all those issues were at stake. And ultimately the, the case was won and went up on appeal and it did result in some improvements in conditions of confinement in, in the Texas prisons. Story_ID: 611916 Speaker 1: We also had a case involving conditions of confinement in every mental hospital in the State of Texas. And that case was also later settled in ways that improved conditions of confinement for mentally ill people. Whenever you have vulnerable people, there are predators around, or indifference can take hold and allow predatory conditions to arise. And the mental hospitals and the mental retardation facilities with people with their limbs frozen in odd shapes and angles, because no one has taken the time to turn them, or bed sores because no one cleans them. These are ill befitting a country that purports to be the leader of the, the world with all the resources that we have. It's, it's a terrible thing. But I was there [U.S. Department of Justice, Civil Rights Division] for four years. I was appointed the deputy assistant attorney general for civil rights. And the strategy was going to be had there been a reelection of President [James Earl "Jimmy"] Carter [Jr.], that I would have become the assistant attorney general for civil rights succeeding Drew S. Days [III]. However, [President Ronald Wilson] Reagan won. William Bradford Reynolds came in, he inherited me as one of his deputies. And the goal of the Reagan administration was to undo all of the civil rights laws and policies that everyone had fought hard all those other years for. So I found myself in the awkward position of being a holdover, arguing on every front, almost every day, with the new Reagan administration about the, the precedents that they were trying to dismember. Story_ID: 611917 Speaker 1: I am Evelyn Pounds, and I am the interviewer, and Adrian Jackson is the videographer. And would you state your name, please? Speaker 2: Yes, my name is [HistoryMaker] Lynn Jones Huntley. Speaker 1: And today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is December 14th, 2005. Speaker 1: And the place where the interview is taking place? Speaker 2: We're at the offices of the Southern Education Foundation at 135 Auburn Avenue in Atlanta [Georgia]. Speaker 1: All right. And I'm going to state that this is a completion interview from the interview that you started on August the 6th, 2005 [sic. August 26, 2005]. Story_ID: 611918 Speaker 1: Last time that you were interviewed you were telling us about your position with the [U.S.] Department of Justice [Civil Rights Division] from 1978 to 1982. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So would you talk a little bit about your exit from that position and your entrance into the new position that you took after that? Speaker 2: Yes. Well I joined the justice department during the [President James Earl] Jimmy Carter [Jr.] administration, as I mentioned previously. And when the [President Ronald Wilson] Reagan administration was elected, it quickly became apparent to me that I was not going to be able to stay there. They were trying to dismantle all of the hard won gains from the civil rights era, to which I was committed. And so I began to think about where else I might go to continue to work and to contribute to the cause of civil rights. And a colleague of mine said, "Well, have you ever thought about working at a foundation like the Ford Foundation [New York, New York]?" I said, "No." And they said, "Well, there's been a reorganization there, they have a new president, Frank--Franklin [A.] Thomas, maybe you could get a job there." So I spoke to Jack Greenberg, who had been my former boss at the NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund [Inc. (LDF)], and also Jean Fairfax, who had been the head of the Educational Fund, and both of them had been contacted as sources for staff possibly for the Ford Foundation. Long story short, I was interviewed multiple times, it was a long time in coming, but I finally was offered the job of program officer for minority rights and opportunities at Ford. And when I knew I had the job at hand, I went in and spoke to Brad Reynolds [William Bradford Reynolds], and I told him that, it was sort of funny, we always, although he was an ideologue, and very much against everything I believed in in civil rights, personally he was a pleasant man. So I went in, and I told him that before my eyes had flooded open that day, indeed before I had even gotten out of my bed, the thought had occurred to me that I would rather go to the dentist and have my teeth drilled to the gum without benefit of Novocain, than to come into the department one more day, and therefore I was giving him notice that I would be resigning. And he was very solicitous and, oh, he'd never want to be surrounded by yes people, and he certainly wanted me to stay and if ever he could serve as a reference and I simply said to him, "Brad, do you want to ruin me? You're going to be my reference?" So I exited the department and went to work for the Ford Foundation, where I remained for thirteen years. Speaker 1: When you say he was an ideologue, would you explain that-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --just a little bit? Speaker 2: I think he had a point of view about the role of law and about what should or should not be a public responsibility to address issues of poverty, and inequality and discrimination. And it was a very narrow view and one that would have undone all affirmative action programs, all minority set aside programs, it preferred to have lax enforcement of antidiscrimination laws and policies. In short, that was an administration, as time wore on, that really was very much at odds with most of the civil rights community and took negative positions on most of the major civil rights issues of the, the day. Story_ID: 611919 Speaker 1: So you left [the U.S. Department of Justice, Civil Rights Division], and you took the position with the Ford Foundation [New York, New York] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Ford Foundation as the minority rights and opportunities officer. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: And there I was given the responsibility to think about the major problems confronting African Americans, Latinos, Asians and Native Americans, and to develop a program of grant making that would be responsive to the needs of those groups. And it was a big responsibility and a wide ranging opportunity to make a contribution, and it was the first time that I had had the chance to think not only about litigative strategies to try to advance civil rights but also complimentary educational and research and public policy and advocacy strategies that could advance those interests as well. So I learned a lot and I grew a lot during that tenure. Speaker 1: Okay. And what were some of the challenges that were confronting you with the new position that you had not faced with, you know, the, the prior positions-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --that you had? Speaker 2: Well, when you are a line officer, or a lawyer involved in particular cases, you have a direct relationship with clients, and you are doing the work yourself to try to advance their interests. A philanthropist is one step removed. You are identifying problems, thinking about the strategies that could impact, in positive ways, those problems and help to solve them, identifying groups that can implement the policies and practices that could impact these problems, awarding the monies in a way that is judicious and most effective, monitoring how they spend the money and then constantly assessing how they do with the work for which you've given them support and making adjustments all along the way. So it requires you both to think very broadly about what's going on in the external environment, as well as the dynamics within the non-profit sector and in particular organizations as well. And that includes issues such as capacity building or ways of strengthening institutions through fundraising enhancement, those kinds of efforts, governance questions. So it was very much a broadening experience, and I had a wonderful group of tutors, they were called grant seekers. And, as I was want to tell my colleagues at Ford, the people who came there seeking resources were the frontline troops and a little humility on our part and an active listening, you could learn a tremendous amount about the needs, the problems, the possibilities. And so I, I got to meet a remarkable array of people not only in the United States but also internationally and some great human beings were put before us from which to learn. Story_ID: 611920 Speaker 1: You said they were grant troopers? Speaker 2: Grant, the grant seekers (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Grant seekers? Speaker 2: --are the frontline troops in these issues. So, you know, when you work for an institution that has a lot of money, some people succumb to the idea that they somehow are the--are a part of this great rich establishment. But I was always mindful that I was an employee there, a salaried person, I'm not a rich person, I was working for a rich institution. And the best way I could serve my community, and others for which I had responsibility, was to be very attentive to what people who were closest to the problems said, and try to figure out how to translate their goals and aspirations into language and concepts that the foundation [Ford Foundation, New York, New York] would find appealing, so that I could get the money from point A to point B. When I went there I thought to myself, what are the couple of signature things that I want to do? You cannot fight every battle in a big institution and win, and a matter of fact you will wear yourself out and lose credibility. I wanted to make sure that there were several key things that I thought were important that I could do during my tenure there, and keep those always before me. Speaker 1: And what were some of those? Speaker 2: Well, I have always believed that the African American church is a sleeping giant. There is no such thing, of course, as the church, they're really just a collection of different kinds of churches and very loosely affiliated as a matter of fact. And yet they have access to more hearts and minds than any institution in our community. And so I believed that it would be very important to try to find ways to strengthen and enhance the secular service delivery capacities of these churches and to bring them into closer dialogue with philanthropic institutions. You know, most of the African American communities' disposable charitable dollars are given to churches. And so in that sense churches are our indigenous philanthropy. And I thought it was important to have organized philanthropy like foundations and churches in closer communication and collaboration for problem solving, and also so that foundations could give money to churches in furtherance of their community uplift and service, not for the propagation of religion but to provide needed services to people in distress and in, in poor and disadvantaged communities. I was successful in initiating the first program that the Ford Foundation ever supported to strengthen the secular service delivery capacities of black churches and related institutions. We supported efforts for community development, for pregnancy prevention, for black male youth health enhancement and development programs for a variety of worthy causes, and it was a vibrant and excellent effort that lasted for many years. And indeed we supported a foundation-wide effort through the Council on Foundations that got a lot of foundations across the country supporting black churches and working with their leaders and seeing those leaders as an appropriate members of the boards of trustees of foundations themselves. That was one area. Story_ID: 611921 Speaker 1: A second area [at Ford Foundation, New York, New York] that I had great pleasure with, had to do with minorities and mass communications. I wrote in an early program paper called 'Civil Rights in Black America' [ph.] that one of the most devastating problems we confront is both the proliferation and negative images of black people and the absence of positive stories that tell the history and the breadth and diversity of our people. And so I wanted to support media projects that would help to dispel stereotypes and would also help to provide people with the sense, not only of the needs, but of the great contributions and strengths of black people. In that regard we were the first foundation, through my instigation, to fund 'Eyes on the Prize,' which was Henry Hampton's great epic series on the Civil Rights Movement in the United States. And Henry became a close friend of mine, and not only did we fund very handsomely 'Eyes on the Prize,' but also 'America's War on Poverty.' He was a wonderful and gifted filmmaker, and I learned a lot from him and I'm very proud of the breadth and scope and quality of that outstanding documentary. That was one example of a film project but there were others to document the life of Fannie Lou Hamer in Mississippi or to focus on the way in which the courts have helped to combat racism and discrimination in public education, a variety of different kinds of films, stereotyping in the, the media itself. We also supported the first program that brought together all the minority journalists organizations in the name of the UNITY ['94] Conference that was held here, I believe, in Atlanta [Georgia], so that black, Native American, Asian American and Latino journalists could talk about the common strategies that they might advance to combat media bias and ensure fairer and fuller coverage of our diverse communities. And that was a one of a kind, first effort, and I was very proud of that. So that's another area that I worked very hard in. And-- Speaker 2: Okay. And that was around 1982, '83 [1983] that conference (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I think that was 1984, '85 [sic. 1994] something like that-- Story_ID: 611922 Speaker 1: The third area [at Ford Foundation, New York, New York] that I was especially proud of, and it won't be a surprise to you, was to give major grants to the, what we call the infrastructure of civil rights litigation and advocacy in the United States. So we made major grants to the NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund [Inc. (LDF)], or the Mexican American Legal Defense Fund [Mexican American Legal Defense and Educational Fund (MALDEF)] or the Puerto Rican Legal Defense Fund [Puerto Rican Legal Defense and Education Fund (PRLDEF); LatinoJustice PRLDEF], the Asian Legal Defense Fund [Asian American Legal Defense and Education Fund], the Women's Legal Defense Fund [National Partnership for Women & Families], all of these groups that were fighting against the efforts of the federal government and state and others to curtail civil rights protections and to turn back the clock. And in my program paper, I made the case that we ought to give these major national organizations flexible and significant resources so that they could respond to emergent needs. And that line of programming still exists in the Ford Foundation. And is probably, in terms of aggregate amounts of money, the largest such program still operating. My budget when I was the, the, I later became the deputy director of my program, and then the director, but we had about $50 million a year to give out, and so that was not an inconsiderable amount of money. And we tried to use it to also strengthen legal services for the poor, to address issues of refugees and migrant workers, to focus on minorities and the media and other issues of that type. Story_ID: 611923 Speaker 1: You were with the Ford Foundation [New York, New York] up until, what is it, 1995? Speaker 2: I was at the Ford Foundation up until 1995. I might also say that it was there that I first got my exposure to the world of international activism to combat racism and promote equality among all people. And I consider myself today very much a, not only a civil rights advocate and an educator, but also a human rights advocate. These are brother and sister movements and efforts around the world. And my program division [Human Rights and Social Justice Program] was responsible also for collaborating with the Ford Foundation's field offices in Africa, Asia, and Latin American on issues of human rights. So I had the rare opportunity to go to sites where the disappeared had been unearthed in Chile during the [Augusto] Pinochet regime. I got a chance to see firsthand, during the military regime in Brazil, the problems not only of lack of democracy, but of gross poverty and racism. I got a chance to travel to many African countries, including South Africa, during the area--era prior to apartheid and after apartheid, and to many Asian countries as well. So it was a widening, broadening experience. And I met many wonderful human beings, struggling against the odds to make the world a better place. Story_ID: 611924 Speaker 1: You were in South Africa. Could you tell us a little bit about the South African experience and what you did-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --with the foundation in South Africa? Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm. Well, Franklin [A.] Thomas was the first African American to be the president of the Ford Foundation [New York, New York]. And sadly, given the way things are these days, he may be the last, I hope not, but that was the case. He was a remarkable man. He had led a study commission that published an outstanding report called 'South Africa: Time Running Out.' This was during the apartheid era, and before he became president of the Ford Foundation. After he took the helm of Ford, he created a study group to continue work examining what was going on in South Africa and documenting the problems there. And I was part of that study group. So I got to go to South Africa with an--the distinguished array of people that included the former Secretary of State Cyrus Vance or the governor of Michigan, Governor [William] Milliken, a number of heavy hitters, and I was one of the staff members who got to go with them to see and learn firsthand. And we also had meetings in the United States that brought people from South Africa here to talk about what kind of strategies could be advanced to try to dismember apartheid. My first trip to South Africa came right after the 1985 UN [United Nations] World Conference for the end of the Decade of Women [1985 Third World Conference on Women] that I had attended in Nairobi, Kenya. And I went to South Africa, and I hadn't been there before, and I flew in by myself and I was scared to death. And I got to the airport in South Africa and there was no one there to meet me. And I was looking around and some strange white woman called my name. And I had never met her before either and I went over to her and she said, oh, she'd been sent by the foundation to take care of me during my layover in Johannesburg [South Africa], and she'd see that I got back because I was going on to another city. And she took me to her house and no sooner did I get to her house than the state of emergency was declared. I went on the next venue but that time will always be etched in my memory banks because on the program and the itinerary of all the activists and leaders whom we were going to meet, I had to mark detained or missing. And there was one incident, a Reverend [Mvume] Dandala, we were supposed to meet, and I had met him before in the United States, and he had disappeared during the period we were there. We were told from some other people that they thought he was at a particular South African prison. Now I'm the old prisoner rights lawyer from the United States, so I persuaded two other people to go with me to the prison and demand to see Reverend Dandala because I was told that sometimes just knowing an international group were interested in you might be the difference between life and death. And we went to the prison and I don't know what I was thinking because they could have easily arrested me at that time, but anyway I went in and insisted on seeing Reverend Dandala and would not leave. And we finally met with the warden and he would never confirm or deny that Reverend Dandala was there, but we later learned that Reverend Dandala was, in fact, there, and he was subsequently released. Story_ID: 611925 Speaker 1: I say all of that to say that those were very turbulent times when very brave people were putting their lives on the line, and there we were trying to serve as intermediaries, as people who could bring international pressure to bear on the apartheid government. But once South Africa gets in your bloodstream, it never gets out. It is our best hope for a prosperous, free, leadership country on the continent of Africa. And my only regret is that now that Mr. [Nelson] Mandela is free, and Mr. [Thabo] Mbeki is presiding over the economic restoration of the country, that the pace of international investment in South Africa, though good, is not as rapid as it should be, and that many of those dear people, who have lived lives of deprivation and poverty, will probably not in their lifetimes see the benefits for which they sacrificed so much. But it's, it's a wonderful country, and I've been back now any number of times since then, and each time I go it's, it's very different. So I'm very proud of that era of work at the Ford Foundation [New York, New York]. It was a lot, I was there for a long time, but that should give you some sense of what we were trying to do. Speaker 2: And now you did have a chance to meet with Mandela? Speaker 1: Yes. But that was years later, and after he had been president of South Africa. After I left the Ford Foundation, I remarried [to Walter R. Huntley, Jr.], came to Atlanta [Georgia] and began work at the Southern Education Foundation. And I wanted to do the project of my dreams. And I called the project of my dreams the Comparative Human Relations Initiative. Over the years at Ford, I had had the distinct privilege of meeting remarkable human beings struggling against the odds of racism and poverty, in both Brazil and South Africa, and the United States, my home place. And I kept thinking to myself all of these different people and institutions are fighting the same evil, it's just dressed up in different historical and experiential and cultural garbs, and there ought to be some way that these people who are really part of one movement, can come together to learn from each other's experiences about what works and what doesn't, and also in a global era about the global forces that are increasingly interacting with domestic forces to effect the efficacy of our strategies and work. In other words, there needs to be a global movement against racism and discrimination. And I hoped by getting people who had many similarities, although they aren't readily apparent, from South Africa, Brazil, and the United States together to learn from each other that I can make a contribution. And so I developed that program, I came to the Southern Education Foundation to implement it. And I worked in that area for seven years. It was in that context that I met Mr. Mandela. Story_ID: 611926 Speaker 1: Let's back up a little, back to before 1995 when you were with the Ford Foundation [New York, New York]. You did the work in South Africa and the other countries-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: What other country did you make a mark so to speak, was it Brazil? Speaker 2: It was Brazil. When I first came to Ford, and began to get this international exposure, I had two wonderful African American colleagues who were working on the black movement in Brazil, in the Brazil office in Rio de Janeiro [Brazil]. And so it was natural that I would want to get to know them. One was named Patricia Sellers, the other was Michael [J.] Turner. And I came to visit them several times in Brazil to meet with the black activists, who were really a small vanguard at that time, trying to promote racial consciousness, trying to mobilize support against racism and discrimination and exclusion, and trying to dispel what they referred to as the myth of the great racial democracy. So I had been to Brazil any number of times and met with, with my colleagues, a variety of wonderful Afro-Brazilians and white allies, who were trying to do this work. And as a matter of fact I had hosted a group of them in the United States who were visiting when I was at the Ford Foundation. So all of that made me want to combine Brazil, South Africa, and the United States into one project which we called the Comparative Human Relations Initiative. You know, all three countries have a history of slavery. All three countries have a large disadvantaged population of people of African descent. All three countries tried through either practice or operation of law to enforce racial discrimination. And all of them face the challenge now given the demands of the global market place, to completely rethink their strategy. It is no longer in any country's advantage to have a huge mass of underdeveloped, under-contributing talent, going to waste in the competitive global market place. Skills and talent have to be developed and educated in order for countries' economics to grow and for investment capital to be attractive. And so, Brazil, like the United States belatedly, and certainly like South Africa, have come to a new awareness that these black people, who for so many years they were content to keep as field workers, and in the service and manufacturing industries, are now the wave of the future for the intellectual capital leadership of these countries. And that made the comparison between the three very interesting. Brazil was the last country to abolish the Trans-Atlantic Slave Trade that was in 1888. It inherited and imported more Africans than any country in the Western Hemisphere. It is the largest black nation outside the continent of Africa with a majority of black people, although many of them don't consider themselves black in the same way that we do in the United States. And it is a country that is the size of the continental United States. It has one of the world's ten largest economies. So we have a large, majority-black nation sitting right on our doorstep, it's called Brazil. And I became fascinated with the history and culture and possibilities for Brazil to exercise some tremendous leadership. And one more thing. At the leaders of the--the G8 leaders summit, where the leaders of the major industrial powers around the world meet every year, only--the only African descent country represented there was Brazil through [Luiz Inacio] Lula da Silva, the president of Brazil. Think about, there is no African country that's in that elite club. So whether Brazil considers itself a black nation or not, those of us who know its demographics know that the majority of its people are people whom we would consider black. And the black movement is just starting to really exert itself and push for its own empowerment. And I have great hopes for Brazil. Story_ID: 611927 Speaker 1: So after the Ford Foundation [New York, New York], where did you go? What-- Speaker 2: Well, I came to the Southern Education Foundation [Atlanta, Georgia]. I had known its president who was then Eldridge McMillan, he's a delightful man. I had met him when I organized what we called the National Commission on Testing and Public Policy when I was at Ford to examine the role of standardized tests and opportunity allocation. And Eldridge was one of the commissioners whom we asked to participate, and he was a lovely man. And when I came to Atlanta [Georgia] I tried to think about where could I take these grant funds, where the administrative overhead would mean something. And I thought about The Carter Center [Atlanta, Georgia], and I thought about Emory [University, Atlanta, Georgia], or one of the black colleges, but at the end of the day I decided to come to the Southern Education Foundation to run my project [Comparative Human Relations Initiative], and it proved to be a wonderful and supportive home. And that project lasted for seven years. We had meetings in Brazil, South Africa and the United States. The last meeting we had in South Africa was where I had the privilege of meeting Nelson Mandela. And he was our keynote speaker at the conference. And then there after I led a delegation of people from the United States and Brazil to the UN World Conference Against Racism that was held in South Africa I think in 2002 [sic. 2001]. So that was the end of that project. But we, we issued a number of reports of our findings. We have an anthology that features some of the leading scholars and activists and intellectuals from the three countries, that is now available, it's called 'Beyond Racism[: Race and Inequality in Brazil, South Africa, and the United States'], published by Lynne Rienner [Publishers]. We have an anthology of black movement leaders that was published in Portuguese and Brazil, called 'Tirando a Mascara,' 'Removing the Mask.' And we have a number of, we have a website called www.beyondracism.org. It's a bit out of date now but people can still download our materials. And just three years after the project is over I just looked at the figures and over the last several months we have had over a hundred thousand visitors to the website, almost all of them from Brazil because it is one of the few websites that has a Portuguese component to it. And Brazilians are thirsty for information about what black people in the United States and elsewhere are doing and some of the strategies and policies we have promoted. So it's, it's heartening. And if I had more resources I sure would work on trying to get more materials and information to, to Brazilians. Story_ID: 611928 Speaker 1: Now in your current position with the Southern Education Foundation [(SEF), Atlanta, Georgia], you started out as director and now you are president; is that correct? Speaker 2: Correct. Speaker 1: Okay. And what are, well just tell us about your position now as president? Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: What you do daily? Speaker 2: All right. Well, let me start by saying a word about what Southern Education Foundation is. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We are an organization that traces its roots back to 1867 when George Peabody, a northern philanthropist, established a dedicated fund to work on education issues in the post-Civil War-torn South. And thereafter that fund [George Peabody Education Fund] and three others Slater [John F. Slater Fund for the Education of Freedmen] Jeanes [Anna T. Jeanes Foundation], and Randolph [Virginia Randolph Fund] were combined in 1937 to create the institution we call today, the Southern Education Foundation. So we will have our 140th birthday in 2007 and our, or seventieth birthday if you want to view the 1937 year as the anniversary year. We've been around for a long time. What does SEF do? For most of its life, the Southern Education Foundation was a private foundation. Meaning that it had a small endowment from which it made grants to support a variety of worthy causes designed to advance education. One of the earliest things SEF did was to push for public schools in the South. And particularly, public kindergarten for children in the South. It also played a leading role, under my predecessor's [Eldridge McMillan] leadership, in desegregation cases, and in trying to help black colleges survive and thrive. In 1988, it became what we call a public charity, meaning that we really are an operating foundation like most nonprofits. Our endowment is too small for us really to have the kind of impact we would like solely by making grants. So instead we basically raise monies from the public, from foundations, and from corporate sources to underwrite our program activities. And since I've been here we have continued to do some very important and cutting edge work that's much needed. For example, there are seventy-seven historically black colleges [HBCUs] in the South. And many of these colleges are very resource challenged, they have small endowments, they have lots of need, scholarship need, dependent students, and what we have tried to do is to help these schools learn better how to meet the new principles of accreditation so that they will not lose their accreditation status. The Southern Association of Colleges and Schools has disproportionately sanctioned black colleges and as a matter of fact a number of them have closed as a result of losing their accreditation. So accreditation really is a life and death issue for most colleges but especially black colleges. And our efforts have helped some of these colleges learn about best practices and strategies to meet accreditation requirements. Story_ID: 611929 Speaker 1: We [Southern Education Foundation, Atlanta, Georgia] also have worked with these schools, particularly librarians and faculty members and technology people, to try to promote instructional technology use in the classroom in order to enhance student learning. And it is, it is disappointing but not surprising the resource challenged institutions don't often have as much money as they need to provide professional development for their faculty. And yet, young people are coming into the schools with technology proficiencies, and interests and you really can't say that you are providing kids with the kind of education they need if you can't model in your own instruction the kind of technology use that you hope they will master. And so what we have done is to help faculty members from consortium of sixteen black colleges [HBCUs], learn about instructional technology as a method to improve teaching in the classrooms. It's, it's a, a reinvigoration of the human capital of black colleges. And finally we have partnered with The Kresge Foundation in an $18 million, five-year effort to help black colleges, a select subset of them, enhance their fundraising capacities from black alumni and try to create a new culture of giving among students and, and alumni. And I'm happy to say that at a, an event that we had earlier this year, here in Atlanta [Georgia], there were twenty-six black colleges that were honored and those schools had collectively raised $53 million from other black folks. So it was nice to realize that we have now a generation of people, some of whom have significant resources, and who are increasingly willing to support these anchor institutions in our communities. But whether it's small amounts or big amounts, the schools simply know what are best practices and strategies to raise money from alumni and we think we've set a new high bar of achievement in, in that regard. So we work a lot with the historically black colleges. Speaker 2: Now of those schools were, how many of them were in the Atlanta area? Were, were any of those, the schools here represented (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, yes. The schools that were involved, all of the black colleges across the South were invited to participate in these projects. But in the fundraising project that I'm specifically referencing, there were five colleges in specific that were given large grants to prove what could be done. And that included Johnson C. Smith [University, Charlotte, North Carolina], Dillard [University, New Orleans, Louisiana], Xavier [University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana], Meharry [Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] and Bethune-Cookman [University, Daytona Beach, Florida]. The others got smaller grants for that purpose. But several of them were honored during this program. I know that Clark Atlanta University [Atlanta, Georgia] had gotten over a $3 million contribution from one of its alumni, for example. Story_ID: 611930 Speaker 1: After the hurricane [Hurricane Katrina] hit, especially with Dillard [University, New Orleans, Louisiana], was there any work that you all [Southern Education Foundation, Atlanta, Georgia] might have done for-- Speaker 2: Absolutely (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) Dillard. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Well, Dillard and Xavier [University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana] and the--and Southern University of New Orleans [Southern University at New Orleans (SUNO), New Orleans, Louisiana], all three historically black colleges [HBCUs] with an aggregate student body of about 10,000 students. Dillard is the smallest of the three, it has about 22 to 2,500 students, I think. Xavier has about 4,300. Yes, we have been very much involved. We were able to secure some funds from the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation. And we have thus far dispensed $3.2 million to help students who previously attended Dillard or Xavier enroll in other black colleges on an interim basis so their education is not interrupted while those schools reconstitute themselves and recover from the hurricane. The Mellon Foundation also made grants directly to the schools themselves to help them plan and begin to rebuild and to maintain core staffing. And we have, as well, been working with a consortium of foundations to try to get them involved and providing more information and hence money to black colleges, particularly, Dillard and, and Xavier. I was just talking with the vice president for advancement from Dillard yesterday as a matter of fact. These schools face enormous challenges. Dillard estimates that it has sustained damage between $340 and $400 million. It had an endowment of less than $75 million. Xavier estimates that it has sustained damages from $40 to $90 million. It had an endowment of less than a $100,000--$100 million. So both of these institutions are in deep trouble and I hope that current efforts to lobby the federal government to help these institutions recover and help their students find their way back so that these institutions can continue to thrive will be forthcoming. But right now, the federal government has done very little to help them, and they are in a very precarious position. I am told that Xavier has preregistered over 3,000 students for the second semester beginning in January. And I am told that Dillard has preregistered almost 1,000. The housing of those students, the care for those students, the classes, faculty housing resources, facilities for classroom uses, technology equipment, all of these are issues that are bearing down on these schools, but if they, if they close their doors for longer, they may lose their student bodies for good. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: And then they would have to start all over again, and that would only compound their difficulties. So I'm hoping the students will go back and be tolerant of the discomfort and the disruption. They're a part of something much larger than themselves. I want them to have a good education, but Dillard and Xavier and SUNO are, are three jewels in our crown. And black colleges nationally graduate about twenty-five percent of all blacks who receive a four-year degree and almost forty percent of those who receive degrees in science, technology, engineering or mathematics. So, losing any of them is a devastating blow to the, the important education pipeline for the nation. Story_ID: 611931 Speaker 1: Now in the case of Morris Brown [College, Atlanta, Georgia]-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --the, has it, I--need to ask this question, has it been, it did lose its accreditation? Speaker 2: Yes, it did. Speaker 1: And nothing has been done to actually salvage that institution? Speaker 2: Well, Morris Brown is, is struggling now. It has some good people involved, it's trying to come back to life but they face an uphill battle. My last understanding, and this may or may not today be accurate, was that they still owed well over $20 million to the federal government. They don't have an endowment. And when last I talked to their president [Dr. Samuel D. Jolley, Jr.], he said that they had about a 125 students enrolled, and they were--offered four majors. Now those students who are enrolled by going to an unaccredited school are not eligible for federal financial aid. And so there comes a point when you have to ask is it in the best interests of the students to attend an unaccredited school, even if that is the key to helping the school rebound. And I think that delicate balancing process is occurring. They're hoping to raise the money, they've borrowed some money. I'm praying for them, but it will take a lot for them to meet the standards in order to become reaccredited. And that's the process they would have to follow in order to come back to life and become financial aid eligible. Story_ID: 611932 Speaker 1: And what are some of your other duties as president of--SEF [Southern Education Foundation, Atlanta, Georgia] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, SEF is a multifaceted organization. I've talked a bit about historically black colleges [HBCUs], and some of our work. But a lot of our work is from preschool through higher education. And one of our programs of which I am most proud, is a program called Miles to Go. What we have been doing across the South is going into particular southern states and documenting patterns of education access and outcomes, and strategies to try to reduce disparities in education quality for low-income students. And then working with citizens groups and policy makers and other opinion shapers to create public will supportive of improvement in education. A majority of the South's public school students are low-income students, a majority. Most southern states have a dropout rate of forty percent or more. So when you see all of the improvements in test scores and the like, remember that that is minus about forty percent of the students who should have been included in that pool. This is, this is intolerable. Those young people will have much harder time in the work force, will not be able to earn livable wages, everyone knows that now it requires some measure of college just to earn livable wages. So we have a huge problem in the South and our reports are designed to persuade people that investing in education, just like investing in roads or investing in convention centers, is one of the most important means by which we can improve the economics and foster economic growth. So education is the underpinning of economic growth and ought to be seen in the same way. If we can find money for roads and other things we ought to be able to find the money for education of low-income students of all races. And that's the core mission of the Southern Education Foundation, is in--through the Miles to Go program. Story_ID: 611933 Speaker 1: We [Southern Education Foundation, Atlanta, Georgia] also have been doing work in preschool. You know, it's interesting, the Federal Reserve [System] just the other day issued a report saying that investment in preschool is one of the best investments the country could make in economic growth. Speaker 2: Now what age groups would this actually take into consideration? Speaker 1: Children from three to five-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --preschool before they're kindergarten eligible. We know that that's when young minds are developing. That's when the, the habits that will form a lifetime are developed in many children. And children who have access to quality preschool education, not only do better in school in terms of grades, but they do better overall in terms of life even employment and earnings figures tracked to kids who have had better preschool. So when you think about low-income children who may be deprived of some of the things that others have, finding ways to have public support for universal preschool, quality preschool, for low income kids has to be a priority. This is a battle that is ongoing in a variety of southern states, some have it to one extent or the other but trying to raise the standards and trying to get the resources so that low income kids have this chance to be ready to succeed in elementary school, is also something on which we are working. Story_ID: 611934 Speaker 1: We [Southern Education Foundation, Atlanta, Georgia] are very much interested in trying to create a new generation of young people who understand the importance of improving education for all students. And so we have had to honor the fiftieth anniversary of Brown versus Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954]. We created a program called the Education Summers Youth Leadership Initiative. Our goal was to find fifty of the smartest, most engaging and engaged young people we could from southern colleges and universities and expose them to opportunities to work in nonprofits that are concerned with low-income kids and improving education opportunity for them. And I'm happy to say as of this date, we've put fifty-one young people through these programs. They have served in leading non-profit organizations across the South. It is our hope that through efforts like this, we can help to inspire a new generation of leadership in education and social justice, and, as well, help young people think about the opportunities for employment and quality work and a chance to contribute through the non-profit sector. Speaker 2: So how were these students selected? Speaker 1: Well, we have a competitive process. The first year we had this we had a distinguished panel that included the former governor of Mississippi, William Winter, and Laughlin McDonald from the ACLU [American Civil Liberties Union] here in Atlanta [Georgia], and Eldridge McMillan the president emeritus of Southern Education Foundation and others. We sent out applications and notices, students could apply directly, they had to write an essay, they had to give us their grades and show evidence that they would benefit from the program, they had to have recommendations and then the judges picked the best and the brightest. And the first year the average GPA of students in the program was 3.56. And the program was about eighty percent African American students, a lot of them from historically black colleges [HBCUs]. Tremendously talented, inspiring young people. Each one was required to do an independent course of study and make a report or a program for how they were going to continue this work. And some of them did websites, they did reports, they did--one young man even wrote a poem and the title of his poem was called 'We Are the People We've Been Waiting For' [ph.]. I just, I'm very excited about that--that program. We've got to find a way to leave someone in the pipeline for leadership in this very important cause and this is our way of trying to contribute to that. Speaker 2: Excellent. Now we have a few questions, well is there anything else that you wanted to add? Speaker 1: Well, you, you asked me what my duties and responsibilities are-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --they are the, the leadership of the organization, working with our board of excellent people, now headed by [HistoryMaker] Dr. Emmett [D.] Carson of the Minneapolis Foundation [Minneapolis, Minnesota], and previously by [HistoryMaker] Norman Francis, the president of Xavier [University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And trying to recruit the most talented hard working people we can get to do this work and trying to serve our community and fundraising all the while. So those are my responsibilities and duties, and I've been the president for three years, and it really is a privilege to be here. Story_ID: 611935 Speaker 1: Is there anything else that you'd like to add, or something that we didn't ask that you'd like to comment on about your life? Speaker 2: Well, since we talked first, Judge Constance Baker Motley has died. And I said in an earlier interview what a privilege it was to serve as her law clerk from 1970 to 1971. Judge Motley was the first black woman to be on the federal court. She was the first black woman to serve as the borough president for Manhattan [New York, New York]. She was the first black woman to serve as the chief judge of the [U.S.] District Court in the Southern District of New York. She won any number of cases before the United States Supreme Court. She represented James Meredith, Hamilton Holmes, [HistoryMaker] Charlayne Hunter-Gault. She was a fearless, courageous, wonderful woman, with a real internal compass for fairness and attention to detail from whom I learned a great deal. So I would be remiss if I didn't say in this record that when the judge closed her eyes, the nation lost one of its greatest leaders for fairness, for justice. And personally, I feel diminished that the judge, as I called her, is no longer there as a reference point for me. But she was a wonderful, wonderful woman. And I loved her and, and had great regard for her. Speaker 1: And when did she make her transition? Speaker 2: She died just about a month ago. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And they are still having memorial services for her and-- Speaker 1: Were you able to attend any of them (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, because the memorial service they had for her was on the day when I had my board of trustees meeting [for the Southern Education Foundation, Atlanta, Georgia]. And but I have been in touch with the family. And I wrote a blog for the American Constitution Society [for Law and Policy, Washington, D.C.] website that tells stories of, of Judge Motley. You know, earlier in this interview I talked about the case of Martin Sostre. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: It was Judge Motley who ruled in Martin Sostre's behalf. So she was a fearless and wonderful, wonderful woman. Story_ID: 611936 Speaker 1: Early on, the other interviewer [Larry Crowe] asked me about my family history, and I gave a sort of garbled version of that. But I just want to say here that if you have good parents, it makes all the difference in your life. And my mother [Mary Ellen Cooley Jones] died two years ago, and I'm very deeply grieved by that loss but I will forever be indebted to her because she was a kind and good and completely loving mother. And both my mother and father [Lawrence N. Jones] went to historically black colleges and universities [HBCUs]. So I hope my continuing work in behalf of these institutions is a small measure of payback for all that they have given to my family and to me personally because I also attended Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee] for a period of time. I have thought often about how things sort of go around in circles. I started off my legal career working on cases involving the death penalty and people in prison. Now thirty-some years later, I'm working on the education of the sons and daughters of the people who were in prison. The same people who are stuck at the, the bottom and haven't had a chance to advance through education, or because of racism or, or indifference. So in, in one's life I think there's a kind of unity, at least I sometimes discern in my own, and I like to think that the work to which I have devoted my life will be carried on by others after I am gone. And I believe that it will be because the lesson from the human rights world, of which I am a part, is that this work is often hard and isolating, but all of us are a part of something bigger than ourselves. And sometimes all you can do is witness, sometimes you have a role to play very actively to try to make a difference, but each one of us has something we can do. And I'm determined that I will use what little bit I have, I'll put my bucket down where I am--to try to do what I can to make a difference and I know that there will be others to carry on this, this battle in the years to come. And that gives me some great hope that the good guys may finally win. Story_ID: 611937 Speaker 1: One thing that we've omitted that--would you tell us about your family? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Your personal family? Speaker 2: Yes. I am happily married to Walter R. Huntley [Jr.], who is a native of San Antonio [Texas]. And he's lived in Atlanta [Georgia] now for many, many years. He came here as a young man to work in [Mayor] Maynard Jackson's administration, and went on to be in his first administration his chief of staff. And then Walter directed, among other things, the Atlanta Economic Development Corporation [Atlanta, Georgia], which is a public private agency concerned with urban rehabilitation. And now he is serving as a business consultant, still working with a lot of urban mayors on issue of urban development and living a good life. And I have no children, but I have a stepdaughter whose name is Tyeise [Huntley] who graduated from Georgetown [University, Washington, D.C.], and who is a very talented young woman interested marketing and going to business school. I have four nieces, ages seven to twenty-seven, who are like daughters to me as well. And they are the joys of my life. My eldest niece is in education like I am, teaching, in New York City [New York, New York], first in the South Bronx [Bronx, New York] in high school, and now at a private school in New York and she has her master's degree in education. My second niece is a student at the John Jay College of Criminal Justice in New York City. My third niece is a junior at the University of North Carolina [at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina], and says she's going to go to law school, so my brainwashing of her over the years (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It worked out. Speaker 2: --has paid off. And my youngest niece, Cara, is just a character. At age seven who knows what she will do but she's a delightful young girl. Speaker 1: And how do you spell Cara? Speaker 2: C-A-R-A. Story_ID: 611938 Speaker 1: Now why did you want to tell your story? Speaker 2: Well, it's, it's interesting. I've always been a very private person, and not too much given to revealing either my interior life. But I've also been persuaded by friends that all of us has a story to tell, and that you never know how something you say may reach someone else, and help them along the way, or inspire them to do something differently or give them a little vantage point to see something that you may have seen. And that's it's part of our obligation to try to make those gifts, if that's what they are, available so that people can learn not only from your strengths, but from your weaknesses, and not only from your successes, but from your failures and have the courage to, to live their own lives more fully. So with that in view I was surprised to be asked if I wanted to participate in this. I thought a lot about whether I wanted to do it, and then I thought well, why not, I have nothing to report that I am embarrassed or ashamed of. I've met some wonderful people and to be able to share that is also a gift so, I'm happy to do it. Story_ID: 611939 Speaker 1: How do you feel about the way you have lived your life and what is important to you? Speaker 2: Wow. Well, it's interesting. When I was at the Ford Foundation [New York, New York] one of the trustees newly appointed came into my office one day and he said, I was on pins and needles what was he going to ask me about our program [Human Rights and Social Justice Program], he said, "Well let me ask you a question just to get us talking, if you were hit by a car tomorrow, what would you want your obituary to say?" And I have thought a lot about that. And so I guess what I am saying is that I have been involved in pursuit of the lofty dream of fairness, of social justice. And I'm happy with the little bit that I've been able to contribute. I am unhappy that I cannot and could not do more or didn't have the courage or the strength to do more. I think all of us are put on the earth for a reason, for a purpose. And I asked my dad [Lawrence N. Jones], who is a source of inspiration to me once, what prayer does he say at night? And he said, well, every night he says the prayer, dear Lord please make me a fit instrument of your purpose. And so that is the prayer I say every night. And when I look back at my life, I'm sure that I have been a failure in the grand scheme of things in some ways but I also think that I'm doing what I'm supposed to do and that there's a kind of unity like I was talking before in my life around values, and I'm going to keep doing it as long as I can. There's more than enough work for any of us to do. Story_ID: 611940 Speaker 1: Now for those going into the field of law and--what suggestions do you have for them? Speaker 2: Going into the field of law what suggestions. Well, you, when I went to law school, there was the old expression that the law is a seamless web. And it really is a seamless web. Law is involved in everything because it is one of those structural elements of society, it's a set of expectations, a set of regulations, a set of rules, and those who make them and those who have them, who apply them, and those who are governed by them and those who want to change them, all are in some ways involved in law. So I would say to all people who are interested in going to law school, there's so many things you can do with a legal career. I have had at least three and maybe four careers, first as a practicing lawyer in a lot of different places. Then in philanthropy where I was able to use my analytical skills and knowledge of law to do things that were both law related and not law related, to relate to the international human rights world, and now to relate to the world of education where, what do we talk about, we talk about laws and public policies, No Children Left Behind [No Child Left Behind Act of 2001], and Title III. So for anyone who cares about social justice and who wants to make a difference, law is a wonderful profession because there are many avenues through which you can use legal training directly and indirectly to make a big difference. You can live well, and you can do good, simultaneously. And, you know, when I started in law school there were five women I think out of a class of three hundred at, at Columbia [Law School, New York, New York]. Today women are over a majority of the students in many law schools. And the demographics in the bar are changing greatly. So for young women, it's also a great career and field, and I think that opportunities are opening up every day for more and more of us to rise to the top. Story_ID: 611941 Speaker 1: What are your hopes, or your concerns, for the African American community? Speaker 2: Well, I have many concerns. I work in the field of education. I think we're hurtling backwards in terms of education. We have too many young black men who are not developing their minds and not being given the opportunity to really fully use their time and talent in ways that are going to allow them to live the rich, broad lives to which I would hope they would have access. So I worry very much about the quality, the poor quality of public education and how it is hobbling generation after generation of young black people, particularly, those who are from, from low income communities. It is, the legislation is called No Child Left Behind [Act of 2001], but it's really, to my mind, no child kept behind. We're keeping a lot of young people behind, we haven't reached them. We haven't been able to make the educational enterprise relevant in their view to their life chances. One woman whose community organizers said to me the other day, the problem with our young people is they think talent and not education is the key to success. And we haven't done a good job of showing how you could be the most talented ball player but if you can't count and can't read a contract you will still be ripped off so you still have to have education if you're going to be a sports figure or a singer or an entertainer. There's that hard reality. So I worry really about education. Education is, what good does it do to have equal opportunity if you don't have the equal ability through education to take advantage of equal opportunity. So education is a big worry. The second big worry I have about our people has to do with the large numbers of young black men who are caught up in the criminal justice system and the consequence for young black women who want to have families and stable households and who can't find anyone with whom to make a life. I think that's a great tragedy of our time. And, and it, it is painful that so many women now face the responsibility of caring for children if they have them by themselves. And children feel very strongly, particularly boys, but boys and girls, the absence of the father in the, the homes. So, I worry about the plight of young women in the future and of young men who have not yet found their way into really being able to use the full measure of their talents so they can advance. Story_ID: 611942 Speaker 1: I worry about, I'm going to come to things I'm optimistic about in a moment. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: I worry about (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 1: --the popular culture, which seems to make the measure of worth material goods, the car I drive, the money I have, the bling I can put on my, my neck or on a chain. I, I don't begrudge anybody having nice things, I like to have nice things, too. But when you get to the point where you feel that anything and everything is okay as long as it advances me, and it's every man for himself, then we have succumbed to the worst lessons of racism. We've been trained by masters of inhumanity, and now we're emulating that part of them, too. That's to me a great, great tragedy. And the culture, the, of which we are a part now is so competitive in terms of its orientation that we have forgotten that there is a common good, a social good, and that all of us ought to be interested in each other's wellbeing not just in our own. So we have legitimized selfishness as a prevailing ethos and I think that's a very devastating thing, not just for black people but for, for all people. So those are some of the things that worry me. I could go on but those are some of the things that worry me. Things that I'm optimistic about. We have a tremendous, we have more African Americans with more resources and more access to power and possibilities than ever before in our history. We have more people who are doing better than ever before in our history. And that is a source of strength from which we can build. And if we can find a way of each one reaching one, we can continue the progress of pulling more and, more of us, particularly if we can solve education problems, into a middle class and a life of fuller options and, and choices. So I think we have more resources. Story_ID: 611943 Speaker 1: I think that the global era into which we have entered is a positive thing. I was just reading the book 'The World is Flat[: A Brief History of the Twenty-First Century'] by Thomas [L.] Friedman, and one of the points he makes is the first era of globalization was when countries were trying to restructure the relationship. The second era was when companies were trying to restructure their relationship to do business internationally. The third is now individuals. The playing field can be leveled for a lot of people who previously would have held, been held back because of appearance. If you've got the talent, and you've got the capacity you can deliver now. I think that black people stand to benefit from that. We've got some tremendously ingenious, highly talented, sophisticated people in our numbers. And I think that that's going to change the marketplace. And we know that young black people already the sort of pop culture pace setters-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --for a global youth movement. So I think we will see more progress in, in that area. And therefore I think globalization in an ironic way can be a force for good for our community. Other things I'm optimistic about, I think a general sense of, of resilience that a core of our people still have. They are not the people who are in [The] HistoryMakers. They are people who work hard every day at menial jobs, who don't get the recognition or awards, who haven't gone to school, but who make a good life for their children, and for themselves and who have a measure of dignity about them. And that bedrock is what all the rest of us have advanced from, and I think it is still there. I know these people, I see them, I see them in my church, I see them in my community, we've got a good solid core of good people from which I think we can continue to grow and advance. And all of the problems we have, have still not eroded that, at least not entirely, and so I have confidence that we have, with the right inspiration and leadership, the opportunity to take our full place as equal contributing members of the, the global community in our society. Story_ID: 611944 Speaker 1: How do you want to be remembered? What do you want people to say about you? Speaker 2: Well, my father's [Lawrence N. Jones] influence has been profound on me. And we were talking about these issues not too long ago. And my father said to me, because I was expressing great frustration this hadn't worked, and we hadn't been able to do this, and look at this problem we're front--confronting here. And he said, "Well, you know, God doesn't ask you to succeed, he asks you to try." And so when I think about how I would want to be remembered, I would hope that people would say of me, she was earnest, she tried. She wasn't a perfect creature, but she tried with the gifts and talents that were hers at the time to do things that were good and positive and to, to constantly fight against the kind of despair and selfishness that all of us have inside. And that's how I'd want to be remembered as a person. Story_ID: 611945 Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be? Speaker 2: My personal legacy? Speaker 1: Your personal legacy, or just your legacy in general to be. Speaker 2: I want my legacy to be other people who have, by virtue of something that I may have done along the way, have a better chance and be a beneficiary. You know, one of the things I'm most proud of is that I've been privileged to work with some very talented people over the years and to help some of them move to a different level. I'll give you my little brag list. When I was at the Ford Foundation [New York, New York], I hired a young Puerto Rican man to come and work in my program division. He is now the executive director of the American Civil Liberties Union [ACLU], fighting all of the battles against torture and the kind of denial of First Amendment freedoms that are the bedrock of this country. I could not have foreseen at the time that I hired him, the heights to which he would reach. But he credits me with having helped him along the way and I love him like I would my closest friend and so I'm proud of someone like that. I'm proud of [HistoryMaker] Emmett [D.] Carson who is the, now the chairman of my board [at the Southern Education Foundation, Atlanta, Georgia] but I first met Emmett when he was a very young man. He hadn't been out of graduate school long, he came for a job, interviewed with the Ford Foundation, I thought he was a very talented young black man, I wanted to hire him but the foundation didn't think he had enough experience. I told him after that, "Emmett, let's stay in touch, every goodbye ain't gone, these jobs come around again, I will see you again." A couple years later, job came around again, Emmett was hired, he advanced very rapidly because he's very smart. And today he is not only the president of one of the nation's largest community foundations, but he's the chairman of the board of the Council of Foundations [sic. Council on Foundations] which is the national body to which all or most private foundations are members. There was a young woman, her name was Mora McLean. She came to me a couple of years out of law school, a young black woman, originally from the [U.S.] Virgin Islands. I hired her as an assistant program officer. We became good friends as well as professional colleagues. Today she is the head of the Africa-America Institute [New York, New York], which is one of the few organizations working to try to improve conditions in Africa. What I'm saying in a longwinded way is I have been privileged to see some young people along the way and sometimes just say, you know, you really are talented, you can do this. Story_ID: 611946 Speaker 1: I have a young woman here [Southern Education Foundation, Atlanta, Georgia], who's working in the office, she's a, a senior at Georgia State [University, Atlanta, Georgia], her name is Brenda Lopez [ph.]. She was one of our Brown Education Summers students. She comes from a low income family, she's a very bright young girl. She and I spend hours talking about law school. She wants to go to law school. And what is my role? To tell her, you know, "Brenda, you're very smart, you can go to law school, you will do perfectly fine. Don't be afraid of the LSAT, take it. Here's how you prepare for it. Don't lose your self-confidence now." Sometimes people just need to know that others see value in them. And by helping them to see that they have everything that it takes, they'll do all the rest themselves. So I done take credit for the achievements of these people I'm mentioning but if I have encouraged them or made them believe in themselves just a little bit more or given them an insight that's helped them along the way, that's my legacy. I want my legacy to be a group of people whose lives I have touched some way, directly or indirectly, who are doing good things for their community and for their families, and who represent the values that that I care about. One more example of that but I'm very proud of this one. There was a young white woman who came to work at the Southern Education Foundation as a secretary. She had failed her freshman year of law school. She was a very emotionally fragile person, very fragile. And I kept on talking to her about how unrealistic--she had four children under the age of six, you know, how unrealistic it was for her to think that she could have done all this, it wasn't a personal feeling, she wasn't superwoman. And over a period of time, she got stronger and stronger. Yesterday when we had a book signing, not only has she made a contribution to the Southern Education Foundation, but she's formed her own web business, which she calls a Virtual Assistance Network. And so anything you want to do from accounting to fundraising to secretarial work, she has all these contractors, she's doing very well. She looked pretty as a picture, she was very happy. And I thought to myself, my, what a transformation from this young woman who just thought she didn't have any worth when she started but all she needed was somebody to say, oh, yes, you do. Stop being so mean to yourself. So I enjoy that kind of thing. And my legacy will be the lives of other people that I've been able to touch directly, or maybe indirectly. Story_ID: 611947 Speaker 1: The gentleman is my father, Dr. Lawrence [N.] Jones, who was the dean for sixteen years at the Howard Divinity School [Howard University School of Divinity, Washington, D.C.] and worked at Union [Theological Seminary, New York, New York] and at Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee] and a variety of other places. And the lady is my mother, Mary Ellen [Cooley] Jones. Her maiden name was Cooley. She's a graduate of Virginia State College [for Negroes; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia]. And she was an elementary and nursery school teacher for most of her life. My father is still very active in preaching, and writing and just completed a manuscript ['They Overheard the Gospel: The African American Religious Experience Prior to the Civil War,' Lawrence N. Jones] on the black religious experience in colonial America. And my mother is deceased. Speaker 2: Okay. Thank you. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: This picture is of the Honorable Judge Constance Baker Motley for whom I clerked from 1970 to 1971. The first black woman on the supreme court [U.S. District Court for the Southern District of New York], and a civil rights litigator and leader of national and international renown. Speaker 1: And about what, when was this done, what year? Speaker 2: That picture would have been taken some time during the mid-'70s [1970s] I would say. Speaker 1: And she-- Speaker 2: Because she was much younger at that, on that picture. Speaker 1: Okay. And she was in her office you think, correct? Speaker 2: Yes, she was in her office. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And I should ask where is, was her office located? Speaker 2: Her office was at the United States courthouse [Foley Square Courthouse; Thurgood Marshall United States Courthouse] at Foley Square in New York City [New York, New York]. Speaker 1: Now this is you and just tell us about that one. Speaker 2: That would have probably been a picture taken in 1972. I recall that it was taken in the library of the NAACP Legal Defense [and Educational] Fund [Inc. (LDF)]. It was during the height of a major case [Guthrie v. Evans] that I was working on involving conditions of confinement at the Georgia State Prison in Reidsville, Georgia. We were representing a class of 1,800 inmates and they wanted to take these pictures for fundraising and promotional purposes but I was very tired because I had just come back from the, the prison. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: Would you tell us who those are from left to right? Speaker 1: Yes. This picture was taken in Cape Town, South Africa. It was a press conference at the beginning of the Comparative Human Relations Initiative, which was our study of race, poverty, and inequality in Brazil, South Africa, and the United States. The gentleman on the far left is Dr. Paulo Sergio Pinheiro, who was a professor and later became the human rights secretary for Brazil. The second gentleman is an official of the United Nations Human Rights Commission [United Nations Commission on Human Rights]. The third gentleman is a newspaper publisher whose name is Shaun Johnson. The fourth person is standing over me is Dr. Franklin [A.] Thomas, who was the president of the Ford Foundation [New York, New York]. There I am of course. And the last person is a representative with the South African government, who was involved in the Human Relations Initiative. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: To the left is Dr. Paulo Sergio Pinheiro, the human rights secretary of Brazil. That was a young woman who worked for IDASA [Institute for Democracy in South Africa] from South Africa with, shaking Mr. [Nelson] Mandela's hand. Of course, I am standing next to Mr. Mandela. He was the opening speaker at the Comparative Human Relations Initiatives conference in South Africa. So you can see there a Brazilian, an American and a South African. Speaker 2: All right. Yes. I believe this one is the same conference but different people? Speaker 1: It is. Speaker 2: Okay. So could you tell us who these people are? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISUCSSION) Speaker 2: Yeah, that's there. The gentleman on the left is Dr. Charles V. Hamilton, who years ago with Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture] wrote the book, 'Black Power[: The Politics of Liberation,' Kwame Ture and Charles V. Hamilton]. In the middle is Dr. Johnnetta [B.] Cole, who has the distinction of having been the president both of, of Bennett [College, Greensboro, North Carolina] and of Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia] colleges, two of the historical black women's colleges. And the person on the far right is, is Mr. Franklin A. Thomas, who was the president of the Ford Foundation and my employer. Speaker 1: And what year again did you say the conference took place? Speaker 2: This conference, I believe, would have been in 2000, 2001. Yeah. This is one of my favorite pictures. I don't recognize the lady on the left, but the gentleman on the right is Mr. Maceo [W.] Hubbard, who was the first African American lawyer ever to serve in the United States Department of Justice. The picture was taken at my going away party in the Great Hall of Justice [International Court of Justice, The Hague, the Netherlands] in around 1982. And Mr. Hubbard made remarks at that occasion. Speaker 1: And this is a better picture of-- Speaker 2: Yes, this is another picture of Mr. Maceo Hubbard, a remarkable man. He told me that during his era of leadership before the March on Washington in the department he was the only black ever involved in the deliberations on what the department should do. And he went to a meeting with Bobby Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy] and several others, and their position was that no comprehensive civil rights legislation needed to be enacted because all blacks needed was the Voting Rights Act [of 1965], and then the problems of race and poverty and the rest would take care of themselves. And Mr. Hubbard said he tried to argue with Bobby Kennedy and the others to the contrary, but none of them wanted to listen to him. So he said--he just didn't say anything further because he knew that there was going to be a March on Washington. And he told me that, one of the greatest satisfactions you could have in life is, if you--see a son of a bitch that you don't like running head long into a brick wall, and you say, "There's a wall there," and they don't pay any attention, the greatest joy in life is watching him hit. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Is he still with us? Speaker 2: No, Mr. Hubbard's gone to his reward. Speaker 1: Profound words (laughter). Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Yeah, this is Dr. Paulo Pinheiro again, human right secretary of Brazil. But the lady in the middle is the Honorable, Honorable Benedita da Silva, who grew up in a favela in Brazil and started off her life as a maid and later went on to enter into politics. She ran for the mayor of Rio [de Janeiro, Brazil]. And during the [Luiz Inacio] Lula da Silva election she served for several years as the human rights--social actions secretary, social actions secretary. She's also been a member of the federal legislature of Brazil. She's written her biography. She's a remarkable, very proud, black Brazilian woman. And she was at our meeting in, in Cape Town, where she made a presentation. Speaker 2: I know this is you a little earlier but this photo is, could you tell us where this one was, yeah (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That was my going away party in 1982 from the United States Department of Justice. And on the left we have my dear colleague, who was, at that time, a deputy section chief, Donald Pailen. He went on to be the corporation counsel for the City of Detroit [Michigan] in [Mayor] Coleman Young's administration for a number of years. The tall gentleman is James [P.] Turner, he was the principal deputy to the assistant attorney general in the Civil Rights Division. The other lady in the picture is [Congresswoman] Eleanor Holmes Norton. In an earlier life, I worked for Eleanor as her general counsel when was the head of the New York City Commission on Human Rights. And at that time she was the chair of the EEOC [Equal Employment Opportunity Commission] and spoke at my party. William Bradford Reynolds was the gentleman I talked about previously who was a [President Ronald Wilson] Reagan appointee, and very much an enemy of civil rights. And there I am in the middle. And the gentleman on the far end, on the right is Lisbon Berry, who was one of the lawyers who was in my trial section and a very dear and close friend of mine who is now deceased, God rest his soul. Story_ID: 611948 Speaker 1: These are relatives. The lady in the blue in the second row is my aunt, my mother's [Mary Ellen Cooley Jones] sister. And next to her is my uncle. My aunt's name is Rosa Jean [Cooley] Seldon, my uncle's name is Charles Bruce Cooley. And then the gentleman in the front is my father, Lawrence [N.] Jones. My mother is next to him. And my cousin, Carolyn Joyner. The lady with the fur in the back is an interesting person. She was one of the maids in the justice department [U.S. Department of Justice]. And for a while I kept on finding in my office, after the [President Ronald Wilson] Reagan administration took office, documents from the attorney general's office. And I became very concerned, I said, my God, I'm being set up here. These are classified documents, what are they doing on my desk? I'm in civil rights [Civil Rights Division]. And one day she came into my office and I said, "Well take a load off your feet. How are you doing?" She sat down. She said, "Oh, you've been getting those documents I been giving you?" She says, "You know, I goes in the attorney general's waste basket, and I see something that says civil rights, I bring it to you." And we laughed and laughed. Because no one would have thought that a poor woman who was a maid would have the perception to do that. And so, so goes the fabled justice department security system. And I had to ask the head of housekeeping to give her permission to be off of work to come to the party, and oh, was she proud and I was proud to have her there. And then the woman next to her is Rita Greenfield [ph.], who was a paralegal in my old trial section. Speaker 2: All right. Now this is your mother's-- Speaker 1: Sister (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) sister. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: And your-- Speaker 1: My uncle. Speaker 2: Okay. And that's your mother's brother? Speaker 1: Correct. Speaker 2: Okay. Now here's an important lady with you. Speaker 1: Yes, there is an important lady with me, and I have been wracking my brain in what context I was at the White House [Washington, D.C.] for a reception and was going through the receiving line, and they snapped this picture of me talking to Hillary [Rodham] Clinton. I don't really remember the setting. It may have been some Women in Philanthropy meeting, or something like that. Probably (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But it was fairly recent was it? Speaker 1: --during my tenure at, at the Ford Foundation [New York, New York] so it would be at least fifteen years old. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: That was just a picture of me that was taken by a television station in Brazil where I was being interviewed to talk about racism, poverty, and inequality, and to persuade the Brazilian public that they had a problem with racial discrimination. Speaker 1: Okay. And about what year was that one? Speaker 2: That probably would have been in 1999, 1998. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: This is a picture of my beloved husband, Walter R. Huntley [Jr.], who is a kind and generous person and who is the light of my life. That was taken earlier this year, 2005, out in California. Speaker 1: What part of California, do you remember? Speaker 2: I think it was at Pebble Beach [California]. Speaker 1: And that was vacation? Speaker 2: No, he was there for business reasons and I went along as the dutiful spouse. Speaker 1: Okay. And here? Speaker 2: Yes, I was very pleasantly surprised that the students at Tufts University [Medford, Massachusetts] elected me as a recipient of their [Dr. Jean Mayer] Global Citizenship Award. And so I went there to receive the award and to make a presentation about my work in Brazil, South Africa, and the United States. And I think Jeffrey [D.] Sachs was one of the people there who was honored at the same time that that I was. It was quite a nice affair and I appreciate (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And Jeffrey Sachs, what does he do? Speaker 2: Jeffrey Sachs is a professor at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] who has been very actively involved in the global effort to reduce poverty and inequality. Speaker 1: And around what year was that of you, approximately? Speaker 2: I would say that was around 2000, 2001 something like that. Speaker 1: And was it the law students or was it the-- Speaker 2: No, they were students in the College of Liberal Arts [Tufts University, Medford, Massachusetts] who had a special program on global inequality and inequity, and every year they invited two or three special guest lecturers to come and participate with them and to make a presentation. So there I am holding forth about issues of race and poverty in the three countries. Speaker 1: And wasn't it Tufts that gave you an honorary doctorate? Or what school was that-- Speaker 2: No, that was Cambridge College [Cambridge, Massachusetts]. That's also in the Boston [Massachusetts] area, but a different institution. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Well, this is a picture of my brother, Rodney [Bruce] Jones, who is a jazz musician in New York [New York] and started out his career playing with Dizzy Gillespie and Chico Hamilton and other jazz luminaries and now has his own group and still does freelancing. And that was his wife, Eugenia [ph.] and two of their children. It's just a favorite picture of mine. The girls are now quite old in the sense of being in their twenties. But I always loved that picture. Speaker 1: And that was taken in New York? Speaker 2: Yes, in New York City. Oh, this is another picture of me taken with Judge [Constance Baker] Motley. I believe, that that was at her house in Chester, Connecticut. She would occasionally invite her law clerks up to her house for a, a meal and to spend some time and I think that was probably taken there. Speaker 1: All right. And would that have been in the '70s [1970s] or-- Speaker 2: It probably would have been in the '70s [1970s], yes, I would say so (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And do you have any idea who the other person is in the photo or-- Speaker 2: I don't really recall who the other person was. Speaker 1: All right. Probably one of the other law clerks. Speaker 2: It may have been a former law clerk, I don't remember. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Well, this was a very special occasion. I had given an eighty-second birthday party for my father at a hotel in Washington [D.C.]. And my mother was still alive at that time and so the four of us had that that picture taken. Speaker 1: And what year was that do you think around? Speaker 2: That would have been in 2002. This picture would have been taken in the mid, let's see, it would have been taken in the mid-'80s [1980s]. The reason why I put it in this group is because it was the first meeting in the history of Brazil sponsored by the government where the discussion was about the role of affirmative action in a multiracial society. And I was one of the international representatives brought there to talk about race, poverty, and inequality and affirmative action practice in the United States and South Africa. Speaker 1: And that's in Portuguese, right? (Unclear)-- Speaker 2: That's in Portuguese. And it was, it was held in Brasilia, Brazil, which is the capital of, of Brazil. Speaker 1: Well, I can read the multi--multiculturalism. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: Oh, this is a picture really included to portray my predecessor here at the Southern Education Foundation [Atlanta, Georgia]. The gentleman standing next to me that is Eldridge W. McMillan, who served at the Southern Education Foundation as its president from 1978 until the end of 2002. And that was, the gentleman on the other side of Mr. McMillan is the governor of the state, who is a Republican, Governor [Sonny] Perdue. And Eldridge had just been sworn in as a continuing member of the Georgia Board of Regents [Board of Regents of the University System of Georgia]. I was later appointed to the Georgia Student Finance Commission by Governor Perdue. Well, these are happy days of, of traveling and seeing and thinking and being stimulated. In the background we have the Taj Mahal in [Agra] India, where I went and spent a considerable amount of time once, visiting with a variety of groups. And this was just a bit of sightseeing. Speaker 1: Was this with the Ford Foundation? Speaker 2: Yes, when I worked at the Ford Foundation. Speaker 1: And our last photo. Speaker 2: And this picture was taken of me on a camel in front of the pyramids of, of Egypt outside of Cairo [Egypt]. I was there attending a global meeting of researchers on the fate of cities around the world. And in a moment of R and R, I went to see the Great Pyramids and got to ride a camel...