 Story_ID: 25518 Speaker 1: Alright. My name is Larry Crowe. I'm the interviewer today with the HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Sir, could you please give us your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: My name is Clifford W. Houston. And that's C-L-I-F-F-O-R-D, W. Houston, H-O-U-S-T-O-N. Speaker 1: Alright. And the W stands for? Speaker 2: Wayne. Speaker 1: That's right. Okay. And sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: 12th month, 3rd day, 1949. And I was born in Oklahoma City, Oklahoma. Speaker 1: Okay. And sir, what is your occupation and title? Speaker 2: I am an endowed professor of microbiology and immunology at the University of Texas Medical Branch [Galveston, Texas]. And I'm also the associate vice president for educational outreach. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is January 31, 2013. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're currently in Galveston, Texas, and we're at the Shearn Moody Plaza Building, in my office. Story_ID: 25519 Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight Peoples Magazinish-type questions we ask as a warm-up. And they only require a short answer. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: The first one is do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Yes. My favorite food would be, I would say, a nice steak and baked potato. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: I like earth tones, so I would say the brown to gray colors. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: My favorite time of the year would be summer. I like the outdoor activities. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: I like the Caribbean islands. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Any one of them would be fine. Speaker 1: Alright. And the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: I don't know if I, I have many different phrases and sayings, and I'm not sure if I have a favorite one, to be honest with you. Story_ID: 25520 Speaker 1: Well, I'm going to ask about your family history. I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side, but we'll start with your mother's side first. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: My mother's name is Mae, M-A-E, Frances, F-R-A-N-C-E-S, and her last name--do you want her maiden name or her-- Speaker 1: Maiden name. Speaker 2: Her maiden name is Hanley, H-A-N-L-E-Y. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: She was born in 1928 on January 23rd, and she was born in Tulsa, Oklahoma. Speaker 1: Okay, in Tulsa. What can you tell us about your mother's side of the family? How far back can you trace them, and what are the stories? Speaker 2: I can really only go back as far as my grandfather and grandmother on her side of the family. My grandfather died when my mother was less than ten years old. So, I really never met him. And my grandmother died when I was a freshman in college. Speaker 1: Okay. What can you tell us about them? Were they from Tulsa? Were they always from Tulsa? Speaker 2: They were actually from a town called Checotah, Oklahoma, which is right outside of Tulsa. But my mother, by the time that she graduated from high school--she actually graduated from Booker T. Washington High School, which is in Tulsa. Speaker 1: Now how do you spell Checotah? Speaker 2: Boy, (laughter). Let's see. C-H-E-C-O-T-A-H. Speaker 1: Okay. Checotah, Oklahoma. So, your mother actually grew up out in Checotah? Speaker 2: For the first part of her life, until she got into high school. Speaker 1: Okay. So, I take it there wasn't a high school in Checotah for black students? Speaker 2: There probably wasn't. Speaker 1: Okay. So, well, what did your grandparents do? Were they farmers, or-- Speaker 2: They were farmers. My grandmother never really had worked, and my grandfather was a farmer. Speaker 1: Okay. And what were your grandparents' names? Speaker 2: Freeland and Paulina Hanley. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, is there a story behind the name Freeland? Speaker 2: Not that I know of. That's what we--in fact he named one of his sons Freeland. But I don't know any history behind it. Speaker 1: Because it seems to me that he would have been born right after the Oklahoma Land Rush, where people were getting free land. I don't know if that had anything to do with it, but it sounds like it might. Speaker 2: That could be possible, but I have no real knowledge of that. Speaker 1: Okay. Seems like it might be possible, though? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: I think the Land Rush was 1899, or something like that, right at the turn of the century. Speaker 2: It was one of the latest, one of the later states to achieve statehood. Speaker 1: Okay. So did he own his own land? Speaker 2: He did. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And my grandmother used to tell the story about him having one of the first cars in that town. And one evening he drove the car into town and came back with a mule and pulling a wagon. Somehow, he had gotten swindled out of that car and traded it for the horse and wagon. I don't know the full details of that story, but it seems to me that there were lots of examples of that in the history. Speaker 1: Okay. He got cheated-- Speaker 2: Maybe he could have been playing cards. I don't know (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. So, alright. Is there any story about how he acquired land? Speaker 2: I think basically he acquired land probably through the previous generation, through the land rush. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They told me when there was a rush for land in Oklahoma, African Americans, Native Americans and white Americans all were involved in that rush for land. And they were able to stake out land, and they even sharecropped together prior to statehood. And when statehood took effect, that's when all the issues of racism and prejudice occurred, because the ownership of land was tied to voting. And all of a sudden, that became a political issue. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. It was Indian territory prior to 19--what? Speaker 2: At least prior to like 1899, for sure. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. Now, did your mother have any stories of growing up in Checotah? Speaker 2: No real stories there. Most of time she spent talking about how she really didn't get a chance to know her father before he died, and they just lived a simple life there in what would be known as the country. And anything outside of the city limit was considered living in the country. But she spent most of her time talking about her high school days in Tulsa, Oklahoma. Speaker 1: Okay. What did she say about going to Tulsa and living-- Speaker 2: Well, in Tulsa [Oklahoma], that was considered a relatively big city. And she, you know, Tulsa used to be known as Black Wall Street. And it was owned--and businesses, banks and grocery stores were owned by African American people. And at some point when it got to--most of the white folks lived in the rural areas and were doing farming. And they would come into town to go to the banks to borrow money to purchase property, or to go to the grocery stores. But at some point, this became known nationally, and Tulsa ultimately was burned down. And then the whole restructuring of the city occurred. Speaker 1: Are you talking about the black community of Tulsa? Speaker 2: Yeah, well, including the black community. But most of the infrastructure which was owned by blacks was all burned down and bombed. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's the riot of 1921, or the Tulsa disaster of 1921. Speaker 2: Right. It happened, well that happened subsequent to the burning and the bombing, yeah. Story_ID: 25521 Speaker 1: So, she [Houston's mother, Mae Frances Hanley] went to school at Booker T. Washington High School in Tulsa [Oklahoma]? Speaker 2: Yes, she did. Speaker 1: So, what did she say about-- Speaker 2: Well, she was just always telling me about when she was in high school, she participated in a lot of activities. And she really enjoyed that part of her life, being in high school there, and how much she still has connections with friends and classmates who graduated the same year she did. And of course, there's only a few still around, but they still maintain contact and communication. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so, she would talk about that. No real detailed stories, but just the fact that it was a fun time for her in her life. And she got a chance to then graduate from high school, and then she moved to Oklahoma City [Oklahoma]. The same thing happened to my father, who we'll talk about later. But he was born in Muskogee, Oklahoma and he moved to Oklahoma City, too, and that's how they met. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, did your mother have an aspiration in high school that she wanted to achieve? Speaker 2: Well, she did say that she would have liked to have gone to college, but they just didn't have the finances to do it. And so, she just said she didn't go. She decided to go to work in Oklahoma City. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. Did she want to be a teacher or a nurse or some other occupation? Speaker 2: I think she probably wanted to be a teacher, because back then that was considered a really high status position for African Americans. Story_ID: 25522 Speaker 1: Let's go to your father's side. Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Edgar, E-D-G-A-R, Houston. No middle name. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: His birthday is April 19th, 1926. And he was born in Muskogee, Oklahoma. Speaker 1: Okay, Muskogee. That's M-U-S-K-O-G-E-E? Speaker 2: That's close enough. Speaker 1: Okay (laughter). Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Muskogee, Oklahoma. Okay, so, well, how far back can you trace your father's ancestors, the Houstons? Speaker 2: Only as far as my grandfather. Speaker 1: Okay. What was your grandfather's name? Speaker 2: Albert Houston. Speaker 1: Okay. And now, what did your grandparents do for a living? Speaker 2: They mostly worked on farms, too. And my grandmother, I never met her either. She died when my father was four years old. And in fact, I even have a difficult time recollecting her name, to be honest with you. Speaker 1: Now, is there any story about what she died from, or even for that matter, what your mother's [Mae Frances Hanley] father died from? Speaker 2: No. There's no recollection. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I just wondered if there was some-- Speaker 2: On my father's side, I mean on my mother's side--I think maybe my grandfather died from pneumonia, but I'm just not sure. Speaker 1: Okay. Let's see. Okay. So, your father, did he have a lot of brothers and sisters? Speaker 2: My father had, I think three brothers, and he had, my understanding is that he had at least two sisters, but they died very early in life as well. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so, I know of two of the brothers, and they both lived in California for most of their adult life. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, now did your grandfather own his own land, too? Speaker 2: No, I don't think so. Speaker 1: Okay, so he was a sharecropper? Speaker 2: For a while. And basically, though, he left my father and he was raised by his grandmother. And then I think he moved to Oklahoma City [Oklahoma]. And I don't know what type of work he was doing there. Speaker 1: So, he was raised by his grandmother? Now, do you remember her name? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Did he have any stories he shared about growing up? Speaker 2: Well, you know, his stories were that, you know, he had to struggle to survive. He got to about the eighth grade and then dropped out, and then just had to work. And he talked about how he really appreciated his grandmother raising him, at least to the point where he was old enough to go out and do some work. I just remember him talking about he played on the, in the seventh and eighth grade, he played on the football team. And he was really proud of that. But then after that he just had to drop out of school. Speaker 1: Okay. And then he moved to Oklahoma City? Speaker 2: He moved to Oklahoma City when he was probably at least twenty-one years old, probably earlier than that. Story_ID: 25523 Speaker 1: Now, both of your parents [Mae Frances Hanley and Edgar Houston] came along during a really tough time in Oklahoma. I think part of their childhood occurred during the Dust Bowl [1934-1936], right? Speaker 2: Yeah, I remember the Dust Bowl. I just don't remember what years. Speaker 1: Yeah, it's in the years--in the '30s [1930s], yeah, going into the '40s [1940s], you know, where the whole land, you know, agriculture in Oklahoma and Kansas and some of those other states, they turned to dust, you know-- Speaker 2: At the time that they met, both of my parents were domestic workers. They actually met at a hotel, the Skirvin Hotel. It was like, it was one of the luxury hotels in downtown Oklahoma City [Oklahoma]. And they met there. She probably was a maid or something like that, cleaning the rooms. My dad worked most of his career doing maintenance type of work, janitorial type work. Speaker 1: Okay. What's the name of that hotel? Speaker 2: Skirvin, S-K-I-R-V-I-N, I believe. Speaker 1: Okay. Skirvin Hotel, Oklahoma City. Speaker 2: Uh huh. Speaker 1: Okay. So, they met at the hotel. Now, do you know what year they got married? Speaker 2: 1947, I believe. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I'm pretty sure of that, yeah, '47 [1947]. Story_ID: 25524 Speaker 1: Now, did your dad [Edgar Houston] serve in World War II [1939-1945] at all? Speaker 2: He wanted to, but he was not selected. And so, he tried to change his, move his birth certificate up. At the time, I don't know if he--it was something about age or something. And he tried to get in the military, but he didn't get in. Speaker 1: He might have been too young, actually. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: He might have been a little bit too young. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, but he wanted to get in? Speaker 2: He wanted to get in. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I think that was true of a number of African Americans back then. They wanted to get in because they thought that if they served, then perhaps they would get better treatment when they came back. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But we sort of know what that story was, how it ended. Speaker 1: So, now, what did your parents do for a living? Speaker 2: My mother [Mae Frances Hanley] just worked off and on during the course of our family. My father worked two jobs the whole time, solidly. My mother would work either--I know she was like a physical therapist aide at one time at the Medical Center in Oklahoma City [Oklahoma]. She worked as a domestic worker in the homes of people, more well-to-do folks, and that's about all I remember about her working background. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But she spent a lot of time at home too, with the kids. And so, my dad was really the person who was the bread-winner. Speaker 1: Okay. And where did he work? Speaker 2: He worked for the Oklahoma Gas and Electric Company. And once he started working there, he stayed there until he retired. And then his second job, he worked part-time for Sears [department store]. Speaker 1: Okay, worked for Sears, okay. So, this is before Sears let you be a clerk, I mean, that sort of thing, right? Speaker 2: Right. He worked there as, at Sears he was working as a, I guess, a janitor. Story_ID: 25525 Speaker 1: Okay, now when you think about your parents' talents, their personalities, their sense of humor, their inclinations, how they walk and talk and look, who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: Wow. I think I'm probably a combination of both. I think I get my patience from my dad [Edgar Houston], and I think I get my sense of humor, or quick wit about myself, from my mom [Mae Frances Hanley]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. But my dad was always a very patient man. He was, he never had a whole lot to say, but when he spoke, people listened. And on the other hand, my mom was definitely more talkative and was quick to defend her children. And she definitely had an opinion on everything. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a story about her opinions? Speaker 2: Well, I guess one story I could share is, you know, she was very protective of her kids all the way up to the time when they were grown. She would continue. So, the story that comes to my mind is that--in fact, my Ph.D. mentor brought this up at his retirement party. He said that he remembers some social event, where the graduate students and the faculty all brought their families together to do something. And so, my mother had a chance to talk to my advisor. And she said, "It sure is taking him a long time to get out of school." (laughter) And she gave him that look. And so, he says he will always remember that look, because she thought that he was keeping me in his laboratory too long. And the truth is, I graduated after about four and a half years, which is actually soon, now, for people to get Ph.D.s. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, but--and I never knew of that until he mentioned that. In other words, she had like a little one-on-one talk with him. Story_ID: 25526 Speaker 1: Now, do you have brothers and sisters? Speaker 2: I have one brother and three sisters. Speaker 1: Okay. Can you name them all, and put yourself in order for us? Speaker 2: Well, I'm the oldest. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then I have a brother who's next. And then I have three sisters. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. So, when you were growing up, your household consisted of basically your parents and you and your four siblings? Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Four siblings, right. Okay. So, you didn't have any grandparents living with you or cousins-- Speaker 2: Not for any long lengths of time. There were times when my grandmother would come and stay with us for maybe about a month or so. But nobody ever lived long-term there other than the immediate family. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And this is the grandmother that's on my mother's [Mae Frances Hanley] side. Story_ID: 25527 Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: Sure. I have a number of childhood memories. I can remember when I was-- Speaker 1: What about the earliest? I mean-- Speaker 2: Oh, the very earliest? Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Oh, my gosh. I think that my earliest childhood memory would be going to kindergarten on the first day. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. And I can remember having butterflies, and being so worried and nervous about going to school. And you would never have associated that with me now, in the way that I have to speak to large numbers of people. I have to carry myself a certain way. But when I was going to school, I used to really, be really worried about the first day of school. And they used to have those back to school sales, and all this stuff. Just the commercial would make me nervous. So, I don't know what that was all about. I think it was just going into a new environment, going into a new classroom each year, having to meet new students, new people. I guess that would make me initially on the shy side, I guess. Story_ID: 25528 Speaker 1: Now, did you grow up in the same place the whole time, or did you move around a lot? Speaker 2: No, we, I recall, let's see. During my entire time that I was in school, from kindergarten through the twelfth grade, we only lived in two houses, yeah. So, it was pretty stable. My dad [Edgar Houston] was an excellent provider, and I really admire him for that. And my parents [Mae Frances Hanley and Edgar Houston] are both still alive. They're still married, and they're just hanging in there right now. But he, what I remember about him was that no matter what, we never missed a meal. And that's one of the things my mother always says all the time. So, he was a good provider. So, I remember when we lived in one--it was a housing project that was built brand new, and we moved into that neighborhood. What we didn't know was that this whole sub-division was built just for black people. We had no idea that that was the case. I shouldn't say we--we, the children. I don't know how much my parents knew. So, they were brand new houses, and so we moved into that neighborhood and we stayed there up until the time that I was about ready to enter the eleventh grade. And then we moved into a bigger home. And that first house was a frame house, it was a wooden frame house, but it was very nice. It was a corner lot-- Speaker 1: The project one? Speaker 2: No, it wasn't a project, it was a single-- Speaker 1: Okay, the one you lived in-- Speaker 2: The first house that we lived in was a frame house-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was on a corner lot, and it was considered to be very nice. But then the next house that we moved into, it was even more, it was a brick house, and it was in a neighborhood that was still somewhat integrated. But then the whites that did live in that neighborhood soon moved out, so the neighborhood changed. But it was a large brick house, is what I remember. And it caused me to have to move to another school. And I had gone to one high school, but because we moved I was in another school district. So, then I had to go to another school. I went from Douglas, Frederick F. Douglas High School which was predominantly black, to Northeast High School which was integrated, but the majority of the students were African American. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that's the school I graduated from. Story_ID: 25529 Speaker 1: You said the first house your family lived in was a frame house that you remember? Speaker 2: Uh huh. Speaker 1: A sub-division, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: A sub-division built by, we're not sure who? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: But you have the sense that it was built to contain the black population? Speaker 2: Yes, exactly. Speaker 1: Alright. And what was the name of it? Speaker 2: Gordon Oaks. Speaker 1: Gordon Oaks. Speaker 2: Gordon Oaks Addition. And I went to Gordon Oaks Elementary School. So, they built the school, they built the homes and people were happy to move there. Speaker 1: Okay. Gordon Oaks Elementary School. That's where you started school. Story_ID: 25530 Speaker 1: Now, we always ask this question. When you consider the places that you lived when you were growing up, what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Well, I guess I was very fortunate, because first of all, as children we never knew we were poor. That's number one. And then secondly, I remember that parenting was a lot different than it is now. In other words, you didn't have to worry about whether your kids were going to be abducted or anything like that. We used to walk to school. I have a granddaughter, and she lives like three blocks from the school, but she would never walk to school. You know, she's eight years old now, so things are different. And so, I remember walking, probably for the elementary school, at least ten blocks to go to school. And what I remember in walking to school is that the street that I had to walk up to that school from my house was a sub-division on one side of the street, and then it was all the undeveloped land on the other side of the street. So, of course, and it looked like, it was just the woods. And so, I remember just spending many times going over there. And we'd go after school and just play out in the woods and, you know, people would--we'd never worry about getting lost and never worried about anything happening to us. So, those are the kind of memories I have, is that our parents never questioned or asked us where we'd been or any of that, and yet most of us got back and we didn't have any bad stories to tell. So, to me that was a beautiful part of life. And I also remember just hanging out with my friends in the neighborhood, standing on the corners, laughing and talking. And we'd do things like play football. We'd play football across the yards, and we'd say, we can tackle on the yard and then you could touch on the driveway. Well, you know, that probably didn't work out exactly like that, but those were the rules. So, people ended up getting tackled in the middle of the driveway and, of course, we get skinned knees and elbows and stuff like that. But I remember that. That was a lot of fun. And we used to go to store, walk to the store, you know, for our parents to get groceries. Those were things that, you know, I remember, where I don't think we have the same kind of issues that we have today. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's a different, a whole different scenario. As you say, you've got a granddaughter that lives three blocks, but she'd never think about walking. Speaker 2: Right. She lives in a well-developed area in Houston [Texas] called Sugarland, which is a very exclusive neighborhood. Story_ID: 25531 Speaker 1: Children were safer then. Do you have any reflections on why that might be, that they were safer than-- Speaker 2: Well, I don't, I think it's probably two-fold. One is probably there truly were less things happening to kids then. But again, probably another component of that is that there probably, I think some of the same things happened but they just weren't reported, I would imagine, but probably at a lower frequency, would be my guess. Because I'm sure that the things that happen to kids now probably did happen to some of them a long time ago, just not at the rate that we see now. Speaker 1: Right. Seems like a scary set-up in a way, where you have the woods on one side, and you-- Speaker 2: I know, I know. And kids tended to go straight to school. I mean, nobody really just--and there may have been a few that played hooky, but most of the time when I'd go, it would be like after school or on the weekends. My brother and I would go. We used to do it in a group, and take our dogs with us. And there was, seemed like there was so much to see. And I think that's probably how I actually got interested in science, too, because I was always interested in nature and looking at the insects and the lizards and all the things that you could see out there. And one scary thing that did happen to me out there in that wooded area is that there was a clearing. I was over there in the evening time right before sunset. And I can remember walking out of the trees, but into an open area that just had weeds and bushes that were probably up to your ankles, or something like that. And I saw a snake, and so I froze. And so, I looked around and, of course, what most people want to do is run in the opposite direction. I turned around, and there was another snake there. And then I looked over here, there was a snake. I looked over there, there's another snake. And I was trying to figure out--this was just about sundown. So, I just decided to take off running (laughter). Luckily, none of the snakes bit me, but that was pretty scary, because I was running across all these snakes. Apparently they come out in the evening when it gets cool and there was a bunch of them, a bed of them, I don't know, there was a nest of them, whatever you call it. I just happened to be in the wrong place. But I got away without being bitten, so I was okay. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 25532 Speaker 1: Now, was Gordon Oaks in a part of town which was the black side of town, or was it, I mean, was Oklahoma [City, Oklahoma] stratified like that, where you have like a-- Speaker 2: Yeah, right. There's, Oklahoma is basically divided into four quadrants. And the so-called black part of town was the northeast part of the city. So, typically when plumbers and taxicab drivers, when you give an address--like my parents' address is Northeast 14th Street, for example. Then, all of a sudden, certain people don't want to go to that area now, especially now. But back then, we still lived in the northeast part of town, so what I'm saying is the house that they live in now, which is a better house, is still in the northeast part of town. The first house was also in the northeast part of town. And so, Oklahoma City [Oklahoma] is a bigger area than you think. It used to be second largest city in the United States, in terms of area, not population, but area. The city limits actually are outside of the county limits, if that makes any sense. So, Oklahoma City--and still for the most part, you have other quadrants that are integrated, but still the northeast part of Oklahoma City is almost one hundred percent African American. Story_ID: 25533 Speaker 1: So, now, when you started, you said when you started school you had a lot of trepidations about going to school. Speaker 2: Uh huh. Speaker 1: But what happened after you got to school? Did you, did that ease? Speaker 2: Yeah, that sort of went away. The butterflies sort of disappeared after the first week or two in school. And by the end of school, of course, I didn't have any of those kinds of issues. I was, I guess, very blessed to be talented enough to do very well in school. I didn't really have to study that hard, and so it just came naturally, like spelling. And the schoolwork was not a problem. Now, this is at Gordon Oaks Elementary School. I want to make sure I tell you that (laughter). I went to junior high, it was a brand new built school. It's still in the black community. It's called John F. Kennedy Junior High, and that's where I went to school. Speaker 1: Was it brand new, right after his assassination? Speaker 2: Uh huh. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In fact, his brother came to dedicate the school after that, shortly after the assassination. And that's when it was built. And I actually didn't know about security for folks in his position. And I can remember just, they had cleared out an area where he was to walk through. And I remember just jumping out into that area to try to shake his hand (laughter). Of course, the security person pushed me out of the way. I never got a chance to shake his hand. But in retrospect, had I been more knowledgeable, I wouldn't have done that. But, so, I actually got a chance to meet Robert Kennedy, I believe, who was the person who came. And once again, this was one hundred percent African American school. And finally, I went out to Douglas High School, and that traditionally is an African American school. Remember I told you my mother went to Booker T. Washington High School in Tulsa [Oklahoma]. They were rivals, Douglas and Booker T. Washington. They had some of the best football games and rivalry that I've seen, and I enjoyed that part of my high school experience. And many of the athletes went to OU [University of Oklahoma, Norman, Oklahoma] to play football and on to other places, I'm sure. But what I do remember is the fact that the bands were so good. And that's when I first started recognizing how good the African American bands are. Story_ID: 25534 Speaker 1: But the final school I went to, after my parents [Mae Frances Hanley and Edgar Houston] moved to where they live now, I had to go to Northeast High School. And that was a different experience and probably an even worse experience for my brother, my younger brother. So, he actually, after one year at Northeast, he transferred back to Douglas [High School] and graduated from Douglas. I graduated from Northeast. Speaker 2: Now, you say Northeast had fifty percent black population, you said? Speaker 1: I didn't really say, but I just said it had a predominant, they were predominantly African American. But there was a significant number of white students there. In fact, they used to be totally white, but as people were moving into that particular area of the northeast quadrant, then there was more and more white flight, the same way with the house where my parents moved in. That used to an all white neighborhood, and doctors and lawyers lived there, but they moved out because of white flight. Speaker 2: So, the migration, I suppose of African Americans into Oklahoma City [Oklahoma] took place in the northeast quadrant, which at one time had been white? Speaker 1: All black. Speaker 2: Pretty much. Speaker 1: Yeah. It started out as all black, northeast. Speaker 2: Oh, did it? Okay. Speaker 1: And then they started venturing out to the other quadrants. But there was even, at first there was just this pocket of African Americans in the northeast, and then white folks lived in other areas of the northeast quadrant. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So, basically my parents just moved from where there was a nucleus of African Americans to an area that was integrated with African Americans and whites, still in the northeast quadrant. And that's how this school, Northeast, that's how it got it's name, because it's still in the northeast quadrant, the high school. Speaker 2: So, is everything really still kind of really spread out? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: You know, with the size of Oklahoma City, the sheer physical size of it-- Speaker 1: Yeah, well, currently when I go to Oklahoma City now, I mean, it's integrated. People live just about anywhere they want to. But one area, the southeast part of Oklahoma City, is sort of interesting, too. Because there, African Americans and Hispanic Americans and white Americans live there, but they tend not to be, they're more in poverty, lower income folks there. Probably the most well to do area would be the northwest, you know, of Oklahoma City. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. And that's where--and what's interesting now is that if you want to go a nice grocery store, if you want to go to a nice shopping mall or restaurants, my family has to go to the northwest side of town to do that. In the northeast part of town there's still no nice grocery stores, there's no nice restaurants, and so that's how it exists right now, yeah. Story_ID: 25535 Speaker 1: What was your favorite subject at Gordon Oaks [Elementary School, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma]? Speaker 2: In elementary school? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Gosh. You know, since the courses, I mean everything was integrated, you know. In elementary school you don't get like a separate course in science or anything like that. But I would have to say I probably did my best work, even then probably was in science and-- Speaker 1: Could it have been math, or-- Speaker 2: Science and math, yeah. Speaker 1: So, you did have science in elementary school? Speaker 2: Uh huh, we did. Speaker 1: Did you have science fairs and that sort of thing? Speaker 2: It wasn't quite that organized. At my elementary school, they didn't have science fairs, but we were doing some things. I, myself, independently started becoming extremely interested in science by the time I got to the end of the sixth grade, to the point where I actually converted the basement in my parents' [Mae Frances Hanley and Edgar Houston] home to what would be called a research laboratory (laughter) back then. My parents didn't know what the heck I was doing. In fact, many of my siblings didn't even want to go down there in that basement, because I had like laboratory rats down there, and I had like insects in jars and stuff like that. And I had already gained this interest, just a natural interest in math and science. Speaker 1: Now, what sort of activities would take place down in the basement, with the rats and-- Speaker 2: Well, it got more sophisticated as I got older, because really my real hardcore stuff started like in the ninth grade, to be honest, eighth and ninth grade. But in elementary school, I would just do things like capture ants and put dirt in a jar. Remember the ant farms? I couldn't afford that, so I made my own ant farm by taking a mason jar, putting some dirt in there and threw some ants in there and I watched how they burrowed through the dirt. And I put some breadcrumbs in there and watched how they took the breadcrumbs from the surface and take it down to the areas where they had burrowed out an area. They seemed to, even at my early age I could notice that they seemed to have their own communication skills, the ants. They seemed to be very strong for their relative size. They could pick up pieces of material that was several times their own size and body weight. I was fascinated by that. And they seemed to be very organized. And my question was, you know, are these insects intelligent? Do they communicate with each other? How do they know who's to do what? They even have a classification of who does what, you know. In terms of organizational skills, you've got your worker ants, you've got the ones that fight, and you've got an ant that would be equivalent to a queen bee kind of thing. And so-- Speaker 1: Now, I was going to ask you, if you provided them with a queen, I mean when you collected them, did you know that they could get a queen? Speaker 2: (Laughter) No, I didn't know that. I couldn't see if they had developed that. But I'm just saying I know that they have this hierarchy. And I was trying to understand it back then. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, did you, were you a fan of the nature shows on television, like Mutual of Omaha and-- Speaker 2: I don't know. 'Wild Animal Kingdom', I remember that one. And true, I was fascinated by anything that had to do with science. But one thing I did figure out--so when I went to college, I didn't know what to major in. So, I just took biology, because I knew that if I had to choose between physics and chemistry and biology, at that point I decided I would like the life sciences. And so my career ended up going in that direction. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Today I'm considered to be a microbiologist, and so I'm looking at living things. I'm more interested in that, even though I had to take tons and tons of hours of chemistry. And there were other subjects, like physics, etcetera, but my real interest is in the life sciences. Story_ID: 25536 Speaker 1: Now, did you ever consider medicine? Speaker 2: I did. I did. I considered medicine. And I really--in retrospect, I had the skills and the talent, but for some reason I was thinking that I would prefer to do the research over medicine, because no one had really talked to me about medicine, to be honest. I never saw any really role models in medicine. And growing up in our family, the only time that you got a chance to come in contact with a doctor was typically in the emergency room. You know, we didn't have like, quote, a "family doctor." Speaker 1: Now, did, so was it that your family wasn't ill that frequently or you just used home remedies and-- Speaker 2: I would think they would use home remedies, and you'd really have to make a case to go the emergency room, you know. Speaker 1: The emergency room was for injuries-- Speaker 2: So, I don't know if that was, I think it was just lack of knowledge, to be honest with you. My father [Edgar Houston], as I mentioned to you, has an eighth grade education. My mother [Mae Frances Hanley] has a high school education. They probably didn't have as much money as I thought they-- I didn't know. All my friends were, we were all in the same boat. So, I had no idea that--if we were poor, I really never knew it until after I got in college. Speaker 1: Okay. So, you mentioned the emergency room. I guess that was to be for injuries suffered, you know-- Speaker 2: No, we could go there for anything. You would go to the emergency room if you had a congested chest. I remember my brother had like symptoms of asthma, so he would go the emergency room. And I think that's still true today, to be honest with you. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: For African American people and low-income people--I just came out of class this morning, teaching first year medical students. And we do, it's called problem based learning. And we take actual cases and we talk about them. And we integrate the sociological aspects of medicine with the clinical aspects and then build on top of that, the basic science aspects of medicine. And we see the same thing, that people today of lower income and lower educated people, that's their only source of health care, is going to the emergency room. Speaker 1: Now, so, you didn't know any doctors growing up? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: No black doctors? Speaker 2: That's correct. There were very few. I remember I went to school with a classmate of mine, and his father was an M.D. [Doctor of Medicine]. And so, you know, he was considered to be really the top of the apple barrel, or whatever you want to call it. And he was a person who actually, too, didn't really associate with the rest of us (laughter). So, I don't really know. I had not a clue as to what it's like to have parents that were professionals. So, I don't know. Story_ID: 25537 Speaker 1: Now, did you know, ever hear of a black scientist when you were in grade school? Speaker 2: No. Never did. In fact, at that time if someone had asked me if I would be a black scientist, I probably didn't even know that. I just knew I was curious about science. But my aspiration was to get a B.S. [bachelor of science] degree and perhaps teach or maybe work in a laboratory. But as far as being a scientist myself, I hadn't thought about that until after I was about finished with my B.S. degree. Then, at that point, a work study, because I worked my way through school as an undergraduate. I worked in a laboratory washing glassware at a research lab. And that's when I began to get this real taste of what I could actually do. So, while I was there, I actually met an African American post doc, post-doctoral fellow. Speaker 1: This is in college? Speaker 2: Yeah, this was when I was in college. Speaker 1: Oklahoma State [University, Stillwater, Oklahoma? Speaker 2: At Oklahoma State. And I also met a, it was the first time I met a black professor in biochemistry. And that's when I began to think that perhaps I can do some of these things, too. So, what I'm telling you, is that instead of meeting an M.D., my first experience were Ph.D.s who were role models. Story_ID: 25538 Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, grade school [Gordon Oaks Elementary School, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma]. Is there a particular teacher or anything? Was there a mentor who provided guidance to you? Speaker 2: Yeah, actually, and strangely enough, I can name every one of my teachers, from the kindergarten to the sixth grade. I can't do that in junior high or high school, but I can do it in elementary school. And all of them--I know the kindergarten teacher was very special. And the, my first African American male teacher was when I was in the sixth grade, Mr. Owen Bradford. And it was good for me to meet an African American male teacher while in elementary school, because even today, you don't see that many African American males as teachers in school. And so, as far as favorite teachers, I would say my kindergarten teacher; the second grade teacher, Mrs. Lawrence; and probably the sixth grade teacher, Mr. Bradford. But I could name them all. I've done this at national meetings, where teachers were attending. I would give them their proper due, because they play such a significant role in terms of that educational pipeline. And that's what has tweaked my career to go toward not only being interested in my own career, but once I got to be a full professor, the first thing I did as an administrator was to figure out how I could have an impact on the younger generation coming along behind me. And I really got involved with that, and I think we've really made a difference here at UTMB [University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas]. And it's not impacting just this community here in Galveston, but it's at a level that's impacting the country and the state as a result of some of the things and opportunities I've had to leverage these things. Story_ID: 25539 Speaker 1: Okay. So, now, at John F. Kennedy Junior High School, was there a special teacher there that you remember? Speaker 2: That's, so that would be, wait a minute, seventh through the eighth grade. I think so, yeah, but I'm blanking on her name. I probably had a crush on her, too (laughter). But she helped me with science. And she helped me with my first science project. I can't call her name right now. But all the guys just thought she was the most beautiful woman they'd ever seen (laughter). Of course, we were just in the seventh grade. But I remember she spent time with me working on a science project, and it was a very sophisticated project. So, you're asking me--so, but at that time I was still doing stuff down in my parents' [Mae Frances Hanley and Edgar Houston] basement at this other house. And that's where I really had the rats and stuff like that. And so, she helped me with this project where I was working with the adrenal glands in rats, to determine, you know, if you remove the adrenal glands, if that will have an impact on them in terms of their behavior. Because the adrenal glands, that's the gland that produces the hormone that tells you when to either run or fight. You know, it makes you stronger than you normally would be. So, when you're challenged, that gland kicks in and produces a hormone that will allow you to run faster and allow you to do things that you normally wouldn't do under peaceful conditions. Story_ID: 25540 Speaker 1: Now, you were actually removing the adrenal glands of rats when you were in the ninth grade? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And how was this done? Is this an operation where you had to anesthetize the rats? Speaker 2: Yes, I did that. I anesthetized the rats. I would actually make a surgical incision in their abdominal cavity. I would identify the adrenal glands and then I would remove them with the scalpel. And I would then sew up, suture up the animals before they would come back out of their sleep from the anesthesia, and then I would look after them after they, while they recovered. And then I would do certain tests on these animals to see if they behaved differently than the ones that did not have their adrenal glands removed. Speaker 1: And where were-- Speaker 2: This formed the basis of a science fair that ultimately made me win first place out of the entire city [Oklahoma City, Oklahoma] for a science fair. And I think that's what's on the cover of a magazine that I have a photograph of here. Speaker 1: So, how did you determine where the adrenal glands were? Did you-- Speaker 2: Well, through textbooks. Yeah, I could look in textbooks, and they showed me that. Or then you read up on what exactly those adrenal glands do. And so, I had all the background information to make a nice science fair project. Speaker 1: And what were your findings? Speaker 2: It was the first time I'd really learned the scientific process, and I think that's what really turned me on to science for a career. Well, the findings were that animals that had their adrenal glands removed were less likely to be aggressive when they're cornered. Remember, I said its fight or flight, is what we used to call it. And they were really sort of lackadaisical in their behavior. Nothing seemed to bother them. And no matter what you did to them, they would not run nor would they become aggressive when you would do things that would disturb them. So, we were able to do certain little tests that could determine this aggressiveness or assertiveness in the animals, and we could actually record that data. And so, I would do the experiments at home and then would go back to school and get some mentoring from the teacher. And ultimately, we put this all together for a science fair project, and it got first place. Speaker 1: In the city? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So, is this the first time an African American student won the city's science fair? Speaker 2: I think so. And that's the reason why I ended up on the front page of this magazine. And the photograph I brought here was the one that was used for the magazine cover. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And there's a picture of my parents, and there's a picture of me with a number of different awards I'd gotten by the time I was in--by the time I was in the ninth grade, I'd already been in the honor society and gotten other kinds of awards, leadership awards. That was another aspect. Remember the shy guy that didn't want to go to school on the first day? You know, all of a sudden I'm the president of the student council. I became much more of a leader in my development by the ninth grade. Story_ID: 25541 Speaker 1: Were you, was church a big part of growing up? Speaker 2: Yes. I went to Tabernacle Baptist Church in Oklahoma City [Oklahoma]. And my brother and I, there's a photograph in the church today of some of the history of the church, and it has a photograph of my brother and I serving on the usher board, the youth ministry. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. Now, did you like music? Speaker 2: Yeah, I liked to listen to it, but I never have played a musical instrument. I really take my hat off to people who can do that. But I just enjoy, but I don't understand how people can do that, where you can--don't even know each other, and you come together and you can actually after a few minutes, play music. But it's so much math involved in music, that now I use it as a way to get kids interested in math and science, because music is nothing but mathematics, and we don't even know it, for the most part. And it's really fascinating. Story_ID: 25542 Speaker 1: So, when you got to Frederick Douglass High School, did you have a science hero? Who was your hero, or did you have one? Speaker 2: Booker T. Washington, he was one of them for sure, and George Washington Carver. Speaker 1: Alright. Now, in those days were they teaching any black history in school? Speaker 2: Very little. You really had to dig it out of the textbooks. But even back then, he was known. Both of those individuals were known, and I knew about the discoveries of George Washington Carver. I really, that was my real exposure, first exposure to an outstanding scientist who happened to be African American. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that was a good stimulus for me, because what he could do with the peanut was just fascinating. Speaker 1: Did you ever do any kind of experiments with any particular item, like a peanut or something? Speaker 2: No, because that was more on the chemistry side of it. And everything I did usually had some implications with living organisms, either at the microscopic level or at the macroscopic level. And so, when you asked me the question about medicine, I probably could have easily gone into medicine had I had someone tell me that that's something I could do. Back in those days, it really was important what teachers said to you. This is what I tell people today, that young people are so--what the teacher says is so powerful that they don't realize when you're talking to kids you should always encourage them. Because they really believe in--if you tell them they're not going to be anything, then they're going to believe that. If you tell them that they can be something, they'll also believe it. And I think it's important that, you know, teachers give the kids the positive reinforcement and encouragement that they need. That's such an integral part of teaching, I think. Speaker 1: Okay. So, let's see. Now, at Douglass High School, did you have good mentoring at Douglass High School? Speaker 2: I did, but I was only there for basically one year before my parents moved. And back then, where you went to school was highly associated with where you lived. And so, when my parents [Mae Frances Hanley and Edgar Houston] moved, they basically moved just a little bit closer to Northeast High School than Douglass. And that's why my brother and I ended up going to Northeast. When I lived in Gordon Oaks, the place we talked about extensively earlier, that was closer to Douglass. But even though it was closer to Douglass, we still had to ride the bus to go to school, so that meant it was too far to walk. But when we moved to that second house, we could actually walk to Northeast, even though it was still a good little walk, but we didn't have to catch the bus to go to school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Now, Northeast, you kind of alluded that it was more of a challenge than Douglass. Speaker 2: It was more of a challenge. It could have been just because it was a higher grade level, too, when I was there. But I think there, we had to really get to know kids that we never met before. Whereas at Douglass, the same kids that you went to school in elementary school, were at that school. At Northeast, we had to start all over again, and I think that had a lot to do with both my brother and I getting off to a slow start there, just socialization, especially my brother more than me. Some of the kids that went to Northeast actually went to Kennedy [John F. Kennedy Junior High School], the middle school that I was telling you about. And so, I did know a few kids there. But my brother never went to Kennedy, so he didn't get that same experience of knowing some of the kids there. So, he transferred back to Douglass. Story_ID: 25543 Speaker 1: Now, were you following the space program? I didn't ask you about that, but that was-- Speaker 2: You mean back then? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Actually, probably not. Not at the ninth grade level. Speaker 1: So, the seven astronauts, the Sputnik [first artificial Earth satellite launched in 1957], the first man flight and all of that-- Speaker 2: Well, I was certainly tuned in by the time we landed on the moon, and that was during the [President John F.] Kennedy administration. And at that time, I should have been in high school. Speaker 1: The moon was '69 [1969]. You would have been out then. Speaker 2: I graduated in '68 [1968] from high school. Speaker 1: Yeah, they walked on the moon in '69 [1969]. Speaker 2: Okay. So, I was already probably a freshman in college. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Yeah. I think when they landed on the moon, that was my first real hook and interest in science, in space. Speaker 1: Okay. You just didn't think about the space program? Speaker 2: I didn't really think about it that much. Speaker 1: Now, were you influenced at all by science fiction as a kid? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah. I was influenced by it, because I was always trying to determine what was fiction and what was real. And sometimes you could get right on the edge, where some of the things that you might think would be fiction can actually be real, based on science. I mean, if anybody had said that a remote control was real, say back in the fifties, nobody would believe it. You know, I still remember when we first got a remote control television, getting up bypassing the remote and changing the station, you know, because I wasn't used to having a remote. I was used to just manually turning the channel. Speaker 1: You'd get up and turn it (laughter). Speaker 2: Yeah. So, it was a transition for everybody. I mean, that's true for everything, including cell phones. There was a time when I didn't really think that cell phones were necessary, but now they really are necessary. So, I think it's an evolution of our own thinking, in terms of scientific achievements. There's a photo just behind you that shows my experience at NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration]. And those were the people that reported to me when I was at NASA. And when I left to come back here, because I was only there for two years--and I was there on something called the IPA, which is the Interpersonal Act. And it's a way that the government can borrow the scientific intellect of faculty members from universities and then return them back to the university. And so, when I left, then they signed that. But the whole idea was, we were inspiring children. If you notice, the kids in that photograph are, I mean, they're children, they're not adults. And the whole idea is to get kids to think about space. So, when you asked me that question about me, I just got a late start on space. I can imagine what kids now--they know all about it at such an early age. They're so much more advanced than when I was coming along. Story_ID: 25544 Speaker 1: Now, did you have to work growing up? Speaker 2: I did. I washed dishes in restaurants. I actually washed dishes at the hospitals, at the OU [University of Oklahoma, Norman, Oklahoma] Health Science Center, which is set up exactly like UTMB [University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas]. And so, the interesting story I could tell you there, is when I was in junior high, I was working in the kitchen of the hospital cafeteria and washing dishes. And I did that for probably seventh and eighth grade. And I remember-- Speaker 1: That seems a little young to be working, but-- Speaker 2: I think it was seventh and eighth grade. Speaker 1: You say seventh and eighth? Speaker 2: I think--no, in the ninth and tenth grade. I'm sorry, probably ninth and tenth grade. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. Speaker 2: Yeah, ninth and tenth grade, I worked there, because at that point, we were living closer to the medical center anyway. But what I was going to say was, a supervisor came to me one day and asked me what did I want to be? And I said that I wanted to be a scientist. And the supervisor just laughed and said, "Well, I think you're really thinking way outside of the box." And he said, "But if you really work hard and if you kept your nose clean--" I remember that statement, "--then perhaps you can work here, and you can have my job." I just remember that. And I didn't say anything. But in my mind I was already, my mind was set that I was going to do something other than do that, and that I was going to go to college. At that point I knew I was going to go to college. Speaker 1: Okay. In terms of that statement, "Keep your nose clean." Was it tough growing up in Oklahoma City [Oklahoma]? Did you have--it's so spread out, I mean-- Speaker 2: I never felt like it was growing up in Birmingham, Alabama. I never felt that kind of pressure. But there was some subtle things that, you know, happened to me when I was growing up, particularly when I went to college. It became more and more evident when I was at Oklahoma State [University, Stillwater, Oklahoma] as an undergraduate. Story_ID: 25545 Speaker 1: Now, Northeast [High School]. You're the student body president back in, was it in junior high school, or was it in high school? Speaker 2: It was president of the student council. That's the same thing, the same thing. At Northeast, I continued to be involved in extra-curricular activities like the Key Club, the honor society, student council. I was doing that. And at the same time, I was still doing various types of science fair projects. And I ran track, I think, my junior or senior year in high school. So, I was pretty much involved with not only doing well in class, but also with some extra-curricular activities. Speaker 1: Now, were you involved in the Boy Scouts at all? Speaker 2: No, I never did. I never did join the Boy Scouts. Speaker 1: Okay. Or the Boys' Club or something? Speaker 2: No, I didn't. It's a sad story: I didn't want to join the Boy Scouts. I remember it took me a long time to talk my father. We used to think he was really, really a Scrooge, but he probably just didn't have the money. But I remember I pestered my dad [Edgar Houston] about money to join the Boy Scouts, or something to that effect. So, he gave me the money to join the Boy Scouts. And we gave this money to this man in the neighborhood, and he disappeared. That's my Boy Scout story. Speaker 1: A sad story, you know. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So, at any rate--at Northeast High School. Now, you were involved in a lot of activities. Did you run for student council president there? Speaker 2: I didn't run for student council president, but I was an officer in there. I forgot what office I had, but it wasn't president. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. And at that, from Northeast, I remember the graduating class was like 128 students, and I was like number six. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, I wasn't, I would never consider myself to be a genius, or I was never like the number one student, but I was probably always in the top five or ten percent. Story_ID: 25546 Speaker 1: Now, did you have a chance to take calculus in high school? Speaker 2: I did. I took some calculus and trigonometry and Algebra 1 and Algebra 2 and geometry. Speaker 1: And were there any science teachers, or any teachers, who you really remember from high school, being really encouraging? Speaker 2: Yeah, there were a couple, however, I don't remember their names. But I do remember still working on doing science fair things. And also, not only that, but I had my first, I think in the ninth grade I started having summer science experiences. For example, when I was in the ninth or tenth grade, I had an opportunity to spend a summer at the Federal Aviation Agency [FAA] in a research component there. And I actually worked on a project where we looked at the effects of sleep deprivation on baboons. And the whole idea here was to look at what impact lack of sleep has on pilots. And so, it was a study, it was an animal model, to do that. And I can remember doing that being in the ninth or tenth grade, and the first sophisticated study. And I was able to actually produce some data that was very useful. Speaker 1: Did you get a chance to really observe real baboons and... Speaker 2: I did. Speaker 1: ...keep them awake? (laughter) Speaker 2: (laughter). Part of our job was to keep them awake, you know. And that was really interesting. We had to record their behavior. They had certain little things that you look for, and you record that. And we had to use noise and all kinds of other stimuli to keep them awake. And the point was, we tried to relate it to humans, but just how much can the body stand before it just gives out? Speaker 1: What were your, was there a conclusion on this? Speaker 2: Well, I think the conclusion was that, you know, after fatigue, you know, everybody has their limits, and everything has its limits. And so, we were able to record a certain number of hours, which I don't remember what the actual details of the data were. But it turned out to be something that was very useful at the end. It's been a while since I've done that kind of work, and even thought about it (laughter). Speaker 1: You say that was the first summer project? Speaker 2: That was the first summer project. Speaker 1: Every summer after that, you-- Speaker 2: Every summer I did something. But then, but it spilled over, and it sort of gives segue way to why I am doing the kind of work that I'm doing now. Because if you get a chance to know what I'm doing here, you'll see that I have like a portfolio of science education programs through the summer and the academic year for young kids coming along. And so, my freshman year in college, the very first summer I came back, and I worked in a neighborhood project helping young kids in the community do math and science and artwork. And it was paid for by Oklahoma State [University, Stillwater, Oklahoma]. And I think that was my first real experience, in terms of trying to bring along people that are behind me, to do something in the community, to be a role model, to be able to help other people that are younger than me. And that's been a concept that I've used ever since. And so, I've always been involved with doing that kind of thing, even when I was told as a new professor that, you know, you're not going to get tenure if you do that. But I was able to do it. I was stubborn and I didn't listen. And I would go to Prairie View A&M [Agricultural and Mechanical] University [Prairie View, Texas] and places, and spend my own money to travel there to talk to the young people about going into math and science and pursuing a degree higher than the one that they're in currently, and that they could go further than a B.S. [bachelor of science] degree. And it was that kind of talk that, I think, that started me in the business that I'm in right now. And that's the Office of Educational Outreach. Story_ID: 25547 Speaker 1: Now, when you were on the verge of graduating from high school, what kind of counseling did you have? Speaker 2: Very little. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. I still, I don't know what's going on in the high schools, but even today, I don't feel like students get adequate counseling at most schools. But I know I received very little. Speaker 1: Were you encouraged at all to go to college? Speaker 2: No. In fact, you know, as far as--I don't even know how much counseling was used to determine whether you go to college or not. That just sort of, is not even in my memory bank. So, I don't know. Speaker 1: So, that spring of 1968, that's the spring that Dr. [Martin Luther] King was killed, in April. Do you remember what you were doing? Speaker 2: Yeah. I was a senior in high school. And I was devastated like most of us were, and very angry, and didn't understand why. And I remember thinking that basically with all the riots that were going on after that, you know, whether or not I would even go to college. But I decided to go. I had no knowledge of fraternities and sororities, really. I only had one other person in my family who had gone to college, and he pledged Alpha [likely Alpha Phi Alpha; fraternity]. And I think that's why I did it, because I just knew one person in my family who did it. Speaker 1: Was this a cousin or something? Speaker 2: A cousin, yeah, on my dad's [Edgar Houston] side. Speaker 1: Where did he go to school? Speaker 2: He went to the University of Oklahoma [OU, Norman, Oklahoma]. And so, I decided to stay in-state, probably because it's cheaper to pay in-state tuition than out-of-state. And since I had to go to school on student loans and work study, it's easier to get back and forth home. Stillwater [Oklahoma] is like maybe fifty miles outside of Oklahoma City [Oklahoma]. So, I was able to go to school and still be close to my family. Story_ID: 25548 Speaker 1: So, Oklahoma State University [Stillwater, Oklahoma], and this would be the fall of 1968? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Alright. So, what's the demographics of Oklahoma State [University]? Speaker 2: Then or now? Speaker 1: Well, then. Speaker 2: Oh, then I think they had about 18,000 students, and I think that there were less than 150 African American students. Speaker 1: Now, did the students have an organization when you got there? Speaker 2: They did. They had a, I think, like a black student organization there. And we, I joined (laughter) and so, shortly after that, during my--actually, it was a couple years later. The students did a, had a demonstration on campus. They were demonstrating because there were no significant numbers of black professors. There were no books in the library that spoke toward black history or any books of substance concerning black people. And so, the students decided to boycott the campus. And so, I remember we left campus and went to Oklahoma City [Oklahoma]. And it got statewide news coverage, etc. And during that time, the press and the public was putting so much pressure on the university that they did begin to start hiring African American faculty, but not a whole lot, just a few here and there. And there was this one African American faculty member who had been there during the time of the student demonstrations. And he was a person who actually, he was a biochemist, and he was a person whose laboratory I ended up working in, I think it was my senior year, I worked in his laboratory. And it was that time that I spent there that I met--he had a post doc in his laboratory. And I met this guy--plus knowing him--is what gave me, I guess, is the confidence that I could go to the next level in graduate school. In other words, not just be satisfied with graduating with a B.S. [bachelor of science degree], but that I could go on and do a master's degree. And so, that's what I decided to do. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now, so what was the teacher, the name of your-- Speaker 2: The professor? Speaker 1: Yeah, the professor. Speaker 2: Earl Mitchell, Dr. Earl Mitchell. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And the post doc that I met, his name is Dr. Ambrose Gerald. Speaker 1: And where did he go on to? Speaker 2: He now is a senior research scientist at Woods Hole Institute in Massachusetts. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And Dr. Mitchell is retired. Speaker 1: Okay. Did Dr. Mitchell retire from OSU [Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio]? Speaker 2: Yes, he's retired now. Both of these guys are doing well. They're considered to be outstanding folks, doing well. And so, for me, I think they gave me the stimulus that I wouldn't be satisfied with just barely making it, but I wanted to do well, too, and excel. And I did, because of them. Speaker 1: Now, were you prepared for the work at Oklahoma State pretty much? Speaker 2: I would say no, because everything--you know, I did well at the schools that I attended. However, I realized that even though I did well in my own environment, when I got to OSU I realized there were still some things I was lacking in my background, and building the foundation toward an education in college required some basic things that I didn't get when I was in junior high and high school. And so, what I did was I compensated for that by working extra hard. So, I can remember many times in the library on Saturdays when there's an OSU football game. And the stadium was right next to the library. And every time they would score a touchdown, they would shoot that cannon. And I could just hear it going off, and the crowd yelling. And I'm there listening to recorded lectures, taking notes from what I might have missed when I was actually in the classroom. So, I was working, so I made up for my lack of background by working extra hard. And what I remember is seeing my white counterpart students out there throwing Frisbees outside of the library and relaxing, and I'm working. But that's been the story of my life, that I've just had to work extra hard to get where I am now. Story_ID: 25549 Speaker 1: Okay. So, when you got your bachelor's of science degree--and it was in microbiology and chemistry [from Oklahoma State University, Stillwater, Oklahoma], right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: In '72 [1972], 1972. Now, from the notes here, you stayed on campus to work, right? Speaker 2: Well, I actually worked for a year as a research technician in Dr. Earl Mitchell's laboratory that I told you about. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But then I soon transitioned into the master's degree. Speaker 1: Okay. At Oklahoma State? Speaker 2: At Oklahoma State. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, I've got a note here that you also worked as a lab instructor at Langston [University, Langston, Oklahoma]. Speaker 2: I did. I did that while working on my master's degree at Oklahoma State. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that was a good experience for me, because all of my college education has been in predominantly white institutions, so I was also curious about what it would be like to be on an HBCU [historically black colleges and universities] campus. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, I got a chance to do that. Speaker 1: Well, what was it like? How did it compare? Speaker 2: Well, first of all, the facilities are just lacking, and I could tell the difference there. But also, once again, I felt the need to want to go there and to share my experiences and also what knowledge I had at that time with the students at Langston University. And for me, it was very rewarding. It was a good experience to teach those undergraduate students. I think I was teaching chemistry there. And Oklahoma State [University]--I believe, I don't know if it was Langston or Oklahoma State that was paying me to do it, but I just remember the experience was really, it was a good experience to do it. Story_ID: 25550 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, tell us about, there's a figure here, Joseph J. Firetti. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Does that ring a bell? Speaker 2: Right. That's at the University of Oklahoma Health Science Center [Oklahoma City, Oklahoma], and that's where I got my Ph.D. Speaker 1: Okay. That's later, much later on. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Alright. Speaker 2: He was my faculty advisor. Speaker 1: Okay. So, for your master's degree, who was your advisor? Speaker 2: It turned out to be Dr. Earl Mitchell, the guy that I was telling you about. I started off working in his lab, I mean, as a technician. And certainly, between the time--it was like almost a year that I worked as a technician before I decided to enroll in a master's degree program. And I did my research in his laboratory. That's how his name is connected there. Speaker 1: Okay. So, when did you get your master's degree? Speaker 2: In '74 [1974]. Speaker 1: Okay. In 1974. And what was your thesis project? Speaker 2: Oh, I looked at, in his lab, since he's a biochemist, I looked at the isolation of certain plant enzymes, beta-galactosidase. So I was able to do an experiment where I actually extracted this enzyme and purified it and then studied its mechanism of action for my master's thesis. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then that resulted in, I released a couple of publications as a result of that. Speaker 1: Now what-- Speaker 2: And that was a turn-on too, because to be published as a young African American scientist was very important, because that was, publications was really the key to your professional advancement and development. And so, I was happy to get--I think my first publication was with Earl Mitchell. I haven't looked at my CV [curriculum vitae] in a while, but I think my first one was with him. Speaker 1: Okay. And it was about the isolation of the plant enzymes? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. What did you find out about the isolation? Speaker 2: Well, it turns out that the particular enzyme, I believe we were isolating it from barley. And it turns out that these enzymes are very essential to the digestion of the food itself. And so, if you could understand that, then that could help to--in many different directions--for humans as well as animals that may be fed this grain, you could actually get maximum growth and also maximum viability in the animals as a result of this enzyme. Speaker 1: So, if you could like isolate the enzyme and boost it or something, you could more efficiently digest it? Speaker 2: Yes. If you could isolate that enzyme, it could be used to more efficiently digest the protein that's in the grain. And so, we were able to publish two papers that showed that. Speaker 1: Okay. So, this is grain used in agriculture? Speaker 2: Yes. And you might imagine, Oklahoma State [University, Stillwater, Oklahoma] is considered in Oklahoma the agricultural school, just like A&M [Texas Agricultural and Mechanical University, College Station, Texas] is here [Texas], yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 25551 Speaker 1: Alright, now, you finished your master's degree in 1974. Did you, when you finished it, did you have full intent to going on and finish your Ph.D.? Speaker 2: It was right at the end. In fact, I'm trying to remember the sequence here. '72 [1972] and '74 [1974]. Well, I think that, you know, that year that I worked, I'm trying to figure out if it was before or after I got my master's degree. I'm not sure. I'll have to go back and look at that. But the bottom line here is that I entered the University of Oklahoma Health Science Center [Oklahoma City, Oklahoma] as a doctoral student in, I believe it was 1975. That's why my numbers are--and then four years later would be '79 [1979], that's when I got my Ph.D. So, Joe Firetti, Dr. [Joseph J.] Firetti, was my advisor, and he's the person whose laboratory I worked in to do the work that I was doing there. Now, while I worked at the University of Oklahoma Health Science Center, it was totally different than what I did in Dr. [Earl] Mitchell's lab. Because now, I'm working on a Ph.D. project that had to do with micro-organisms, but I was able to use some of the same principles that I had learned in Earl Mitchell's laboratory. And that is the purification process, how to purify components. So, in Dr. Firetti's laboratory, I worked with Group A streptococci, which is a micro-organism that causes strep throat. But if it's untreated, then it's capable of causing rheumatic fever and also acute glomerulonephritis, which is kidney damage--causes kidney damage. And so, I wanted to understand the mechanism of action of the pathogenicity of that organism. And so, if you can figure out a micro-organism causes disease, then you can figure out how you can cure that disease. And so, it turns out that streptococci produces toxins. And so, then I used the same technique that I learned in Earl Mitchell's laboratory, in terms of purification. I used those techniques to purify toxins that are produced by strep and then later come back and figure out what roles those toxins play in the pathogenesis of disease. And so, that became the whole basis of my doctoral dissertation. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, if you want me to stop, I'll stop talking about-- Speaker 1: No, no, no. In fact, you should talk more about it. Speaker 2: Okay. Well, one of the things that I did was to isolate it through a series of steps that required column chromatography. It required then, separation by maybe iso-electric focusing. We used a whole difference of bio-techniques in order to get a purified quantity of the toxin. And once you do that, typically you do that when you do electro-phoresis. You get a single band, and if you get a single band that stains at a certain molecular weight, then that is the toxin. And it's also, you also figure out what the molecular weight of that toxin is. And then I took that, and then I used that to do other studies. For example, I would take the purified toxin and I can inject it intra-abdominally in the skin of rabbits. And what you get is something called an erythematous reaction around that site of injection. And that's the same thing that happens when you get something like rheumatic fever. You get these red blotches all on the skin when you come down with streptococcal infections. Most people that have sore throats usually go to the doctor and you'll be treated with antibiotics. But the good thing about streptococci is that it's still sensitive to penicillin. So, a doctor can give you penicillin for your sore throat. They swab it and then culture it, and then come back, and if it's strep, they can give you penicillin and it knocks it out. But what about the people who don't go to the doctor? They have a sore--if you don't go to the doctor, and you have a sore throat and you never get any treatment, then your sore throat will go away and you think that you're fine. But several years later down the road, pretty soon you start getting heart failure, kidney issues, and kidney failure issues. So, you have to pay attention to those sore throats. And even though most of the time when you go for a sore throat it's viral, and it's a viral etiology, but in the case of strep, you have to pay attention to it because if you don't, you'll get these later complications. So, my whole dissertation was built around how we could figure out how to avoid those problems. And so, for the rest of my career in microbiology, I've always studied what roles bacterial toxins have in the pathogenesis of disease. Even when I came here, I did post doctoral work, and I switched from streptococci to gram negative organisms, which are like Salmonella, E-coli and Vibrio cholerae. These are the ones that commonly cause food poisoning. They also produce toxins. So, I was able to figure out the mechanisms of action of these toxins. I figured out the protein analysis of these toxins and the amino acid sequence analysis, and then the nucleic acid sequence analysis. If you can figure out the nucleic sequence, then that means you've figured out the gene, the code for that toxin. And if you make a mutation in that gene, you can change the toxin so that it's no longer able to cause disease, and that way you can make vaccines and you can cure diseases. And that's for me the stimulus for going into research, was that if you become and M.D. [Doctor of Medicine] you can treat diseases. But becoming a Ph.D., you can actually cure diseases, and that was the thing that really turned me on about that, because I get requests, I get communications from people all over the world because research has a common language. So, I can go in any country and I can communicate with the scientists in those countries, because we use the same nomenclature. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that's very important. Story_ID: 25552 Speaker 1: And, so the work that I've done in my career, while it helps a lot of people in the United States, it also helps people in third world countries like India and other places that have these kinds of diseases. Currently, I spent my whole time working on something called Aeromonas hydrophila, and Aeromonas hydrophila is an organism that's found in fresh and saltwater. It's found in swimming pools. It can be found anywhere. And it causes wound infections. And so, if you have a cut or an abrasion in your skin and you come in contact with that micro-organism, it can cause tremendous wound infections. If it gets into the blood it's fatal. And so, I studied that toxin, we characterized it, and we figured it out from the amino acid sequence to the nucleic acid sequence. And we now have cloned it into other organisms. But that study has led to a whole lot of things that would be an important part in understanding the mechanisms of action of that disease. So, now, what we find now is that the stuff that I've worked on, now can be associated with-you remember this thing that's coming out that's real popular on the news, it's flesh-eating bacteria. Speaker 2: Right, right, right. Speaker 1: I actually have, I've studied this. This is two organisms. Both the two organisms-- Speaker 2: What do they call them? Speaker 1: It's Group A streptococci, and the other one is Aeromonas hydrophila. It's so interesting. But those are the two micro-organisms that I studied as a Ph.D., and then also an as early faculty member. And so, now we're going to have a leg up in curing that flesh-eating bacterial disease, because we've heard some devastating stories in the news about one lady who went skiing and lost both her arms. There are people that have had other stories where they've had devastating wounds and lost legs, etc. I saw the same thing several years ago, working on mice. I would inject the tail vein of these mice with the toxin that's produced by the micro-organism. And when I did that, what I found was that the, in some cases I would, instead of giving an intravenous injection, if I did an intravenous injection, the mice would die within several minutes. So, it was very lethal. And what we'd see is hind leg paralysis followed by respiratory failure. They would die. Occasionally, I would miss the tail vein and hit just a subcutaneous injection in the skin or in the muscle of the tail. And the next day I'd come back, and at the site of the injection, the tail had fallen off. That's the same thing that happens in humans with this flesh-eating bacteria. Speaker 2: So, the cure-- Speaker 1: It destroys tissue. It's a tissue destroying toxin. And that's something that we have published and isolated long before, you know, the media came up with this flesh-eating bacteria. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: But long before this thing became really rampant in terms of humans, we had already figured it out in animals, in experiments in the laboratory. So, that will put us several steps ahead in terms of curing that disease. And it might not be me, but it'll be some people using my published data to go ahead and figure out how to cure it. So, I feel pretty good about that. Speaker 2: They're still working on finding the cure for that bacteria? Speaker 1: That's right. But it's easier, because they can look at the work we've already done. So, they don't have to do that part, they just go further with getting toward a cure. Speaker 2: Right now, is the cure like amputation of the part that's affected with it, or what? Speaker 1: Well, no. I think that--what we want to do is to block the infection before it gets to that point where you have to lose a limb. And you can do that. One, by vaccination. You can have a vaccine that can protect you from getting infected by that in the first place. You can be infected, but the vaccine will protect you from being devastated by it. So, that's probably the route that people want to do. And ultimately if enough people, and if it warrants developing a vaccine, then you can take that vaccine, and now you can go skiing, you can--. 'Cause this organism is found in water, it's a water-associated type of micro-organism, lakes and streams, any--. If you get a cut or puncture or an abrasion and it comes in contact with contaminated water, then there's a chance that this micro-organism might get into your bloodstream. If it does, or into your tissue, it causes this devastating effect that the news media calls flesh-eating bacteria. Speaker 2: So, in the case of the skier, was she was cut and then it came through snow, or-- Speaker 1: No. This was a water-skier. Speaker 2: Water skiing, water skiing. Speaker 1: She was water skiing. And when you hold onto the toggles, sometimes if the boat makes a really sharp turn, the rope can get across your forearm. And somehow that rope got tangled across her forearm and made some cuts in her skin. And then the organism entered through that area. So we call it a portal of entry. And it got, and then it started infecting the flesh and developed in that area. And so, that's how it starts. But that's the kind of micro-organism I've been studying all my career, is strep and Aeromonas. Story_ID: 25553 Speaker 1: Okay. After you earned your Ph.D. in '79 [1979], you-- Speaker 2: I came here [UTMB, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas]. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And I did two years of post doc as a McLaughlin Fellow before I joined the faculty. Speaker 1: Alright. Speaker 2: And that's where I started. I left the strep behind, and I started working on what we call gram negative organisms. And that's Salmonella, which you've heard of, called food poisoning: Vibrio cholera, and this latest one, Aeromonas, which at the time, when I started working on it, no one even looked at it as being a significant human pathogen. They thought it was a disease only of cold-blooded animals like snakes and fish and alligators, etc. Speaker 1: Yeah. I see it as a picture of a fish, infected, in the outline here. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Tell us about, you know, two of your colleagues here that have been mentioned quite often, Johnny W. Peterson and Ashok Kumar Chopra. Speaker 2: Yes, Chopra. Johnny Peterson was my mentor as a post doc. Remember how Joe Ferreti was my mentor as a doctoral student? So, when I came from the University of Oklahoma here, I worked in the laboratory of Johnny Peterson as a post doctoral fellow. And I was the first African American to get a J.W. McLaughlin post doctoral fellowship here at UTMB [University of Texas Medical Branch]. And I worked in the laboratory of Johnny Peterson, where I started looking at these other kinds of toxins produced by bacteria. Speaker 1: Okay. And Dr. Chopra? Speaker 2: Dr. Chopra was my post doc. So, see it's a chain effect. So, I worked in Johnny Peterson's lab and Dr. Chopra worked in my lab. And he is a world renown outstanding scientist that's gone far beyond what I've done. And it makes me feel good to know that I actually trained someone who has surpassed me. And he's still a young guy, and he's doing all kinds of neat things, and he's taken it to another level, and he's definitely world renown. Speaker 1: Now, at UTMB, did you have your own laboratory? Speaker 2: UTMB? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. I had my own laboratory for years, ever since I joined the faculty. But lately, as I transitioned from being a research scientist to an administrator, I actually turned my entire laboratory over to Chopra, the guy you talked about. So, he inherited my laboratory and also inherited the remaining years on a grant that I had with the National Institute of Health. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now, how was your lab funded back in the day? Speaker 2: From the National Institute of Health [NIH], primarily. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The majority of the research enterprise in this country is funded through the National Institute of Health. Sometimes you get funding through the National Science Foundation [NSF], which I've gotten that kind of funding before, as well as funding from the Howard Hughes Medical Institute [HHMI]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But NIH funds the majority of active research in this country that's biomedical. Story_ID: 25554 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, you, at some point here, I don't want to get the date wrong, but at some point you became the recipient of an endowment here, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: That was named for? Speaker 2: That was Herman Barnett, the guy who I was telling you about, the first African American to graduate from UTMB [University of Texas Medical Branch] as an M.D. [Doctor of Medicine] Speaker 1: What year was this? Speaker 2: That was 1997. Speaker 1: Okay. And did you know Herman Barnett? Speaker 2: No, unfortunately. He was avid flyer, and he actually died in a plane crash before I got a chance to meet him. However, I did get a chance to teach his son, who went to medical school here as well. And so, he and I know each other very well. In fact, I'll be seeing him tomorrow evening at some event. Speaker 1: Okay. Tell us a little bit about Dr. Barnett. Speaker 2: Well, Dr. Barnett was definitely, I think, really strong, and a hero in a way, because he broke the barriers as to education in the medical school here at UTMB. As I hear from other people, he had to sit in an area that was roped off from the other students. He had to endure a lot of harassment and pain as a result of coming to school here. But yet, he did it all with grace, and not only that, he was at the top of his class. He had to study three or four times harder, but he refused to just pass the course. He actually excelled in the course. And I think I get some of that from him. You know, that really inspired me to do well. He had a very lonely experience, you know, being the only person of African American heritage in that class, but he paved the way for so many other students. And I can tell you this, and I've heard so many different stories about him, what happens to him even driving around in Galveston [Texas] and going across the bridge to La Marque [Texas] and Texas City [Texas], those areas over there where he'd been stopped by police and was harassed and etcetera, etcetera. He endured some horrible things. Some of the faculty members here, the older faculty members, tell me about him, that they actually had a chance to teach him, and they would tell me just how strong he was. And that just made me feel much, even better about even being awarded that endowment named after him. His, he had a passion for learning and he had a passion for flying. So, he's really made an imprint, not only in Galveston, but in the Houston [Texas] area as well. I don't know if I can say enough positive things about him. Speaker 1: Okay. So, he passed away before you got here, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So, this was, yeah-- Speaker 2: Yeah. He died in a plane crash. I don't know what year it was, but he was flying his own plane, yeah. Story_ID: 25555 Speaker 1: Okay. Now you said earlier, and I didn't follow up on it, I should have. But you said that you never really experienced any crass racism until college. Speaker 2: And probably maybe I was too naive to notice it. But growing up in Oklahoma I never saw labeled water fountains or labeled bathrooms. I never had any experience with going through the back door to a restaurant or anything like. So, you know, most of my experience has been more subtle kinds of racism, not direct, but indirect. And so, for me, when I hear a student say that are people who are from Mississippi and Alabama, when they tell their stories, then I really have a difficult time relating to it, because I never had that experience in Oklahoma. Story_ID: 25556 Speaker 1: We were talking about some of the discrimination that you've experienced in the course of your time, you know, here [University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas] and at Oklahoma State [University, Stillwater, Oklahoma]. And you were saying the overt parts of discrimination didn't affect you growing up. Speaker 2: That's true. I never saw any labeled fountains or labeled bathrooms, or anything of that sort. However, there were the subtle parts. And sometimes those are the most insidious types of discrimination, and just little ways of saying things to you or little subtle remarks that I probably overlooked and didn't pay attention to it. For example, when I was at Oklahoma State, I remember--I mentioned to you that I worked through school. And I got either student loans or I was on a work study. And all of my work study experiences were always in different research labs. And so, my freshman year, I worked in a botany laboratory. Now, I was really interested in, as I mentioned to you, more in animal life rather than plant life. But it was a job, and I needed to earn some money. So, I worked in a botany laboratory. And apparently, the faculty member whose laboratory I worked in did probably say some remarks to me that I probably either didn't pick up or on just chose to ignore it. So, that sort of makes me think about that, once you asked me the question. But--because I remember doing something one time in the laboratory, perhaps making a mistake. And I remember he almost said something to me, but it just caught in his mouth. He didn't come out and say it. And, but I got the gist of it. And I kind of remember that kind of thing. I remember being ignored. If I had to tell you anything about how people currently feel in coming through areas where we traditionally have not been, that would be the feeling of isolation that I felt, and that people coming along behind me have felt, and being invisible. And I can remember telling somebody, I said "So, I'm 6 foot 3, 200 something pounds, how can I be invisible?" That was a feeling that I remember, not only as a graduate student, but to some extent as an early faculty member. And to me, that is just as devastating sometimes as some of the other issues that people experienced in years prior to me. And so, not being recognized for, you know, your capabilities and hard work is also an issue--being in meetings where your comments are not acknowledged. Those are some of the examples that I can think of. Story_ID: 25557 Speaker 1: You spent a time as Deputy Assistant Administrator for Education Programs in the Office of Education at the National Aeronautical and Space Administration [NASA]. Speaker 2: I was definitely an associate administrator. Speaker 1: Okay, associate administrator. Speaker 2: Then that's like two levels below the administrator, which is the highest position at the headquarters. There, I was in charge of all of the educational programs across the country that are implemented at the seven space centers that are spread across the country, as well as in charge of museums associated with space. For example, we have a space center in Houston [Texas] which is just adjacent to the Johnson Space Center. And there are several of these types of museums. We call them informal education venues. And it's a way in which you educate the public. And so, I was in charge of that as well as secondary education, higher education and informal education. And I was also over the Office of Technology and product production at NASA headquarters. Speaker 1: Okay. So, you did that for two years, right? Speaker 2: I did that for two years. It was a good experience, from 2003 to basically 2005. And the interesting thing about that was, I was in the middle of packing to leave Texas to move up to Washington, D.C. [District of Columbia]. And on the day that I was packing--the movers were at my house to move me to D.C., and that was the day that the shuttle crashed [Space Shuttle Columbia Disaster, February 1, 2003]. And I can remember, my son and I were sitting on the bed looking at what was going on, and it just exploded. So, my son paused, and he says, "Well, are you still going?" And I said "Yes, I'm going to still go." And so, I went there and the morale was pretty low at headquarters. Sean O'Keefe was the administrator of NASA at that time. And we were in a mode. Immediately, we were in a mode of returning the flight. In other words, getting to the point where we could start flying the shuttle again. As you know, it's currently, it's now retired as a spacecraft. But I got involved with not only doing my job in terms of the Education Office, but also advising NASA in terms of what could be the impact from a microbiological point of view of long-term space travel. As you might imagine, the majority of the workforce at NASA are engineers. And many of them have no idea about what happens if you have long-term human space flight, and what impact that might have in terms of your immune system, which long-term exposure to radiation will cause a immunocompromised state in your body where you lose your function, your immune functions to protect you against infections. Speaker 1: So, if you don't use them, if they're not being used, they start-- Speaker 2: No. The radiation is killing the antibodies in your body. It causes mutations in genes that would then harm your function of your immune system. Your immune system is what protects you from getting sick, getting infected. So, that's one thing. But at the same time, the long-term exposure to radiation has your immune system, in terms of suppressing your immunity; the long-term exposure to radiation will cause mutations and germs, or bacteria, that will cause them to become more virulent. In other words, cause them to become stronger and tougher organisms, and enhances its ability to cause disease. So, with those two things working together, then that makes people more susceptible. Story_ID: 25558 Speaker 1: So, the bottom line was that NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] had to be more careful about what we bring onto the spaceship from earth, the germs that we carry on-board the shuttle. And then they also have to be concerned about what germs they might bring back. And so, those were concerns that they really hadn't looked at that closely until then. And then most of the time, the studies that they were doing at NASA would have to do with bone loss, muscle atrophy. These are the kinds of things that are commonly being concerns of NASA. And so, bringing in this component, especially when we talk about building a vehicle that will then go to Mars, that's really long-term space travel. So, we have to be able to be in a position to address those issues where human flight is concerned. Speaker 2: Yeah, I would imagine the bacteria that already exists in human beings, and most of it is beneficial, I think, in terms of digesting food and so forth. Speaker 1: Uh huh. Speaker 2: Would it mutate in space? Speaker 1: It could possibly mutate into something that would be what we call virulent organisms, yeah. The ones that are helpful, we call them normal flora, so we do have a lot of beneficial bacteria in our gut, all over our body. And they actually help to fight off the ones that want to cause harm. And so, that all has to be taken into consideration. So, a good example--what you just said was, if you wipe out the normal flora in your gut, then you're more susceptible to getting other diseases that you normally wouldn't get because of the fact that these normal bacteria are actually covering sites that the bad ones would like to have, but they can't get there because you have normal flora covering all that area. So, these are things that we have to consider. But, that's just from a microbiological point of view. But there are many different aspects of space travel that we need to look at. Another one has to do with, you know, what are you going to do in terms of if somebody gets sick up there while you're up there at Mars? The person who works on my staff--she works 75 percent in my office and 25 percent at Johnson Space Center [Houston, Texas]--is working on, she does tissue engineering. And she's working on some type of no-drill dentistry technique that will allow people to take care of things like cavities while you're in space and there's no physician up there, or dentist to help you. So, it's this kind of technology that I had a chance to see while I was at NASA headquarters, to look at some of the innovations that they have worked on that actually benefit the public here on earth. We call them spin-offs. And so, as a result of these spin-offs, our whole society has become adjusted to these things and these discoveries such as the remote control, microwave oven; even to some extent cell phones. All of these things were originally designed by people who were doing NASA related work, including the sensors that will be in the future cars, the bumpers, so that it will sense if you get too close to the railing or not. All that stuff is coming--being able to scan a whole grocery cart full of groceries with one swoop other than scanning each item like we do now. Those are the kinds of things that are coming, and being in the Office of Technology, I had a chance to see that. The last one I want to talk about from NASA, the spin-off, is using something like a glue or sealant for human surgery, so you don't have to use sutures. They have this material that they can put on a surgical incision that will seal the tissue together stronger than it was originally. And that's something that, it's another spin-off from discoveries at NASA. Speaker 2: Okay. That's being, it's being used now? Speaker 1: It is. They've already started using that now, that last one. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: The bumpers, it's coming in the cars. And the scanning of the full grocery basket is coming soon, too. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: You just push it through and-- Speaker 2: I was hearing that NASA is-- Speaker 1: You'll have an immediate $195, you know, basket full of groceries. Story_ID: 25559 Speaker 1: How does the United States rate in terms of other countries in terms of supporting science, and STEM [Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics] education and that sort of thing? Speaker 2: That's a very good question. In the United States, we have a very good post-high school education. In other words, our colleges and universities are very good. And that's why international students love to come to the United States to get their education. Where we fall back in the race internationally, is at the K through 12 [twelfth grade] level. And studies have shown that we're 25th in math, far behind other less developed countries. And for me, this has been a personal role that I have, and that is that all of our children should get better exposure in science and technology and engineering and mathematics at an early age, because that's the only way you can have the solid foundation that is required to go to college. And so, that's why I do the things that I do, is because I know that two things are happening in this country. One is the aging baby boomers who are going to be retiring over the next five to ten years, people my age and older. And then secondly, the rapidly changing demographics in this country, that when we look at replacement of the current workforce, we're going to look at under-represented minorities, and we're going to have to look at women. Those will be the people who are going to replace the current workforce. And so, we've got to make sure that every ounce of brain power in this country is utilized, that we no longer in this country have the luxury to ignore any group, and that we've got to have competent replacements for the current workforce if we're going to continue to be a world leader in terms of our position in the U.S. in science and engineering and all of those disciplines. And so, I really want to focus at the K through 12 level, because if you don't get a good solid foundation there, then it makes it much more difficult to go to college. And I think I alluded to that in my own history of telling you how I came along. And I can see that in other children. I think strengthening their educational foundation builds confidence and it builds an ability to feel like you can achieve anything. And to me, that's so important to not only having a solid educational background, but you must also have the gumption and the self-confidence to do the kinds of things that's necessary to be successful. Story_ID: 25560 Speaker 1: Okay, now, speaking of breaking ground. In 2006, you became president of the American Society for Microbiology [ASM], which is the largest scientific organization in the world, right? Speaker 2: That's correct. Speaker 1: Yeah. Now, this is, you were the first African American to be elected to this position, the first black person, correct? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Tell us about that. Now, how did this come about, and what have you used the presidency to do? Speaker 2: Well, it came about from the fact that I started working as what we call an ASM [American Society for Microbiology] member volunteer several years before that. And I actually served as Chair of the Education Board for the American Society for Microbiology three consecutive terms. So, each term is worth three years. So, that was a total of nine years serving as Chair of the Education Board. So, while serving as Chair of the Education Board, each board chair is a member of the Council Policy Committee of ASM, which is the governing body of ASM. So, I had a chance to get a chance to see what the officers of ASM were doing, how they conducted themselves. I had a chance to meet the presidents--the past president, the Secretary of the Treasury, etcetera, and to interact with them. And I was truly, just by observing them, subconsciously probably being mentored. And so, the selection of candidates to run for president is sort of an inside thing. There's a committee that will do this. You don't lobby for it. You don't do anything. They just will pick you. You are nominated. And I never knew I was nominated until one day I received a phone call while I was in my research lab. And they said "Dr. Houston, you've been nominated as a candidate to run for president of the American Society for Microbiology." They said, "Would you accept the nomination?" And I said, "Yes, I would do that." I knew of another African American who had attempted to run, but didn't get through the nomination process. So, I just had in the back of my mind that I felt like it was an opportunity that I couldn't refuse. And so, I agreed to accept the nomination, but I was just honored to be selected to be one of two candidates to run for president. And I never thought I would win. And so, I was so surprised when I got the message that I had actually been elected, but not only elected, but by a big margin. And so, that was really refreshing to me, to know that happened. Because out of the 45,000 members that we have that are members of the American Society for Microbiology, one-third of them are international. So, that means, you know, my name had to be carried across the globe in order for those people to vote for me. So, I was quite flattered and honored to be elected. The very next day after the election, I found myself on a plane on my way to Geneva, Switzerland to speak with the director of the World Health Organization [WHO]. And while I was there, I had a group of ASM members to accompany me on that trip. We talked about some of the issues that are happening globally. So, immediately with just working in my laboratory at UTMB [University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas] and working on the projects that I described to you earlier, now I was faced with dealing with global problems such as the bird flu. That was really popular back then. There was different outbreaks all over the world. There was an issue of AIDS [Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome] in Africa and-- Speaker 1: Mad cow disease. Speaker 2: Yes. And so, the World Health Organization monitors all of these things all over the world. And they are in close communication with the Center for Disease Control [CDC] here in the United States. And so, I was connected with people there at the CDC. And so, one of the things after having that meeting discussing strategies about what we could do as microbiologists--and by the way, we are the first line of defense here in this country. When the anthrax letters came out, the first people they called on was the American Society for Microbiology. Anytime there's any kind of possibility of any kind of biological warfare, or if there's any kind of pandemics or epidemics, they call on my organization. And so, one of the things that I, while I was there, I heard about the plight in Africa of AIDS, tuberculosis and malaria. And so, one of the, the next big trip that I went on was to Africa. I went to Zambia and South Africa. And I went there with the idea of not only telling them about how they could increase their own workforce, but also how they can sustain that workforce by educating their younger children in STEM [Science, Education, Engineering and Technology] and to create a STEM center similar to the one that we have here at UTMB. And I was able to get that started. And so, I'll be going back to check on the progress of the, they call it the Z-STEM. Here we call it T-STEM, T for Texas--Z for Zambia. They call it a Z-STEM center that they've established. I want to go back and see how they're doing. But not only that--. So, that's a long range solution. The short range solution was how can we train their people who are already out of college or working to become laboratory technicians, to not rely on folks from the United States and other places to do their diagnostic work, to come over there. Most of the people who come from the United States can't stay forever. You know, they'll come and work for a year, and then they leave. So, they're dealing with a transient workforce right now. And I'm trying to figure out how I can help them to sustain a permanent workforce. And you do that by growing your own. And so, I have a chance to tour their hospitals, their research laboratories. And so, we've been able to use all of the forces that we have at ASM to support this whole endeavor of providing professional development for their workers. So, teams of volunteers from ASM are now going into Africa. In fact, we even have set up an ambassador system, where not only in Zambia, but we're interested in doing this in most all of the countries in Africa, which is a big endeavor. And so, that's the strength of ASM. When I got back to the United States, the first thing I did, because I toured the schools there, was I wanted to make sure we could use some of our outdated textbooks to send over there for them because they don't have books. And so, I was able to get ASM to agree to send over our books that we--we have our own publishing company at ASM. So, the same books you see right here on this table, if you look at the back you'll see many of those are published through ASM Publishing. We could send our extra books, the books that are not sold. The ones that are currently outdated would help. And so, we were able to ship many books and also some computers to Africa, particularly Zambia, to help address this issue. Speaker 1: Okay. That sounds exciting and, you know, something I hope catches on. Now, are African physicians, I mean, scientists coming here to study with the intent of going back? Speaker 2: Right. Well, they come for professional development training. And yes, there are some African graduate students who will then go back and also work in their countries. In fact, I know of a couple of African American, I'm sorry, African post-docs and doctoral students that I've actually been involved in training. And so, they want to go back and help their country. Story_ID: 25561 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, as the years have gone along here, you've become less involved in research and more involved in administration. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Tell us about your educational activities in administration here [University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas]. Speaker 2: Well, actually the reason I wanted to actually go into administration was for the purpose of going back and helping the people that are coming along behind me. So, in order to do that, I do it by being inclusive of all people, because I know that if I'm able to create programs in which all, everybody is, nobody is excluded, then I'm able to get universal funding to do it. That's number one. Then number two is that people are--somebody--mine was luck. I feel like what happened to me was somebody going to Las Vegas [Nevada] and hitting the jackpot. I mean, I had the innate ability, but I'm talking about the people I met. When I met folks, that was simply serendipity, luck, because my definition of luck is when preparation meets opportunity. I was prepared and I just happened to meet the right people at the right time. And it gave me the opportunity to go where I am now. So many times people are prepared and they never have the opportunity. There are people who have many opportunities and they're not prepared. But when the two meet, then I consider that luck. And so, but it's amazing though, the harder you work, the luckier you are, so that's very important. But getting back this whole story about why did I go into administration. I went into administration because I wanted to be in a position to leverage funding. I wanted to be in a position where I could have impact, meeting more people than just the one-on-one things I was doing as a graduate student and as an early faculty member. I used to go, at my expense, to go and give lectures at Prairie View [Agricultural and Mechanical University, Prairie View, Texas] or give a seminar somewhere. And I would do it on my own time and out of my own money. But I felt if I could be in an administrative position, I could actually be able to leverage greater amount of funds to do greater things in terms of trying to accomplish my goal. And that's exactly what has happened. And so, I've been able to get funding, significant funding, from NIH [National Institutes of Health], the National Science Foundation [NSF], Howard Hughes Medical Institute [HHMI], the Texas Education Agency. It's just a patchwork of funding that I use to sustain my programs. And these programs are not only for students, but for the K through 12 teachers. I feel like one teacher will impact hundreds of students. So, what we do, we enhance the scientific background of the teachers, who then go back to the classroom and share that experience with many more students than we could possibly deal with one-on-one. Story_ID: 25562 Speaker 1: Okay. So, as the vice president here [University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas] you're in charge of educational programs? Speaker 2: Associate vice president. Speaker 1: Associate vice president. You were explaining the education projects. Some target teachers, and some target students. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Undergraduate students? Speaker 2: Yes. We have, what we have is a portfolio of educational programs for students and teachers. And so, within this umbrella of educational outreach, we have hands-on stimulating activities for students. That's what makes us different, because we provide students with experiences that's found outside of the traditional classroom. And that's what turns on students. When students can see the practical application of how these scientific principles are used, then they're going to go back to the textbook and really dig in there and try to figure out how to understand the equations and the principles that are printed in our textbook. So, what they do is, by hands-on experience, they get a chance to build rockets. They get a chance to build bridges out of popsicle sticks. They get a chance to actually do DNA analysis, or to do the CSI [crime scene investigation] stuff that you see on TV that they're so excited about, and understand exactly how to do electrophoresis. They get a chance to know how to do polymerase chain reactions [PCR], which will then--you take a little piece of DNA [deoxyribonucleic acid] and you can multiply it so many times that you can figure out who caused the crime, etc. So, these are the kind of things that we actually allow kids out of the classroom to come and experience. So, when they go back to the classroom, they have a whole different perspective in terms of learning. And that's what's so important, because in the young kids, you have to figure out what is it that they like. We've actually developed a virtual laboratory where they can use the computer and go into what feels like a three-dimensional laboratory and they can actually do experiments to solve problems. And we've attached to that a gaming component, where students get points for making the right decisions, and then they get deducted points for making the wrong decisions. At the end of the day, they get a final total. Kids like that, because they're competitive, and they would like to get the highest score. And so, in that--and we were working with a company out of Dallas [Texas] to market this. And the point here is that we would like to provide that in the classroom. We've already beta-tested it with middle school students from the local high schools. We've tested it with teachers, and they all like it. So, now we've got to figure out to market it and distribute it. What it does is, it allows a person to go into a virtual environment that ordinarily they couldn't go into. For example, we have the Galveston National Laboratory that's on the UTMB [University of Texas Medical Branch] campus. This is a, really a bio-defense type laboratory where all kinds of organisms are used to study, you know, how can we counteract, say, a biological attack. Or, how can we defend ourselves against a pandemic or epidemic. And we have strains like hemorrhagic fever and some of the Ebola viruses. These are things that the public would not and should not come in contact with. But through this virtual laboratory, the students can actually come in and put on protective clothing that's all virtual. They have to make a decision about wearing gloves or face masks, the garments that will protect them. They have to choose the right reagents and how to set up an experiment that will work, and they do it all on their own. And then at the end, they find out where they made their mistakes and they can learn from that without being harmed. So, this is something that we're really proud of, and it's something that we hope to get out to market this year, as a matter of fact. Speaker 1: How many lives do they get to-- Speaker 2: How many what? Speaker 1: How many lives do they get in the virtual game? Speaker 2: Oh, well, they probably should give you one, I would think. You know, when they make the mistakes, they don't have to die. So, unlike in the real world (laughter). Speaker 1: In the game world, you know, you get two or three lives. Speaker 2: Oh, okay. Speaker 1: When one dies off, then you get another one. Speaker 2: You get another one? Well, that part we didn't add. We didn't add that component in there. But I think the other piece that I want to tell you, is that for us--so, we had this umbrella called educational outreach. And then within that, there's a component called the T-STEM Center. That's the Texas Science, Technology and Engineering Center. We have one of seven T-STEM centers in the state of Texas. And we're the only center that has a biomedical focus. And that makes us really unique. And so, what we've formed is something called the T-STEM Coalition. And that means that all seven of the T-STEM centers that are geographically located across the state of Texas will work together to form the coalition. So, if somebody in Lubbock, Texas, where Texas Tech [University] is, needs to know something about biomedical sciences, they can come to our, communicate with our center here in Galveston, and vice versa. If somebody comes to our center that are interested in an engineering project or study, they can go to Texas A&M or Texas Tech, because they're strong in engineering. So, by leveraging our strengths and expertise, we can essentially service the entire state of Texas through those seven centers. So, that's very important, because now their centers are focused at the teacher level. And mainly we do it through in-service, where teachers get time off to come and participate in our professional development activities. But there's another strategy, too. And that is to start looking at what we call in-service teachers. Those are the people who are training to be teachers and are in college right now. And by changing their curriculum and giving them a stronger math and science background before they even graduate, then I think that will be--I'm sorry, that's pre-service. When we look at the pre-service people who are students, if we can give their background more science and math to the curriculum, they'll be better teachers when they come out. And they'll also benefit more from the professional development workshops that we have offered to teachers that are practicing. So, that's another strategy to really increase the expertise of teachers going out into the classrooms. And the other piece is the fact that I've designed our student programs to actually be an inter-connecting link along the educational pipeline. And what I mean by that is, you can transition from middle school to high school programs to prepare you for college. And so, we have students that have gone through all of our programs since my office was established, in 1991. And since that time, I've now run into people who are professors at Harvard that have come through my programs. That just shows you how old I am. I ran into an M.D.-Ph.D. African American male who is now on the faculty of the University of Utah School of Medicine [Salt Lake City, Utah]; one from Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]; and then from other prestigious universities. That means that we are actually making a dent in providing people to that future workforce that we talk about. Of course, the future is now. I mean, we started over twenty years ago, and now we're really beginning to see the fruits of our labor. And I know that we couldn't do it without having a strong foundation at the K through 12 level. I mean, that's the key to it. And I truly believe that whatever happens to a child in the first twelve years of their life, in terms of education, will set the tone for where they're going to go for the remainder of their lives. Story_ID: 25563 Speaker 1: Okay. I think when we came in you showed me a picture of a Ph.D. student that you guided through here, the University of Texas. Speaker 2: Yes, right. This was a person that I had an opportunity--she came into my laboratory as a pre-doctoral student and finished her Ph.D. in my laboratory. So, I was very proud of that, because I was really determined that I would like to--I had graduated other students before, but I specifically wanted to graduate an African American student out of my lab. And I was able to do that. Speaker 1: Okay. Can you give her name? Speaker 2: Monique Ferguson. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. Speaker 2: Yes. Story_ID: 25564 Speaker 1: Now, as a microbiologist, what are the most exciting areas of microbiology today, in your opinion? Speaker 2: Well, of course I'm going to be biased. See, within the field of microbiology, you have these sub-fields. You have bacteriology; you have virology; you have immunology, parasitology, and mycology. And I know for a fact that certainly bacteriology is a very exciting area. But, I think that people who are studying viruses, the virologists, also are studying a very exciting area, because I truly believe that we are going to have a cure for AIDS in less than ten to twenty years from now. I'm sure of that. I'm sure that we'll be able to cure a number of cancers in that same timeframe. So, the real question, and I challenge young people coming through the educational pipeline is, today we're worried about AIDS [Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome], we're worried about cancer. But what will be the new challenges of the future? And that's where we need those young people coming through the pipeline with their talent and their intelligence to solve these new problems that are on the horizon. And so, that's why it's important to, that's why I'm so interested in educating our young people, because I think it's very important. But one time a person asked me, they said, "Throughout these programs that you have, those students that choose not to go into science when they finish your programs, do you consider that a failure?" And I said, "No." I said because even if the students don't go into science, they're going to be a much more science literate person, no matter what field they go into. And so, that can be a big benefit. They may be a politician, they may make critical decisions on funding for research, they may be in a position to do a number of things, like provide charitable donations to different causes. So, I said, no I don't think that's a loss at all. In fact, if they don't do anything else, they'll be in a position to help themselves. In other words, know when to go to the doctor, know what kind of symptoms would be important to address. If they have that basic information, that's information for their family, and will help to make decisions about what to do in cases like that. So, I don't consider it a loss at all. In fact, I consider it still an asset to our society. Story_ID: 25565 Speaker 1: Okay. Just watching the news the other day, they were discussing the controversy in the Texas, I think, Board of Education over the content of science textbooks-- the struggle between those who are against the teaching of evolution in the classroom. And in the meeting they showed, they seemed to show a general lack of public education about what is a scientific process, or scientific method. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. I don't get into that kind of argument, although I can say that for me there is not an issue or conflict between creationism and evolution. I don't see a conflict there. I mean, I truly believe God gave us the knowledge to figure out these things as scientists, but all we're doing is just unfolding the secrets that God has created. And he will only allow us to do what he'd like for us to do as scientists. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I see no conflict whatsoever. When we talk about how this universe was created, I think it was created by God. But we as scientists, our job is, we're trying to figure out how it happened. So, we have theories. But theories are, that's exactly what they are, they're theories. And until they're totally proven, then we will never know. But that's good, too. I mean, the purpose of being a scientist is that we're always curious about everything, including how we got here. And so, to me I don't see a conflict. Story_ID: 25566 Speaker 1: Okay. And the actual political conflict going on, does that affect what you do at all? Speaker 2: No, not really. I mean, you know, I operate fairly independently. We get our research money from NIH [National Institutes of Health] and other places. And at the state level, what I think is, what I'm most concerned about is the effect on the funding for K through 12 education, and how these methods of thought and types of thinking, what impact that has on the K through 12 level would be my biggest concern. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what are your future plans? Do you think you're going to one day become the president of a university, or what do you-- Speaker 2: Well, I don't, actually, it really hasn't been a strong ambition of mine to become a university president. I am content with doing things that will impact the most people, but not at the level of president. But probably, you know, if I would do anything, it might be a dean or a vice president of something. It could be vice president of academic affairs. I think I would like to operate there. I think my strength would be where I'm still connected to the students, as opposed to being a president, because the president has a totally different role at universities now. Most of the focus of a president at major universities really has to do with fundraising. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, in terms of microbiology, is there any one aspect of research today that you have the keenest interest in? Speaker 2: I think still I'm interested in the pathogenesis disease in general. How does a micro-organism cause disease in humans is still a very important question to ask. And so, I think that it's intriguing to be able to look at that mechanism, not only at the molecular level, but the genetic level. And so, that's always been a central theme in the work that I've done. And that work is like solving a puzzle. It takes many years to figure these things out, and once you figure them out, then it's on to the next challenge. Story_ID: 25567 Speaker 1: In 2000, you received the Presidential Award. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Excellence in science. Speaker 2: Yes. That was conducted during the [President Bill] Clinton administration, and I received that award in a White House celebration. And I was very honored to be selected as a mentor of students for science and engineering. And it was quite a, I was very flattered and honored, and it was a great experience to go to Washington [District of Columbia] and receive that award. Story_ID: 25568 Speaker 1: Now, when you look back at everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could go back and tweak it? Speaker 2: That's a good question. I probably would figure out to balance working more efficiently and free up more time to do more relaxing, fun things (laughter). Remember, I told you when I was an undergraduate, when I was studying, I felt like I had to study almost twice as hard because I just did not have the background at the high school level, even though I did well. I did the best with what was offered at the school, but that had more of a reflection of what the school was providing, more than my abilities. So, when I got to--as an undergraduate, I remember working hard and studying in the library on the weekends and listening to the lecture in class, and then turning right around and spending the same time listening to a recorded lecture that I did. I had a tape recorder with me. Then I would go back and fill in any blanks that I had in my notes in the library. So, I've always been a hard worker. So, whatever my abilities are, it was always bolstered by hard work. So, I put those two together, and that's how I've been successful. I would say I'd certainly would have had more time to go play volleyball on the beach or go skiing or do something (laughter). So, that would probably be something I would do. But other than that, in terms of accomplishments, I'm satisfied pretty much with the accomplishments that I've made. And the rewarding part is that I'm helping other people. To me that's one of the greatest accomplishments, to see people grow and to see people become all that they can be, has been very rewarding for me as well. And I'm actually happy with what I've accomplished. So, when you asked me the question about being a president of a university, you know, if it's there-you know, if it comes, it comes, but it's not something that I'm pushing for. Story_ID: 25569 Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: Gosh. I'm extremely worried about the African American community. I'm concerned about when I go across the country to predominantly HBCUs [historically black colleges and universities], that I find very few African American males in the classes. I see that significant numbers of African American males are in prison. A significant number of them are on drugs, and that bothers me, because I see so many people with great, with so much potential that's wasted. And that part I have a problem with. And so, that's probably why I do the things that I do, because there needs to be a way that we can change how we look at things. And so, as far as the African American community is concerned, I think we need to do more outreach. We need to look at the, work with the churches more effectively to impact the community. And also, to look at how in the world do we get kids to have more confidence in themselves, too, because I notice that is an issue as well. They may have the potential, but they don't have the confidence. So, it's a multi-faceted issue when we talk about the African American community, because I'm thinking about the economics. When we make a dollar, 95 percent of that money is going out of the community, instead of into the community. These kinds of things will have a negative impact. I mentioned to you about my home town that I go back to [Oklahoma City], that northeast quadrant that I told you about. That's happening across all the countries, in major cities, and we've got to do something about that. I think it's so important. Now that I've realized--I've seen for myself that kids have the potential. I can see it in them, and when it's not cultivated, then I consider that a waste. We've got to figure out how to capture more of our kids in the pipeline, because there's significant leaks in that pipeline. We've got to figure out how to patch up the pipeline. But in addition to that, we've got to increase the diameter of the pipeline so that we get more flow through it. If we can do those two things, then I think we'll have a better outcome. Story_ID: 25570 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, when you look back again at everything you've done at this point, what today would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: I think--I feel very comfortable with the discoveries I've made in science. But I do think that the fact that what I'm doing in science education is going to be a significant part, too. Because now we have data that's come back to show that we can make a difference in terms of how students score on standardized tests, how students that are under our program compete with more affluent school districts. In fact, I just looked at some data, and I have it on my desk, that shows that a school in Galveston [Texas], and it's called a STEM [Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics] academy, can outscore a more affluent school district where actually I live, on every aspect of the state standardized test scores. Every component was--they beat out this more affluent school. Seventy percent of the kids are on free lunch. Only five percent of the kids are gifted and talented. These kids come from a really unstable home life, but yet they are excelling when put in the right environment. So, for me, if I have to say anything about my legacy it's going to be, you know, what did I do for the folks coming along behind me? I'd like to think that I at least helped in some small way to make that a reality for more people. Story_ID: 25571 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, you got married at some point along the way. And you have a son, I know. Do you have any other children? Speaker 2: No. My son, he, I remember bringing him to the laboratory when he was a little boy. In fact I've got a photograph I can show you of him working in the laboratory where I was getting my Ph.D. And he used to do science fair projects. And somewhere around seventh grade, he said, "Dad, would you be terribly disappointed in me if I didn't do a science fair project this year, and do a history project instead?" And I didn't want to inhibit him, so I said "No." I said "Well, let's do a history project." So, we did a history project and we went to Austin [Texas] for the state competition. And he did well in that history project. And he later went on to go to Texas Christian University [Fort Worth, Texas], where he majored in radio and television production. It turned out that that didn't pan too well for him, and now he works for a pharmaceutical company. And now, he's back talking to and working with Ph.D.s and M.D.s [Doctor of Medicine] at medical centers in the Houston area, and doing quite well. So, he told me, he said, "Oh, Man, I wish that I had, you know, listened more about math and science, because now I'm having to talk the language to the M.D.s about different products that I want to, had them write prescriptions for, so I've got to know the lingo and I've got to know how to sell this product to them." And so, he's come full circle. Now, he's doing quite well. Story_ID: 25572 Speaker 1: Now, is there anything I haven't discussed, we haven't discussed, or a question I haven't asked that we need to address before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: Well, I can't think of any, other than the fact that I wanted to make sure that I explained to you about this T-STEM center [at the University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas] that I have that's part of my overall umbrella. One thing I just want to tell you about that is that the structure is, I don't do all this stuff, so I want to clear that up. I have experts that are education background experts that will assist me in taking the real scientists, authentic science, that I bring to the table. And then I mix it with the educational expertise of my staff, who then translates this information that I have into something that can be understood by teachers in the classroom. That's what makes it beautiful, because what we can do is create new exercises and experiments, and realistic practical application kinds of exercises that are fun for the children but are excellent learning tools, so they're learning while they're having fun. And that's what captures the imagination of these young kids. So, I have people who have Ph.D.s in curriculum development. I have people who have E.D.Ds, Doctors of Education. Everybody on my staff except for one has either an E.D.D. or a Ph.D. in education. The one person I told you about, who is my executive director, that's the person who works seventy-five percent out of my office and twenty-five percent out of NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration]. And this is the person who I told you does no-drill dentistry and is developing tissue engineering, the self-adhering stuff that you can put on a surgical wound and it makes it bind stronger than if you use sutures, etc. That person works on my staff, too. So between she and I, and I have another person who is called a program manager who also got a Ph.D. in the basic sciences. So, between the three of us plus the other folks that have applied education backgrounds, it makes a hell of a team to go out into the community and share these things that we have to offer. And the fact that we are here at a biomedical research center also provides a unique expertise and experience, that only kids can get by coming here or by looking at some of our programs that we're doing by on-line and distance education. That's another direction we're going into, so that we can share this expertise to a broader audience. So, that's something I wanted to make sure I pointed out. Story_ID: 25573 Speaker 1: Alright. Sir, the last question is similar to legacy, but a little bit different. How would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Gosh, that's a very good question. I think I would like to be remembered for my scientific contributions that I've made. And that can be found in the journals and the textbooks that you see before you. That--just to focus on that for a second--that makes me feel good, to know that there are children in classrooms across the country that will read these textbooks and see me as a role model, and the fact that I've contributed something to the scientific enterprise that they can learn from it, and to be, and to serve as a role model for these kids. That makes me feel good. So, I'm very proud of those textbooks there. I'm very proud of the fact that I've appeared in textbooks at the elementary level, high school level and college level. That makes me feel good. The other piece is that, you know, some of the work that I've done will actually help society in general. The discoveries and the contributions that I've made to the literature will make me feel good, because I look at some of these papers, and the comments you get when you publish those, it's global, it's all over the world. So, I get e-mail requests from people from India, from Europe, from all kinds of places, to work in my laboratory. And that's a big plus. The person I mentioned to you before that you mentioned to me, Ashok Chopra, he read some of my papers while he was a graduate student, and he contacted me. I remember speaking to him and recruiting him. And he was India and I'm here, but he knew all about my work. And so, the legacy I would like to establish is on two levels. One, is that I would like to be remembered for the contributions I've made internationally, that's one. But two, I want to be remembered for what I call breaking the educational curse in my family. In other words, I'm the first person to graduate from college in my immediate family. And now, my son is a college graduate. I expect my granddaughter to be a college graduate. And that also is a legacy that I would like to continue. I know African Americans where they themselves are fourth generation college graduates, and here I am a first generation college graduate. But I think that every time that we can graduate a person in that generation, then hopefully, they will make it a better opportunity for the next generation. So, I think that's very important as well. Story_ID: 25574 Speaker 1: Okay. What's this picture? Speaker 2: This is a picture of Monique Ferguson, the first African American student that graduated with a Ph.D. out of my laboratory. And guess what? The guy in the middle is Ashok Chopra, the guy that we were talking about. He served as my post doc. Speaker 1: And how do you spell his name? Speaker 2: First or last name? Speaker 1: Both. Speaker 2: Both? Okay, it's A-S-H-O-K, and then Chopra is C-H-O-P-R-A. This is a picture of my visit to Zambia. And I'm actually standing there in the office of the president of their university. Speaker 1: And who's who? Speaker 2: Oh, I can't recall the names of the people. That's the same situation here, too. I wouldn't know who that guy's name is, I wouldn't know what his name is exactly. I have to go back and get the ASM [American Society for Microbiology] to do-- Speaker 1: Is that the president of-- Speaker 2: No, that's the president of the university. But we did get some high level government people involved, like the Minister of Education. Okay. This--remember I told you it was established ASM educational areas all through Africa? Speaker 1: Uh huh. Speaker 2: Well, this is in South Africa. What we did was we established an ASM station in South Africa. And every time we'd do that, they'd put that symbol on the door. But if you notice at the bottom, it says "South African Reference Center." Speaker 1: It's got the South African flag, and-- Speaker 2: Yeah, alright. Here I am, I'm at a, it's an orphanage school, and I'm touring the facilities there along with some folks from Africa. Speaker 1: Now, this is in-- Speaker 2: This is in Zambia. Speaker 1: 2009, right? Speaker 2: That's my son. That's Michael Houston when he was probably about five or six years old, working in my laboratory. Well, it was the laboratory I was training in to get my Ph.D. I'll put it that way. Speaker 1: Alright. Speaker 2: This is a summer science experience that I had when I was in the ninth grade. And I believe that was right after I had completed that summer experience. Remember, I told you I was working with baboons. We were doing sleep deprivation studies on them. In fact, they even included that in the article. So, it says it right here, "The FAA Medical Center." So, I helped--working in a laboratory. And this is a picture of my family. And that's my mother and father and my one brother and three sisters. Speaker 1: Okay. Can you name people from left to right? Speaker 2: Okay. That's Edgar Houston, Jr. Then the lower picture is Deborah. The next person is Barbara Houston, and me and then Donna. Okay, then my parents, Mae Francis and Edgar Houston. Okay, this was a celebration that--let's straighten it up a little bit. Are you going to do it? Okay. This is a celebration of Herman Barnett, who was the first African American to graduate from UTMB [University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas]. And it talks about his entire legacy, and the program was all about him. But at that same program, was when I was endowed as the Herman Barnett, Professor in Microbiology. Speaker 1: So, we're actually going to capture this in the photo shop, and then tweak it and then type up your words into a caption. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Where is that? Speaker 2: Oh, that's just, this is from the Annual Biomedical Conference for Minority Students. This is a national conference that I put together, and it is composed of outstanding scientists, that you see, and speakers that you see in front of you. But basically, the real beauty of this are the students. We have over 3500 participants, and they come from all over the country, and they're some of the best and the brightest students in the country that are presenting their work, either in oral presentation or in poster presentations. And they get a chance to listen to these outstanding scientists and speakers. This is where I did my master's degree work. And that's me with the big Afro, standing with, walking with a graduate student out of the laboratory of that African American professor that I was telling you about, Earl Mitchell. Speaker 1: Earl Mitchell. Speaker 2: Yes, at Oklahoma State University. We're walking across the campus. And this is a story that was published in Jet Magazine, and it talks about my election to the American Society for Microbiology as President. And it talks about how that is the world's largest biological society, research society. Speaker 1: Scientific-- Speaker 2: Yes, right. Alright, this is an article that was written about me in Ebony Magazine. And the whole idea here is--it actually touched on a story I told you guys, about working in that hospital cafeteria. And we talked about how I ended up, ironically, getting my Ph.D. in that same institution where I worked, where I washed the dishes. And, but that was ironic. Speaker 1: You were still washing dishes there. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Alright. This is an article that was published in the ASM news magazine of my trip to Africa, to Zambia. And those are some of the people that hosted my visit. And if you're looking for me, I'm in the back, in the middle with the orange tie. Speaker 1: Uh huh. Speaker 2: Okay. This is a feature that was in 'Science' magazine. 'Science' magazine is one of the most prestigious scientific journals that cover all areas of science. This is the story written about my election as president of the American Society of Microbiology [ASM], featured in the Alpha's Magazine. Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity is the fraternity that I belong to, and it is established on college campuses across the country. And they have undergraduate chapters as well as graduate chapters. Okay. This is an elementary, or maybe at best, a middle school textbook. And I was honored and featured in this textbook. And as you can see, it's also funded by National Geographic. And it's the story about my career as a bacteriologist. And actually what those things right there represent, that's streptococci. I talked about that when I was working at the University of Oklahoma, and I studied that. It looks like that, with the long beads like that. Speaker 1: I remember seeing it in high school-- Speaker 2: Alright. This is a college textbook, university textbook. And remember the flesh-eating bacteria? Speaker 1: Uh huh. Speaker 2: See, some of the earlier work was, the studies were done on fish, and this is the arm of a patient right here. And that's what kind of damage that that germ will do. And so, in my laboratories, especially with the help of Ashok Chopra, we just got that one figured out. And hopefully, it will contribute to solving that issue of flesh-eating bacteria and preventing other people from being sick by it. Speaker 1: Is this another picture? Speaker 2: No, I think that's just an acknowledgement. I'm not sure. Speaker 1: Yeah, I think it is. Speaker 2: I don't know if there's a picture or not. That's a picture of me when I was about three years old. And there, at that time, I think it was just my brother and I (laughter). Speaker 1: I'll put that over there. Speaker 2: Those are just, inside of there might be a photograph or it may be something-- Speaker 1: Did you already take the photo out of here, you think? Speaker 2: I think so. The one of my son, it goes back in that envelope. Speaker 1: Alright. So, now, this is, oh my God. Speaker 2: Now, we're only going to take some of those pictures. And I think one is--I'll hold that while you pick up the one that fell. I guess that's, is that a photograph? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Yeah, we don't--that's a fraternity picture. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But I don't know if we need it. Can you put it up on there so it's stable? Speaker 1: We've got that on the chair right near you. Speaker 2: Alright. Okay. That picture that you're looking at right there is the one in which I'm looking over an NIH grant that I've just submitted. Speaker 1: Is this one from the textbook? Speaker 2: That's one from the textbook, right. And if you take this one, this is Herman Barnett's son. This is Sheila Jackson Lee, who is the, she is a-- Speaker 1: Congresswoman. Speaker 2: Congresswoman, from Houston. And that's Herman Barnett's widow. And here is a picture of me-- Speaker 1: At the podium? Speaker 2: At the podium, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Was this at a conference? Speaker 2: I just remember it was a lecture in which I received an award. I think it was the MLK [Martin Luther King] Award one year. This is Bernard Harris, who is the first African American to walk in space. And I invited him to come and speak at one of the ceremonies that we had at UTMB. This here is a reception for me when I was promoted to the associate vice president for Educational Outreach. And at that time I was the first African American to have, that was the highest level administrative position at UTMB that at African American had achieved at that time. We now have a provost who's African American. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: This is the president of UTMB at the time. He's the one who awarded my endowment. Speaker 1: Okay. Anything else? Speaker 2: I think that's probably it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Oh, you might want to take this one. This is a delegation of Chinese scientists who came to UTMB to look up my research, and I was showing them around the campus. You notice I'm still wearing the white coat at that time. I'll move my finger out of the way. Those lab coats are still in my closet at home. I hope to put them somewhere. Speaker 1: Now, what year was this? Speaker 2: That would probably be, it was like in 1995. Speaker 1: Okay...