 Story_ID: 24470 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, and I'm the interviewer today with HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Ma'am, can you please give us your full name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: My name is Fern Yvette Hunt, and my first name, F-E-R-N. My middle name is spelled, Y-V-E-T-T-E, and my last name is, H-U-N-T. Speaker 1: Alright. And what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: I was born on January 14, 1948, in New York City. Speaker 1: Okay. And, ma'am, what is your occupation and title? Speaker 2: I am a mathematician and that's the title that I have, and I--you said occupation and title, so (laughs). Speaker 1: That's it (laughs). Alright. Okay. Alright. And what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is September 14th, 2012. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? You don't have to give the address, but just, you know. Speaker 2: We are in my home in Silver Springs, Maryland. Story_ID: 24471 Speaker 1: Alright. Okay. Now, before we go into depth, there are five warmup questions we ask that only require a short answer. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And, they are--the first one is: Do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Do I have a favorite food? Well, food is my favorite, but a favorite foods are, I like some West Indian things like fish fritters. I like New England clam chowder, and I like turkey stuffing. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Depends on the object, but I would say red, probably, and blue. I like blue for larger objects with larger surface area; cars. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Yeah. I would say spring. I try to live with all heavenized (sic) aspects, but I would say spring, if you would give me a--if I had to pick one. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: The beach. I enjoy going to the seashore at all times of the year. Speaker 1: Okay. And the last one is: Do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Yes. And it's due to my sister. "When you lose the battle, try to win the lesson." Story_ID: 24472 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, I'm going to ask about your family history. I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side, but I'll ask about your mother's side first-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and then ask about your father's side. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So, can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: My mother's full name is Daphne. That's D, as in David, -A-P-H-N-E. Lindsay is capital L-I-N-D-S-A-Y, Lindsay Hunt. And now, that--the thing is a little bit complex here is that she remarried, I guess, when she was 68, thereabouts, so. She's known--that last name would be Clement now, that you would add that at the end, maybe, C-L-E-M-E-N-T. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: She was born on May 3rd, 1918. Speaker 1: Okay. Where? Speaker 2: She was born in New York City [New York]. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what can you tell us about the ancestors on your mother's side? How far back can you trace them, and what were they doing in history? What are the stories? Speaker 2: Well, let's see. Well, on my mother's side, there would be two branches that I know some--the two branches that I know about; one side, through my mother's mother. So, her maternal side of the family. As far back as we can go is John Wilson, who was my great-grandfather. He was born in the St. Mary's Parish in Jamaica, West Indies. And he was born in 1830 at the time of Emancipation, the British Emancipation [1833-1834]. And so, that at least part of the time or maybe none of the time, at least when he was an infant, Emancipation occurred. And he grew up on a farm that was, as I understand it, it was owned by two British women. And they lived there for a period of time for some decades. And my great-grandfather and brother, as they grew, continued to work on the farm and eventually purchased it from the women, who want, by this time, wanted to return to England. And so, they and in particular, my great-grandfather, came into possession of property and the homestead was known as "Rock Cottage," and still known, I think. And he lived until the middle-'20s, (1920s), 1920s. So he lived a long time. And my mother, actually, remembers him and has some interaction--had some interaction with him. Speaker 1: It's amazing it's not that, you know, slavery was not that far away, in some ways. Speaker 2: No. Not in our family anyway. On my mother's paternal side, that is the Lindsay side, the--I know a little bit less. The Lindsays we do know--I do know that the Lindsays lived mainly in Manchester Parish [Jamaica], which is in the interior, and it's actually quite cool and mountainous. And the family stories are that the situation there, with respect to slavery, was pretty distorted. And that there were uprisings, and in fact, in that particular section really, they simply just lost control of the slaves, many who could flee. Huh? Speaker 1: So this is what they would call the Maroon Community in a lot of ways. Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah, in a lot of ways. Yeah. Exactly. It's very similar to the Maroon situation. I guess in Florida. Speaker 1: (unclear) (simultaneous). Yeah, they were in a higher altitude up in the-- Speaker 2: Yes. Yes. Exactly. And the--somehow the geography, I guess, lent itself to being able to escape into--into difficulty, frankly, in controlling the population. I know that there were--I understand, I should say--that there a lot of, you know, shootings and hangings and stuff like that, in an attempt to sort of quell the rebellions. In any case, the Lindsays come out of that period, and they--they owned land, mostly in the Shooters Hill [Jamaica] region, and just facing some mountains, actually, a little bit later mined for bauxite, but--. Speaker 1: Shooters Hill. I just--is there a reason for that name that you know of? Speaker 2: That's a good question, and why was it called Shooters Hill? I don't really know. I just know it was a very steep road, now, but it sort of rose and came down. And the post office was built there and the post office was Shooters Hill Post Office. And my grandfather was one of a large family of, I'd say about ten people. And he was the son of James Lindsay, who had bought a large amount of property and, maybe, in fact, the property on which my grandfather Robert Lindsay and his siblings lived. He bought this property in 1870, and I have--I have the deed. He had a beautiful handwriting. Anyway, he purchased this property and then left to his children. And so, all along the road there, there would be farms that were owned; one by my grandfather, the other by my uncle Clement, another owned by Uncle Norman and, of course, they're great-uncles. And all of these people were born in the middle to the--somewhere in the period between 18--when would they have been born? Yes, they would have been born somewhere between 1865 and--no. They would have been born 1880 to 1891. My aunt Ida was born in 1891. I've got that. If I've got that right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Roughly. I may have to nail that down a little--I'm pretty sure that's right. In any event, yeah, and they had a lot of kids. And so, and then you asked me for--well, all I can say about that is that they--I knew many of them. I probably knew about five or six of them, and others had died, I think, by the time I came on the scene. Speaker 1: Okay. So this is, of the two sides of the family, your father's--I mean, your mother's paternal side has the most people, I guess, right? Speaker 2: The--yeah. It's a strange situation. I think, from my remarks, you can see that a lot of my family were born a long time ago and they died. And that is essentially what has happened, that--we have some through the Wilson line, we have some cousins. Through the Lindsay line we have very, very few; maybe the Lindsay line, I think we have--and they're older, you know, they're my age or older. So, that's--so that--and I knew that even as a child. We just have where they're not too many of us contemporaries. Most of the family was before, in the nineteenth and early twentieth century. So, on my father's side, my father is Thomas Edward Hunt. Speaker 1: Now wait a minute. I didn't want to go to him yet. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 24473 Speaker 1: Because I have some questions I asked about your mother [Daphne Lindsay]. I want to kind of bring her up into adulthood from growing up. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So now, did your mother grow up in--now, she was born in New York-- Speaker 2: New York City [New York], yeah. Speaker 1: --so she grew up in--did she grow up in Harlem [New York]? Speaker 2: Yes. That's correct. So, my grandfather, I guess they must have moved here around the period of World War I [1914-1918], I would say. They probably, just--maybe just before. I'm just--yeah. I'm guessing they moved just before World War I, yeah, because my--and, in fact, the Lindsays basically did that. The Lindsay brothers, several of them moved up here; work on the railroad, settled in Boston [Massachusetts], some of them, and then came down to New York. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My father--my grandfather married Martha Wilson, and she already had one child, my aunt Adelle, and they had my mother. And they lived in Manhattan [New York] until, probably until my mother was in high school, and they moved to the Bronx [New York]. Speaker 1: Okay. Alright. Now, they didn't know each other in Jamaica. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: They actually met here. Speaker 2: They met here. Speaker 1: They were from two different places? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Far, okay, removed. Okay. So they moved to the Bronx. When was that, like, before World War II [1939-1945] or--? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They would have moved there, I would guess, in the late '30s [1930s]. Speaker 1: Okay. So, your mother grew up in Harlem, but the family moved to the Bronx. So she--. Now, did your mother talk about--did she have any stories about growing up, about what it was like when she was coming along? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. She's got quite a lot (laughs). Well, I say quite a lot relatively speaking, you know. She has one story about, which tells a little bit about her. She was a very little child. I think she was about seven thereabouts, six or seven; maybe--between five and seven years old, and my great-grandfather John Wilson, who was by this time residing, as I told you, in St. Mary's in Rock Cottage. And he was quite a gentleman. He had extensive--by this time he had a lot of land, and he was kind of, you know, he was a Victorian. And my mother was wearing a dress and, I guess, it was sort of skimpy or something, very short. And so, my great-grandfather sort of, I guess he kind of glared disapprovingly at my mother and said, you know, "Why is that dress so short?" You know. And my mother answered him right back and she said, "Because that is how it is made." (laughs). So that's one story. Much later, she tells the story of the time when Joe Louis defeated Max Schmeling, and they were all--well, she talks about--. Life in Harlem, at that time, you were in apartment buildings, so it's very dense, but also windows were open in the warm weather, and I don't remember at this time, and I should remember, whether or not it was cold weather or warm weather when the fight took place. But I guess the neighbors could communicate with each other either by opening windows or they're hanging out or they're in each other's homes. So everybody was watching this--or not watching, but listening. Of course, the radio--this was the age of the radio. And they're hanging on every blow and stuff like that. I think this is the second fight, not the first. And Joe Louis won, and my mother talks about how they just--these were the young people--just spontaneously came down, left their house, went out in the street and just walked, paraded down, you know, just joyously, and had a spontaneous celebration. And they--there was just such a feeling of pride, you know, because of this victory. And then my mother also talks about the situation in Harlem on--she said that--she talks about the fact, of course, 125th Street, you know what's it like now. But it was also a major shopping thoroughfare back when she was growing up in the, you know, in the '20s [1920s] and the '30s [1930s]. But, the shops were overwhelmingly--they were owned overwhelmingly by whites then, you know. And my mother talks about this and it's sort of interesting, because, you know, she--you could sort of hear a little bit of the resentment in her voice. In any event, this ended decisively. There was some kind of, effectively, a protest and riot-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --that took place. And, as a result of this, there were, you know, vast changes at 125th Street; one of which was that my aunt, Aunt Adele, was able to--and some of my--and I think a couple of my relatives--were able to open up dressmaking and little businesses along, you know, along that court. So, that's sort of one story. Speaker 1: Yeah. That's the riot of 1943 [The Harlem Riot of 1943 took place in Harlem in the New York City borough of Manhattan on August 1, after an African American soldier was shot and wounded by a white New York policeman]. Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, it's pictures of it on the 'net and everything. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: It seems that it's not talked about a lot in American history books. They had a big column write-up, and it was over a store ownership and other oppressions that people suffered going into these stores, and the insults and other things along 125th. Speaker 2: Yes. It was a very strange situation because, of course, you're--yeah, and a lot of the customers were African-American. But it was--it's the same thing. And my mother, who is very musical and was--is a--was a music teacher, was also very involved in the music scene. And-- Story_ID: 24474 Speaker 1: Now, does she [Hunt's mother, Daphne Lindsay] play the piano? Speaker 2: She played the piano and she also composed music. She was also an arranger. And one of the things that she did is, she was one of the young composers that worked with-- (pause). I should have prepared this. Can I go--I can't go away. Speaker 1: (laughs). Speaker 2: But in any case, she was one of the composers that worked with a very prominent composer of the '30s [1930s], and prepared-- Speaker 1: Who was he? Speaker 2: --African-American spirituals, also composed new music based on African-American themes. So--. Speaker 1: Who did she work with? Do you remember who it is? Speaker 2: I'm having a senior moment. I'll remember him. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I'll remember him. But, in any case, she was part of--she made a contribution, I should say, to a compilation of music called "Unsung American Song." And this was all new music composed by young African-Americans that were celebrating the lives of African-Americans in history like Phyllis Wheatley, and my mother's contribution was about her. So, she was a great admirer of Duke Ellington and Count Basie. She certainly knew about them, and also, I think--I don't know if she could go to the Cotton Club, but she certainly, when they performed at theatres where she could go, she certainly did go. A tremendous admirer, most of it I think is on the radio, is probably how she heard them, but when she could see them live, she would. Speaker 1: Yeah. Now, they've performed at the Apollo and different ballrooms (unclear) (simultaneous) and different places. Speaker 2: Exactly. Exactly. And she would go and dance--yeah. She would go. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, a lot of her stories involved that. Speaker 1: Now, did she--with a project like "Unsung American Song," did she know Paul Robeson or any of the--? Speaker 2: No. Well, she doesn't--no. I don't think she knew Paul Robeson. Paul Robeson may have been a little younger than my mother. Let me see. Was he--or a little older. I mean, in other words, he may have--I don't know if he was in Rutgers by the time she--. Speaker 1: She was born in 19--no. He was older than her. Speaker 2: He was older. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And so, they wouldn't--and I guess the music scene was big enough so that--I very much admired him, but I don't think she knew him at all. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I don't--I think she--she didn't know him personally. Speaker 1: But she admired his work? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: (unclear). Speaker 2: And she--there was a baritone who went to--who had quite a successful career in Europe who she knew, actually. William something. Speaker 1: William Warfield? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Okay. (unclear) it's awful. I should know that. Speaker 1: Yeah. William War--. We've interviewed William Warfield, actually. Yeah. Yeah. He just spends a lot of time in Europe, and he--on his interview he sung (sic) one of his songs in German for us-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: --at the end. Yeah. Speaker 2: Wow. That's great. Speaker 1: Yeah. Now, it sounds to me that she was--she knew some people in the African-American history community. So I just wondered--there're quite a few West Indians involved in the African-American history community; Charles Seifert being the number one person. He had a little museum even in Harlem at one point. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: So I don't know if she knew him or knew about the Harlem History Club or John Henrik Clarke or some of the other people who--. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. I know he--I know exactly who you're talking about. And I don't think she had much connection with them. Part of it is because at a critical point in her life, she moved from New York, actually, during the World War II [1939-1945] period. I guess she could have picked up John Henrik Clarke after the war, but she was very much--she was in her, you know, childrearing and family years, and I think would have (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: Mean she moved from Harlem [New York]? (unclear) Speaker 2: She was in Harlem. She moved away from Harlem. Speaker 1: Yeah, right. Speaker 2: That's the point. Speaker 1: To the Bronx (unclear). Speaker 2: To--no, no. That wasn't it. She continued to come into Harlem-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --for cultural things. But the real issue was money, because by the time the war started here in 1941, she was already looking--she had graduated high school, excuse me, Whatley High School in '36 (1936), and attended college for a while, Hunter College [New York], and basically ran out of money. I mean, you know, her parents, you know, just, you know, they were working really very low-level jobs. And so, there was no money to be had from them, and she wasn't really getting any real work. This was the Depression [1929-1939], and it was just great that my grandfather had work. So she, you know, she didn't--she decided to leave college even though she really, really wanted to be, you know, educated, and came to Washington [D.C.] because that's really where the jobs were. And, by that time, she was seeing a young man who, in fact, later became my father. She had met him in the Bronx. They were down the street or something like that. Story_ID: 24475 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, let me now pick up your father's side, and then we'll have them meet (laughs). Okay? Speaker 2: Mm-hm. Speaker 1: We'll do it like that. Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Thomas Edward Hunt. Speaker 1: And spelled the regular way? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. And, what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: June 1916. Now, it's going to get really sketchy because I, you know-- Speaker 1: Okay. And where was he born? Speaker 2: He was born in New York City [New York]. Speaker 1: Okay. In Harlem [New York]? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what can you tell us about the ancestors on your father's side? Speaker 2: Very little. I do know that he is the son of James and Henrietta Hunt. Henrietta, the former Henrietta Baptiste, B-A-P-T-I-S-T-E. And they were probably about the same age as my mother's parents. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And he was--he was actually part of a family of, I would say, about four children. His parents--James came to the United States, I think he was--he was an agricultural worker. So he was, you know, like today's Latino immigrants. You know, he was picking, you know, whatever it was that was getting harvested. South Carolina, I think, is where he was doing this. He may have started in Florida and then traveled up to-- Speaker 1: Now, is--okay. I'm sorry. Is your father from--is his-- Speaker 2: It's my grandfather I was describing. Speaker 1: Yeah, your grandfather, did he come up from Jamaica too? Speaker 2: No. He came from--they both came from (pause)--I think it's because I'm nervous. Speaker 1: No. Don't be nervous. Speaker 2: Okay (pause). Speaker 1: Is it an island or? Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It's an Caribbean island. Speaker 1: Barbados or? Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: Montserrat (laughs)? Speaker 2: It's a very small--(unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: In that neighborhood? Speaker 2: I'll remember then I'll tell you. Speaker 1: Okay. Alright. Alright. Guyana or--? Speaker 2: It's not Martinique. Speaker 1: Were the French there? Speaker 2: No. It's British. Speaker 1: British. Speaker 2: It's British, but it's pretty small. Speaker 1: Okay. Bahamas or--? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Alright. Well, at any rate, he came from the islands and he--. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: He came up from--now, this is your grandfather James that came up. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Now, this would be in the nineteenth century, right? (Latter part?) Speaker 2: No. He came up--well, he came up before World War I [1914-1918]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I know he, James, the grandfather, he was in the Navy. Speaker 1: Okay. So he migrated to South Carolina you say? Speaker 2: Yeah. That's kind of where, you know, in terms of the scraps of history that I know. Speaker 1: Okay. And then on to New York? Speaker 2: Then--yeah. And I don't know exactly when they got to New York, but he got to New York. But I would guess it was probably after the war, after World War I [1914-1918]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No. It couldn't have been because my father was born in 1916. So it was somewhere--. Speaker 1: That's during the war. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 24476 Speaker 1: Okay. We were talking about your grandfather, James, migrating from the islands to South Carolina, then to New York. Speaker 2: So there's one story, I know that my grandfather had a church. He actually founded a church and had it for a period of time. That much I know. My father's [Thomas Edward Hunt] family, I think, found settling in the United States a great deal more--it was a lot more difficult. It may have been because, you know, I'm sure people who study immigrant--immigration, you know, your situation in the home country in some sense determines how were you going to do here. And it may have been that they had--James had a lot of issues and difficulties perhaps. I do know that he was a laborer, that Henrietta was a homemaker. But life was a bit tough. But I think that the children really benefitted from the very good public school education that was available in New York to everyone at that period of time. And so, my father and his sister Elaine were very close, and I actually have a letter that--or had a letter, I should say--she wrote, and she was tremendously--it's quite a lovely letter. She wrote, I guess she wrote it to him while he was abroad, while he was in the Army during World War II [1939-1945]. And so, there's that she was--she was murdered, I would say maybe it was during--maybe it was during the war, and I'm sorry that I never got to know her. She really sounds like a wonderful person. Speaker 1: Is there a story about what happened to her? Speaker 2: We know very little about it. She seems to--it may have been a robbery gone wrong. That's the only thing that I could piece together. She was not married and she had no children at the time, so there was no one to ask really other than my father. And by the time I came on the scene, my father was a very taciturn individual and did not talk a great deal about his family, period. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 24477 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, so your father [Thomas Edward Hunt] served in the war [World War II, 1939-1945]. Speaker 2: He did. Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: He was drafted, I believe not long after he met my mother [Daphne Lindsay]. He was sent to England and he was there for a couple of years. And I believe they corresponded during that time, and I don't know if he was able to get all of the correspondence because there were restrictions on, as my mother tells me, there were restrictions on what he could say about just exactly where they were and what they were doing. But he was there and we know that he later went on to France, and he was part of a unit, an engineering unit. He-- Speaker 1: So we didn't--I didn't ask you this, but your father, he finished high school and everything? Speaker 2: No. He--well, he said that he finished the eighth grade. I'm not quite so sure about that. In any event, he did not finish high school but he was quite literate. He read the newspaper, he could--he checked the grocery bills, he did the shopping, and he was always constantly rechecking the bills and, you know, and could, you know, do forms and taxes, you know. Although I think later my mother [Daphne Lindsay] did those, you know. So, he certainly was adequately educated. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And literate. But no. I mean, he didn't graduate high school. Speaker 1: Okay. So he was in an engineering unit--was this the Army Corps of Engineers or something or what was it? Speaker 2: No. They did a variety of the--the Army was segregated at the time, and I think that there were just a number of--variety of chores. I believe they were largely non-combat. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I don't know what they were, except I know that my--I know that he guarded German prisoners, and I know that he was--that he was under fire and had to do his job occupying foxholes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I don't know whether he had a weapon or not. He must have had some kind of weapon if he was guarding prisoners, because I know he said that. Speaker 1: Yeah. They usually in the--even the black soldiers in the segregated Army had weapons. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Even those assigned to non-combat duty-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --were taught to use weapons and had them. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But they just kept the blacks separated from the rest of the-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --under white officers, usually. Speaker 2: I see. Speaker 1: I mean, there were some black officers, but they were usually reporting to a white officer too. Speaker 2: That's right. I mean, I know a whole lot more about what my stepfather did because he was--actually, he was, I guess, in a black unit, but he was essentially part of the general staff. And he really enjoyed World War II (laughs), as opposed to my father, who I think it was just--he never talked about it to us. All I know is I was watching "The Longest Day." It must been--I must have been in high school or something, and we were watching "The Longest Day." He usually didn't watch these things, but for some reason he was there. And we--they were showing, you know, the landing on the beaches, and then these German planes, the Stukas, came dive-bombing onto the shore, and they were shooting--they were machine--trying to machinegun the Americans as they were coming onto the beach. And my father just, like, said, "Yes, yes. That's right. That's just how it was" or something. So, you know, I don't know if he was--did a landing, he was actually at that landing or at a landing very similar to it, because, like, he wasn't there at the beginning. So I don't know if he knew that this "Longest Day" referred to the Normandy landing or not. But, you know, he was there and he said, you know, "That's how it was." So I know for sure he was under fire and, like I said, this is--it was--it was not a good experience for him. Story_ID: 24478 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, is there a story about how your parents [Thomas Edward Hunt and Daphne Lindsay] met? Speaker 2: Well, the story that I have is that my mother--that Elaine was a very good friend of Adele; that is to say, Tom's sister was, you know, was very friendly with my mother's sister. And so, I guess somehow, you know, I think basically that is how they met. But, you know, my grandparents Robert and Martha, I think were very, probably a little bit too restrictive. They were very religious, and they wanted to keep people bottled up. And I think my older--my mother's sister Adele, older sister, was kind of a refuge for people throughout her life. You know, young women who--just were bottled up by these strict West Indian parents, and she would try to arrange, you know, some sort of reasonable social life, you know. Because, really, I mean that it was kind of like none whatsoever until what, you know. I don't think they ever thought how, you know, how the next generation was going to come about; how they were going to get any grandchildren, except to sort of whirl around in anger and ask you why you haven't produced any, you know, in middle age. I don't--you know, what are they thinking? So, in any event, I shouldn't wonder, and I'm imagining that, you know, Aunt Adele, you know, introduced--noticed Tom and introduced them or something like that. In any event, my grandparents found out about Tom and hated him, of course. And, you know, he wasn't of the same, you know. He hadn't--he did--he hadn't the same educational attainments, he wasn't, you know, and they probably sort of sniffed out that he, you know, they weren't quite the same social status and, you know. So he was just really not--and there were other things too. I mean, I think that there are probably very good reasons why they, you know, they didn't think that he was really quite the right match but--. So they were quite disapproving. And then, so, that's the story of how they got together, is basically they got together and then he went to, you know, he was drafted. And so, she, my mother, left. I think my grandparents were a little bit too--she was already getting to be, you know, nineteen and twenty and, you know. So a good way to just get away, I think, probably would be to move to Washington [D.C.] and find work and start her life. Speaker 1: Okay. So, when he returned from the war-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --she was in Washington [D.C.] then? Speaker 2: She was in Washington. He was--yes, she came back. He was--he came back sometime in '46 [1946], I think. And they got married in December of 1946. Speaker 1: Okay. So did they go immediately back to Harlem [New York] or--I mean to the Bronx [New York]? Speaker 2: Yeah. They--it seemed to me they rented an apartment in Harlem, that's correct. And they lived there--they lived there for a couple of years. I came into the scene in January of 1948. And by then, my mother became quite concerned about the apartment, because about--now that I was in the picture, because there were coal--I guess there were--there was a coal furnace and it was just she was very concerned about the quality of the air, and then it was--she was, you know, smelling it, it was horrible. But they really couldn't afford anything. I mean, they were really--at this point, my mother was not working, and my father, I don't know whether he started in the Post Office or not. He might have by then. In any event, they didn't have enough money to find anything in Harlem. And my mother found out about a new housing project that was going up in Mid-Manhattan, and this was going to be brand-new, and it was going to be integrated, which is integrated housing, which was really pretty unheard of in that part of the city. And so, my mother just hopped on it and got her name on the list, and we were accepted. Speaker 1: Now, where was this and what was the name of it? Speaker 2: The project was called the "Amsterdam Houses." The projects--the building complex was bounded on the east by Amsterdam Avenue and on the west, essentially, by West End Avenue and went on the south, I would say 61st Street, and on the north by 64th street. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. So. All right. So this is--all right. So this is like west of Central Park, right? Speaker 2: West of Lincoln Center. Speaker 1: Lincoln Center, okay. Okay. Now, is this where you grew up? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's right. I was--we lived there until I was about sixteen. Story_ID: 24479 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, when you think about your parents' [Thomas Edward Hunt and Daphne Lindsay] personalities, their dispositions, their looks, their habits, their hobbies, and who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: Physically I resemble my father. I think that that's pretty clear. I resemble my mother. I have certain characteristics in common with my mother for good and for ill. For good, I certainly--I share with her a real curiosity and desire for knowledge. I enjoy learning and my mother certainly did. My mother was very artistic, very musical, and very gifted in languages. I think I also have a little bit of a gift in languages, but I didn't develop it very much. But I did, you know, I did take music lessons for a long time, and I still am involved with music. So we share that. We-although we have gone in very, very direct--different directions in terms of our religious beliefs, I think that we share a desire for spiritual advancement, and for a kind of relationship with a larger--with something larger than ourselves, with a spirit--we want a--there's a spiritual dimension to human life that is very important to us, and that is important to our sense of completion as people here while we're here on Earth. And I think for sure that is something that we share in common. We tend to be a little bit judgmental, quick to judge. I think that that--and quite stubborn. So we share that. With respect to my father in terms of other than the physical, I think there's a certain--you know, my father worked for the--was a mail handler for the Post Office for many, many years. And that meant many times going to work on days like Thanksgiving and Christmas, which we would really miss, you know, really miss him. And I think there's a certain plotting, methodical aspect of how I do things that is very, very similar to him. I'm a little bit of a glass-half-empty kind of person, and he definitely was that. Speaker 1: Okay. Is that that taciturn side of the personality with you? Speaker 2: Yeah. I'm not a big--and this is where there's a profound difference, which neither my mother nor I understood very well, and that is that, my mother was a great extrovert, and I am definitely an introvert. I mean, I, you know, I'm an adult and I socialize, so, you know, you have to--you have to talk to people, you have to not insult them, you know, and things like that. But this is all, you know, acquired. Underneath this is, you know, I'd probably rather not be bothered. If somebody tells me about some place we have to go and immediately, you know, there's a twinge of pain, you now. And I just have to, you know, grin and bear it, so. And my mother gets thrilled or my sister gets, you know, excited. Speaker 1: Okay. So. And so, you share both of these aspects. You said your father got increasingly kind of taciturn as he got older. I mean, is that--did something happen really that--? Speaker 2: Well, it just was--I think, to put it shortly, you know, as I said, you know, my mother has this description of my father before, you know, when they got to know each other; and then, of course, he was gone for however many years he was gone. I guess--I can't remember how many years that would have been. Maybe four years, something like that. It was a good, long time. And basically, to put it shortly, she said, you know, the man that came back was just simply not the same person. So--and it just sort of, just didn't get better. You'd call it PTSD, I guess, you know, or something is what it would--you know. He--the experiences over there just--just made him fearful of--. It wasn't like he was (starting?) at loud noises or anything like that, but he just had--he just had difficulty looking at the bright side and coping, and coping with the pressures of being an African-American male. I mean, he was as steady as a rock in a lot of ways. He went to work every day, he often helped out with the, you know, the housework. He would be the one to mop the floors, stuff like that. But he and my mother were--did not always see eye to eye, I think. And they, you know, he was a little bit--he would get very angry, you know. He would never raise a hand, you know. Never. I mean, he was--he would never raise a hand to her or anything like that. He wasn't abusive, but he was really pretty angry, and it was kind of scary at times without doubt, I mean. Story_ID: 24480 Speaker 1: Okay. So, do you have an--oh. Let me ask--so it's just you and your sister? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And she's seven years younger than I am. Speaker 1: Okay. That's a--that's pretty substantial (jump?). Speaker 2: Yes, it is. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yes, it is. But, you know, my aunt Adele is seven years older than my mother, and my sister, Erica, has two children, and they're about seven years apart. So, I don't--you know. Go figure (laughs). But it is big enough so that I did--there was a little bit of a maternal relation between her and I. I was protective at times, not all the times, believe me. You know, there were many times when we just, you know, I was really giving her a hard time. And, but, there were some times when, you know, when my parents were not doing well and I just thought, "Oh, this is just not--this is not good, and let me just keep the kid out of that." Speaker 1: Okay. So, growing up, was the household basically your mother, your father, and you and your sister? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. So no relatives were staying with you and that sort of thing? Speaker 2: No. Story_ID: 24481 Speaker 1: Okay. So, do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: Yes, I do. I have--I remember my mother practicing. My mother got as--good enough to have--oh, by the--the name of the composer is W. C. Handy. Speaker 1: W. C. Handy. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You know, his--we interviewed Carlos Handy in Texas Southern University. Speaker 2: Yeah, he's a physicist. Speaker 1: That's his grandson. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Yeah. And I think I asked him. Speaker 1: He's a physicist, yeah. Speaker 2: And I think I asked him. And is he related to him? I think I know--. Speaker 1: Yeah, he's the grandson of-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Okay. Speaker 1: --W. C. Handy. Speaker 2: Yeah. It was W. C. Handy. Speaker 1: Yeah. We just talked to him last month at Texas Southern. Speaker 2: That's good. Oh, did you? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Oh, that's great. Yeah. I know him. I've met--I should say, I've met him a couple of times (so that might be?) good enough so that--I haven't seen him in a long time. Yeah. But, anyway, yeah. She got good enough. So she was actually concert level and performing. So, she used to play "Claire de lune," [Claude Debussy] and I remember I used to--I would hear that or some of the [Frederic] Chopin she would do. And it would--I remember the powerful, overwhelming emotions that that music aroused in me. That's probably among my first memories, and how, you know--. It's hard--it's to describe the kind of a mixture of great happiness and the exultation on the one hand, and yet a kind of regret as well. So, that's my earliest memory. Speaker 1: Okay. That's interesting to hear your mother played "Claire de lune," you know. Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And then the other things, but that particularly. Yeah. Speaker 1: Such a rich and moody kind of piece. Speaker 2: Mm-hm. Story_ID: 24482 Speaker 1: Okay. So, so your mother [Daphne Lindsay] was serious. She was working with W. C. Handy, and this is a serious musician we're talking about. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Oh, absolutely. She was with the RCA Orchestra for a while. Speaker 1: Oh. Now, did she make any--I guess she's recorded too, I guess? Speaker 2: No, not really. She just mostly composed. I don't know quite why she wasn't a bit more aggressive about that after the marriage--and that's the other thing. Who knows what--what was all that transpired, you know. As I said, you know, the effect of him--of her marrying him and, you know, and maybe discovering that he wasn't quite the man that she thought he was. Speaker 1: Well, the war was a debilitating experience for a lot of people. Black soldiers had some stories. I've heard some of the stories are just unbelievable (unclear). Speaker 2: Oh, really, now. Maybe I should read a book about that, you know, and try to--because he certainly--. It's funny how uncurious one is about certain things, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, in a certain state. I mean it's--yeah. Generations seem to go past each other at a certain age. But then later on, on reflection, if you have access you can ask the questions, but if you don't, then you can't, you know. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: There are a lot--yeah. I have to share some information with you at the end. Speaker 2: Yeah. That would be very useful. Speaker 1: My father talked about it all the time, which is unusual. Most people don't talk about it. But he talked about it all the time. Speaker 2: My stepfather just couldn't talk, but he--but there was a lot he left out and he would say that he did. Story_ID: 24483 Speaker 1: Well, we always ask this question: Can you describe the neighborhood you grew up in, I guess, in your environs, and what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Okay. Well, as I told you, we had moved--we moved to a housing project. And effectively, what that means at that period in time, was that you had relatively new buildings that were about six stories high. So they're mid-rise buildings that were situated--they were situated with varying topography, but basically downhill as you move from Amsterdam Avenue down to West End Avenue, and where we --242 West 62nd Street, where our house was situated not far from the Hudson River, frankly. And, it was a--our building was directly across another building of the same height. And then down some stairs, very wide stairs, you could walk down and there were two other buildings facing each other. The--at that time, there were families with children, and probably their income profiles were not very different from us, but it was extremely diverse. So we had a great many white families, many of them Catholic. And I came--some of them became my playmates as well as black families. There were black families and white families that were--and there were a lot of tree plantings. So the housing project was different in two important respects from your average city neighborhood, because it--because it had--it was integrated on the one hand in Mid-Manhattan; and on the other, there were many plantings. So there were bushes and trees along there as well. And so, you know, when I was a kid, I and playmates, and often by myself, actually, would play Indian in the woods because the bushes were tall enough, and some bushes that ran along the road that ran, I'd say, not far from where I lived. And so, we'd do that and we would play children's games. Children were easily assessable. We had--we were near some older houses and--which were called the "Fitz Houses," (ph. splg.) which were sort of traditional, low-rise city buildings where black people lived, one of whom was Thelonious Monk. And so, we would see him. He wasn't a terrifically happy individual at that point in time, but he was there, you know, we'd talk with him, so he was our neighbor, so to speak. So we had swings and we had playgrounds. So it was a very enriching place in a lot of ways in the early years. Story_ID: 24484 Speaker 1: All right. Thelonious Monk. He was a neighbor and your mother [Daphne Lindsay] certainly would know about him, another piano and composer and arranger. Speaker 2: Mm-hm. Speaker 1: You know, but you were saying off camera that she didn't necessarily approve of him. Speaker 2: No. Well, you know--no. I would say she did not approve of him and wouldn't have approved of him. She didn't really know him personally, but he--and my sister, actually, has done a little bit more work on this, but I think he may have been using drugs through part of the period when we--when we knew him. So he was really not at his best at that point. And I'm sorry to say, and I don't have any excuse except that I was a kid, but we used to run up and, you know, and worry him a little bit, and he'd whirl around and (laughs), we'd run away. See, you know, I kind of knew he was famous, but, you know, he didn't seem to be (laughs) very friendly, and so, it was a good way to kind of entertain ourselves by having him scare us, and, you know. I can't give you any--I wish I could, you know, give you something more enlightening and edifying about him. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, that's something. That's a story that says something about his life that some people might not know, that kids would run up just to get scared by him when he was in a bad way. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: That's interesting. Story_ID: 24485 Speaker 1: So, now--oh, one thing I'd like to point out. Now, when people hear the projects today, they think of, like, horrible conditions, people there with no income and that sort of thing. But that's not the case then, right? Speaker 2: It wasn't the case in the beginning, but it began to be towards the end. Basically, in the--for the Amsterdam Houses, drug use began to be more prevalent. It seemed to me initially they were--the whole process--the whole admissions process was, I guess, pretty rigorous and it probably would have been easy to screen out people whom in the minds of whoever it was, was doing--the Housing Authority, New York Housing Authority--in their minds, would be likely to have issues are like that. But as time went on, more and more the income requirements were slightly relaxed in terms of job requirements. This was a time when, you know, lots of people were on welfare. I mean, welfare was a significant program. So there came to be many families, single-mother families and kids, and their children, and these were--some of these families were really pretty troubled. And even in our own house, there began to be drug use. And they began inviting, you know, there were teenagers, and they began inviting other people who--with significant, you know, problems. So, towards the end of our time in the projects, you started to see some of the--some of the issues associated with the projects. They also aged and they weren't refurbished, right? I mean, they were spanking new when they moved in. but, you know, fifteen years had gone by, you know, and, you know, you need to maintain. And by then, already, you know, there were issues of--(but, you know?) nothing approaching what happened in the '70s (1970s), but there were still issues. And so, that initial impetus just died down. And my mother [Daphne Lindsay] started looking around because she felt she knew that there was some drug use in the house, and by that time, Erica was a child, I was a teenager, and I was--with respect to me, she wasn't so much worried about me getting involved as much as I--I was bullied as a child. This was just before the Civil Rights Movement [1955-1968]. And in the black community at that time, there was a severe problem of--it was a severe skin tone issue, which actually went away for a long time during and after the Civil Rights Movement. But at that time, it was bad. And so, any kid that, you know-- Speaker 1: So you were bullied by other black children too-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: --as well as (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: Yeah. Well, yeah, whites were not--I had white friends, but they were largely--you know, the discrimination from the larger community was of a different--was of a different, and I think in some sense--well, I won't say more serious, because to a kid it's really pretty serious, but it was of a different kind. There were other than, you know, so it was seldom, seldom that--it was almost always, and it was not color-based, because you'd be lumped in with everyone else. Black kids, it was you. So--and so, my--and my mother could see, you know, by this time I was a teenager, I spent a lot of time upstairs because I just didn't want to interact with people my own age largely, except I had some good friends in junior high. It was a great time. But in high school, I was in a school that was predominantly white by that time, and many of them lived in the Bronx, far away. So I had no peers other than the ones who were tormenting me locally. So, and my mother could see that. And so, she felt we need to get away. Story_ID: 24486 Speaker 1: Okay. So. All right, now, I want to go back to, you know, growing up as a little kid first before we get you to that point. When--so, when did you start school? What was the name of your school? Speaker 2: I was at P.S. 141, which is on 58th Street. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, did you like school? Speaker 2: Not at first. I think I struggled. You know, I had trouble doing things and reading, it seemed to be a little bit bad. I know that I took an IQ test. I don't think I did very well. So, and then somewhere in the second or third grade--second grade, I really, you know, it may have been a developmental thing. And I really started to move ahead better, in a better way. And I got into a nice class in third grade and met many of the friends I still--I have, just still have one or two. And the educational level was really very good there. By that time, third grade, we moved to a new school. Speaker 1: Okay. What was the name of that one? Speaker 2: P.S. 191 and that was on 61st Street, Amsterdam. Speaker 1: Now, before we leave P.S. 141, are there any teachers or people that you remember-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --as being particularly helpful or--? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No. In P.S. 191-- Speaker 1: (unclear). Speaker 2: --they were fairly good teachers, I would say. But--so I had--I got a decent elementary school education, I think, given everything. But I can't remember anything compelling at all in that period. And when I can--I can remember their names, I guess that's all. Speaker 1: Okay. So, did you like any particular subject better than another? Speaker 2: I really liked geography. I loved being able to make product maps (laughs), you know. Speaker 1: Product maps? I don't--what are those? Speaker 2: Product map is you have a map of a country and you have different regions. So, for example, what kinds of products do they make? So for Ecuador, you would have, say, bananas in the north, and then you'd have a symbol-- Speaker 1: So you put a little symbol on your map? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. You go and find something that looks like bananas, and then you--. So, if you had to do, like, Central America, you'd have a whole big, sort of map, outline map of Central America, and then you'd have products in each country, you know. So I really enjoyed that. So I liked that. I liked history and I always have. Can't tell it from carrying other stuff. But, I mean, I did enjoy history. And I--it started later on, after the chemistry set, I enjoyed science. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, you were nine, and now you're in the fourth grade, I guess, when you got the science--the chemistry set? Speaker 2: Correct. Speaker 1: And, well, tell us about that experience. This has been written about now. Speaker 2: (Laughs). Speaker 1: I had it before I got here, so. Speaker 2: Yeah, right. Speaker 1: Yeah. Tell us about that. Speaker 2: Well, my mother [Daphne Lindsay] in this period was, as I said, as a reflection, she loved learning, and so, it was reflected in how she got Christmas gifts for us. And she was giving me, actually a series of very nice Christmas gifts; one is a Golden Book Series. And I had been in the hospital, I think, in the Christmas of the previous year. I had an operation. And so, the following Christmas, I guess, maybe, you know, just to say, "Well, glad you came through it all," she got me a Gilbert Chemistry Set, which was the--it's a single metal file cabinet, and it contained, you know, the top part of the chemistry set held the manual which had the experiments and described, you know, numbered the experiments, and it described the chemicals you would need, what to do, and what it was illustrating. And then the lower half were the chemicals themselves. And, you know, so, there was everything from acetylcholine to sodium, you know, potassium chloride; things like that. And you would do an experiment that would show how dyes are made. It seemed to me they also had an alcohol lamp. You couldn't do this now. And it had a wick, you could light it, and then you had the test tubes, and this had three or four test tubes. (This is the first strain?). And then you put--because a lot of the experiments required, of course, that you mix your chemicals and then you had to heat them, okay. And you had a holder and then you'd heat them over the alcohol lamp with no glasses, of course (laughs). And so, I was just happy as a clam. I was just loved this. And, you know, I certainly told my mother as much. And so, the very next year, I got the--I had the junior kit, and then the next year I got the senior kit. And then the senior kit had many more experiments. There were a double rack of chemicals, more test tubes, and then they had one experiment which is really very simple, which was illustrating the idea of paper chromatography, which is essentially separating out a chemical into its--into some of its--a solution, excuse me; into its constituent parts by dragging it along filter paper. So, that was interesting and became the basis of a science fair experiment that I did somewhere in the sixth or seven grade. Speaker 1: So, okay. So, did you have any friends that, you know, got involved in chemistry too? Speaker 2: No. This was pretty much on my own. It wasn't until I went to junior high that I became a member of the science club. And as a member of the science club I did meet other kids who were, you know, interested in science; maybe not directly in chemistry, but things that were like that. Story_ID: 24487 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, where did you go to junior high school? Speaker 2: Junior High School 17 in Manhattan [New York]. It was called LaSalle Junior High School. Speaker 1: Like the explorer Robert LaSalle? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Yeah. LaSalle Junior High. Okay. Okay. All right. So, you're like in the sixth grade or seventh? Speaker 2: In seventh grade. Speaker 1: Seventh grade. Okay. All right. So, you're a member of the science club there. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So did you feel like the chemistry set kind of put you ahead of some of the other students in terms of what your expectations were in science? Speaker 2: I think probably it very much did. I think it opened up--in some sense it opened up a layout. I mean, my interactions, like I said, with other kids mainly from the housing project, made me really think of them, you know, as really a bunch of knuckleheads, frankly, who, you know, were not going to go anywhere good. And so, I thought, "Well, you know, maybe there's--you know, I'll pursue this." This is at least something interesting that, you know, takes my mind off, you know, them and what was happening there outside the apartment on the one hand, but on the other hand--. And at this point, I had no idea if I could become a chemist or a scientist or not. But by then, the Sputnik thing, and I remember that. Mrs. Tem (ph. splg.)--what was her name? Temwall (ph. splg.) in the fifth grade had told us that science was really going to be the big thing, that the, you know, that there needed to be all of these scientists and engineers because we had just been thrown back, you know. We were backward and had to catch up with the Russians. So I-- Speaker 1: Yeah, this is 1957, right? Sputnik? Speaker 2: Yeah. So I knew--by then I knew that there was going to be, you know, that there was going to be this need. And so, the chemistry set sort of made me, because I had been, you know, involved with the chemistry set, I thought, "This is--this might be a place for me to go. This might be--this may be something for me to--a place, a goal that I can set myself, and that will, in fact, allow me to leave the situation that I'm in on the one hand, and on the other hand, do something that I enjoy as my hobby." Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So. Speaker 1: Now, were there any teachers that really--. Speaker 2: Encouraged me in the science direction? Speaker 1: Yeah. Yes, in junior school? Speaker 2: Oh, in junior high. Oh, yeah. Well, see that was it. I mean, that's where I was really, really very fortunate, because the faculty advisor for the science club was a teacher--actually he was official an eighth grade science teacher named Charles Wilson. And he--. Speaker 1: Now this is an African-American man who--. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: You said he had a master's from Columbia [University]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And a-- Speaker 2: In chemistry, right. Speaker 1: In chemistry, right. Okay. So here you meet someone who-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --tailor-made to help you. Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: So, he--so I met him, not as a teacher, but actually as a faculty advisor for the science club. Actually, what happened was, I had gotten into a fistfight in seventh grade. I was put in to--because I was musical, I had been put in to a class which is the class that does the orchestra. But this is also because of the--essentially because of the tracking that they did. Of course, New York City schools by this time also had done, you know, heavy tracking. It was not in the top track. It's just how it worked. And these--this class included people from the projects that--and--so I had gotten into a fistfight with one of the--you know, and it wasn't so much that I was aggressive, because that just wasn't true. I was really much too introverted for that. Speaker 1: What happened? Speaker 2: Well, essentially, it was a situation, I guess, where, you know, my first instinct was to avoid to tell the teacher, to run, and then if that wasn't possible, I wasn't going to back out. I mean, roughly speaking, that was--those were my--that was my priority. And we're--it was a closet that we were in, I think at that time, I think it may have been the other kid made a mistake and I--oh yes. Well, the kid, we were twelve, I was developing and this--the kid said, you know, "You need a bra," you know, and sort of pushed me into the closet, kind of thing. And I think that's how that started. You know, it was just--. So, we had a fistfight, and the teacher, he was a white teacher, actually, assigned there, and he was a science teacher. That was his subject area. And he--he pulled us aside and he said, "You know, Fern, I know you're interested in science and stuff like that, but, you know, you know, this kind of behavior is not going to, you know, it's not going to do you any good, you know." And the way he said it, it was like, "You know, if you keep this up, you know, you're not going to--you're not going to be a scientist, kind of thing. You're not going to be able to be a scientist." Which really worried me (laughs). But, you know, he didn't bother to try to find out what had actually happened. I mean, and this is really quite typical. That's why going to the teacher was, you know, this is, I guess what, kids are told now. But at that point, adults were really quite clueless about this, you know. But he did a good thing. He actually talked to Charles Wilson, and Charles Wilson approached me and, you know, I explained the situation. And I did not know about the science club, but he told me about it, and so, I started attending. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. So, well, so did you have actually any science courses in the seventh grade? Speaker 2: Yeah. We had science. It seemed to me we had science as a subject every year. So seventh, eighth, and ninth. And I had Mr. Wilson in the eighth grade and the ninth grade. Speaker 1: Okay. But you had him as an advisor in the seventh grade. Speaker 2: As an advisor. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: For the science club. Story_ID: 24488 Speaker 1: So, well, tell us about the science club. What did you learn there, and what were they doing that you wouldn't have been able to have access to otherwise? Speaker 2: Well, as a member of the science club, I think the major activity was preparing for the science fairs that were held. It was an annual science fair, and I don't know what the grades were, anywhere from probably elementary to high school. And the--and so, you would be working throughout the year on your project--you would--you know, would decide what your project was going to be, work on it. And Mr. Wilson had a laboratory that was extensive. He did all the glassmaking. He had real burners where you could cut the glass, roll it and cut, and tie it, cut it off. He could make flasks. You could heat your--if you were doing experiments you could, of course, heat them in his laboratory. He also had an extensive collection of animals that were in glass jars. He had fetal--he had glass jars of fetal animals, fetal pigs, fish, he had fossils, he had several microscopes of varying power; I mean, you know, of varying power. Some of them are a couple of thousand times. I mean, at this point, pretty close to the top, top of the line microscopes. He had electrical equipment if you needed--and that included materials so you could solder, put together a radio. He had capacitors, he had soldering irons material. I mean, it was just really extensive. So, they were used for both science classes and for the science club. Speaker 1: Okay. So you had access to all of these. What was your first science project? Speaker 2: Paper chromatography. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. So, did you win any awards or anything? Speaker 2: I got third prize. And then I did two other projects. One was in, I think, the one I remember was column chromatography, and it must have--in fact, I entered only twice, I think. Column chromatography, I think the last year, which was interesting, I did not enter, but already my interests were changing--I think there was a--from chemistry over, I suspect, into mathematics. So, I suspect that was what was happening the third year. But the second year I did column chromatography, got an honorable mention. Speaker 1: Now what are you saying? What is it called? Speaker 2: Column chromatography. Speaker 1: Column? Speaker 2: And this was--Mr. Wilson was sanguine about that. I think he--so, my mother [Daphne Lindsay] and I went down to Fisher (of?) Scientific and got a column. God bless her. I mean, that took some real doing. But we did and worked with that. Story_ID: 24489 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, were your--you had a lot of older relatives. Were they supportive of you while growing up? Speaker 2: I think so. I mean, I know that I complained about being bullied to my aunt Ida, and she said, "You know, Fern, the blacker the berry, the sweeter the juice." (laughs). And then, you know, it's just so prosaic, but it was just such a comfort to me (laughs). And it was about--and she said it at about the right time. I was getting, from thirteen or fourteen, and I was, you know--I had learned a couple of boxing moves. I was watching a lot of fights on television because I was--I wanted, you know, to be able to, you know, defend myself if it came to that. And I was also getting a little taller. And somehow that little phrase, plus my growing ability to defend myself a little bit, was just sort of the right ticket. So, the bullying began to go away a little more. Story_ID: 24490 Speaker 1: Okay. Now this is 1961 when you're in the seventh grade. Guess what? Okay. So, you were at LaSalle [Junior High School] (unclear) (simultaneous--. Speaker 2: And then I finished in '63 (1963). Speaker 1: '63 (1963)? Okay. Now, that's the year--that was a big year in Civil Rights. Did your father [Thomas Edward Hunt] and mother [Daphne Lindsay] follow the Civil Rights Movement [1955-1968] closely? Or did they discuss it in the home, the activities of Dr. King [Martin Luther King Jr.] and SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee], and all the other, you know, all the things that went on (unclear)? Speaker 2: No. Actually not very much. My father--my father, I guess you can encapsulate it as this: At the time of the assassination of [President] John F. Kennedy, I guess they had the funeral on T.V., and basically, my father took the position that it was all a fake anyway. He was a big Hollywood guy anyway and what difference would it make. So that was--which, of course, shocked my mother and I very greatly, you know. And, you know. But, so, and my mother was--she followed it a little bit more. I was the one who was really transfixed. I was just like--I was going to church. As part of our church reading, I think we were given letters from prison one summer, one fall. I can't even remember that. Speaker 1: Now, you went to an Episcopal Church, right? Speaker 2: No. I went to a Presbyterian. Speaker 1: Presbyterian Church. Speaker 2: That was the nearest. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I went to a Presbyterian Church at that point. Speaker 1: Okay. And what was the name of the church? Speaker 2: Good Shepherd Faith Presbyterian Church. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, did your mother go there too? Speaker 2: Yeah. She started going there because it was nearby. It wasn't her style, but it was adequate, you know. It's Protestant (laughs). Speaker 1: Okay. And did your father attend church at all? Speaker 2: No. Story_ID: 24491 Speaker 1: All right. So 1963 is a big year. [President] John F. Kennedy is assassinated and--. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: I think in the beginning of that year, well, spring, Medgar Evers is killed. Speaker 2: Oh, I went into high school in 1962. Speaker 1: '62 (1962). Okay. Speaker 2: Okay. So I must have been--. Speaker 1: So you were in high school when (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yes. So I was in high school when that assassination occurred. So I must have been in junior high from '59 (1959)--let's see. I would have been eleven turning twelve. Yeah, I would have been eleven years old going into junior high, and then I graduated, (I don't know?), three years later, seven, eight, nine. Two years later. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Okay. And, you know, I would've--yeah. So, I would have been about fourteen thereabouts. Fourteen. Speaker 1: Right. You would have been a sophomore-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --in high school, I guess, when some (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: Yeah. That's right. And then I went to high school. Yeah. Speaker 1: Now what--you went to the Bronx High School of-- Speaker 2: Science, right. Speaker 1: Science. Okay. Now that--there's a story here we haven't talked about first, isn't it? That the--because not every gets into that school, right? Speaker 2: No. No. It's a school that's admitted by--that admission occurs by examination. And Mr. Wilson had suggested to me, and I probably may have asked him, because there were several options for high school, and I think I probably asked him what I could do. And he suggested two things; either Charles Evan Hughes Technical Electricity Program at Charles Evan Hughes High School [New York] or the Bronx High School of Science [Bronx, New York]. And Bronx High School of Science sounded, you know, most attractive to me, but you had to sit for an examination, and--which I did. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, were you making really good grades by this--at this point, at this juncture? Speaker 2: Yeah. By the time--by the time about I'd say, you know, about eighth grade, last half of seventh, early eighth grade, I was making pretty good grades in science, and it was respectable enough. I was pretty, yeah, I was pretty respectable. And then they got really good, probably, in ninth grade. I mean, I probably had something like a 95, 98 average, in between and thereabouts. Story_ID: 24492 Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. So Bronx High School [of Science]. So you took the examination and passed and was admitted? Speaker 2: Yes. And I was admitted. And so, I entered the tenth grade. Speaker 1: Okay. Oh, so you entered in the tenth grade. So that would be '63 (1963). Speaker 2: Yeah. So I was in ninth grade. Speaker 1: Yeah, '63 (1963). Correct. Speaker 2: Seventh, eighth, and ninth in junior high, and then tenth in high school. Speaker 1: Okay. That is 1963 then when you start--you started actually in high school then. Speaker 2: Tenth in '62 (1962) and-- Speaker 1: But in tenth grade. Speaker 2: --then I was a junior. I was a junior November '63 (1963). So I was a junior when that assassination occurred. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So, well, first of all, how did you like Bronx High School of Science? Speaker 2: I didn't. The--and--part of it was the demographics of the place. The--at that point in time, the male-female average--and the male-females, excuse me, ratio was something like three to one. And most of the students there had been in something called the SP Program, which is an acceleration program, which means that everybody was a year younger. So you would have 16-year-old seniors, 14-year-old sophomores, 15-year-old juniors. So, you were dealing with a very largely male population aged 14 to 16 of students, of kids who were from the Bronx [New York], and not only largely from the Bronx, but from the very small social and ethnic stratum of the Bronx population, with a sprinkling of people from private schools largely from Manhattan [New York], and who were fairly affluent, therefore. So that's kind of what was there. There may have been two Puerto Ricans, there may--I think there were probably three or four African-Americans. And this is a school, I don't know, 8,000, 9,000 students. I don't know what it was. It was huge. I'm trying to remember. Speaker 1: Huge school with four--you said four African-Americans? Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah. That I knew of. There might have been--. Speaker 1: How many were--I mean, were they all--all the rest of them males? Speaker 2: Well, they were--no. It's one-third female. It was three to one. Excuse me. So it's one-fourth female. Speaker 1: No. I mean of the African-Americans there. Speaker 2: Oh, were there males? Maybe. I mean, I knew two women. Speaker 1: Two out of the four were--of the four that were there were--? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. So it's 50-50 in terms of (unclear)--. Speaker 2: Yeah. Roughly. Speaker 1: (unclear). Yeah. Speaker 2: So it was a really unbalanced situation. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Now, there were things about it I enjoyed a lot, you know. I mean, I actually enjoyed the foreign language. I remember in French, there was a very good French teacher named Charles Smith, Mr. Smith. (unclear). Let me--I might not have his right first name. It was Mr. Smith. He was there for many, many years. And people would come back from France and (stuff, Americans?). It's, you know, really praised the background that he gave, and it was good. I mean, it was good enough for me to do very well on the reading exam in graduate school. And, you know, and I get along after awhile if I'm in a French country, you know. So he was really, really good. And, you know, and had an excellent library and I enjoyed reading it. But-- Speaker 1: So we all know that teenage years are social years and all that--(unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: It was just a--it was a disaster because--and then they were boys, and so, the thinking was, "Let's just really hammer down on these people because, otherwise, it'll be completely out of control." I understand that. But they would lock the doors. They would lock you in, so you could not leave until it was time to leave for the--you know, once you came in, that was it. You couldn't leave. They would have monitors at the doorways and at the stairways when classes began. And the reason for that they had such an extensive system of student monitors was because, at this point, college was hard to get into and you needed extra credit for--you needed credit for extracurricular activities. And so, they set up this sort of student police force with offices. You know, you could be a sergeant, you could be a captain, and stuff like that, so that, you know, so you could put on your record that you had served as a monitor. So, and they would be on the stairways and they would prevent you, you know, if you wanted to go up the stairway, you know, you had to use the up stairways and you couldn't use the down, and vice-versa, you know. They had a detention system. They had a pink card thing which, you know, whenever you were out of line for any reason, whether you were late or whether you were loud at a time when you're not supposed to talk or whatever, you could get a pink card, you know. So, this--it was a--it was just not a good--it was not a good match between me and the way I was and, you know. So,any--I had a fairly decent history, and I actually took advanced placement history. I had a fairly decent history education, and I seemed to do okay with that--with that subject. Speaker 1: It was a good teacher? Was there--? Speaker 2: Yeah. His name was Irving Dubmno, D-U-B-M-N-O. Story_ID: 24493 Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So, well--so, you're starting to really become a decent mathematician you said at this point? Speaker 2: Yeah. I certainly by that time started to become interested in mathematics without--and, in fact, chemistry, having taken chemistry in the tenth grade, I realized that, you know, that that was just impossible. I mean, I wasn't--it was--it was a subject that had too many arbitrary facts, where compared to mathematics where you could literally start knowing absolutely nothing. You could start "I know nothing," and then as you, for example, when you're in a geometry class, you know that you have certain axioms; certain statements that you take for granted. And then starting from those, you can build up an edifice, the body of knowledge where each step, each brick of the edifice follows directly from the one below it in a way that's logical and reasonable. And that's logical. Don't say reasonable, but it's logical. And so, and you could get quite surprising and wonderful patterns that way. And chemistry, like I said, had a certain arbitrary that's--that actually--probably was not as arbitrary as it appeared, but just needed too much advanced. You needed too much advanced knowledge to really begin to make the logical conclusions that would make chemistry reasonable. And even then it's still a mess. Whereas, mathematics, that wasn't true. So, I had switched over completely by tenth grade and was reading stuff on my own. Speaker 1: About math? Speaker 2: Mm-hm, oh yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So did Bronx High School for Science [Bronx, New York] go all the way through calculus? Speaker 2: They did and I didn't take it. And I didn't--I guess I didn't score highly enough, I guess. I mean-- Speaker 1: They didn't ask--I mean--. Well, if you're scoring high in the other math, then why would--? Speaker 2: I think you needed--. Oh, yeah. Well, in the tenth grade I took geometry. And at that point, I did not score highly enough in geometry to qualify for the accelerated algebra and trig that would lead to calculus in the twelfth grade. Geometry I was okay at, but--which is really funny because I, you know, part of it is seeing, and I'm not always that good at seeing, I'm better at hearing I now realize. And so, this is just a fact of life. I mean, even now I sometimes get turned around in directions. I don't have a terribly good sense of direction. And that's because I don't see all that--all that well. But if I hear it or if it's in a symbol, then we're fine. I mean, I picked up a 99, I think, the next year in the next math course. So, but for--and in those days, as I've learned, I mean, you know, there's a lot of stuff that goes on that you--that was subtle enough that I couldn't always catch, you know. A lot of--there were a couple of shafts along the way that, you know, I just didn't know about. Some things I saw, but some things I didn't. This is just a fact and you don't know until years later, and you go, "Wait a minute." Speaker 1: That's a common story. And then people, you know, wonder, and second-guess, "Wait a minute." You know, you think about if you were a counselor would you have said this or if you were a teacher would you have acted in this way to a student who is obviously talented or--. Speaker 2: And I did try to emulate the best examples of what happened in my life, let's put it that way. Story_ID: 24494 Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So, we're talking about the early years, that's 1963; just been a big Civil Rights year and of the assassination of Medgar Evans, the March on Washington. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: The assassination of John [President John F. Kennedy]--well, the 16th Street Baptist Church being bombed. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Then the--what's the last one? The--yeah, the assassination of John Kennedy being the last event that year, I guess, of big 6-0. Speaker 2: That's right. That's right. Speaker 1: So that-- Speaker 2: So, yeah. They were huge. They were momentous. I mean, I was in an English class and, in fact, the teacher was really quite reactionary. One of the things you didn't mention and that's not mentioned very often is that, you know, this was the period from the right-wing side of things that culminated in the nomination of Barry Goldwater in 1964. And what's important to understand is, for example, in my high school there was something called "Forum," okay, which was a once-weekly meeting where speakers would come and you could discuss current events; politics, history, and things like that, in connection with what was happening. And you could see very clearly that there were large numbers in the student body of very conservative--of right-wing people. (Haran?) was a huge, huge favorite in my high school. And the teacher that I had in the eleventh grade, Natfaul (ph. splg.), was conservative, and he was very much--I mean, Buckley; William Buckley was also another big, local hero, and certainly was a hero of this teacher who was really very intelligent, very knowledgeable about literature. But, you know, coming at it from a right wing perspective. And already there was a little bit of polarization, okay, because of the Civil Rights Movement [1955-1968], now, which was largely due to something happening in the South, but already there were issues of integration in New York City [New York], you know. And when there came to be some demonstrations--I think I even went to one or two of them. But I was following things very closely. So I was sitting, in November, I believe it was twenty, the second, 22nd, and it was in the afternoon, and in the classroom and our door was open and I heard a cheer. And then the radio--first the cheer and then the radio was turned up very, very loudly, you know. And I couldn't, you know, we didn't know what it was, and we went on with class; doors closed and I think we just went on. And then we left class, and in the hallways, and it was there that I found out that [President John F.] Kennedy had been assassinated. Speaker 1: So where did the cheer emanate from--? Speaker 2: The cheer emanated evidently from people who were listening to the radio. Speaker 1: Were these students or teachers? Speaker 2: I think they were students. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 24495 Speaker 1: So I take it there weren't many Catholics in Bronx High School [of Science]? Speaker 2: Yeah. Like I said, this was a very (laughs)--. They were there. They were there, but, you know, we're talking, you know--the large part of that population was a very narrow, you know--most of them were middle-class, Jewish students--students of Jewish descent is probably the way to put it, which means a wide variety of people of all kinds; including, there was one brave soul--we had a demonstration, as a matter of fact. He--there was a sort of a Civil Rights demonstration that the students had later, and he wore a black armband. And Mr. Kinnell (ph. splg.), our English teacher, the man I was telling you about, ordered that he remove it and he didn't. Bless him. He didn't. I mean, and that took a lot of doing because, I mean, a guy--the teacher was very intimidating. I mean, already, you know, we have students that are not in the business of "don't want to be confronting teachers" anyway in that atmosphere. And Kinnell was very intimidating because verbally he was very smart and he could really take you down. And he just stood up to him. And so, he was told to leave, to get out of the class, which he did. He was an incredibly brave soul. So, well, you know, we have a--we had a lot of different kinds of people, but I'm just saying that it wasn't really very diverse, that's all. Speaker 1: It was very conservative? Speaker 2: There was--there was a significant conservative component. In fact, when Meir Kahane came to Forum), which he did, you remember by--even by then, this is just to tell you how early this is, because the Black Panthers must have just started. But then there began to be problems, I think, in Crown Heights [Brooklyn, New York]. It was some part of Brooklyn, and the perception was that black people were, I guess, rousting Jews, Hasidic Jews or Jews of, maybe, of--I don't know if it was a clash between Orthodox Jews or whatever it was, but there came to be something called the Jewish Defense League, which started out. And Meir Kahane, who was the founder and the leader, came to form. And I remember that was a time when I was actually kind of afraid because he had these guys. I mean they were (laughs), you know, these black-shirted--I don't know what you'd call them--young men, I guess, who sort of marched down either side of the auditorium and stuff like that, and were there, what? To stand guard? I mean, I--. It was this audience of predominantly Jewish students. I mean, what was the threat. But he was there and he was, you know--I'm sure he made quite an impression. But I mean, that's to show you the atmosphere that existed, I mean. So, parallel to these--to this conflicts (sic), this--and advancements through the Civil Rights Movement [1955-1968], it was this countermovement which was building on the right. Speaker 1: And this being a Jewish Right. Of course, Meir Kahane later shot up a mosque in (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: Well, I don't know if he was directly involved in it, but he founded a movement called--he founded a movement that was--whose goal was to essentially expel Palestinians from the so-called Holy Lands. Speaker 1: But he is the one that was convicted of shooting up a mosque in (unclear). Speaker 2: Oh, was he? Yeah. Speaker 1: Right. It was him from (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: Yeah. I knew he was later himself. Speaker 1: Yeah. He wrote a book called, "We Will Never Forget," you know about the Holocaust." Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Probably "Never Again" or something like that. Speaker 1: "Never Again." That's the title. Speaker 2: But yeah. That's the kind of thing that--. But yeah. So, that was kind of the--so it was somewhat on the conservative side, yeah. Speaker 1: It has been time when, you know, I thought about the--you mention the Black Panthers, and they have like a paramilitary-type stance, you know, (unclear) simultaneous). Speaker 2: And these guys were sort of styling themselves on that. Speaker 1: Yeah, National of Islam; that's sort of a paramilitary--. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: George Lincoln Rockwell's American Nazi Party, (go on there?) with a similar kind of a paramilitary wing. Story_ID: 24496 Speaker 1: So, at any rate, let me ask you about Malcolm X, too, because he's a figure in Harlem--a lot of--in New York anyway, that a lot of--who went national, that you'd be familiar with during those days. So, it was in 1963 he actually left the National of Islam, right or? Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: That's right. I don't think I ever met him or went to a direct rally, but I certainly listened to him closely once he left the Nation of Islam. I didn't like the Black Muslims very much. I thought they were sort of sleazy. Is this being recorded, I don't know? Speaker 1: (laughs.) Speaker 2: You know, I didn't like the fruit of Islam. I thought that was intimidating and I, you know, and as a woman, I frankly was suspicious of just what women's roles would be. So no. You know--so, once he left, I did pay very, very close attention to what he was saying. Although I would listen to what he--his speeches beforehand because, I mean, he was an important counterpoint. I mean, he really did offer--. You know, Martin Luther King was operating in a certain context. And it isn't that he didn't understand the nature of--the nature of our country in terms of where the bright red lines are, things you can talk about and things you can't talk about. He saw that. But it was just that he made some priorities. And when he talked in April the 4th of 1968 at Riverside Church, he actually laid out those priorities. And so, it's quite clear that he could have gone more in the direction of what--where Malcolm X was going, but decided that racism was something that we needed to get rid of, and that was probably the first thing to work on, it was most workable. And that seemed fair given the mood, mainly in the South. And Malcolm X was coming out of a Northern context where, you know, over Apartheid [1948-1994] isn't the issue. The issue is more economic, it's more global; and he would address those in language that people enjoyed and understood. I had a classmate, Billy Kochiyama, who was with me through--largely elementary school, it seems to me, and in junior high part of the time as well. And his mother, who I believe is Audee Kochiyama, was actually an associate of Malcolm X. So to that extent, she was actually involved in the Black Liberation Struggle, even though she was Japanese-American. Speaker 1: How do you spell her last name? Speaker 2: K-O-C-H-I-Y-A-M-A. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, you know, so she was quite an activist. And I remember talking to her some, but I never had any direct connection with Malcolm X. Speaker 1: Okay. You were in high school when he was assassinated, I think. How did people feel? I know it was a bigger--had a bigger impact in Harlem [New York] than it did-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: --in New York than it did--. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Yeah. I mean, I think his reputation as a national figure is not something I know very much about. You know, he was thought of really as New York, and I think he was living in Queens [New York] at the time of the assassination, although he was speaking in Harlem. So it was very much a New York thing, and it was--. Looking back, at that point, his reputation was not nearly as large as it was subsequently. These--the first autobiography had not come out, and that did a lot in terms of his reputation and stature. And at this point he was thought of as an extremely able and, in fact--and people were really looking to see what he was going to come out with in terms of a new synthesis, because it was really the thinking, "Hey, you know, he's becoming much more internationally. He seems to be really broadening his understanding of the interrelationships between what's happening globally and our economic system as well." But, you know, that was all cut short. Story_ID: 24497 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, were you involved in any--I know there's a--well, were you involved any clubs or activities in high school [Bronx High School of Science]? Speaker 2: (pause). It's interesting. I have to actually think about that (pause). Right. Was I involved in any clubs? Was I involved in the science club? Was I involved in the language club? Was I involved in the--probably Forum. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And helping to--helping on the committee, the setting up activities for Forum. I did not get involved. I'd loved to have been a member of the book club, and I don't know quite why I didn't join. But other than that, no. Speaker 1: The Forum was a group that brought the speakers to school? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Was there anybody that you particular have a fond memory of who came in to speak, you know? Speaker 2: No. I can just remember when (Haran's?) associate came. I remember, you know, just--I'm trying to remember. Somebody-- I had a fond memory of. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I probably blocked it out. I mean, there's a lot of, you know, memory is, you know, it's almost as if I just tried to block out what happened. Speaker 1: So, in high school, during your high school years, did you--did you have a social life outside of high school in the neighborhood or church or someplace else? Speaker 2: Probably church if anything. Pretty largely. I had some very good friends at high school, including, you know, and people that I still correspond with; in fact, visited a couple of months ago. So I had friends, but no, I had no social life. I mean, as an African-American woman in the '60s [1960s], it's just--it would--no. It would be no. I didn't have any. And my friend, Teesa Warren (ph. splg.), I don't think she had a social life either. I mean, it's not that she didn't want one, but I mean, it just--forget it. Story_ID: 24498 Speaker 1: Okay. The World's Fair occurred in 1964 in New York, and your sister informed you that you went numerous times, right? Speaker 2: The family went many times. I actually think that that probably was due to my father [Thomas Edward Hunt]. So that's--that's really significant. And she informs me that we went--that he loved to, you know, they had these cars and, I guess, you know, this is one of the frustrations of being a male New Yorker, I guess. He did not have a car and he really didn't drive. I mean, he may have done that in the Army some, but he never--he never either had the time or the ability. Certainly he had the inclination to drive, but they had this system where you could get into your cars and, of course, he'd be in the front driver's seat, my mother [Daphne Lindsay] in the next, and the two of us in the back. And so, this, you know, he had his chance to kind of be on the road and be the man of the house. So, what I do remember is, I remember the international aspects of it and really seeing other countries and learning about other countries. I think that--that was the thing that came down. And the idea of technology being able to solve problems, there was some hydroponics exhibit. I know that had a big effect on me. And actually I remain interested in that whole topic of food security and local food production. But I remember the hydroponics exhibit, and I was just flabbergasted that you could grow crops like these with water and some chemicals and no soil. So that's the thing I remember. Erica remembers it. And I know we did the--there was a--it was a very dignified setup. So already by that time I was a little bit jaundiced about that. But there was a train that we ride in, and I know Erica was very fond of going on that. They were all were, and we were a family. We were going--we were going together, and I think that that, you know, and enjoying something. And I--that was unusual. Story_ID: 24499 Speaker 1: Okay. So, when--okay. So when you're approaching graduation from high school, I mean, now, did you--did you graduate at--near the top of your class or anything? Speaker 2: I think I was--I had an 88 average, and out of a class of 3,000 I might have been, like, 1200; one thousand, you know. So I wasn't--I wasn't at the bottom, but I wasn't--I was in the top third. It was good enough to get into a good school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But it was not remarkable, and that probably in some respects is due to the fact that, although I read a great deal during that period, I watched a lot of television. A lot. I had some bad habits. Speaker 1: A lot of television? Did you have a favorite television show? Speaker 2: I loved old movies. Movies of the--so. I mean, even now I can remember a lot of them. So, movies of the '30s (1930s), Katherine Hepburn, Cary Grant. I probably saw every film that they made, every film that Jimmy Cagney made. So the '30s (1930s) and the '40s (1940s). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Some of the '50s (1950s). So movies were my favorite programs for sure. I was also seeing a lot of foreign films by now too. So, you know, but on T.V., I would say I was probably, maybe eight hours a week. It was ridiculous. Speaker 1: A lot of T.V. (laughs). Speaker 2: (Laughs). Speaker 1: Now, did you go to the movies too? Speaker 2: I did. I started going to the movies when I was about fifteen or sixteen. And I started seeing--well, of course, this is the great period--there was, "Trudeau" starting making very good films. There was wonderful films (sic), Italian films coming out at that point. "Bertolini," as well as "Fellini." Well, he--I don't he's as good as some of the even earlier old films coming out like "Open City," "The Bicycle Thief." I've got to remember who did that. So the films of--they were really opened up a very different sensibility that--other than--that I had not seen before. Speaker 1: Okay. So you attended the art films and (unclear)? Speaker 2: Art films, yeah. Starting attending, yeah, a lot of art films, as well as Amer.... You know, and I've watched American films. Even when they came back on the screen again I would go back just to see the full screen experience. Speaker 1: Now, what about music? Did you--were you--? Speaker 2: I was taking organ lessons by then. So--and I was--it was an exchange. I would get the lessons, and then, at the Presbyterian Church, and then I would play on Sunday. Speaker 1: Now, did you have an interest in jazz at all? Speaker 2: I did, but not very strongly. And that probably was just a lack of exposure. But, Brazilian music started coming in, and I got very, very invested in that. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Now, this is about the time that Harry Belafonte and--was bringing over artists like Miriam Makeba and others and that sort of thing. Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Yes. And Hugh Masekela. Speaker 1: Yeah. Hugh Masekela. Speaker 2: Right. Yeah. So I enjoyed--I definitely enjoyed their music. Story_ID: 24500 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what kind of counseling advice did you get in high school about college? Speaker 2: Not very good. I got it from--my advice came from an organization called "The United Negro College Fund." [UNCF] And, somehow, they had gotten ahold of or I had contacted them, and I don't know exactly how that happened anymore. Maybe the high school said--no. I doubt that. They were not interested in Negro students. I mean, you know. Speaker 1: What, the high school itself? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, my college guidance really came from them. And they gave me a test that tested my interests. They looked at my grades and they said, "You know, these are the kind of schools you should (get in?)," and they said, "Well, these schools would be hard to get into but, you know, they're worth a try. These schools, I think, you've got a good chance," you know. And, you know, and they kind of put it like that. Speaker 1: So what did they recommend? Speaker 2: They recommended--they recommended Brown University, the Seven Sisters [a loose association of seven liberal arts colleges in the Northeastern United States that are historically women's colleges. They are Barnard College, Bryn Mawr College, Mount Holyoke College, Radcliffe College, Smith College, Vassar College, and Wellesley College]; in other words, they thought that those were a good bet, kind of. Radcliffe [College, Cambridge, Massachusetts], and, you know, the Harvard's and the Yale's, you know. You could do--but they would be hard. It would be hard to try those. So they suggested the Seven Sisters, and then they said, "Well," you know, I knew they were women's colleges. I thought, "Well, I don't know about that." You know, they gave me descriptions of Bryn Mawr, and they said, "Well, you know, this one's the most academically rigorous, so you might, you look into that." So-- Speaker 1: So that's how you got introduced to Bryn Mawr [College]? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. So--so, did you just go on and apply to Bryn Mawr? Speaker 2: I applied to Bryn Mawr, I applied to Pembroke [College]; that's part of Brown University. And I applied somewhere else, maybe at Rensselaer. I think people started sending stuff to me after I took the PSAT. And, I guess I had scored high enough so that, you know, it was this kind of recruitment thing. I mean they--colleges just starting sending me stuff. And so, yeah, I probably applied to Rensselaer is my guess. And so, I got into all three and--but I had the previous--the February previous to being admitted, I had visited the campus, and I really, really--I really liked the campus. It was all female, but I thought, it near Haverford [College]. So, you know, there was--I was going to be able to have a social life. So, I thought, "Okay, I think this could work, and it's so pretty and it's not too far from New York, you know. Let me--." Now they didn't want to admit me right away, but I got a scholarship from a national--I got a National Achievement Scholarship. So I came in with $2700 a year. And so, they decided to go--and the reason I say that--. Well, it's not a big secret. I mean, the point is that, you know, there are various rounds at that point in those days of admitting people. And they, you know, I mean, like I said, they didn't tell me yes or no until, you know, April. They could have told me before, but they told me in April. And I was waiting. I had been admitted to Pembroke. And so, in any case, that's essentially how I got in. Speaker 1: Okay. So, now you graduated in '65 (1965) or '66 (1966)? Speaker 2: '69 (1969). Speaker 1: Sixty--I mean from high school? Speaker 2: From high school, yes. Speaker 1: Sixty--? Speaker 2: Five. Speaker 1: Five. Right. Okay. That's right. Okay. That's fine. All right. 1965. Story_ID: 24501 Speaker 1: So you started that fall at Bryn Mawr [College]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So, what was Bryn Mawr like? Did you--? Speaker 2: Well, it was a big change, even though it wasn't very far away geographically. I went from a high school of nearly 10,000 people, with a three-to-one, male-female ratio, to a college with, I guess, 800 people including graduate students, of virtually all females. Speaker 1: That's (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: And went from a high school comprised largely of people of the lower middle-class, with a sprinkling of people with, you know, from the higher social classes, to a college where basically everyone--it was the reverse of the social situation. Virtually everyone came from the sprinkling and, you know, then a few of us (laughs). So that was--that was the difference. And it was a college that--whose basic life, day-to-day life, had really probably not changed since the early 1900s, and probably from then had not changed since it was founded in 1885. So, you had individual residents' halls, and then you had classroom buildings; a couple of those. And the residents' halls had their own staffs of maids and porters. And the maids made your room, you know, made your bed, I don't know, once or twice a week and served you your meals. And the porters--a porter, very old man, very stooped over; I had a steamship trunk like the old ones that you see in the movies, with all my clothes for the year, and he put it on his back--and on his back and carried it down the hall and to my room. And that was kind of what it was like. All of the, of course, the staff that I described, maids and porters, were African-American. And they were--many of them were old retainers, many of them were not, were younger, probably about my age. And this was--it was not a--it was somewhat paternalistic, but it was more a class, I mean. But that was--that was what the place was. But it was also a time of change. So by the time I left in 1969, the maids and porters were still there to some extent, but the place had just--the tone had changed completely. It had been--it was now in the modern period. It was now finally-- Speaker 1: Yeah. This is a-- Speaker 2: --firmly in the twentieth century. Within four years it was kind of tumultuous, but--. Speaker 1: Now, this is the age of Black Power, age of Vietnam War demonstrations-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --(unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: And so by the time all of that was done, all of those--of the accoutrement all of those were--were, you know, pre--I won't say swept away, but they were well on their way out. Pretty much swept away. I mean, this is a life that--and when I came in as a freshmen, that the people be going there now don't--couldn't really imagine. Speaker 1: Yeah. I--the way you describe it and the details that you do, it's hard for me to imagine it now (laughs), thinking about it. But they served you your meals in your room? (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: No. No. When you go to a dining hall-- Speaker 1: But they served you (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: --you go to a dining--and they would serve you. Speaker 1: Okay. Interesting. Story_ID: 24502 Speaker 1: So, well, now, what about your studies; how did you like your courses and your teachers? Speaker 2: Pretty well. It was a little bit of a difficult adjusting and maybe that's because of my study habits. But I--and there were other things. I mean, you know, I had a good education, but the fact of the matter is I needed work in terms of writing skills. And literature, that was very good, but it's not at the depth and nearly as extensive as many of my peers. I mean, they--they had letter-perfect verbal SAT scores. Virtually, I was the only one that was really substantially lower, and I wasn't bad. But, you know, these are people, you know, really, at the very peak. And so, when it came to English, art studies and stuff like that, I had to--I had to--I had to scrabble. I had to work a little bit to do that. And so, the way I adapted was, I did what I could in terms of my liberal arts requirements. I enjoyed Greek literature and translation. I enjoyed seventeenth century English literature, and I tolerated the rest and then I immediately concentrated on mathematics as much as I could so I wouldn't have to deal with, you know, with their program, which would have been a little bit tough. But the math was quite adequate. The department, I think, was--I think happy with me. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. So this is where you first took calculus? Speaker 2: This is where I took calculus. A very gifted guy named Ethan Bolker (ph. splg.), who is now at the University of Massachusetts-Amherst--the University of Massachusetts-Boston, excuse me. But--oh, now I remember where my parents--my father's [Thomas Edward Hunt] parents are from. Antigua. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: That's terrible. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: So you can put that in. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: But he--he was very, very gifted. And I probably--I got as good an introduction as could be gotten anywhere. Story_ID: 24503 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, is there a--what--you said it was a time of a lot of change. Was there disruptions on campus in terms of (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: Well, there were a couple of--there were--a demonstration that I attended had to do with black students and really asking--asking for a little bit more support. I never really was in favor of a completely separate residence for black students because it wasn't, you know--the campus was too small and it was easy to--and the setup was so it was too easily isolated. But we did have a black student association but had no place to meet really, you know, and we wanted one and, you know, the administration was kind of--kind of very slow about doing anything about that. It had been asked for some time. And so, I think the demonstration was about a meeting place and some provision for--what the college had started to do to diversify the place was to bring students, especially from HBCUs, to campus for a fifth year so that they could get the biology and chemistry they would need in order to go to medical school. So that was the idea, which was actually a pretty decent idea. So that meant there were a lot more black people on campus after my third year--after my second year, although they weren't part of the regular undergraduate population. So, there was a demonstration there. The war [Vietnam War, 1959-1975] was more of an issue--becoming more of an issue. It was the war. And I just found myself becoming opposed and doing a few things. Not a whole lot. The real revolution in campus life, much of the energy, which I did not take part in largely, had to do with really men. We had these parietals. We had this system where you had to be in your room by 2:00 a.m. Men couldn't be in the dorms after ll:00 or something like that. And so, there was a great deal of dismay, and there was a great deal of agitation or growing agitation, frankly, over an impatience with these rules. Now, so, essentially, what happened is the whole, after some debate of a year and a half, the whole idea of parietals was done away with, and men were allowed to live on campus just as I was leaving. And this was a huge decision. And--. Speaker 1: And to live--were they as students or as--. Speaker 2: They were--Haverford [College] students and they wanted to live in the dorms. Which I could understand because, Haverford, at that point, was (laughs)--. Let's put it this way. For example, you might go to Haverford to eat. So you're, you know, you're there and they have the various tables. And they had one dining area. They didn't have this very, you know, kind of prim and polite residents' eating halls. They had one big dining hall, Founder's Hall. So you'd be eating there. And then I was there many times. And one day, I just thought to sort of look up at the ceiling for a moment. It's a high, huge ceiling, and it was just covered with food. Speaker 1: The ceiling? Speaker 2: The ceiling was covered with dried food. (laughs). I, you know--and the living situations in some of these men's dorms were really, you know. Speaker 1: So they had really made their own space or some men had made it uninhabitable? Speaker 2: Some--yeah. I mean, you know, it was kind of a pigpen, you know. So I could see where some of them would just really rather (laughs) go someplace that's, you know, kind of semi-civilized (laughs). You know, but so, in any case, I think they cleaned up their act a long--in fact they're--since they've become co-ed, and that culture has completely changed. But in any event, at Bryn Mawr [College], it was the pressure, especially from the students, in wanting to make their life more balanced from a gender perspective, that really began--that and the Civil Rights and Union, which, of course, the administration hated and feared, the whole idea that the maids and porters might actually think about getting unionized, which they did. They were all African-American. So, an implicit effect of that was "Hey, we can unionize." Speaker 1: Yeah, so that's a Civil Rights Movement and a labor movement right at the same time. Speaker 2: Right. Exactly. Speaker 1: Now, what about the Women's Movement? Was that acted on campus? Speaker 2: It had very little effect. The month--the crest of the Women's Movement just began in 1969. And so, I actually became aware and to some extent involved. In 1969, I read "Second Sex" by Simone de Beauvoir, and that was really quite an eye-opener for me. So the Women's Movement had not yet made its mark on the campus. But it was to do so, very profoundly, in the coming years, but it didn't do it until after I left. So it had an effect on me, but not on campus. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 24504 Speaker 1: Okay. So, now did you--let's see. What--were you involved in any clubs or take any leadership role at Bryn Mawr? Speaker 2: I got involved in some of the theatrical productions. So, I did the music and--I wrote the music for the freshman--for the freshman show. I played for--my freshman year, I played--I did the music for the freshman show and I play for the juniors, the people two years ahead of me; the junior show. And then I did--I also participated in the junior show, my own junior show. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I was a member of the math club. I was a member of the Black Student Society. And I was kind of a member of an informal group that would go canoeing, and that was later on. Speaker 1: Okay. Because you were out in a bucolic-like, scenic area, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. And it still is to some extent (much for us so?), but it still is. Story_ID: 24505 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, so when you were coming to the close of your college stay at Bryn Mawr--I mean, (unclear) when you were about to get your degree, now what were your plans? Speaker 2: Well, they were sort of--I knew that I wanted to go to graduate school, that's for sure. And I thought at the time, because of some of the--I had become interested in something called "ergodic theory." [Ergodic theory is a branch of mathematics that studies dynamical systems with an invariant measure and related problems. Its initial development was motivated by problems of statistical physics.] And I knew that the Yale University had--that Yale University had a very good program. It's a very good mathematician there. And I, you know, talked to a very distinguished professor, but he--he was even more introverted than I was. And I talked to him about it and he said, "Yeah, you know, it's something that you might try." I mean, this is, you know, I was trying to gauge from him is, "You think I can actually, you know, could I get in? Is this a feasible--is this a good match?" You know, and he, you know, he said he thought it was, you know, certainly an idea. But he was not overpowering about it. And at about that time, I became aware that my mother [Daphne Lindsay]--. I had gone back to New York a couple of times, and I suspected that my mother was losing her sight. And at about the same time, I--we had a new professor, Martin Snyder (ph. splg.), who was teaching applied math. I think I was a senior or something. And he was fresh out of NYU [New York University]. And he liked the place a lot. And so, the thinking--I had a vague thought. I thought I would just apply and then there would be, in some sense, two birds with one stone, although I was a little disappointed not to go to Yale; not to try even for Yale. I thought, "Well, I'd at NYU and I'd be in New York," you know. And since my mother is having this issue, then it might be good if I were nearby. Speaker 1: Now, did your mother [Daphne Lindsay] eventually lose her sight? Speaker 2: Yes, she did. Speaker 1: Okay. So you were some help being back? Speaker 2: Well, yeah. I'd like to think so. I hope so. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. So, in New York University, the Courant Institute of Mathematics, right? Speaker 2: Courant, yes. Speaker 1: Courant. Okay. Story_ID: 24506 Speaker 1: Okay. Alright. So the Courant Institute of Mathematic [sic, Mathematical Sciences], New York University. So, now you're getting into some mathematics, I suppose. I've never been a mathematician, but you're going into areas now that you've explored before, I guess. Speaker 2: Yeah. I think that's probably very safe to say. The Courant Institute was a very unusual department among mathematics departments, because by that point in time, there was a significant divide between something called "pure mathematics"; that is, mathematics that is developed with no specific application in mind; the branches that this is mathematics that may have originated in a very specific type of application like physics or astronomy. But, as it evolved, it evolved independent of its origin. So that's pure mathematics as opposed to applied mathematics, where the mathematics is often much more closely tied to specific applications and there's more synergy. So, on the one hand, you may have mathematical developments that are motivated by the application area, whether it be physics or biology or geology or meteorology or sociology. So, the application field influences the development of the mathematics, and the mathematics, in turn, influences the development of the field that it's being applied to. So there's more synergy in applied mathematics. So there were two types of departments, most of them being pure, by the way. And also, this meant a certain type of style of mathematics in the pure, which was more modern based, which meant that it excluded more classic-type things. Courant's was because of the founder, Richard Courant--he was a German immigrant from the Gottingen Institute [Germany]. The Gottingen Institute was the foremost mathematics institute--it's in Germany--in the world probably. And it broke up because of the rise of the Nazis. So many people left, many Jewish, many not Jewish left, and Richard Courant was one of them. And he came to New York and founded this institute. And this institute educated people in applied mathematics and in pure, but mostly applied. And it meant that the style of education is that you learnt --you learned a lot of--you learned classical and mathematics that--and you learned at a great depth. And so, that meant that you came out of that experience with a lot of versatility because you could switch from one field to another, because you had some depth in--of foundation of mathematics, which would be harder in pure mathematics because it's more specialized. So this was broader education somewhat deeper than you might get at other departments. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, the way your program was designed, did you--I mean, did you intend to get a master's or it just straight (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: Well, I originally intended to get a Ph.D., and I had gotten a fellowship, and so, I started off like that. Speaker 1: Okay. It's--a lot of scientists do that. They don't really savor a master's degree or (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: Yeah. I mean in terms of a career prospects, it was probably a better move to try to get a Ph.D. at this point, and I started out that way. And like--as the biography says, and I would have continued that way, but I--a combination of circumstances, including, you know, you had three levels for passing something called a "preliminary exam"; an "A" or "B" or a "Fail." And in order to be admitted to the Ph.D., you had to get an "A." And I picked up a "B." So, since I'd gotten the "B," I was still eligible for the master's. And the circumstances of my--it was a big change going to NYU [New York University], and I felt that having gotten the "B," having a little bit of what I thought of as a discomfort with the style of education, I decided to take a break, take a leave. So I would take--so I basically earned my master's degree as soon as I could, and then I left and I started teaching. Speaker 1: Okay. Where did you teach first? Speaker 2: City College [of New York]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That was my first position. And, as I often tell people, I was there for a year and then I reapplied--I felt I was ready to go back to graduate school and I reapplied. And because Martin Luther King had been shot and killed, New York University had set up a graduate fellowship in his name, which I got and which actually paid for the rest of my training. I mean it- So all I needed to do, once I was admitted and had the fellowship, was to take the rest of my courses and just study for the exams that I had to take, and then I'd writing dissertation (sic), and that's what happened. Speaker 1: Okay. So when did you finish? Speaker 2: I finished in 1970.... I finished in 1977 and took a degree in February 1978. Story_ID: 24507 Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So, your dissertation was--your advisor was Frank Hoppensteadt? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. And your dissertation was "Genetic and Spatial Variation in some Selection-Migration Models." Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Right. Well, tell us about that in ways that a simpleminded person like me can understand (laughs). Speaker 2: Well, of course, everyone knows about the theory of evolution [Charles Darwin], whether they believe that, in fact, it is accurately describing the origin of species or not. So now as I was saying before, one of the things that one notices in nature or often notices that, is that we see diversity of species not only over time; once upon a time there were dinosaurs, now there aren't; but also over space in the--. You know, there are these wonderful studies, for example, of how in butterflies in industrial England, and they have wonderful pictures of the morphs, as they call them, the individuals, and how their colors can vary so very, very much as a city began to industrialize, all right. And it's not just sort of soot that falls on them, but they actually began to look like, you know--you know, they're on a pole or something like that, and you'd never know they were there. You know, whereas, you know, thirteen miles out into the field they're kind of the way they always were, you know. And the question really is how does that arise? Well, we know that a lot of the theory of evolution, in particular, how species change, it turns out the mechanism for doing that is--lies in genes. All living things have genes. Genes are made up of DNA [deoxyribonucleic acid], and we know that what happens is that genes can change due to the influences of the environment. So, there is an explanation for how species have changed over time; namely, their genes have changed over time. Question is how does that happen in a spatial way? In other words, when you have differences of the environment; one kind of environment here, and one kind of environment in another location, how does that variation arise? We know in time, parents leave genes to their offspring, and there may be little changes or it may be that a parent is advantageous, has an advantageous mutation, as it's called, and that's passed on. Is that the same thing that happens with respect to spatial variation? All right. And if it does, how long does it take, and these kinds of things. Well, I was looking at a mathematical model that essentially explored how changes could happen spatially. And, in particular, if we allow animals to migrate--because if animals are sitting and not moving around, then you're not going to get spatial variation we imagine, except in this time sense. But suppose we allow them to move around a little bit, all right. Then if the ratio between the rate at which they're moving, and the rate at which they're reproducing is at the right range of ratios; in other words, it's a quantitative thing, then we start seeing spatial variation. So, in other words, the mathematics I was looking at allows you to describe quantitatively the interrelationship between animals and plants moving, and animals and plants reproducing, and what is the relationship between the rates; relative rates of production and movement that produce variation. Sometimes it doesn't. If you move around too fast, you don't get variation. If you move too slow, you know, you might not see it. So, that's what I was looking at. And then I also looked at the idea of where you have islands. Sometimes islands of a certain size allow for certain--for diversity. Islands that are not of that size don't allow for diversity. So, in park planning, that's an issue. Story_ID: 24508 Speaker 1: Okay. So. So, your research would be extremely useful for a biologist, I would suspect? Speaker 2: Yeah. In other words, in helping them with hypotheses in terms of, again, trying to quantify, "Well, I know animals move around. I know they reproduce at a certain rate. In other words, what would I need to see--can I infer how fast they've been moving around from the variation that I actually see," you know. "I don't see any variation here. Does that mean that animals are moving around too fast?" And that could make a difference in terms of--also in terms of pollution. If you have certain species that, for example, are desirable but, in fact, are moving away, you know, you would like them--to have in your region, but they're moving into some region where you don't want them to, and can you--can you, in fact, infer how fast that's happening, and can you do something to slow it down. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That might be something you would want to do. I later got very, very interested in the idea that, evolution doesn't always lead to improvement. There's a notion of fitness that Darwin talked about. But in the spatial situation, fitness is not just a reproductive thing. It's also defined by how fast you're moving around, and later on, the size of your habitat. That also defines fitness. So fitness can be defined in terms of these factors, and the idea is to write that down quantitatively so that one has a quantitative measure of fitness. Speaker 1: Okay. So that allows us to predict what would happen if-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Exactly. "What if" kinds of questions. Speaker 1: --and understand what's going on now. Speaker 2: Mm-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. A formula I mean, (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Mm-hm. Yeah. Yeah. So, that's essential, yeah. Story_ID: 24509 Speaker 1: Okay. So, did you study a specific species in terms of--? Speaker 2: Well, later on after graduate school, I became quite interested in voles, which I had--I don't think I've ever actually seen one live, but a vole is kind of a little rodent thing, and there were some scientists that thought that their genetic structure, the genetic structure of voles followed their population structure. So it was known that the population's cycle, in other words, they have boom periods where they're zillions of them, and then they're bust, you know, there're hardly any, and then, boom. And so it's a cycle. Speaker 1: How do you spell that? They're like--. How do you--? Speaker 2: V-O-L-E. Speaker 1: Okay. V-O, okay. Speaker 2: That's the animal, a vole. Speaker 1: It's a little--it's a rodent or something? Speaker 2: It's a little rodent. Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And it's mainly a prey, and it's a prey species, and it cycles. But what they seem to have discovered is that, there is a--there is a gene, okay. They hypothesized a gene where, in fact, the numbers of animals having that particular gene also cycles. So there're lots of this particular gene at the highs and not so much at the low. And it was quite remarkable. And then the question is, you know, if that is the case, if you knew that you had [Gregor] Mendel's laws, which show the laws of inheritance, and so you had--and then you had perhaps a fitness that would change because the population would change. You know, you've got a lot of other animals, a lot of neighbor animals; it gets really crowded. Maybe you're the gene type that just does not do well in crowds. So maybe you don't reproduce quite as well. So if you look at what kind of fitness would you need--we presume it's dependent on the population size--what kind of population size do you need to produce cycling? And that's something. And that means that you're not evolving towards more fitness in a sort of straightforward way. What you're doing is you've got two incompatible situations that can exist simultaneously because they have divided up the time; otherwise, one would be wiped out totally. But by taking this compromise, you're there some of the time, you're not there some of time. By sharing the situation, you have coexistence. And that's not necessarily, you know, survival of the fittest [Charles Darwin]. Essentially, you know, you have, essentially, a type, a genetic type that is unfit, but that's still in the game; still in the game because the solution has been to partition up the time. So it's not there all the time. It's can't be there all the time. Story_ID: 24510 Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Now, has your work been utilized by biologists and-- Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: --or is it cited quite a bit? Speaker 2: --that's a good question. This particular work has not been cited as much as I would have liked. And partly, I guess, because some work that--the work that would be most likely cited, which is the one with the habitat size, has been taken over and used by others. It's been extended from a mathematical point of view to harder cases than the one that I first looked at. So that's part of what's happened. Part of what's happened is that there is no money in this, you know, really. It's really a hypothetical, still--even though it's applied work, it's still too hypothetical, I think, for somebody to pick up. In terms of the things that people--I mean the thing that really is (what's the word?). I have not had any killer app except one project where I'd only did a little bit of mathematics, and that is the computer graphics rendering project. That's the one that where I did that. It's been over for ten years, and I still get email--I mean, it's--I still get emails about that asking for the software that we developed, (eminence?). It's really kind of strange. And it was a--it's a project that, essentially, in a sound bite. Basically, you know, you look at that table. The reason we can see it is because there's light or the way the light is falling. I mean the light is falling on that table. And when it falls on the table, there's a--it reflects; it bounces off the table in various directions that are unique to the materials and to the paint, that's the point, that's used to color; the paint that used to color that thing. And what you can do is, you can use software that will simulate the process of the paint falling on that object, on any object for that matter. You simulate it because each surface as something called the bidirectional reflectance distribution of function. And by simulating that, you can, using computer graphics rendering, get an image; an image that's good enough so that you cannot tell the difference between a simulation of the objection and a photograph. And I had gotten a database. This is the time that there was a big, end-of-Cold War [1991] thing or something, and they released this database of materials, bidirectional reflectance distribution of function. And I got together with some very gifted people, and we rendered some things; developed methods for doing that, for rendering objects and directly, you know, using this function, never having seen the object. And some of those techniques are used because the people I work with, you know, they work in industrial light and magic, some of these, you know. So they, you know, they, other than the, I think that the main guy I work with is with (Revandy?) now. So they work in the industry and have used some of these techniques. But the measurements of the type that are done by NIST [National Institute of Standards and Technology] and that were in this database, are still not being--I don't know if they have really done very much now. But there's enormous amount of interest in doing it. And so, I get stuff from a lot of defense, but also, you know, commercial people. Speaker 1: What year did you come up with this? Speaker 2: This was from 1997 to 2000, and it's this and some other work that I did that would--is what led to the Arthur Fleming medal. Story_ID: 24511 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, tell us about the Arthur Fleming medal. Speaker 2: Well, actually, I think my boss put me in for that. That is a medal that is given out every year. Throughout the federal government they decide, they look and see the scientists that have made the most significant contributions in specific areas. And I think there's one for administration, and there's one, in particular, for science. So they look through all of the work done by various scientists throughout this time. And they give it to people kind of mid-career. So you need to have been in government something like fifteen years or less or ten years or less; something like that. And so, he put in--he put my name in, I think, probably on the strength of this rendering program. And I had done some things earlier as well. I'd been working on a lot of different projects using my mathematical--using probability theory and so on. And, as a result of his nomination, I was awarded the medal. Speaker 1: Okay. And you got the medal in--what year was that? Speaker 2: 2000, I think it was. Story_ID: 24512 Speaker 1: In 2000. Okay. All right. Now, you went out to teach in Utah. Was that before you got your Ph.D. or afterwards? Speaker 2: Yeah, 1977. I was there a year. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, just before your got your P--or right after? Speaker 2: Just before. Speaker 1: Okay. Just before. Okay. Because your advisor had moved out there, right, and so, you wanted to be-- Speaker 2: (Nods head.) Speaker 1: --close to your advisor. And so, how did you like Utah? Speaker 2: As I told you, Salt Lake City [Utah] turned out to be a very pleasant surprise. You know, at that point, I often wonder if I--if I should have stayed. I (couldn't?) go back, I suppose, but I wonder, because it was really--at that point in time, it was the right time to move there. It was, like I said, it was clearly going to become very important economically. And yet, at this point, it hadn't done it. It was like--it's like a rise--it's stock that you know is going to rise. You could tell. A lot of very gifted people were moving into the area. It was a fairly high quality of life already. They had about--they had a lot of cultural activities. It had very nice--and it had great restaurants. And it had this stupid look at policy, but you knew that was going to go away sooner or later. Had good culture, good--a nightlife, was very good; music, it was enough money, so very good musicians came--came through; there's an African-American community living down there in south of--because of the railroad, and it had an excellent Episcopal community. That's how I became an Episcopalian, is because of the cathedral; it was just great. Speaker 1: Okay. So, now, I'm (trapped?)--. Now, there was some connection made there that assisted you in terms of your appointment at Howard, right? I think you were telling me that someone who was there--. Speaker 2: At Utah? Speaker 1: Yeah. Told you about--or you met someone in Utah that--. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: No? Speaker 2: No. It was--what happened, is I was in Utah and I probably contacted Donaldson and told him I as interested in a position I was looking at. I think I probably had decided by then I would go back East rather than stay in Salt Lake [City, Utah], which, you know, I guess, you know, like I said, I could have easily done. It would have been pleasant enough, I guess. But like I said, there were--. Story_ID: 24513 Speaker 1: Now, Jim Donaldson was the dean of (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: Jim Donaldson was the chairman of the math department. Speaker 1: Chairman of the math--at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], okay. Okay. So you joined Howard in 1978? Speaker 2: Mm-hm. Speaker 1: Right. Okay. And so, well, tell us about that. You were there until 1993? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Considerable period. And you worked for other aspects of the federal government while you were there; National Institute of Health [NIH]. Speaker 2: And consulting, yeah. Speaker 1: Oh, yeah. National Bureau of Standards. Speaker 2: At National, NBS. And then I had a one-year position in NIHL. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Well, tell us about your time at Howard? Speaker 2: Well, I taught all sorts of courses; undergraduate and graduate. And I basically enjoyed it very much. The staff, my peers were intelligent and engaging, very friendly, very supportive. They were more--they were supportive of women. Lots of times there weren't--that wasn't always the case in math departments. I had several National Science Foundation grants while I was there. And I was able to do research, although it was challenging at first because I had ten hours of teaching, and that was really--oh, sometimes eleven hours, excuse me, of teaching. And so, it was very challenging, but I liked it. And then I did a sabbatical and--at National Bureau of Standards, and then I returned to Howard. And a couple of years after I returned, I had started while I was at sabbatical, getting interested in fractals. And coming back to Howard, I was--continued doing research in that area. Evidently, the work I started there must have gone over pretty well, because I was called in to the head of the National Bureau of Standards, and he basically offered me a job. And I said, at the time, I had just gotten a National Science Foundation grant, and I said, "You know, I really" or I was in the middle of it, and I said, "You know, I really don't want to do that, and I liked being in academia. And, you know, it was very secure." I think I had tenure by then. I wasn't really inclined to do that. And he said, "Well, if you ever change your mind, you know, we'd like to have you." And I did change my mind...