 Story_ID: 8053 Speaker 1: I am Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. And ma'am, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: My name is Sophia H. Hall, and it's spelled S-O-P-H-I-A and Hall, common spelling, H-A-L-L. Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: I was born on--you'd have that, July 10, 1943, here in Chicago. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your occupation? Speaker 2: My occupation is judge of the Circuit Court of Cook County, Illinois. Speaker 1: And you are the presiding judge, aren't you? Speaker 2: I am the presiding judge of the resource section of the Juvenile Justice and Child Protection Department of the Circuit Court and thus one of the presiding judges of our juvenile court. And I also hear cases in the Chancery Division of the Circuit Court. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, we'll get all of it (laughter). Okay, and what is today's date. Speaker 2: Today's date is May 15, 2003. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're in 1900 South Michigan in Chicago, Illinois. Speaker 1: All right, The HistoryMakers office here. Story_ID: 8054 Speaker 1: What is your favorite color? Speaker 2: My favorite color? Probably the color I have on, purple. Speaker 1: Okay, now, do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Favorite food, that's a good question. I love pasta. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Time of the year? I think I like spring. Speaker 1: All right, vacation destination? Speaker 2: I like to travel lots of places, no particular place, different places. Speaker 1: Okay, now, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: I don't think so, I don't think so. Story_ID: 8055 Speaker 1: Tell me about your family history. How far can you trace your family back? Speaker 2: To the greats, great-grandparents. And I have pictures of them. I didn't bring those. My great-grandfather on my father's [John Hall III] side, and, and then great-grandfather on my mother's [Beverly Hall] side; great-grandmother on my mother's side. I have pictures of all of them. Speaker 1: Okay, so we're talking about going back into the nineteenth century, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Yeah, well, can you give me a date for that, as to how far you can go back? Speaker 2: I haven't thought of dates, but certainly the 1800, in the late 1800s. As a matter of fact, I have a, a news article on my great-grandfather on my father's side when he passed away. I don't remember the date on it, but it must have been late 1800s. Speaker 1: Okay, are there any stories that passed down through the family about your ancestors and what they were doing, you know--where are they from? Speaker 2: Okay, actually, all of them are from originally, in Louisiana. My, on my mother's side, my grandfather [Clifford Doyle] on my mother's side was born in Louisiana, married my mother, my grandmother in Baton Rouge, decided he wanted to become a doctor. And so after he attended college in Louisiana, he came to Chicago [Illinois] in order to enter medical school. And they didn't recognize his college degree. They told him he would have to get a college degree at one of the school they recognized in Chicago because at that time, they didn't have a kind of a national accreditation sort of standard that they have now. Speaker 1: And where did he go to school in Louisiana? Speaker 2: I don't remember the college that he went to in, in Louisiana, don't have the name of it offhand. But he went to medical school here, a Chicago medical school. I don't remember the exact name of it, and he graduated and started practicing medicine here in Chicago, and of course, brought his wife and, to Chicago. And my mother actually was born in Baton Rouge, and then--that's because my grandmother [Sophia Doyle] went back to have the, have her there because her mother was still there. And, and then my mother has a brother and sister who were both born in Chicago. On my father's side, my great-grandfather sent my grandfather [John Hall II] off to medical school. He went to Yale Medical School, and enjoyed it, and then ended up settling in Boston [Massachusetts] where he practiced medicine; married my grandmother, who was Harriet C. Curtis. And she was very active politically in the '20's [1920s] and along the way she was appointed as the commissioner of outdoor advertising by then governor of Massachusetts, Christian Hurter, I think that was his name. Speaker 1: Now, that's remarkable. Speaker 2: And she was a suffragette too. Speaker 1: Yeah, because I was gonna say, women didn't get the right to vote until 1920 or something. Speaker 2: And that was in the--yeah, and you indicated you were a historian. It's fascinating. Women got the right to vote after they managed to push through, through a lot of effort, the Prohibition amendment. And then the politicians began to realize that women could be a force, and that's when women got the right to vote shortly after that. Speaker 1: Okay, and Prohibition was a big deal because a lot of men spent their time drinking--. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: --instead of bringing the money home. Speaker 2: Right, and the women really moved and they organized so well and were successful that, I think that turned it around for women. Speaker 1: Okay, were there any stories that come down through the family about what life was like in the nineteenth century or the early part of the century? Speaker 2: Not that I can think about. My grandfather's practice in, in Boston, you know, went well. So, my father, it was expected that he would become a doctor. And he went to the, I think he went to the University of Pennsylvania Medical School, and--. Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask you about your father and your mother, but I was asking about, I guess, how your family in a position to--not many black families got in a position to have a doctor in the family or go to school. How did they get in that position back in those days? Are there any stories about how they acquired the means to do these things or--? Speaker 2: I think that my, my--and I think that in the news article about my great grandfather on my father's side, indicates he had received some monies from a benefactor and had wisely invested them, and so he was able to afford to send his son to medical school. And, of course, that opened the doors for his career, and there was a, a--during that period of time, and I think a group of, of African Americans who were doing very well. I mean, and there always has been. I think part of the history indicates that a lot of African Americans had property and were doing well until it was decided that if you were black, you had to, you had to be a slave along with everybody else. And then, I think in Virginia, the government ended up taking property from African Americans, and thus, they had to be categorized as black. So there was, there was a wherewithal that existed among some African Americans. And so I guess the question was, whether you were there. I think--I, I would imagine Frederick Douglass might have been within that group, educated and--. Speaker 1: Well, he had been a slave--. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --at the--I mean he, his rise was more, based on his political activities and so forth--. Speaker 2: Yes, yes, but there was--. Speaker 1: --rather than, you know, I mean--. Speaker 2: There were a group of, of African Americans who were doing it, like my, my grandmother, my--on my father's side, Harriet Hall Curtis. The Curtises were doctors, and they founded Freedman's Hospital in Washington, D.C. I mean there's a lot of history around that. And her family were very much involved in that. As a matter of fact, my uncle and the husband of her sister, Dr. U. G. [Ulysses Grant] Dailey, founded a hospital here in Chicago. So, there were, were these groups who were in the professions, medical profession particularly. Speaker 1: But their success does the question of how they get in position to do it coming from--. Speaker 2: Well, the--. Speaker 1: --the United States, with the color line being drawn the way it is, and (unclear)--. Speaker 2: Yeah, but this was, yeah. Speaker 1: And in Louisiana, I mean I, when you think about Louisiana, there was so, there was kind of a different, you know, racial situation going on there with creoles and--. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and other people, you know, the French having been there, and having a different attitude than the English when they got there, and Americans and, you know--. Speaker 2: And a lot of the intermarrying. Speaker 1: Yeah, anomalies in Louisiana that are--. Speaker 2: Yeah, but--. Speaker 1: --where it's different. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So I just wondered, you know, what it--(unclear)? Speaker 2: And some of it has to do with looking like I look because most of, most of my relatives look like I look. Speaker 1: Sure. Speaker 2: So, and needless to say, I think when my grandfather, my father's father went to Yale, he didn't go there as a African American so much or, well, then it would be colored or Negro or whatever. He probably, probably passed when he was there. Speaker 1: Were your ancestors in Louisiana classified as colored or were they classified or creoles or something. Speaker 2: I don't know what the classification was. We haven't--that conversation had not existed in my family. Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause I know we--other people we've interviewed from Louisiana have a story where they have, they come out in Creole culture and they either speak a language when they were growing up, Creole and other things, but I don't know--okay. Speaker 2: No, no, not, not in my family. Speaker 1: That's why I'm asking 'cause it seemed that there was story there somewhere about how you got to, got in position and how people get in position to--. Speaker 2: Right, I think--and, and you're looking for the specific story. The sense I have in my family is that there was help. And there always is, you know, the benefactor. So my, my, you know, this is a good one. My, my father's--my grandfather's father on my mother's side in Louisiana, he was a barber. And he cut the hair of the legislatures in New Orleans. So he got to know a lot of different people, and I think that that kind of helped in that way. But in our family, we really haven't discussed that detail. And in any event, I think--I've, I've never been very good at that kind of detail. So what I usually do is write it down, and I do have some kinds of things I've written down to help refresh my recollection on that detail. Story_ID: 8056 Speaker 1: Could you tell us about your mother first? What was her full name and can you spell it for us? Speaker 2: Sure, Beverly Nelda Doyle, and that's the maiden name. She was born here in--well, as I said, in Baton Rouge [Louisiana], and brought back to Chicago [Illinois]. And she went to--I mean grew up in Chicago, did go to college at what is now Roosevelt University, graduated. Before she graduated, she met my father [John Hall III]. My father had come to, to Chicago to practice with his uncle, Dr. U. G. [Ulysses Grant] Dailey. And they met at a Cook County physicians association dinner. And so--. Speaker 1: About what year would this be? Speaker 2: When they met? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Oh, goodness. It was in the '30's [1930s]. They married in 1939. So, and she was--had just graduated from college at that time. Speaker 1: Okay, well, and so what was she like, you know? She, she became--did she become a doctor too? Speaker 2: No, no. My mother was--she had wanted to be a psychiatric social worker. That was her, kind of aspiration. And when she had, when she married my father, she took the kind of traditional role of the doctor's wife and much like her mother, who was a doctor's wife as such. And so, she did not work outside the home. But she was very active in a lot of organizations. There was a Jack and Jill [of America, Inc.] which a lot of us belonged to. And then the United Negro College Fund, the National Conference of Christians and Jews also, she was very active in, as well as a number of social clubs. The annual 'Ebony' Fashion Fair, she and others within that group, you know, doctors' wives, lawyers' wives, that sort, had, you know, would help to launch--do that. She was also a member of the--I think they had a women's auxiliary or something like that to the lyric opera. So she was very active socially within the City of Chicago. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, let's see, well, tell us about your father. What was his full name and date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Yeah, he was John V. Hall, the--I think that would make him the third. His father was the second, grandfather the first. And he was born in 1907 in Boston, and that's where he grew up and went to Williams College [Williamstown, Massachusetts]. And he went to medical school at the University of Pennsylvania; did an internship at Boston Hospital. These are the kinds of things I always go to my records for, and then after he did that, he came to Chicago, as I say, to practice with his uncle, Dr. U. G. Dailey. And Provident Hospital was my grandfather, Dr. Clifford Doyle was one of the doctors there at Provident. So my father practiced there, and they tell me he was very good at diagnosing. I think that the practice of medicine was not as much fun for him as perhaps administration. So he decided to get a master's in public health. And in 1939, after he married my mother, they went off and spent their honeymoon for a year in Ann Arbor [Michigan]. And I've heard all the stories about that. And he got his master's in public health, and they came back to Chicago and set up house at 62nd [Street] and what's now King Drive. And then he went to work for the Cook County Public Health Department and became director of the department and retired in 1979 after twenty-five years as director of the Cook County Public Health Department. Speaker 1: Well, what was he like? You know, what was he--? Speaker 2: My father? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: He was, he was a good administrator, very caring about health issues, the community. He--I think one of the things he had told me he had helped establish a well-baby clinic in, in--I just forget the community, one of the less well-off, the communities on the South Side, because public health issues at that time were dealing with the question that if you provide appropriate prenatal care for the mothers, the children would be more likely to survive so you reduce the infant death rates. And he was very good, he was very good at it. He was not touted as the first African American director of the Cook County Public Health Department because he looked like he was white. Speaker 1: Did, was the, well, the Cook County Health Department was aware that he was black, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, they probably did. But this obviously was not a reason for note. What he brought to the job was that he was a medical doctor, as well as having a master's in public health. And that wasn't the usual combination, but it was a sought after combination. So, and he enjoyed his work, and was very good at it. And I got a chance to speak to him and--you know, when you, when you're growing up, your father is your father, and you don't quite maybe have the same level of sorts of communication. But I got a chance to know more about that after I was practicing law, and when I was Deputy Clerk of the Cook County Board of Commissioners, which was his boss, so to speak, he'd come to the meetings. And then we'd go to have lunch, and it was, it was kind of nice having those sorts of conversations in that capacity. Story_ID: 8057 Speaker 1: This being an African American project, where we often ask about how we get where we are and people--. Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: And you had mentioned about maybe relatives were, could pass on--in certain situations, and are there any stories about that sort of thing in your family, about people passing in the--? Speaker 2: Well, some, some of my relatives on my mother's [Beverly Doyle Hall] side, my--some of my grandfather's [Clifford Doyle]--I mean he came from a large family, and some of them did just, as they say, go over. And there were stories about that, particularly, the discussion about how they had to give up their family in order to do that. So, you know, the long-distance phone call, you know, what's on and so forth, but not the visiting and so you, you lost--you lose part of your family that way. But, you know, these are traces. Speaker 1: How do people in your family feel about that? I mean, those that stayed on the black side of the family? I mean how do they feel about that? Speaker 2: Yeah, I think it's an understanding of the choice that you make because you're--I mean you can choose, and so you do choose. So I don't think there was a, you know--at least I did not feel within the family an expression of anger or any kind of, of feeling like that. We, we appreciated our family, and we supported the choices that they made. Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause I mean other people don't have to make that choice to be successful, you know, so I was wondering--? Speaker 2: Well, I think it depends upon what you want to do with your life and what you think, you perceive success to be. So it's hard to second-guess somebody else's decision like that. Speaker 1: Yeah, but as I say that other people don't have to--white people don't have to make a choice like that, you know, to be successful. And it's--. Speaker 2: Well, this is true. Speaker 1: And then black people of a certain color can't make that choice. So--. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: It's, it's--to be in a position to make that choice, I mean is, it should be--well, I don't know, it's maybe right at the edge of something, but (laughter)--. Speaker 2: Plus, it's--. Speaker 1: It's probably got to kind of tear at the person making the choice. Speaker 2: That's right, and that is right because I think you end up giving up family, but it--you give up family to do that, yes. Speaker 1: Okay, well, it's something that's been reflected upon--. Speaker 2: I'm sure. Speaker 1: --and written about for many, many years, about, you know, people speculating about what it's like, and I was wondering what your reflections on that might be, you know--? Speaker 2: On making the choice? Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, you've addressed that, I guess. Speaker 2: Yeah. You give up something. I think you give up--you give up some of who you are, and when you give up some of who you are, you cannot be all that you can be. So, but sometimes, the pressure of being black might be too much for some, some people. So, I don't know. Story_ID: 8058 Speaker 1: Tell me about your childhood and growing up. Can you give us an idea of what some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up are? Speaker 2: Yeah. Well, as I say, we grew up, I grew up at 63rd [Street] and, and what was then South Parkway [now Martin Luther King Drive, Chicago, Illinois]. And at that time, you could not move where you wanted to move to. And so there were a lot of--it was a economically integrated society. And when you talk about how that is a great way to be because people who have less get a chance to be around and be inspired by people who have more, and so I had friends from every walk of life. And, and my, my parents, sometimes had concern about some of the friends we had. So--in the neighborhood. But it was, it was really, it was really interesting. I, I was thinking about there were a couple of guys we used to, you know, play with, run in the gangways and so forth that my parents were very concerned about because they, they didn't think they were appropriate, largely because they would get into trouble. Let's put it that way. So they would be concerned that we would associate with them, but, of course, they were a lot of fun. So there was a little stress around that. I went to St. Edmund's Parochial School. Speaker 1: It's like right around the corner from you. Speaker 2: Right around the corner. And my parents were a part of the group that helped to purchase where St. Edmund's is now on 63rd and--. Speaker 1: And that used to be a Greek Orthodox church? Speaker 2: Yes, it did, right. So, so we were one of the, the first there. As a matter of fact, I entered parochial school, kindergarten there as the school opened. My brother was in first grade. And so it was a, it was a very variegated community with, you know, the people who had more and some of the people who had less. And I really enjoyed it, multi-colors, some darker, some lighter, and when you think now, that's more the way it should be. I didn't feel, growing up, a sense of, of ghetto segregation, which I realize looking back on it, was so. I didn't the feel the sense of limitation, but, you know, hearing afterwards, my parents talking about what the situation was there, I realized that, for them, there were those limitations. So I continued at the, at St. Edmund's and a wonderful education there, until I went to fifth grade. And that's what--when things opened up in Hyde Park. And that was, when Hyde Park opened up to the opportunity for African Americans to move there, a whole slew of doctors, lawyers and so forth moved there. My grandfather, who had a wonderful house at 4730 South Parkway, across from the Regal Theater, 'cause we used to go there during the--well, he owned that, and he owned that, actually continued to own it even though he bought 4901 S. Greenwood in Hyde Park, along with the other African American professionals who moved into the neighborhood. So moving into Hyde Park really involved, allowed for a change. And, and that's when I started to attend the University of Chicago Laboratory School. Speaker 1: Okay, cause, yeah, before they opened Hyde Park up, Cottage Grove [Avenue] was the dividing line, wasn't it? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: You couldn't move across Cottage. Speaker 2: You could not, but the moment that opened up, and I realized that probably that's exactly what happened. My grandfather bought 4901, and this must have been in 1954 or five [1955] or something like that. It was in the middle '50s [1950s], yeah, I was born '43 [1943]--or, or really early '50's [1950s], '51 [1951], '52 [1952], something like that. Then all of the people moved in, [John H. H.] Sengstacke on 49th and Green--no, not 49th, 48th and Greenwood and the other doctors and lawyers, all up and down Greenwood. I do remember many of them were all, all living up and down Greenwood, interestingly in these beautiful houses. Story_ID: 8059 Speaker 1: At that point, we're in the integrated Hyde Park community [Chicago, Illinois]. And, and I started at the University of Chicago Lab School. Speaker 2: Okay, so you went there for, from fifth grade on? Speaker 1: Yeah, fifth grade, and I graduated from them, from there in 1960. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And, well, that was an experience because there weren't too many African Americans there, and I guess I started the feeling of not belonging and trying to become a part of the group, but still feeling outside. And there were other, as I say, there were others, we were in the minority, the African Americans, but there were some in the school who were extremely popular. So I, you know, it was, it was, it was different. But the education was terrific. Speaker 2: Okay, now, did--you know, often, when people who are light or in a white situation, white people don't know who they are. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Don't know who they are. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: So it's, it can be real confusing for everybody (laughter). So--. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --they don't have any sense of--can you tell us about any of that kind of thing. Speaker 1: You know, I guess that might be a sense of my feeling of belonging, wanting to be part of the, the popular groups. And though I didn't necessarily at the time ascribe it to my being African American, it could be. I guess I, you, you sort of live in this world of, of, of perhaps uncertainty about your acceptance. So you keep, you know, reaching out. I enjoyed the education. I was very academic and connected to it. Story_ID: 8060 Speaker 1: Was there a lot of social life at the [University of Chicago] Lab School in the first place? Speaker 2: At the Lab School, there was some social life, and the, you know, the population, there were a lot of professors' kids and some others from around and about the city who traveled there. Fortunately, I was in the neighborhood. I could ride my bike there, but there weren't many African Americans there. One of our classmates, named Michelle Clark, became a newscaster. And then I think she was in a big plane crash at O'Hare [International Airport] that happened in 1975 or something like that. But she was one of the popular ones at the lab school when I was there. But I, I--there was social life there, but I was not that much a part of it. So most of the social life that I had was with the Jack and Jill [of America, Inc.]. Speaker 1: Now, what kind of a young person were you? Were you--what did you like to do and what motivated you? Speaker 2: I liked to study. I, I really enjoyed the academics. I already knew I wanted to be a lawyer when I was ten years old. So that was where I was directed, and that was my goal. I enjoyed music, played the piano. As a matter of fact, I learned to play the guitar when I was about twelve years old. So I spent a--I mean I liked to do that. I loved to read, and--. Speaker 1: Did you take like formal guitar lessons? Speaker 2: No, no, I taught myself. My brother was very good at it, and so I got the guitar, and he learned how to play it, and taught me. Speaker 1: What kind of music would you play on the guitar? Speaker 2: Oh, folk, folk music, ballads and so forth, doo-wops, the old '50s [1950s] doo-wops. Then I went off to college, and learned the others. Speaker 1: I remember the Miracles had like a guitar, you know, real prominent guitar. Speaker 2: Yeah, it was really--in those days, guitar playing was pretty easy cause they using the same four chords. So you learn those four chords, and you could probably go on for about a couple of hours singing the same song (laughter)--different songs, using the same four chords. So, but I--I loved, loved the music and, and, and reading and, and the school work, and, you know, the family. We'd vacation. I enjoyed the family and the vacations, and--. Speaker 1: Now, how many siblings do you have? Speaker 2: One, a brother. Speaker 1: Just the brother, okay. And he's older than you? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: So--. Speaker 1: What were your favorite books when you were--? Speaker 2: I liked to read biographies about different people's lives and what happened to him. I think I was kind of entranced about leadership. I just sort of had an image that I wanted to, to be somebody, do something, and I thought becoming a lawyer would be a way to do that. I liked to talk, arguing, discourse, so. Speaker 1: Did your family discuss politics or anything? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. We, yeah, lots of, yeah, lots of discussions. So we were pretty, pretty verbal, around the extended family table, you listened to the discussions about what's going on. So it was--I learned a lot. Speaker 1: Okay, is it--I know your family was involved in the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]. Were there big discussions around civil rights during that period? Speaker 2: You know, my, my--it was my grandfather [John Hall II] on my father's [John Hall III] side who was a member of, you know, the early boards of the NAACP, after it was formed in, I think 1917. Speaker 1: 1910, I--. Speaker 2: 1910 yeah, after the riots in Springfield [Illinois]. So, but because they were in Boston, they were not around the table. And I didn't understand how politically involved and active my grandmother [Harriet C. Hall] on my father's side was until later as I looked through some of the memorabilia. So most of the discussions were my grandfather and, and on my mother's side, the family on my mother's side here in Chicago. So, but there was good discussions. I don't seem to remember that they were particularly about politics, but definitely kind of issue oriented and what's going on. Speaker 1: Okay, now, as you read these biographies, did you have heroes or 'sheroes' that you--? Speaker 2: Not particularly, not particularly. And I enjoyed historical fiction too because it allowed you to find out about other places and other things in a historical context, and I'm--I was a history major. So I, I enjoyed the other kind of ways of life, reading about it. It was interesting, exciting. Speaker 1: Okay, can--who were some of the people you read about? Speaker 2: In terms of the biographies, I don't, I don't really remember. I don't really remember. Speaker 1: Now, did you come into contact with African American history at all when you were coming up? Speaker 2: That's a good question. I guess in a kind of a sense, I was sort of maybe living current African American history because a lot of the people who were in the social groups that my family were in were first this, first that, first the other. So I--and they, they were role models in themselves, lawyers and doctors and like that. So there was always a, a sense that I could be because I saw others around who were. So in a kind of sense, I guess, they were like my role models. Speaker 1: Okay, but did you come into contact with the--I don't know, like a movement, I guess, or even slight in those days, but there was a movement of African Americans around history and culture, and they, I think the Wabash Y [YMCA, Young Men's Christian Association] used to be a center for African American history and--. Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: Okay. And Dr. [Margaret] Burroughs and some of her activities. Speaker 2: Did not come into contact as I was growing up, right. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. So, well, of your teachers in school, were there any that really took a particular interest in you or that you, you know, really admired and, you know--? Speaker 2: At, during high school? Speaker 1: Yeah, during grade school and high school, you know, that really--? Speaker 2: No, no, no. I did not form a real bond or connection. And maybe one of the reasons is I had so much richness within my own family, and, and our social groups that, I didn't feel a need. And maybe they didn't feel that I needed, so I'm aware about how those connections can occur, but it's interesting you would say that. I did not feel that I connected with any particular teacher as being particularly inspirational. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Well, in high school when--did, well, you said it was like, you kind of felt kind of alienated in terms of social activity, but what, did you get involved in any clubs in high school and activities. Speaker 2: I enjoyed drama, and so I did get involved with the drama club and putting on little shows 'cause I think, I guess one of the things about wanting to be a lawyer, I liked to be in front of people and perform. So, so I did enjoy that. And it gave me an opportunity to, you know, be closer to some of the other students through those activities. So that was, that was bond building. I enjoyed that. Story_ID: 8061 Speaker 1: Were there any lawyers in the neighborhood that kind of inspired you in terms of the law or, or that you--I know you probably met a lot of them--. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: People around like Truman Gibson and other people--. Speaker 2: That was a part of the social group, Truman Gibson, Bob [William R.] Ming who later on in life, I practiced law with. But he was a part of the social group. I mean we grew up with all of them. So they, they were a part. Now, did I sort of use them as role models to inspire me to become a lawyer? No. And I think part of it was that I wanted--I was a female, so, the sense--. Speaker 1: Were there any women involved in law in those days that you could--? Speaker 2: I know that now. When I was in college, I did some research on that and got a chance to interview some of the African American lawyers, like Jewel Lafontant [MANkarious] and so forth, but during that period, before going to college, that was not, that was not a basis for my inspiration. My inspiration really was sort of internal, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, I'm not gonna ask you about television and radio (laughter), that might--. Speaker 2: And though interestingly, I do ascribe, as I look back at what caused me to want to become a lawyer, there's this piece of memory there about having watched television and seeing a, a female lawyer, probably in a role or otherwise. I remember seeing it. So somehow or other that's indelibly printed, and I don't--I can't remember--. Speaker 1: Who it was? Speaker 2: Who it was or what it was? Speaker 1: Katharine Hepburn maybe (laughter)? Speaker 2: No, I don't know. I don't think so. But that's a, that's a good guess. But anyway, I, I don't know. I just sort connected with that. And so, and I, and I remember, I must have been about ten or eleven years old. So, but it was very consistent. I was always a rather mouthy child anyway (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, I mean did you get in trouble for, for what you were saying or? Speaker 2: I remember on one report card the teacher observed that I talked too much (laughter). So--. Speaker 1: Did you talk in class a lot? Speaker 2: Yeah, I probably did, yeah. Story_ID: 8062 Speaker 1: You had a lot of friends in school? Speaker 2: I had a few, and generally tend to be a few close friends. I wasn't one of those gregarious types. Speaker 1: Okay, but the ones you had, you really had a intense--? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --talking relationship with? Speaker 2: (nods for yes) Um-hum. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, well, so when you were on the verge of graduation from high school, now, the University of Chicago Lab School is, anybody's been to the University of Chicago knows it's a very serious place compared to other high schools (laughter). Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And other colleges, I mean other universities. They're a very serious, you know, place. You go in and people are walking around, those days they used to go walking around with slide rules, and--. Speaker 2: Well, no, no. We had a lot of fun. It was, there, there was a house that they, which was a recreational area on the corner some place. And that's where you would go to dance and listen to the jukebox music and so forth. They, they tried to give us that kind of a fun life (laughs). Story_ID: 8063 Speaker 1: When you're on the verge of graduation, you knew you wanted to be a lawyer? Speaker 2: Oh, yes, right.. Speaker 1: And, okay, and you, you'd applied for school and knew where you were going? Speaker 2: I knew I wanted to major in history 'cause I'd already been reading history. So the question was, where to go, and I wasn't--I'm not a shopper. So I, I narrowed it down. Interestingly, the college counselor at the [University of Chicago] Lab School, I was telling her that I wanted to become a lawyer. And she said that that wasn't a thing I should do. It was the first time I heard anyone say that I should not pursue this, and I wanted to go to a large school. And she thought I should go to a small school. It was the first kind of anybody saying something negative around that. I didn't follow her advice at all. And I went to the University of Wisconsin at Madison for undergrad, and I picked that one because I knew one person who went, Judge Archibald Carey's daughter and also his pastor, had gone there, and we were friends of the family. She told me how wonderful it was there, and when I visited the campus, I decided that that would be fine 'cause it was not too far from home. And I, I liked it. And it was big. Story_ID: 8064 Speaker 1: I went off to [University of Wisconsin at] Madison to go to undergrad. Speaker 2: Okay, and how did you like the University of Wisconsin? Speaker 1: It worked fine. The education was good. There were some African Americans there, but it was so big we did not make a big imprint there. And I would have to say that I sort of floated among a lot of groups, some knew I was African American; some did not. So I just, I just was me there. I took my guitar, and that brought me friends 'cause I knew how to play, and I would lead the singalongs. Speaker 2: What--so you're singing folk songs? Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, I learned the folk songs and the, and the floor songs. I stayed in the dormitory the entire time on the, I think the tenth floor. I did not live off campus. I was on the so-called judicial committee that dealt with violators of the rules of the dorm. And so I got to know the people on the floor as they came and went. I made a few close friends, one, a woman I met there I'm still friends with. That's probably the only one I've kept up with over those years. It's interesting--I had friends, but I wasn't the center of the crowd. I was always one of the hangers-on, so to speak. But I think because I had certain talents I brought to the relationships like the guitar playing and the singing, and all of that, I was a good, good part of it. It was a lot of fun. It was a lot of fun. Speaker 2: And were you still involved in theater? Speaker 1: Not there, not at the, not at the university. Actually, I did not engage in a lot of extracurricular activities, other than with the guitar. I would, you know, form little singing groups with some of the people cause others were playing. So with the ones who were interested, we'd work together and try and develop some acts, so to speak, and go to the student union and sing. Speaker 2: And those were the days of the big folk--. Speaker 1: Yeah, folk was big. Speaker 2: --music revival and everybody, I mean folk songs were big then, and the television shows (unclear). Speaker 1: I remember going to see Peter, Paul and Mary at the, at one of the theaters there. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: No, it was a, it was a very interesting four years, but it was not, in those four years, it was not an affirmation of being African American. Speaker 2: Now, did you hang with the African American community, did you hang out with the--? Speaker 1: Some of the people I knew, but we did not hang together. I--. Speaker 2: Did you have the traditional fraternities and sororities on campus? Speaker 1: There were fraternities and sororities, but not African American ones. And I went to some of the, the parties, and Alsy [A. Leon] Higginbotham, who is, you know, very prominent in Chicago politics, we were just reminiscing a few months ago about the days at, at Wisconsin. He and Lou Holland was a football player there. And I knew the guys, and I went to a few of the parties, but I was not real integral with the groups. I sort of just floated among different groups. But, no, there was no African American sorority on the campus. And--. Speaker 2: That's interesting 'cause there were some at the University of Illinois [Urbana-Champaign], I think they had 'em down there, but--. Speaker 1: Yeah, but not in Wisconsin, not at Wisconsin. My mother [Beverly Doyle Hall] was a Delta [Sigma Theta], so--no, I didn't have that opportunity at Wisconsin. Speaker 2: So you never joined the, one of those clubs? Speaker 1: Never did. Story_ID: 8065 Speaker 1: Also, during that time period, I guess the fours that you were there, like '60 [1960] to '64 [1964]? Speaker 2: Yeah, it was before everything got kind of crazy with the movements. Speaker 1: Things were jumping off then, and a lot of the students--.. Speaker 2: Yeah, but--. Speaker 1: --I mean the sit-ins that were going on or the Freedom Rides and--. Speaker 2: Not at, I did not feel that or notice that between '60 [1960] and '64 [1964] on the University of Wisconsin [at Madison] campus. There could have been. It could have been going on someplace. Speaker 1: Things, Wisconsin is, correct me, if I'm wrong, at a certain point had a very liberal reputation--. Speaker 2: Very liberal. Speaker 1: And--. Speaker 2: And some of the activities occurred, like the blowing up of the physics lab or something after I left. And that--things started to heat up on the campuses in the late '60's [1960s]. Speaker 1: Yeah, during the Vietnam War--. Speaker 2: Right, but by that time, I was gone from Wisconsin, and I was at Northwestern [University] Law School [Chicago, Illinois], Northwestern downtown, which meant you didn't have that campus life. Speaker 1: Right, okay, but on the campuses in the North, there was, I mean especially the liberal crowd and on these campuses students were volunteering to go down South to do Freedom Rides and work with SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] and all that sort of thing. And you didn't have the--? Speaker 2: I was not part of that, no. Speaker 1: And you didn't know anybody that went? Speaker 2: And I didn't know anybody, no. Speaker 1: Okay, not everybody went, I know that, but it was jumping then, and they had, I think that big summer of '64 [1964], they--more students went down there than any other time in the history of the country. Speaker 2: Yeah, I can probably say that I was, I was pretty sheltered when I was reared, and when I went off to college, I was, I got in when I was about seventeen years. So I was fairly young. Speaker 1: Okay, so did you follow that activity in the media? Speaker 2: No, I followed Muhammad Ali, though, yeah. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Now, tell me about that (laughter). Speaker 2: He was great. He was, he was, he was so wonderful. You know, he was so, so self-confident, shall we say. And I just thought it was so fascinating the way he, he played the media, the interplay with Howard Cosell, I just found it really interesting to watch. You know, and at first, I thought he was pretty mouthy and arrogant, but then when he would deliver what he said he would do in these fights, I said, well, that's all right. Speaker 1: Did you think that Sonny Liston was gonna beat him up? Speaker 2: I had not really put any bets down (laughter) at all, but it was--. Speaker 1: The first fight he did a lot of talking. He was young, he didn't have much of a record. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And people all over, I mean--. Speaker 2: They didn't think he was gonna produce. And I think--I would probably say, I probably didn't think so either, cause, you know, we're all hearing the same thing and being moved by the same sentiment. Speaker 1: And some say there wouldn't have been as much interest in the fight at all had he not been so mouthy--. Speaker 2: Isn't he wonderful. Speaker 1: --because nobody would have paid attention to him cause he wasn't that old, and he hadn't done anything. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But the more he talked, it got built up into a big--. Speaker 2: Sure, sure, he was good media material. No, I, I followed him. Those were wonderful moments. Speaker 1: People were sure he would be beat up (laughter)--. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --but it didn't happen. Speaker 2: He produced, he produced. No, that was, that was, that was very interesting during that time. And, of course, oh, I guess the Beatles came along then. So all of this was--. Speaker 1: '64 [1964], that's your senior year, I guess. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, and Elvis [Presley] was still pretty good during that time too. Yeah, it was--. Speaker 1: That's the summer the three civil rights workers were killed in Mississippi and a lot of things happened that year. It was an election year--. Speaker 2: You know, and I didn't, and I didn't pick up on, on those things. The, the campus and the life there, I was not a part of that. Story_ID: 8066 Speaker 1: Now, in terms of your studies in history, what did you specialize in, in school [at University of Wisconsin at Madison]? Speaker 2: Well, when I went to college, they gave me a history professor as my counselor, and he was the Russian history professor. So I took three semesters of Russian history, which was good. And I really enjoyed it. Speaker 1: A survey courses in Russian? Speaker 2: Yeah, and then European history, survey course, European history--. Speaker 1: Did you do a medieval Eastern Europe, all that sort of thing? Speaker 2: Mostly, mostly European history. Speaker 1: Western Europe? Speaker 2: Yes, mostly Western Europe, right. And I enjoyed mathematics, I took physics, psychology, philosophy--. Speaker 1: Yeah, I noticed you had a bachelor of science with a major in history, which is--. Speaker 2: That's, that's the way you did it. Speaker 1: --which is odd. Speaker 2: One would think so, but that's the way they categorized it at that time. And it was while I was there, when I was looking for a filler, I did a course on occupations and professions, which allowed me to choose to research women in the law. So in 1963, I was looking to find out what women were in the law. And I found the National Association of Women Lawyers, and I read through their materials. And that was in, and then I came back to Chicago to interview women lawyers. So there was Jewel Lafontant [MANkarious], and, and then there were judges. Jewel was the only female lawyer. The others I interviewed were, were judges, like Edith Sampson and B. Fayne Tucker (ph.) and Marilyn Camosa (ph.). Now, these were all judges. So, so the image of female judges was right there. I couldn't find a lot of female lawyers to interview. Speaker 1: And judges? That's interesting. You raised an interesting point because a lot of black women who become lawyers become judges. I mean I don't know what the percentage is, but it's--. Speaker 2: Well, Jewel didn't. Speaker 1: There's quite a--it seems on the surface when you look at it, there's quite a few, you know. Speaker 2: Yes. But there, and there are a lot of women lawyers. So, so that was one of the courses I took while I was there. So I pretty well took liberal arts education. And it was political science too, so it was pretty varied I didn't, I did not do pre-law courses. I, I don't think they had anything that was called a pre-law curriculum. Speaker 1: Did you take any political science at all? Speaker 2: Yes, I did, yeah. So. Speaker 1: Okay, now, did you have--were there any professors at the University of Wisconsin, did you develop any close relationships with? Speaker 2: No, no, no particular inspiration from any of the faculty there. Speaker 1: Okay, any of the students--were there any of them particularly inspiring around, any? Speaker 2: Not that I was, that I got involved in. Story_ID: 8067 Speaker 1: When you graduated from, when you were on the verge of graduation from the University of Wisconsin [at Madison], you knew you were going to law--? Speaker 2: I knew I wanted to go to law school, so I applied at University of Wisconsin Law School, Northwestern [University School of Law, Chicago, Illinois], and the University of Chicago Law School. I figured I wanted to go to the University of Chicago first, Northwestern second and the University of Wisconsin third. I got accepted at Northwestern, and I hadn't heard from the University of Chicago, so I accepted at Northwestern. And so I came back to Chicago to go to law school and lived at home and commuted and went to Northwestern. And during the summers, I law clerked at McCoy, Ming and Black. And as I had indicated before, Bob [William R.] Ming was a friend of the family, and I was delighted when they accepted me to law clerk there. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, well, how did you law school at Northwestern? I mean--? Speaker 2: Law school was fine; first year, I'd say first semester, I didn't do very well. Second semester, I did astoundingly well, so I must have learned something about how to do it. And I enjoyed the time I was there. There weren't very many women there, and I was the only African American, and not everybody knew that. We started with about ten women, graduated four, the others left and one dropped out. The--I enjoyed the curriculum, and during the course of it, I did not really get close to a lot of the other students. One of the fellows lived in--in the neighborhood so we would commute down together, got to know him a bit. And, and the others--it seems that, in some respects, more remember me because I was one of the few women there out of that class, than I remember them. But as time has gone by and our careers have intersected again, I've gotten to know some of the students I went to school there with better. And I think my, at this point in life, my appreciation, at least in the past ten years, of attendance at Northwestern has improved because they've been a good career partner to me in what I've been doing. So, but it was, it was, it was a good four years, and I think that the--learning how to practice law was during the summers when I was at McCoy, Ming and Black. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, are there any stories from that experience, summer experience? Speaker 2: Still playing the guitar (laughter). Speaker 1: You were still playing the guitar there? Speaker 2: Yeah, we had a group there, where we-- Speaker 1: Really? Speaker 2: We entertained, sure. We called ourselves Res Ipsa Loquitors, so--Res Ipsa Loquitur. That's a-- Speaker 1: Res Ipsa Loquitur? Speaker 2: Yeah, that's a Latin term for some legal thing. So, we called ourselves that. Speaker 1: Can you spell that 'cause this is--somebody's gonna try to transcribe this? Speaker 2: Yeah, R-E-S, Ipsa, I-P-S-A, Loquitur, L-O-Q-U-I-T-U-R, I think. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, anyway--. Speaker 1: And you specialized in what kind of music? Speaker 2: Oh, we just did some folk songs for the--to entertain the other students. Speaker 1: Did you have a fav--any favorite songs? Speaker 2: No, no, no. No, this was just, you know, it was just a little fun, just wanted to carry that, that theme through. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: One of the courses I took that I really enjoyed was Law and Society. It gave me a perspective, I think in attitude about how law really follows society, rather than society following the law. Story_ID: 8068 Speaker 1: What were your favorite folk songs? Speaker 2: Favorite folk songs. Okay. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Well, I think I had said to you, I started playing the guitar when I was about twelve. And, and really during college, that was a wonderful way to get to know people and to sort of kind of get a chance to be the center attention because I sort of indicated that I wasn't really the center of any crowd. So I would lead the singalongs, and do the musical accompaniment. Sometimes, when I would go off with some of the friends to vacation, they would cook and I would play the guitar while they were cooking because they didn't want me to cook. But I really would spend--I, I, I created a pretty good repertoire, so I would entertain friends, you know, and relatives. And playing the guitar and singing was a real good way to be expressive and in terms of favorite music, I enjoyed the Peter, Paul and Mary things, and then things got even more complicated. So I loved the balance, and I kept up with the playing through college and certainly in the beginning of practicing law 'cause that would be--you know, it just seemed that people liked that sort of live entertainment. So--but--it's, not particular favorite song, but there's some things I still remember, you know, how to play. One of the one's was interesting. I had learned--I'd heard about it, it's one that Roberta Flack does, 'The First Time Ever I Saw Your Face', and I learned it in its kind of folk way of doing it. Speaker 1: It was like a Leonard Cohen song. Speaker 2: Yeah, and it's an old one. So I learned that early on, and then, of course, she made her version of it. But that was one of the ones I used to play a lot, and I can resurrect it when I sit down and pick it up. But it was a nice way to relax. I love music to relax to. Speaker 1: Okay, now, in those days, true folk music was, often accompanied [Civil Rights] Movement activity. Speaker 2: Yeah, no, my, my music was not (laughter) connected to movements (laughter). Speaker 1: I'm not saying you avoided--did people ever try to draw you into movements, to rallies and so forth to play and sing--'cause that (unclear)? Speaker 2: Well, yeah. I was not running around activist folk. Story_ID: 8069 Speaker 1: When I was in law school, things were just cooking [civil rights acitivity], and so I was out practicing law. My first year of practicing law, the Weathermen were running up and down Chicago [Illinois], and I remember I was in my law office on a Saturday, I think it was, when this thing occurred. It must have been in, you know, either in 1968, I forget when that happened. Speaker 2: '68 [1968] with the riots, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, so this was my first year practicing law. So I was not in the, the college communities where a lot of this stuff was going on because remember, when I went to law school, I was downtown. I wasn't on campus. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So I did not have friends who were, you know, involved in the movements to be drawn into them. Speaker 2: Yeah, the point of the Weathermen, that was a boiling over point. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: And it had already been hot for a while, you know. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: I mean '64 [1964] is when they all went to Mississippi, and all that college--student involvement there. Speaker 1: My, my involvement in those movements and what was going on didn't really start until after I started practicing law. Speaker 2: Okay, and, well, what happened to get you involved in civil rights activities--? Speaker 1: The law firm [McCoy, Ming and Black] I was with, yeah. Bob [William R.] Ming was a, was my mentor. And I had law clerked for him while I was in law school. And then they did offer me a job after I got out. And so he taught me how to practice law, and he was one of the lawyers who put together the 'Brown v. Board of Education' strategy, which led to that decision in 'Brown'; worked with Thurgood Marshall and all of those people. He had an extraordinary practice. Muhammad Ali was represented by Chauncey Eskridge in our firm. So I got a chance to meet him at the law firm. We represented a Elijah Muhammad. I remember going to one of the, one of his rallies at the Armory there at--it was really interesting, and that was on Cottage Grove. Speaker 2: Describe that for us. Speaker 1: Well, you went into the, it was there at, what is it? Fifty--. Speaker 2: 56th [Street] and Cottage [Grove Avenue], I guess or 57th [Street] and Cottage Grove? Speaker 1: Yeah, no, more like 54[th Street] or 53[rd Street]. In any event, it, the place was filled with everybody in white, you know. The women were up at, on the balcony. And it was just full, full of people. Speaker 2: Now, when you when in, they subject the men and women to--? Speaker 1: Well, I was, we were there in our professional capacity. So I, I was there. And I don't know why I was there, but I was accompanying the other lawyers. Speaker 2: They didn't separate you--they didn't make you go--?. Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: --all the way on the other side. Speaker 1: No, no, they did not. Speaker 2: Did they search you? Speaker 1: Not I, not that I remember. But I just, I remember being there, and thinking this is, this was something. But, and then while I was practicing, there were, you know, demonstrations. So I went to, to Rockford [Illinois] to represent some of the kids who were attending high school there, African American kids, who were picketing the school for the way they were treating African Americans--this is late '60s [1960s]. And they were arrested, so I ended up being sent by the law firm to try the case. I won my first case 'cause they couldn't identify my client. Then the second case, they did identify my client. As a matter of fact, I put my client on the stand, which was a bad strategic measure. I lost. The good news is that that case got me to the United States Supreme Court to argue the constitutionality of the ordinances that he was charged with violating. Speaker 2: What did they charge him with? Speaker 1: Picketing within, I think it was a hundred yards or whatever of the school and the other ordinance was disturbing the peace of the school situation. So are those--we attached the constitutionality of the ordinances and the cases ended up in the United States Supreme Court because the Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals found these same ordinances, which were Chicago ordinances which the city of Rockford had copied, they found those ordinances constitutional whereas the Illinois Supreme Court found them unconstitutional or visa versa. In any event, because of that geographic conflict, the Supreme Court took certiorari and we wrote the briefs. And then Bob [William R. Ming] called me into his office and said, "Do you want to argue it?" And I said, "Yes." So--and interestingly, the lawyer who was arguing for the defendants in the companion case, or the case we were consolidated with, was a lawyer I'd went to law--graduated from law school with. So it was a, it was a good opportunity. And at--during that time I was very involved with NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]. I was legal redress chair for the South Side Chicago branch. And then the president of the Peoria [Illinois] branch was arrested and charged. Bob Ming was supposed to try that case, and I went--I was going to Peoria helping, and preparing that. And, and then he was not able to try it, so I ended up going to Peoria and trying that case, and managed to win it too. My sense is that it almost didn't make any difference 'cause John Gwynn, who was president of the Peoria branch--winning the case was fine, but if he had lost the case as a president of the Peoria branch and had gone to jail, that would helped to further inspire the movement that was going on there with respect to getting equal treatment for African Americans in a variety of capacities. So, so it was really during the late '60s, when I was practicing law that I ended up getting more involved in the Civil Rights Movements, and it was just, it was great. Speaker 2: Okay, I just wanted to backtrack a little bit to that Elijah Muhammad meeting, with the Nation of Islam. Now, that's when Elijah Muhammad was alive, right? Speaker 1: Yes, and just beginning to build his, his power. And we represented him. I did not work on any of the particular cases, but I do--I mean we did represent him during that time. Speaker 2: And at that particular event, was Malcolm X present? Speaker 1: You know, I don't think so. Speaker 2: I just wondered, you know, with it being a big Savior's Day event and all, if he was, had been on the scene or Minister [Louis] Farrakhan--? Speaker 1: Yeah, no, this would have been before Minister Farrakhan. Speaker 2: Okay, all right. This was in like 1966 or--? Speaker 1: Yeah, it would have been six--it would have been '68 [1968] or '69 [1969] or '70 [1970], something like that. Speaker 2: Oh I see, and of course, that's after Malcolm X was dead. Speaker 1: (nods for yes) Um-hum. Speaker 2: Yeah, okay, now, '68 [1968], you know, Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] died. Did that--? Speaker 1: Oh, yes. Speaker 2: And what was the--I know that had to impact the law firm and everybody you knew in some profound way? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Can you remember what you were doing on that day? Speaker 1: No, I don't. I don't remember what I was doing on that day, but I do remember that after that, they were burning things up in the city, weren't they? So, and I do remember that. Speaker 2: Okay, what was the mood in the law office? Speaker 1: Well, we were all involved so, depression is certainly so, certainly so. Speaker 2: Okay, well, this case in Peoria, did--I guess, I was wondering, you know, how far behind Peoria was, I guess, other Northern cities in terms of civil rights. I mean downstate Illinois has often been compared to the South, and I don't know if--. Speaker 1: They had a very active NAACP, and as I said, John Gwynn was the president of it. And--of the branch there, and so, you know, there were demonstrations and so forth that would go on. And so we--what is it? I went to some of the NAACP's state conference meetings, and when the case came up for trial, I went out there to try it. We started picking a jury. And we had some in the box. The next day, we were to continue to pick the jury, and one of the women had advised the judge that someone had told her to get off that jury; otherwise, in essence threatened her. So even the prosecutor knew the case couldn't continue, and he asked for a mistrial. And, of course, I joined in that. So the case was put over. And then I had to go back out about a month or so later to start all over with that. But John and--John was an excellent leader. He became the president of the state conference of the NAACP here in Illinois. And, and they were wonderful because, needless to say I tried that case when I was, in about 1971, so I was pretty new out of, out of, out of law school. And they were very supportive. And I, I--it was an incredible experience. Speaker 2: Okay, now, were you--did you get active in those early days in Chicago politics? Speaker 1: Our law firm had represented some of the candidates who might be seeking to object to other candidates who were trying to get on the ballot. So we were--and we did get some, sometimes city business. So, so because of the nature of the practice and what we did, we got to know the politicians and so forth. One of our clients was Jim Taylor out of the 16th Ward and so I got to know him. And he knew Harold Washington--. Speaker 2: What was Jim Taylor like? Speaker 1: Oh, Jim, he was wonderful. And he became deputy mayor to, deputy mayor of the City of Chicago--. Speaker 2: To Jane Byrne. Speaker 1: Under Jane Byrne, yeah. And so I used to out to the 16th Ward where he was. You know, we provided some legal advice and worked with some of the, the people there. And I guess in a sort of a sense, that was my first introduction to ward politics. So, it was, it was interesting watching how, how he did that. Speaker 2: Okay, so he was a--he knew how to work the ward? Speaker 1: He did, he did. He was a, an excellent politician. Story_ID: 8070 Speaker 1: How long did you stay with that firm [McCoy, Ming and Black], and--? Speaker 2: Bob [William R.] Ming passed away in 1972 or three [1973]. And shortly thereafter, I took a position--I was still able to practice part time with the Clerk of the, Clerk of Cook County, then Stanley Kusper. And because of the expertise that I had developed in election law, I was his election advisor. And then I ended up being, you know, doing anything else that needed legal advice in the Cook County Clerk's office. I was also deputy clerk of the Cook County Board of Commissioners because the clerk of Cook County was the ex-officio clerk of the Cook County Board of Commissioners. So I did that for about three years, and in a sense got a chance to advise electoral boards who were hearing the cases that involved objections to nominating petitions of other, of other candidates for office. And I was there for about three years. Then I went back into the private practice of law. Now, I'm with the firm of Mitchell, Hall, Jones and Black, and spent another three years there, and then started to look at going on the bench. Story_ID: 8071 Speaker 1: I guess you were inspired by some black, some women judges in the beginning, I mean early on. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So--. Speaker 2: There were not that many--Edith Sampson was on the bench then. And I would appear in front of her when I was practicing law, and she would tell me to run for office and become a judge. So, and she was, she was quite a character. And I would appear in front of her. And there were other African American males who were on the bench, Kenneth Wilson, Glenn Johnson, quite a number, about--and when I say quite a number, I mean five or six or seven. And so as a matter of fact, two of the partners out of McCoy, Ming and Black had gone on the bench, Richard Gumble and Mark Jones. So we--and, of course, George Leighton, who was a circuit court judge and then on the Appellate Court and then finally to the federal district court. So, as a matter of fact, he, it--the firm used to be McCoy, Ming and Leighton before Judge Leighton went on the, went on the bench. And he went on--that was shortly before I started law clerking at McCoy, Ming and Black. So and, an interesting piece there was his, his wife had taught me in kindergarten at St. Edmund's [Parochial School, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Okay, and what about Strayhorn, was he a judge at that time, Earl Strayhorn? Speaker 2: Earl Strayhorn, I, could be, he could have been. I did not get over to the criminal court that much, but he could have been, as well as Gene [Eugene] Pincham. Speaker 1: Yeah--. Speaker 2: 'Cause when I came on the bench, and when I ultimately went over to the criminal division, they were very supportive. Story_ID: 8072 Speaker 1: Tell me about your election as judge. I mean how did you manage that? Speaker 2: Well, the interesting thing was, I had not really looked at becoming a judge. I had practiced in the district court, and one of the judges I appeared in front of frequently was--goodness, his name is escaping me right now--Joe [Joseph] Sam Perry. And at that time, they were planning to give more authority to magistrates, judges who the district court judges selected in the federal system. So he encouraged me to apply for that. And I said, why not? I've got nothing to lose. So I filled out all the applications. As it turned out, after they--and for the first time, they had evaluations by the various bar associations. So I went through the evaluations. I ended up being among the five finalists for the magistrate position and lost. But during that time, I started think, thinking seriously about whether I wanted to go on the bench, and if I did want to do that, I probably should try to do it sooner than later because the people I knew who might be helpful, might not be in a position to be helpful forever. So that's when I inquired about doing so, and went before the slating committee and was slated by the Democratic party to run in the city. So, and that, in those days was a, pretty much of--that you'd probably get in because generally, within the city, the Republicans really didn't put up any opposition during the primary. And it was about--I think it was after my, after--my father [John Hall III] was ill during that time. And after the primary results had come out, he passed away. Speaker 1: Okay, so he lived long enough to see you? Speaker 2: He lived long enough to--right. And he--. Speaker 1: --basically see you become judge because there's no, there's no opposition. Speaker 2: That's right. And he had encouraged me to do it. And he was right. Story_ID: 8073 Speaker 1: How is it to be a judge? Speaker 2: Well, if I was isolated before, I continue to be (laughter). You know, it was a good decision because I really enjoy, you know, trying to do the right thing. And I enjoyed, I enjoyed advocacy, but I really enjoyed having a chance to reach a decision because one of the few positions that you can be in life, when people are going to--well, when you get the last word. Let's put it that way. I started off in the municipal division, as a matter of fact, I was put in the same courtroom that Judge [Edith] Sampson had been in when I used to appear in front of her, so I considered that to be a good omen. And I was doing forcible entry and detainer work which she had for about ten months. Then I was assigned to hear personal injury cases, jury cases, and I did that for about another couple of years, and then I had the opportunity to go to the criminal division to hear felony cases over at 26th [Street] and California [Avenue, Chiacgo, Illinois]. And I was the first woman to go there. Speaker 1: So you were the first woman, period, to go to criminal court--? Speaker 2: Yeah. And I had had some thoughts about whether I wanted to do that, but I decided that I needed to do it because most people when they think about judges, think about criminal cases. And I really thought I needed to have that experience and it really was defining because being a criminal court judge puts you in that life and death situation. And the cases, trying the cases, sometimes they were bench trials, mostly bench trials, jury trials also. But the sentencing was yours. So, to the extent that--well, you had to figure out what you were gonna do. And there were some limitations, but generally, the decision was yours. Speaker 1: Now, can you tell us about some of the more interesting cases or stories that come out of that period of time? I know there had to be some--. Speaker 2: In the criminal division, I think the cases that I remembered are the automatic transfers of juveniles because generally, it was murder, and there were very young kids involved. They were gang cases. Sometimes the fact situations were very difficult to listen to. Those were difficult. The other cases that were very memorable, one I remember, was a woman who was accused of killing her infant after, after birth. When you look at those kinds of cases, you kind of feel that, that sometimes the people involved don't have as much freedom to choose as we would hope to. You feel that they have choices, but the circumstances are so, sometimes difficult for a lot of reasons. And then, of course, you're feeling, there, but for the grace of God, go I. So, drug cases, where you hope that if you give the defendant an opportunity to go to a drug rehabilitation program, it will take. And you feel that if--that you have the opportunity to give them the opportunity, and if they don't get that chance, they won't have the chance to take it. So you would give them that opportunity, but not often would it take, but I do remember one gentleman, I--he told me afterwards, he went to the drug rehabilitation program because his attorney told him it's either that or jail. (Laughter) So that was his motivation, but he said he really learned, and he had become a counselor after having gone through that. And, and that kind of makes you feel good because you made, you made the right choice and it, it took. So, you just don't know what's gonna happen. I would see my probationers about every three months to support what the probation department did. And it was nice to see some that made progress. And I felt that if the judge remained involved, you knew what was happening during their probation, it might help to motivate. And sometimes it. Of course, sometimes it didn't, but I felt it something that I could do more than just, just imposing a sentence and going on to the next case. Speaker 1: Is it difficult to find time to do that sort of thing as a judge? Speaker 2: No, no, you made time for it. And if it's what you wanted to do. After I left the criminal division, I kept up with my probation caseload for another year. And by that time, most everybody was off. But it was a good thing to do. I, I enjoyed that. Speaker 1: In the criminal--I mean as, I guess just to play the voice of the average person, you know, reading the paper, we wonder, and I wonder if judges have the same--if the wonder the same things when we see some of these criminal cases and some of the awful details, you know, are these people crazy or, you know, or what's the--I mean--that's a funny way to put it--. Speaker 2: I know what you're saying. Speaker 1: But sometimes you wonder if people who commit certain crimes are, are--are they insane or are they--people ask are they insane? Are they evil? Are they--is it circumstances that are compelling them or pushing them--? Speaker 2: Probably all of the above. Speaker 1: --that they can't, you know, pull themselves out of, I mean--? Speaker 2: I mean, and when you think about the amount of violence that people live with on a day-to-day basis, so that the idea of committing violence isn't so far away from their life. I think there is a, a kind of cycle. I mean you're in your home. If you're abused--and, and I would look through the, the sentencing reports and very often you'll find broken and--homes and abused children. So they' were used to seeing violence against themselves, against others. And sometimes a very violent crime can be happenstance. So in most cases when you think about it, most crime is fairly pedestrian. And you're not gonna read about that. It's just the very, you know, particularly violent one--but you don't have a whole lot of particularly violent ones. So, but the violence, in your communities, is part of some people's everyday lives. Story_ID: 8074 Speaker 1: Are there any specific stories you could tell us, 'cause they're always instruct us, whoever sees this tape in future, hopefully, this will be around for a hundred years-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and it will be some of sort of a record for what was going on in 2003, you know. Speaker 2: Yeah, well, one of the cases I talk about to, to people, particularly when I'm trying to talk about why it's important that judges have some discretion in sentencing because there always is the notion that a judge's discretion should be limited. And usually that's driven by people who think judges are too lenient. There was one case I had where, this kid lives in the projects. And the so-called gang leader tells the kid to watch the bottom of the stairs in one of these project buildings. And unknown to the kid who was doing the watching, the gang leader is upstairs killing another kid. And, of course, everybody gets arrested. And so this kid goes to trial on an accountability theory. He didn't commit the offense, but because he watched the door while the other kid was upstairs doing the killing and even know--even though this defendant was--didn't know that the killing was occurring upstairs, under the law he would have to be found guilty. And the jury did find him guilty. But all of his circumstances and why he did it, and what occurred all came out during the trial. And I usually, after a case is over, and the jury has rendered their verdict, I'll go into the jury room and I'll ask 'em, you know, how was the experience and, you know, did our staff treat you well. And, and I usually would, would say to them that I didn't want to talk about the case because it wasn't for me to second guess what they did, and always there's a possibility that there might be, a motion to have the verdict overturned. That's always a possibility. This jury was so distraught about this particular kid because they had to find him guilty because the law required it, but they really didn't, as they were expressing to me feel that he was so responsible. And they wanted to know what was going to happen to him. And because they were so distraught, I told them that I had to give him twenty years because there was a mandatory minimum sentence. And under day-to-day good time, he would have to serve at least ten of those years, and there was, there was nothing else that I could do. Well, obviously, that didn't make them feel much better, but it, it was a way for me to kind of explain to them what was going on, and they wanted to know what was going to happen. It's a situation where, you know, you wish that there had been some discretion to really make the punishment fit the offense. And in this instance, under the circumstances that had been presented, there were a lot of mitigating circumstances. But there was no room to--because of the restriction in the sentencing, for me to take that into account. I had to give him twenty years. Speaker 1: And how do you feel about reactionary legislation that's often put forward when some community figure is killed or some, there's some celebrated case. For instance, 1997 or '98 [1998], Arnold Mireles, who was a community organizer in South Chicago was killed by a couple of gang bangers around a housing issue, you know, that a landlord had. He supposedly hired--he promised to pay a couple gang bangers for bumping off Arnold Mireles, and they--he was killed by a couple of gang bangers. Apparently, they've been convicted. They're in jail now. But the city and some of the resident, you know, cooked up a new piece of legislation, you know, designed to protect people working on community policing. If I understand it, if you kill a person who's organizing in the neighborhood, then your penalty would be more severe than if you killed, say you or I (laughter). Speaker 2: I know. Speaker 1: Which is--it doesn't seem to make any sense to me, you know. But it, and this somehow is gonna deter people from killing community activists or something. But that's--and the public gets behind it. They go to Springfield [Illinois] on a bus. His neighborhood's upset. They want to see something done, you know. So they go and they pass this new Arnold Mireles law. But what does that really--do you have, you know, any--those kind of--? Speaker 2: That's, that's--I mentioned I had taken that law and society, and society uses the law to accomplish whatever it is they, they feel is important. For instance, residential burglary. When I was at 26th [Street] and California [Avenue, Circuit Court of Cook County, Chicago, Illinois], they passed a residential burglary act which said that if you were convicted you got a max--the minimum was two years in jail. Now, when you just think about it, yes, you feel upset if somebody's in your house burglarizing it. But usually those offenders sometimes are first-time, kid offenders. So here you have a first-time, kid offender, if he's found guilty of burglarizing a residence, he's gonna end up with two years. And that doesn't seem to make sense. So and that was at that time. I think they've changed it since then, and certainly since I left 26th and California, but I mean--that's, that's what the society does. Story_ID: 8075 Speaker 1: Does severity of punishment deter crime in your opinion? Speaker 2: I'm not aware of any statistics that demonstrate that because you have to think about--I mean when you think of it, most people don't think they're gonna get caught. And there you go. And then, for really violent crimes, sometimes it's such a crime of passion that they're not thinking about, well, what if I got caught and what would I get. So, it's not a rational process in doing that. So I'm not, I don't really think that severity will do. Now, you know, for white-collar crime, it might because those are ones where people are pretty rational about how they're gonna do it. So I don't know. Speaker 1: That leads to another question to and maybe (unclear) can answer to. You know, we're raised watching television, and we're watching 'Perry Mason' or 'The Defenders' or somebody deal with a case where a person, usually well-to-do white person or something, takes a lot of time to plan a perfect murder, you know, and are most of the cases that come--I mean, how--what percentage of the murder cases that come before you are well-planned, strategic murders and--? Speaker 2: Not many at all. The ones I had when I was there, there were not that many that were like that at all. Usually, it's a crime of the moment or, or--and then somebody died. Then that became the murder case. Speaker 1: I mean like murders committed within the process of some other crime or something, maybe--? Speaker 2: Sometimes that happened. And when I was at 26th Street [Circuit Court of Cook County, Chicago, Illinois], I didn't have that many murders. I mean, you know, the, the bread and butter was the, the thefts, the burglaries, the drug cases, assaults and things like that. So the murder cases were the exception, not the rule. Speaker 1: And since the early '90s [1990s], there's been--and black leadership, I know Jesse Jackson and others have criticized the criminal justice system for the severe penalties for drug possession and drug use, you know, certain kinds of drugs that seem to be the ones that are prevalent in the black communities. Speaker 2: Yeah, the crack cocaine distinction. But that's a--I haven't been in the criminal system since 1986 when I went to the Chancery division, and so--. Speaker 1: That's before crack came to Chicago actually, so it wasn't really here then. Speaker 2: (Laughter) You might know better than I do (laughter). Speaker 1: I do, I do, but I, and I'm--I do know it was in [Washington] D.C. Speaker 2: But I know that in the federal sentencing guidelines, that distinction was made, which seemed to be that crack got a heavier sentence than cocaine and many people, you know, discussing the literature, certainly believed that that was unfair because it seemed to, it seemed to suggest a racial differentiation in terms of who was using what. Speaker 1: I guess usually middle-class drug users don't use crack, right? Speaker 2: Well, that's what I read in the literature (laughter). Story_ID: 8076 Speaker 1: Do you have any thoughts on why there's so, there's such a record number of young, black males in jail today as to--I mean the stats keep going up. It's a higher percentage every year, and prisons are being built in farming--what used to be farming communities and the new occupation in town is prison guard in the prison? Speaker 2: I know when I was in the criminal division [of the Circuit Court of Cook County], it just seemed like there were a lot more African American males who were appearing before me. And I don't know if it was a geographic thing. I'm trying to remember if they were trying any more cases out in the, the districts then. I don't think they were. It just seemed like more were coming into the system. And I don't know, you can--there's a lot of literature about it. But I think they're--I think there's more of an opportunity for African Americans to get arrested and end up in the system, and go deeper into the system than, than others. I think in my reading and my experience that if that certainly is true. Now, why it's true is another question. Speaker 1: Do you have any thoughts about as to why? Speaker 2: You could think of racism. You have more police in perhaps the so-called high crime and it--that may turn out to be African American communities. Drugs, certainly economic motivations to be in the business. If the drug dealing is in the African American community, it's on the street, whereas in the more well-to-do community, it's in the houses. So I mean, you know, education, educational opportunities. I think you can run down a list of things and feel that that's so anecdotally. Trying to get the statistics on it is another, another question all together. But I know that research has been done, and I've seen some of it that sets up a more statistical explanation as to why. Story_ID: 8077 Speaker 1: Do you have a philosophy, a sort of philosophy as a judge that you can share with us? Speaker 2: Well, I guess after--I've been on the bench about twenty years. I've been in the criminal division. I'm in the chancery division [of the Circuit Court of Cook County] now. I was before. So I've spent about seven years in that division that hears a lot of business cases as well as family cases in the kind of a sense, not divorce or that, but breaches of trust agreements and things like that. I was presiding judge of juvenile delinquency, child protection. Right now, I think what I'm doing--does express the, my philosophy. I'm the presiding judge of the resource section of the juvenile court. And that gives me an opportunity to bring groups together to talk about how they can come together to help youth. And when, when rules of the community are violated, be they criminal laws or other types of rules, the uniform discipline code for schools or even the courtesies of neighbor to neighbor, you can try to resolve that in the adversarial way that we have been using, where you have winners and losers. And I think our society looks at that as being the solution. You win, you lose, you're punished, blame, either or, but to really resolve a dispute, to really resolve it and try to bring things to some kind of a peaceful conclusion, is not gonna happen through that adversarial you win, you lose. There has to be a way to figure out how to create everybody as a winner. And the way to do that is to think of yourself within a larger community. It's just not you and your neighbor. It's just not the kid who burglarized the person's house. It's everybody in that community who needs to take responsibility and be involved. And it's through that, thinking about the community needs rather than a particular individual's need to, to--not to exclude it. I mean you need acknowledgement. You need individual recompense or restitution or something like that, but it has to be done in the context where the whole community is involved. And if everybody takes responsibility rather than trying to shunt responsibility off of others, then the way to resolve that situation, that specific situation, increases. There is a way to resolve, and also in the process of that, you can avoid something like that happening again. But you, you have to think in a broader sense than just what happened to a particular individual. So I keep--so part of this is a philosophy of restorative justice which is a term that's used. But more and more, the legal system is looking at ways to settle things and mediate things. And, and I think it's because people know the limitations on a resolution of a dispute by reaching a point where one person walks away, the so-called winner, and the other person walks away as the so-called loser. Speaker 1: Okay. Not to reduce your comments to just, to this, but have you--would you consider yourself an advocate of community policing in the broader sense, not in the, necessarily in the way the city uses it right now or any other specific locale. But are you familiar with the philosophy on that? Speaker 2: Yes, and I've been working in some of the things I do with the community policing part of the police department in restorative justice. And, you know, if it's done correct, of course because I really feel, the police are a part of the community. And though they're perceived as being in a sense, you know, the punishing part of the community, if they were able to be perceived also as a helping part of the community, then everybody's job would be easier. And certainly their job--which their mission is protecting the community. But that doesn't mean that those--the rest of us who are in the community don't have some responsibilities for helping to protect the community. So in a sense, it's all of our jobs to help the protect the community, as it is all of our jobs to help kids to be able to grow up in a community safely. See, you, you can't, you can't sit there and point fingers. And we're such a finger-pointing society. Speaker 1: Yeah, and some of the advocates of problem solving in neighborhoods like B. P. Brown in the early days. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And Robert Trojanowicz at University of Michigan, talk about the community actually doing things in the community to prevent, you know, conflicts, potential conflicts from arising and to, you know, and now there's a lot of discussion, I know, in the city, Chicago Alliance, and they would say--and other groups would discuss it, Restorative Justice, and getting, you know, to prevent--well, they're trying to prevent recidivism of ex-offenders and that sort of thing, I mean--. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and get 'em jobs. And they were--it got so bad at one point, the guys couldn't get a ID when they got out of jail, so they had to like, you know, get, move, get that ball rolling, so you know--. Speaker 2: Yeah. Well, it's really tough at that end. And I think one of the reasons why it seems to work, Restorative Justice, with youth, is that there's a feeling that it might be more productive at that point; easier, perhaps to see how it might work. It's a little harder at the other end, so. Speaker 1: And there's so many people coming back to the community that have spent years and years in jail--. Speaker 2: Oh, well--. Speaker 1: --You know, and the--. Speaker 2: I, I did, in the, you know, in the course of wanderings, had come, had got to know someone who was involved in the prison ministries and the effort to try to address, you know, what was needed when the, the people came back. And it was not--the first need was not the job. The first need was really kind of learning how to live on the outside, the support that was needed to just be able to reintegrate yourself into how to live on the outside. And, and that was new to me cause the first thing you think of is a job, but you can't hold that down unless the rest happens too. Story_ID: 8078 Speaker 1: Can you just summarize your career, I guess, you know, and then I have a couple of philosophical questions for you. Speaker 2: Yeah, I think part of what I have done in my career in addition to being on the bench and doing that, has been involvement in the professional organizations. When I became a judge, there were not that many women on the bench, and not too long before--well, about the year before--I was elected in 1980, they had started a National Association of Women Judges, which I joined in 1983 and became president of in 1990. During that period, one of our big moves was to deal with gender bias in the, in our legal system in terms of how decisions were being rendered and also more women on the bench. So here we are ten more years later trying to implement. We have more women on the bench than ever before, and there's a greater sensitivity with respect to how decisions are rendered, and even the law has changed to respect the roles that say, wives play in a marriage when the husband is the only one who's working outside the home. So the languaging of it and all of that has changed over these twenty years that I've been involved. I've been very active locally with the Illinois Judges Association. I was president of that in 1992. Now, during--about the time, I was on the juvenile court bench, and then I've been involved with the American Bar Association all along. And I'm gonna be chair of their National Conference of State Trial Judges of the juvenile division. The tremendous opportunity that I have this year to be chair of that serendipitously comes with the fact that in, on May 17, 2004, 'Brown v. Board of Education' will be fifty years old. My interest and involvement with civil rights during the time I was practicing law, concern while I was on the bench is really gonna give a tremendous opportunity to work with a lot of other people to get the conversation going around equal protection of the laws for citizens in the, in the United States. And it's not just African Americans. It's other groups. It's the whole idea that we are a multicultural society. Back in 1990 at a futures conference, we were projecting forward, thinking about what our world was gonna be like, going into this century and realizing where we can more, different ethnic groups and recognizing that soon the Caucasian group is not gonna be in the majority. It's in the minority. And we have to really embrace these differences in our society, and we're still working at it. And then the other concern that also arises out of 'Brown' is not just the treatment of other, other groups, but also the vibrancy of the third branch of government because to the extent that there isn't an understanding of what the court system does, then there are limitations placed on our ability to do what we need to do in order to have the balance we have in this country between the legislative, the executive and the judicial branch. And in a kind of a sense, the plate was set for that when 'Marbury v. Madison' was decided, and the Supreme Court then stated that they could and did have the responsibility to determine whether legislation violated the United States Constitution. So it, it's a, it's a delicate balance, and it's something that I think because it's not talked about enough, people don't understand. And, and I think it's important for judges to be an important part of and leaders of those conversations with the citizens on the street so that they understand and then appreciate our system of government. Because since our, since we have this system of law, we can resolve some very difficult disputes without people going to the street and having violence. When you look at Iraq now, that's what they need. They need a really stable system of law to help support the changes that are going on there. And I was just reading recently that the judges are getting back in business there, so to speak. Story_ID: 8079 Speaker 1: How do you feel about the proliferation of judge television shows? Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: You have 'Judge Mathis', 'Judge Judy', Judge--oh, there's so many of 'em. Speaker 2: It's entertainment. Speaker 1: There are two black women judges on the air, maybe three. Speaker 2: Yeah, it's entertainment, in the genre of reality TV, I mean, yeah. I don't think it gives a good idea of what judges do. And the only concern I have is that people expect judges to talk so much because the real hallmark of being a good judge is to be able to be an excellent listener. And you can't listen if you're talking, and I--you can't be judgmental about people because you really have to respect the people who stand before you, and I've, I've never felt at liberty to demean or belittle or otherwise say bad things about the people who appear before me because at that point, I don't think they're gonna listen to what I say in trying to be fair and impartial and, and rule on the dispute that's presented. So I don't know. It's entertainment so if people enjoy it, I--just so long as they don't think that that's real life. Story_ID: 8080 Speaker 1: You said earlier--I think just a moment ago that America is changing, there'll be, I guess, more minorities in the United States--the minority groups will outnumber the Caucasians in the United States at some point. Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: But the dilemma remains that Caucasians control most of the resources. Speaker 2: That's it. Speaker 1: So what, how do--do you have any thoughts about that? I know black people have taken cases to court in the form of reparations lawsuits. I mean they're--they've been--one's been playing for a long time. You know, there's a--well, do you have any thoughts about the reparations movement? It's largely a legal struggle, I guess. Speaker 2: I think it's a good conversation. I have no thoughts about it as legally appropriate. But I think it's another way to talk about what's happened to African Americans in this country. And I do believe that--well, just to use it, Jim Crow, has meant that opportunities that have been there for others have not been there for us. Story_ID: 8081 Speaker 1: We were talking about reparations. Did you have any final thoughts about the reparations movement because a lot of it is based on legal precedent, international law, what others have been able to get as [compensation]--or redress, legal redress for, for crimes committed against them. And--. Speaker 2: Well, I, I guess I think of it in, in practical terms. In practical terms, it might be very hard to strike a figure that would even seem to be fair across the board. But I think that it's an opportunity to talk about the responsibility for the entire--of the entire society for what's occurred. I've often felt that, that we will have achieved a kind of an equality in this country, as between African Americans and Caucasians when the percentage of poor African Americans equals the percentage of poor Caucasians because at that point there will be equal opportunity to poverty in a kind of a sense. The--I think, I've always felt that education really was a key, and it's a key to opportunity. And that's why I thought it was, it's interesting in those cases that led up to 'Brown v. Board of Education' that the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] focused on education, but they not only focused on the, what happened in the courtroom--I mean in the classroom, but the relationship building because after everybody leaves that college, if the relationships are there, then those relationships also provide opportunities. And often it's who you know that you go to. Speaker 1: That's certainly the case in Chicago. Speaker 2: Yeah, and you can't measure, you can't, you can't, you can't measure that so easily. Story_ID: 8082 Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community? Speaker 2: I'm really--I, I look at the children. And I guess it's a sense that the children are connected to a future and that they're able to see a future. In so many of the communities where there is not much and there is much violence, you have kids who don't feel connected to the future. They don't see themselves as leaders or want to be leaders. I, at the same time, see some of the children in some of these communities, and I've worked with this peer jury, Restorative Justice, who have incredible potential to be leaders, to--who care. And then I worry that once they get out there, if they don't have the right kind of support, they might give up. And the other thing is that for us to succeed, we really have to fight maybe harder. The breaks aren't easily there. And in a kind of a sense, I feel that and understand that more because the breaks have been there for me. I know how fortunate I was in having the opportunities I had and the support I had and the environment I was reared in. And I've realized--I didn't realize then, that that was pretty, perhaps unusual. So I really admire the, the ones who are able to overcome and to be able to succeed. So those are the concerns I have, that there be inspiration, that there be support and that there be opportunity. Story_ID: 8083 Speaker 1: What would you consider as your legacy at this point? Speaker 2: At this point. Well, I've been around for twenty years so, so I've had the opportunity to be the first this, that and the other. And I think that I have acquitted myself well, and I have been told I've been a role model for some. And that certainly brings you sureties (unclear). One person was saying that they remember seeing me in this news, news article, when they were talking about the first women on the bench--I mean there were quite a few at that point, so they did a little article in the ['Chicago] Tribune'. So someone told me that they still had that, and that had inspired them going forward. Another incident was when I was being interviewed for the State Justice Institute for work, which was a [Bill] Clinton appointment and a [U.S.] Senate confirmation, one of the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] agents who interviewed me said that she had come to my court when I was over at criminal court. And that was when she was in high school and had remembered it so that serendipitously when this file came across her desk that they needed another person for the interview, she recognized my name and was interested in coming for this interview. So I hope that I have been somewhat of a role model for others. And then I think that as, as you have found out, and as I hear myself saying, so much being on the outside of so many groups, I mean hardly the middle of any, I real--I really have a, a kind of feeling for, for bringing people together. And I'm so invested in being any one thing that I can't hear and feel sympathy for people who are other things. So I've really tried to develop, in this effort as presiding judge of the resource section the ability to try to bring people together to talk over differences. And I think in a kind of sense, maybe I can do that because I tend to have a kind of demeanor that's, as you had expressed, not passive, but probably with a lot of ups and downs. I, I can exercise restraint and patience, and that becomes really important in dealing with people who might go off. And I think that, that helps to bring calm to a diverse group, and that's, that's what I try to do. Story_ID: 8084 Speaker 1: How do you feel about the attack on affirmative action? Recently, the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] sent a, you know, descended on Washington, D.C. and a lot of young people made impassioned, you know, speeches about affirmative action, and they weren't all black either, so. Speaker 2: Yeah, for or against? What do you mean? For--? Speaker 1: For affirmative action. Speaker 2: Yeah, I think it's interesting, and I didn't realize this, but in the briefs that were filed in support of the decision of University of Michigan [at Ann Arbor] to use race as a part of the criteria were a lot of briefs that were written by corporations because the corporations realize that they have to have workers, let alone leaders within their corporation, who can live in a diverse society. And how in the world are you gonna learn this if you come from an insulated upbringing, and you go to college and you face the same insulation. You don't get a chance to meet, talk to anybody who's different, to have a one-on-one personal relationship with someone who's different and trying to figure in your own self, how you can relate to someone who's different. One of the things I do is cultural diversity training. I got into this because I was a part of a task force that was looking at the question of how do you reduce the number of African Americans in our juvenile detention center. So, two and a half millions dollars was put into this project by a foundation and we sat and talked. We--there were some changes made. But trying to get to the issue of, well, was racism a part of it? Well, needless to say, the institution said no. So I was chair of the committee that's trying to address this. We couldn't get the statistics, so one way to at least, to make--to address it, was to say, well, why don't we just talk about developing cultural diversity training so that the people who are, who are making these decisions at least they have an opportunity to discuss how they relate to people who are different and to, more fundamentally, recognize whether they have any stereotypes which they're acting on, and perhaps, innocently, don't realize they're acting on those stereotypes. So I went through the training, and we, we had five classes, about fifteen each, training, sixty representatives of the Chicago Police Department, the detention center, judges, state's attorneys, public defenders. And now, I do that for judges because in order to be able to do what judges do, we have to--our whole job is to relate to people who are different than us in a, in our court community. And we have to render judgments. Hopefully, the people will think that we've treated them fairly. So we have to be able to recognize how to manage our relationship and how to gain the trust of someone who's different from us. And some of that can be taught if, as we grow up or as we go to school, we have the opportunity to form those relationships or try to form those relationships. So that's, I guess, what I feel about affirmative action. Story_ID: 8085 Speaker 1: Is there anything that you reflect back on that you would do differently than you've done already? Speaker 2: I think what I said was I'm very fortunate that I wanted to be a lawyer. I had the support of family. I had the ability to do so. I had the opportunities to, to learn from incredible people. I had a chance to go on the bench, to being in the right place at the right time and to be able to take advantage of those opportunities. I've been very fortunate so, nothing I can think of that I would have done differently. Story_ID: 8086 Speaker 1: How would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: You know, I don't think I have finished yet. I have a feeling the next ten years are gonna be some very interesting years. So I have not reached the end yet. At this point, if, you know, I was to end it right now, I would think that it would be that I did the best I could at everything I tried, and I did it passionately and caringly and as intelligently as I could, and as, trying to be the best I could be...