 Story_ID: 643611 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Ma'am, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Shirlee Ann Morris Taylor Haizlip [HistoryMaker Shirlee Haizlip], H-A-I-Z-L-I-P. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: September 3, 1937, in Stratford, Connecticut. Speaker 1: Okay. You can look at me actually. That's what, that's what, yeah, that's probably better. Okay. And what is your occupation and title? Speaker 2: Now I'm retired, but I'm--author. I haven't retired from writing, so I call, I am an author, so we publish books and many articles and essays and opinion letters and things like that. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today is November 16, 2013. Speaker 1: And where are we at the current time? Speaker 2: We are in Los Angeles [California], and we are in a historic building where I live called the Trianon [Le Trianon]. And if you were, you were in France you would say (pronunciation) the Trianon. And it was built by Douglas Fairbanks [Douglas Fairbanks, Jr.], and we are in the apartment that's called the penthouse apartment of the Trianon. Speaker 1: Right and it's a lovely place-- Speaker 2: Thank you (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) I might add. Story_ID: 643612 Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions that we always ask that only require a short answer. First one is do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Yes, my favorite food is chitterlings. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Yeah, pale pink. Speaker 1: Favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: October in Connecticut. Speaker 1: Okay. A favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: St. Thomas [U.S. Virgin Islands]. Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: (Pause) My goodness. Story_ID: 643613 Speaker 1: Now I'm going to ask about your family history. I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Julian Taylor, Sr.] side, but we'll start with your mother's side. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: My mother's full name was Margaret Rose Morris Taylor [Margaret Morris Taylor]. Speaker 1: And can you spell that for us? Speaker 2: M-A-R-G-A-R-E-T, R-O-S-E, M-O-R-R-I-S, T-A-Y-L-O-R. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: She was born in Washington, D.C. on May 12th in 19, 19, 19, Lord, what is it? I wrote it down. Nineteen twelve [1912]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family? How far back can you trace them and what were they doing historically? Speaker 2: I can happily trace them back to the 15th century. And they were Irish and Scotch and English. And they, and migrated to America and they were very successful and landed in Virginia and one was a judge, his name was Halyburton [James Dandridge Halyburton]. And he was a famous judge because he swore in Jefferson Davis, president of the Confederacy. And that would have been a great-great-great-great-grandfather of mine. And the rest of the family lived in Washington [D.C.], which is where my mother was born and grew up. And the family separated when my mother was a little girl, the family broke up. And there--that led me to a search later on in my life. Speaker 1: Okay. Now there's a, now this is--what you described was the white side of your family. But is there a history of the black side that you--of course, they come together (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, by that time they were black and white when my mother was born and on my mother's side. The, they started out as being Irish, Scotch and English, and some of those people, quite a few, married black people. So when my other was born, she knew that she was born a black person and she lived as a black person, as did the rest of her family until they made a decision not to do that. Speaker 1: Okay. And just a moment about race I guess in this coun- country. You're of a certain race because of law, right? Speaker 2: That's right, right. Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: And practice, you know, 'cause sometimes people can say they're one thing, but the law calls them another. And if there are certain mores avail- that are operating in that particular area where they live, they can live according to what they believe and not what the law says about them. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. I just thought we'd raise that in case somebody's watching this that is more naive about it than (laughter), than we are. Well, all right, so, well, so your mother was born in D.C., but she was, she was sort of--she was given up for adoption I guess at age four. Speaker 2: At age four, yes. Her mother [Rosalind Scott Morris] died and that was a desta- she was from a family of seven or eight people. And the destabilizing factor in the family was that her mother died very young, when my mother was four years old. And her father [William Morris, Sr.] was not able to get jobs because he was an alcoholic. And, so the eighteen year old, the oldest child was an eighteen year old brother [Sumner Morris] of my mother's. And he took all of the children that he could take with him and they left. And my mother was left with a next door neighbor. And then she found, she had another cousin there who came and took care of her. So she was taken care of by three caregivers until she was eighteen and left home and married my father. Speaker 1: Okay. But the whereabouts are the rest of her family? Speaker 2: She didn't know where they left-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --where they went. Speaker 1: And this is a mystery that's been in your family for a long time until (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) For a long time. Speaker 1: --'til you solved it later on. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: (Unclear) a book ['The Sweeter the Juice: A Family Memoir in Black and White,' Shirlee Haizlip]. Speaker 2: I grew up knowing that it was a mystery and my mother was very sad around holidays 'cause she had no relatives or friends who visited her or who she could visit. She never heard from anybody in her family. So my father had a very full and wonderful family and, so they became our family of record. So we, everything was oriented to my dad's family because my mother's family was missing. Story_ID: 643614 Speaker 1: So we'll get to the book ['The Sweeter the Juice: A Family Memoir in Black and White,' Shirlee Haizlip] later on as we, as you--we get to the point where you're writing it. But what did your mother [Margaret Morris Taylor] say about growing up? Speaker 2: Her own growing up (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What was life like for her? Yeah. Speaker 2: Her life--it was very sad because she was passed around to a number of homes and people took care of her and that was just about it. And then at one point the caregiver she had must have had a--some kind of mental problem because she did very strange things. And she was very, very strict. So my mother was very happy to get out of that situation as an eighteen year old. Because her guardian was not very kind to her. Speaker 1: Okay. Now did your mother have a chance to go to college or-- Speaker 2: She went one year to Miners Teachers College [sic. Miner Teachers College] and then she met my father [Julian Taylor, Sr.] and they got married. Speaker 1: Now Miner Teachers College is associated with-- Speaker 2: It's in Washington, D.C. Speaker 1: Right (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's now the D.C., D.C. University, University of the, of the District [University of the District of Columbia]. It became a actual university. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: But it was a teachers college and it was for black teachers, for black students. Speaker 1: Yes, now-- Speaker 2: Historically, a very important college. Speaker 1: Yeah, UDC they call it, yeah, um-hm (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) UDC, exactly. Speaker 1: Okay. Miners Teachers College, all right. Story_ID: 643615 Speaker 1: Let me go to your father's side, and then we'll put them together. Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: His name was Julian Augustus Taylor [Julian Taylor, Sr.]; J-U-L-I-A-N, A-U-G-U-S-T-U-S, Taylor, T-A-Y-L-O-R. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: He was born in Washington, D.C. [sic. Hertford, North Carolina] on May 14th in 1903. Speaker 1: Okay. And, now what can you tell us about his side of the family? Speaker 2: A lot (laughter). He came from--his father was an eminent minister of a large church, the Florida Avenue Baptist Church in Washington, D.C. and his name was William Taylor [William A. Taylor]. And William Taylor had come from North Carolina and to Washington by way of Richmond [Virginia]. William Taylor had five sons, one of whom was my father. And the thing for me as a child was we had a picture on the wall of my grandfather and his sons and they all had gone to college. Now my grandfather graduated from college in 1893. And think about how close that was--not far from 1865, a college graduate. Then he sent all of his sons to college. So I grew up with this wonderful picture of, and knowing this, this wonderful picture on the wall. And, so it was clear to me from the time I was I guess eight or nine that I had to go to college 'cause everybody in my family went to college. And his--my father had a brother who was the editor of the Pittsburgh Courier [New Pittsburgh Courier]. He had another brother who was a dentist. Another brother who started the A and T [agricultural and technical] arts department, who was an arts professor. And he had a brother who was a musician. So they all were gifted. And when they were young men, they had a quintet. They all had beautiful voices and they were all musically oriented, and they all played instruments. And they would sing throughout the south, giving musical concerts. So music and art and culture were very much a part of what I understood to be would be my life. Story_ID: 643616 Speaker 1: Now where did your father [Julian Taylor, Sr.] go to school? Speaker 2: He went to Dunbar High School [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar Senior High School] and then he went to Howard. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Dunbar in Washington, D.C. Speaker 1: That's the oldest high school in the United States, black high school in the United States (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I know, the first one. Speaker 1: The first one, yeah. Speaker 2: And very--everybody--and my mother [Margaret Morris Taylor] went there also. Speaker 1: Then Howard University [Washington, D.C.] and I guess he was a div- divinity student (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Divinity student, yes. And my grandfather [William A. Taylor] taught at Howard University in the divinity school [Howard University School of Divinity, Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 1: Okay. A lot of history in that. I think--wasn't it Mordecai Johnson was a part of the divinity school? Speaker 2: Yes, yeah, he was, he was, he was after my grandfather. I had a number of relatives who taught at Howard. Speaker 1: Okay. Now do you, do you remember meeting any of the, I guess the luminaries from Howard when you were growing up? Speaker 2: I met Howard Thurman, but he came along later. I did meet Mordecai Johnson and I knew his daughter. Those I guess were the biggest luminaries I knew. Speaker 1: Yeah, Howard Thurman was a tremendous influence on a lot of the students, you know, yeah. The great Howard--I have, we have lots of stories about Howard Thurman in our archives and Mordecai Johnson as well, so (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) A giant, yeah. Story_ID: 643617 Speaker 1: Now is there a story about how your parents met? Speaker 2: I don't know that story. I know that my father [Julian Taylor, Sr.] was quite a lothario from what I have seen and heard. Oh, yes, there is a story. They met at a funeral. And he was assisting the minis- he was assisting his father [William A. Taylor] who was also a minister, at the funeral. And my mother [Margaret Morris Taylor]--it was a distant cousin of my mother's who died. And my mother was there and she was very pretty, and that's how they me. He asked her if he could come to see her sometime. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So this is while he's still a student at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] I guess? Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Or--okay. All right, so the result is that they, they--when did they get married, do you? Speaker 2: In 1932. Story_ID: 643618 Speaker 1: Now when you think about your parents' personalities, what they look like, how they walk, how they talk, their sense of humor, their talents and interests, who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: Both. I think I take my intellectual curiosity from my father [Julian Taylor, Sr.], and my ability to be a leader from my dad. And I think I take my, what I hope is graciousness and kindness from my mother [Margaret Morris Taylor]. She was a very much beloved figure, and she was just kind and open to all people and taught me to be that way. So that's how I, that's how I see myself. Story_ID: 643619 Speaker 1: Do you have siblings? Speaker 2: I have an older sister. I had an older brother, he died unfortunately kind of young. And I have a younger sister, so. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I have two half sisters. My father [Julian Taylor, Sr.] was married [to Viola Thompson Taylor] before he met my mother [Margaret Morris Taylor], and he had two daughters who lived in Washington, D.C. Speaker 1: Well, can you name them beginning with the oldest one? Speaker 2: In the-- Speaker 1: And in the order of their birth? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And include yourself in the-- Speaker 2: Yeah, the oldest of my sisters was named Mauryne Brent [Mauryne Taylor Brent], she was my half sister. Very beautiful. Speaker 1: This is the one who was on the cover of the Jet magazine. Speaker 2: Yes, right, right. And it's very hard to grow up with a gorgeous sister like that, looked like a movie star. And then the next older was Doris [Doris Taylor Keith], that's Doris, and she married a photographer named Keith who used to do work at the White House [Washington, D.C.]. And then the next oldest is my full sister. Speaker 1: Oh, wait a minute, just--I have to go back to that one too, just to--he's probably the first black White House photographer. Speaker 2: Probably, right. His name was DeWitt Keith. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: But that time they weren't as known, you know now we know who the White House photographers were. But he did a lot of pictures which are in an arch- --need to be in an archive in the '40s [1940s] and '50s [1950s], and were in the White House and the state department [U.S. Department of State]. Speaker 1: And this is during the FDR administration, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: [President] Franklin Delano Roosevelt (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right and thereafter, um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. And you were telling me off camera that he--his appearance might have been such that they didn't know he was black. Speaker 2: I think that's probably true. And it's not that he tried to pass, but he didn't make an issue of it because he knew he wouldn't be there. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So-- Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: And I was a little girl when that was going on, so I don't know what the dynamics were. But I just accepted and I saw the pictures that he took and I knew what he was doing, was a great photographer. Speaker 1: Okay. And he took a lot of your family photos. Speaker 2: He sure did, he sure did. So we have a wonderful-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --gallery of pictures for thirty, forty year period. Speaker 1: Okay. This is DeWitt-- Speaker 2: DeWitt Keith. Speaker 1: DeWitt Keith, all right. Now the next sister (laughter). Speaker 2: The next sister was [HistoryMaker] Jewelle Taylor Gibbs, and she is a professor, was a professor at Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California]. Speaker 1: And what did she teach? Speaker 2: Ps- psychology, she's a clinical psychologist. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And she's written several books about the young black male. Speaker 1: Okay. And well known--I mean, I know the name, I know the name, I know the name. Speaker 2: Yes, she's very distinguished in her--just quite a scholar in her field. And her book was a breakthrough. It was called black male, black male, young black, an endangered species ['Young, Black and Male in America: An Endangered Species,' ed. Jewelle Taylor Gibbs] It spoke to all the problems that we are still dealing with right now in terms of the treatment of young black men in American society. Speaker 1: Okay. And who's next? Speaker 2: My brother came after, his name was Julian A. Taylor, Jr. [Julian Taylor, Jr.]. Speaker 1: Okay. And what did he do for a living? Speaker 2: Myriads of things. He was very bright, very smart and when he died, he had an undertaking business cause he really, he liked that. He was, he was a jack of all trades. Speaker 1: Okay. And who's next? Speaker 2: I came next, and then my--I have a younger sister's name is Patricia, Patricia Rose Lewis [Patricia Taylor Lewis]. And she was an educator, and her last job was as a principal, an elementary school principal. She's retired now. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Lives in Connecticut. Story_ID: 643620 Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: The earliest memory I have was living in Waterbury, Connecticut. And going to see a movie for the first time after I had been to the dentist--that was my reward. But that's my earliest childhood memory. And then next was my sister, the older sister [HistoryMaker Jewelle Taylor Gibbs] getting hit by a car. And I--we were walking together and this car came up on the sidewalk and she was under the car. And then having her leg was broken but it did heal. But I remember running home, it was only a half a block away from our house. And I remember running home to tell my mother [Margaret Morris Taylor] and she was crying, ran down the street carrying my younger sister [Patricia Taylor Lewis], who was a little baby at the time, that my sister had had an accident. Speaker 1: That's a terrible experience. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So you were close to being, being hit-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --as well. Speaker 2: Yeah, I--we were together and the lady backed up out of a driveway so--without looking I guess. That--so that's my earliest childhood memory. Story_ID: 643621 Speaker 1: Now give us a sense of what the migration was. Now your parents [Margaret Morris Taylor and Julian Taylor, Sr.] met in D.C. [Washington, D.C.], fell in love, got married. And, so-- Speaker 2: And moved in the '30s [1930s] to Connecticut and then that's when we were all born in the '30s [1930s]. Except for my younger sister [Patricia Taylor Lewis] was born in the early '40s [1940s]. But my--and I think I mentioned that my father had been born in North Carolina. His fa- his father [William A. Taylor] moved the family to Washington. And that was because of the riots in 1919 in North Carolina. Speaker 1: Oh, in Wilmington [North Carolina]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They were--those--if you read about them, you know that they were targeting educated black men, and they burned down the office of the Wilmington black newspaper [The Daily Record]. And then they went looking for all the black men and they were going to systematically kill them. And my grandfather had a degree by that time. So he decided that that was no longer the place for him, and that's why he left. Speaker 1: Now this is (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So that--yeah, that was the first part of the migration, and he stayed in Washington. And then my father came to Connecticut in the '30s [1930s]. Speaker 1: I think this is, this is another chapter in--I know there's a Wilmington, big Wilmington race riot in 1911. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Where the City of Wil- Wilmington-- Speaker 2: That's the one I'm talking about. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, (unclear), yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Governed by black people. Speaker 2: Yeah, and it was the only city that was, whose government was ever taken over in the United States. Did you know that? I read that. Speaker 1: Right, by a coup d'etat. Speaker 2: By a coup d'etat, yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, right. Speaker 2: So (unclear)-- Speaker 1: So the whites actually surrounded the city hall with cannon-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and opened fire and actually a little, little-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --small war took place. Speaker 2: And they killed the editor. No, the editor had to leave, of the paper. But they did kill other people, and I'm sure that's why my grandfather left. Story_ID: 643622 Speaker 1: He [Haizlip's paternal grandfather, William A. Taylor] has this successful career in-- Speaker 2: He had a very successful career. Speaker 1: --in D.C. [Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 2: Yeah. So much so that--I'll show you the pictures of his funeral and the article that was in The Washington Post about his funeral. It says thousands of people came. Speaker 1: Right, I think I've heard of him before, mentioned in other interviews-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --to tell the truth. So, anyway the family moved to Waterbury [Connecticut], right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Is that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My father [Julian Taylor, Sr.] founded a church [Macedonia Baptist Church] in Ansonia [Connecticut]. But at the time they moved, and they promised him a parsonage. But they couldn't find anything or I don't know whether there was either a financial problem with the church or a racial problem in the town, but ultimately we left Waterbury and did go to Ansonia where he had the church. Speaker 1: Now what denomination was your father? Speaker 2: Baptist, uh-huh. Speaker 1: Ba- Baptist, okay, all right. Okay. So he has a Baptist congregation in Ansonia? Speaker 2: In Ansonia, and it was a church that was started in the late 1800s by a small black population in that town, this was a New England town in, you know, southern Connecticut. So there was only one black Baptist church there and the person who became the pastor of that church was--automatically became a community leader because of the large group of people that, you know, followed him. And my father at the time was the only educated black man in the town. The town had--was a factory town. And many of the black people had come there for the jobs at the factories and did very well. You know, they--most of them came from either North or South Carolina. Two or three little towns, and those were all represented in the church. And most of them, as you know didn't go beyond the third grade because of the cycles of--agricultural cycles. So they came to that town and they got a very educated minister. And he took a private role of teaching many of his members to read privately. And I didn't know that 'til I was about thirteen. I knew that every Saturday a lot of men would come with their Bibles in hand, and I just assumed they were--my father had a big study and they'd go in the study and close the door. And I assumed they were having bible class. I never asked him about it because I just took it for granted. Then when I was about eleven, I said, "Well, why do you have this and you also have bible class at the church?" He said, "Because I'm teaching them how to read in this class." So he taught a lot of people how to read and that-- Speaker 1: Yeah, that's a great story (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) really a wonderful thing. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's a great story. Speaker 2: So but you said something else in saying that that I--I can't remember the point. I, you know, I try to re- remember these points without wri- writing them down but sometimes I don't get it. I can't remember, it escapes me now, but I--oh, you said he was the only educated-- Speaker 1: Black man in the town. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: One who--I mean he had, he had a advanced degree and a regular degree and had been to high school [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar Senior High School, Washington, D.C.]. Most of his members hadn't been to high school. Most of them hadn't finished elementary school. So I grew up with a lot of people who had much less education than I did. Story_ID: 643623 Speaker 1: Now can you describe the neighborhood you lived in? Speaker 2: Yes, we lived about a block away from the church [Macedonia Baptist Church, Ansonia, Connecticut]. I would say it was a middle class neighborhood. It was inte- an integrated neighborhood because the, most of the black people lived across--there were two sides to the town. A west side and east side and it was divided by the Naugatuck River, and we lived on the west side. And most of the black people lived on the east side. So we knew all of our neighbors. The houses were colonial houses, colonial style houses, modest. Our next neighbors for example on one side were Irish and there was some Russian neighbors. We had Italian neighbors and we had black neighbors. Our neighbor- it was a mixed neighborhood but mostly white. But our town was an ethnic town. We had seven or eight nationalities from Europe and then the black people who had come from the South. So it was an interesting place to grow up in because we only had like six public schools. It was a small town. And, so all the schools had all the representations of the people there and I found it a very fortunate, in retrospect, way to grow up because I was always used to mixture. Although my Sundays were always black, you know, with the church members. So I lived in two worlds and migrated back and forth quite easily. It was just something I thought everybody did, you know (simultaneous). Story_ID: 643624 Speaker 1: In my high school class, for example, there were only maybe sixteen black kids and out of 125 [at Ansonia High School, Ansonia, Connecticut]. So we were in the minority in the town and in every aspect of the town. But we were fully integrated except for the YWCA [Young Women's Christian Association], which my father [Julian Taylor, Sr.] integrated when I was a little girl after there--one of my childhood memories was of a triple drowning--Sunday school picnic, our Sunday school picnic. And we would go to a place in Ansonia [Connecticut] that had a pond. And as you know a lot of black people never learned to swim for whatever reason. And this particular year, I think I was about seven years old, and my father was an immaculate dresser. In the summer he always wore white linen pants or tan linen pants and beautiful silk shirts. He was quite a dresser. And two of the girls went out into the water and they didn't know, and they didn't know how to swim and they didn't know there was a hole or a drop in the water. And they were teenagers, thirteen, fourteen years old. It was a Sunday school picnic. And they started having trouble and I was standing by the side. And, so the Sunday school superintendent, a young man, did not know how to swim either, went to try to rescue them. And all three of them were struggling now at--so somebody called the fire department and all the bells and whistles in the town started ringing, and these three people were drowning. And they drowned. And I remember my father couldn't swim, but he walked out in the water in his white linen pants, trying to reach them. And somebody, and somebody grabbed him 'cause he was going to try to save them, but he couldn't swim. And, so he came back and you know he was--his white linen pants were ruined and everybody sobbed. It was, it was, and it was the first time I'd seen a dead body. Speaker 2: So you saw this with your own eyes? Speaker 1: Yeah, I was standing there watching. But, and of course for someone that age, you don't understand the importance of it, the impact. But I'll never forget it. But after that, the church [Macedonia Baptist Church, Ansonia, Connecticut] decided they would go to a beach on the, on the eastern shore of Connecticut and never went back to the pond. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: In that, in that same year my father integrated the Y. Speaker 2: And for the purpose of teaching you how to swim (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, right. Story_ID: 643625 Speaker 1: Yeah, we're just lamenting the lack of swimming in the black community off camera, but that's--so did you go to the Y [Young Women's Christian Association] to learn how to swim? Speaker 2: No, because I had, let me see, no, I didn't go to the Y. I learned, I learned at Camp Atwater [North Brookfield, Massachusetts]. And I also learned, I also, I was a Brownie, you know. I guess they--do they still have Brownies before Girl Scouts (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I think so. Speaker 2: I was a Brownie and I think I really learned at day, the Brownie day camp that I went to when I was seven or eight years old. Speaker 1: Did your father [Julian Taylor, Sr.] learn how to swim at the Y? Speaker 2: No, he didn't learn, he never learned. Speaker 1: Okay. But he played a prominent role in opening up the-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --the Y? Speaker 2: Yeah, he just said he liked, he went one day and had a meeting and said he'd like to have his members [of Macedonia Baptist Church, Ansonia, Connecticut]--and of course everybody was very sympathetic after this, you know, and it was a small town so the impact of the triple drowning was great. The girl--everybody was teenagers. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: So we--ne- never any problem, no protest or anything like that. They said, "Reverend, you know--." Yeah, he had a great deal of respect. And he was a very diplomatic man and persuasive. Speaker 1: This is something I guess the community felt deeply after (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They would, wouldn't you? Speaker 1: --a picnic and you can-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --actually see-- Speaker 2: Church picnic. Speaker 1: --three of your members drowning. Speaker 2: Oh, it was awful, yeah. Speaker 1: And not be able to do anything about it. Speaker 2: And it was the kind of picnic in the old fashion days that everybody went to, everybody looked forward to it. So just about the whole church population was there. And a lot of them were related. So you can imagine the sadness and the sorrow of the, of the three families. Story_ID: 643626 Speaker 1: What were some of the, well, the other sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: My father had two churches. He had a church in a town called Norwich [Connecticut], which is up near New London [Connecticut]. A beautiful old town that was comprised of mostly people who had come from the island off of Afri- not the West Indies, Cape Verde, very beautiful people. And, so in the morning he would have his service in Ansonia [Macedonia Baptist Church, Ansonia, Connecticut], and then he would, he would drive every Sunday and have an evening service in Cape Verde--in town--I think they had about a hundred people. And ev- once a month we would go--all the family would drive, 'cause it was a long drive, like an hour and a half. And, you know, four children. So he would take us once a month. Well, this particular Sunday we had been there and we were on our way home. We'd get home between eight and ten [o'clock]. And there was a road called the back road. And we were coming down the back road and he spied--we all saw this young black woman running along the side of the road. And he stopped because there was no, there were no lights on the road. And she looked like she was in trouble. And sure enough it was one of his members. And we all recognized her and she said, "Well, I came out with this fellow and he was wanting me to do some things I didn't want to do." And my father said, "Well, we'll take you home." It was about 9:30 at night. So the man came out behind him in the car and followed us--lived in the valley--followed us down into the valley and he took her to her door. She lived in a tenement house. And the man got really angry with him and came up to him and--it was a young guy. Speaker 1: To your father. Speaker 2: To my father. He didn't know my father. He was a stranger. And tried to stab him. And he did have a knife. Fortunately my father always carried a pocketbook with his engagements right here in his pocket, and I'm sure that saved him, but he did that and he pushed him down on the ground. Well, by this time, lights were going on, we were in the heart of the black area of town and people heard that, "Reverend Taylor's [Julian Taylor, Sr.] been stabbed, Reverend Taylor's been stabbed." And my mother [Margaret Morris Taylor] got out. He was on the ground. My father was a slight man. And he was stunned, you know, by being pushed down and he didn't know what had happened to him. And people came out with brooms and knives and they were gonna, they tried to lynch the man. And they had to call the police to get the man, to keep the man safe because they were beating him because they thought he had killed. And the rumor was getting out that my father was dead and he wasn't dead, he was just knocked down and the breath was knocked out of him. So I remember that quite vividly. Speaker 1: How old were you when that happened? Speaker 2: Maybe eight, nine. Speaker 1: And the drowning? Speaker 2: It happened about a year after the drowning, yeah. All this drama, you know but they were things that impacted on our lives. Speaker 1: Okay. So this is in the mid-'40s [1940s] or so? What (unclear)? Speaker 2: Yeah, mid-'40s [1940s]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Nineteen forty-four [1944] or so? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: Like that. Story_ID: 643627 Speaker 1: Anything else? Sights and sounds and smells. Speaker 2: As I--of that time, of--what period of time do you want me to talk about in terms of (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, growing up I guess as a elementary school kid to, you know, to high school [Ansonia High School, Ansonia, Connecticut] I guess. Speaker 2: Well, one of my, one of our favorite activities was to go to New Haven [Connecticut]. We had a piano and we didn't have a piano teacher. And there was a very famous black piano teacher in New Haven, and we were only eight minutes away from New Haven. So we would drive to New Haven, which was always a treat for us. And we had this very theatrical teacher whose name was Mimi Hope [ph.]. And she was probably the closest thing to a movie star we'd ever seen in terms of her--she was just very boisterous and very dramatic and she wore very bright fingernail polish and great big earrings and she was very cultured and very outspoken. So she was quite a character. She was kind of like an Auntie Mame. And the piano lessons became secondary to just kind of being in her presence for an hour and hearing us--she would tell us stories about some people she had met who knew how to play the piano and all of that. And it was just a, just a wonderful cultural experience for all. And the three of us would go. So we each I guess had a half hour. And my father [Julian Taylor, Sr.] would sit and wait and listen. But that was a wonderful time for us, and her name was Mimi Hope. Speaker 1: Hope, H-O-P-E? Speaker 2: H-O-P-E. Story_ID: 643628 Speaker 1: Also for me, every year we would drive to Washington and then to North Carolina and sometimes South Carolina. Now every year, every two years my father [Julian Taylor, Sr.] would get a new car. And, so we were always driving down, down south in a big car that was shiny. We had a woman who looked like she was white, who was my mother [Margaret Morris Taylor]. My dad was quite brown, my mother was quite fair. So we would start our journey early in the morning, like at three o'clock. And when we were very young, we--my mother never told us, they never told us why we had to do this. They just said they liked to get to their stop before dark. And sometime after the man attacked my father with the knife, my father got a German luger, which he kept in the car. And, so we thought he kept the German luger in the car so that he wouldn't be attacked again. But now we came to, we came to understand later that it was probably protection against people who were racist. So we would drive and we would, my mother would pack a lunch because we knew after New York, or she knew they didn't tell us why. We just always thought well, we're gonna have lunch in the car, won't that be fun? And we'd stop and they never could tell us, or would tell us until we were a certain age, you know, that there were places we couldn't eat in after New Jersey. So that was a--when we did find that out, it was, it was very sad. And I knew that there was a big difference between my life in Connecticut and my life in Washington, D.C. because there was still segregation in Washington, D.C. Speaker 2: Now (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And that made me very young--determined to change things. I hated it. I resented the fact that I couldn't go into a store and try on a dress. That was just, just seemed criminal to me. Speaker 2: So Washington, D.C., the nation's capital, was still very much (unclear)-- Speaker 1: Very much segregated, yeah. Speaker 2: Virginia, city-- Speaker 1: Yeah, I always thought of it as the Deep South. And then we would travel from there. My father would do revivals at friends' churches at, I mean, specific times in August. And so we would travel from Washington North--to North Carolina and sometimes to South Carolina, to very small towns. And I knew that we were told that our behavior had to be very different there. And that we had to stay close to the house and there were things that we could not do. We couldn't go to the movies and we should not go downtown unless we were with several adults. So I had a bifurcated life and really experienced, or I guess I was kept from experiencing, true segregation because we didn't go anywhere except people's homes that we knew. And, you know, we weren't--our parents tried to hide that from us because they didn't want us to think of people as being bad or mean or evil. And I don't know if that was a good thing or a bad thing. But perhaps it was good because I did tend to think people were, you know, I still do, tend to think that people were good. They didn't tell us that white people are bad or evil and that's why we couldn't do those things down there. We just, just wasn't talked about until we were older. Story_ID: 643629 Speaker 1: Were you interested in writing at all when you were growing up? Speaker 2: I wrote well, but it wasn't--I didn't think of myself as a writer. I think because of all the professional people in my family, I expected that I would be a doctor or a lawyer. Just brainwashing I suppose. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And you-- Speaker 2: But I liked to write and I liked, I did write things in school where I expressed myself very early on. And that was kind of amusing. I remember writing about segregation when I got back. And I think it was in either seventh or eighth grade. And my white classmates were very surprised that I would write something like that, you know, where I basically I was complaining about things that I couldn't do when I went south. Speaker 1: So this would be-- Speaker 2: It was in the '50s [1950s], late '40s [1940s] and '50s [1950s] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 2: I graduated from high school [Ansonia High School, Ansonia, Connecticut] in '55 [1955]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, so-- Speaker 2: Long before the-- Speaker 1: --eighth grade was like '51 [1951], or so. Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: All right (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Exactly. Story_ID: 643630 Speaker 1: Now what was your--the name of your first school? Speaker 2: Willis School [Ansonia, Connecticut]. I've written that down for you in case you'd like to have all that (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 2: And I wrote down the name of the colleges and stuff like that. Speaker 1: Well, I'm going to ask you anyway. Speaker 2: Oh, all right (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) 'Cause that's what we do. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: 'Cause oral history, otherwise we have all of that-- Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: Willis School, now did you go there for the entire--your-- Speaker 2: For the entire--from the first grade on. Speaker 1: Okay. First through--did-- Speaker 2: Through seventh. Speaker 1: Through seventh. Speaker 2: One through seven (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, all right. And did--were there any parti- particular teachers who were mentors or role models for you that you remember? Speaker 2: Yes, several, and they were all Irish. Donovan [ph.] and Kiley [ph.]. I loved my grade school experience. There weren't too many black kids in the school, but I had a, you know, a broader black family through the church [Macedonia Baptist Church, Ansonia, Connecticut]. And I was treated well, and I did well as a--I was following my sister [HistoryMaker Jewelle Taylor Gibbs] who had done very well. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I got all A's all the time. Never got a B, so I, and I just assumed that was the way I needed to do, what I needed to do. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Did--were you drawn to any particular subject matter in school? Speaker 2: I loved English, did love English and art. I liked learning, I loved to read. So I liked learning about, I liked history and geography as well. Speaker 1: Did your, did your school ever go to, over to the Mark Twain House over in New Haven [sic. Mark Twain House and Museum, Hartford, Connecticut]? Speaker 2: No, the--they didn't. They didn't take any--our school at that time didn't take any trips. But I, you know, I did a lot of traveling with my parents. Speaker 1: Now I saw that right there in New Haven [Connecticut], such a rich history of African Americans. You know, African Americans (unclear)--where the Amistad (unclear) was kept. Speaker 2: Right. I didn't learn about that 'til later. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: 'Til the Amistad, 'til later. 'Til, not 'til college [Wellesley College, Wellesley, Massachusetts], actually. Speaker 1: And the home of, author of 'Uncle Tom's Cabin.' Speaker 2: Harriet Beecher Stowe. Speaker 1: Yeah, Harriet (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, I knew about that, yeah. Speaker 1: --yeah, the Stowe home [Harriet Beecher Stowe Center, Hartford, Connecticut], right, is there too. Story_ID: 643631 Speaker 1: Now did, did you have a favorite writer growing up? Speaker 2: Louisa May Alcott as, you know, as a elementary school student [at Willis School, Ansonia, Connecticut], yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Did you like going to the movies? Speaker 2: Oh, I loved going to the movies. My parents [Margaret Morris Taylor and Julian Taylor, Sr.] went to the movies a lot. They went to different movies, but we could walk to the movies and it wasn't far away. I think I spent most Saturdays at the movies, and I liked Westerns, and Alan Ladd was my favorite. But you see I also had a movie star in my family. My older sister was in a lot of black movies. Speaker 1: Now what's her name? Speaker 2: Mauryne [Mauryne Taylor Brent]. Speaker 1: Mauryne, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So was she in some of the--cause I know there were, there were several directors. That, you know, served up black movies-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --to the community. Speaker 2: She did, she was, she was in a lot of black Westerns. Speaker 1: Are these the Oscar Micheaux-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I think so (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) Westerns? Speaker 2: I've got a picture of one of them, I'll show them to you, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: But it--when you grow up with a sister who's a movie star (laughter) and you're a girl--it's very intimidating. And she would come to our home town and it was like Beyonce [Beyonce Knowles] visiting the hometown, you know. And everybody knew she was there. And she was very nice and very sweet and very kind, gentle, she was very warm. So she was--and very accessible, so very--everybody heard she was in town, so the phone would be constantly ringing. Speaker 1: Yeah, there's a, there was a--I can't think of his name now. He was a cowboy star, the black cowboy star of movies. Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm sure I have a picture, I'll show it to you. Speaker 1: Jeffries I think, Jeffrey-- Speaker 2: Came, he came later. You mean Herb Jeffries? Speaker 1: Herb Jeffries, right (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, there were two others and one was a guy who later played a chauffeur in a lot of pictures, chauffeur or a manservant. And the other was a big, tall guy. But I'll get those names for you later. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right. So did they show-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --any of your-- Speaker 2: They didn't show. Speaker 1: --sisters mo- movies? Speaker 2: No, not in, no, they just made the black movie circuit. They, you know they didn't go into white film houses. Speaker 1: Okay, so-- Speaker 2: Unless they went into New York [New York] and, and they showed them in Washington, D.C. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So the major urban areas that had a huge black population (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: They would show those movies. Speaker 2: They would show them, yeah. Speaker 1: So Chicago [Illinois], New York-- Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: --Harlem [New York, New York], D.C., Baltimore [Maryland] probably. But you couldn't see her at home? Speaker 2: No, never saw her at home. I've seen the movies, though, since, you know, in later years. Story_ID: 643632 Speaker 1: So what was high school like? What was the name of your school? Speaker 2: Ansonia High [Ansonia High School, Ansonia, Connecticut]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That was the name of the town I lived in, A-N-S-O-N-I-A. I loved high school. I loved junior high and high school. I was an officer every year. I was the first black president of the eighth grade, and they'd never had either a black or a female. And then I was a vice president all the, of all my classes. And it was interesting 'cause at that time, girls couldn't be presidents of the class in high school. They could be president of the eighth grade class, which I was. But it was boy, girl, boy, girl kind of thing. I was a cheerleader. I had a group of friends that I'd been in school with since first grade [at Willis School, Ansonia, Connecticut] and I can only say I had one of the most wonderful times in my life in high school. Lot of friends and good experiences, went to a lot of conferences and did well. Speaker 1: So (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Was an honor student. Speaker 1: Okay. Now what kind of conferences would you go to? Speaker 2: Like the, they had the Columbia journalism con- conference [Columbia Scholastic Press Association], and I went to that every year. And-- Speaker 1: Is this in New York City [New York, New York]? Speaker 2: Yeah, New York City. And they invited high school students--they had three days for high school students who were working on the, I worked on the school paper, editor of the school paper. So I went to those. And youth, just general youth conferences. Whenever they needed a student to go to a conference for the school, I was usually the one selected. So I had a good, good experience. Story_ID: 643633 Speaker 1: Who did you look up to in those days in terms of-- Speaker 2: Role models? Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: Mostly my uncles and my parents [Margaret Morris Taylor and Julian Taylor, Sr.], you know, and Jackie Robinson. Jackie Robinson came to visit and stayed at our house once. And that was in 1942 when my father--a young man was accused of, one of his members was accused of raping a girl on the steps of the Catholic church, a white girl. And everybody knew the young man didn't do it, so my father--at that time there was only one black lawyer in the State of Connecticut. My father got the church to--formed a N double- NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and got them to hire this black lawyer to defend this--and got the, and got the guy off. And one of the rallies to raise money for funds, Jackie Robinson was invited to, my father invited him. He came up and he stayed at our house. And oh, I just thought that was wonderful. Speaker 1: So your father was really connected to people. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, he was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I mean, he could call-- Speaker 2: He was very, he was the first black delegate to go to a convention from Connecticut. And he was a Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] delegate. And they caught him on CBS when Kennedy was announced the victor. Yeah, he was very well connected and he was on the town council, and whenever there were problems with the black community, they came to my father to see if he could help. And one of the things my father did which stuck with me all my life and was a wonderful example. Was, you know, as I said, teaching these guys, men how to read, you know, privately and not for money. I guess he felt that was part of his mission. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, your father really sounds like he was really engrossed in the community and-- Speaker 2: He was, and he was a very beloved figure, and they did love him, you know. And he got on the planning commission. There was a bad flood in the town [Ansonia, Connecticut] while we lived there in the '50s [1950s], and a lot of people were left homeless. And he was put on the town commission to help figure out which, what way the town should go in terms of housing. Story_ID: 643634 Speaker 1: Now what were your career aspirations in high school [Ansonia High School, Ansonia, Connecticut]? What were you thinking of doing for a living? Speaker 2: Probably I--there's no doubt in my mind I knew I was going to be a professional, but I didn't know which kind. So I had a dentist in the family. I had a cousin who was a lawyer. I knew a lot of black doctors in Washington [D.C.]. So those were the professionals that I knew. Other fields weren't open to women yet and certainly weren't open to blacks, but those were the ones I knew about. So I just knew that when I got to college, I'd take some sort of major that would help me get into graduate school. 'Cause I didn't, I didn't know, I didn't have a deep passion. So I was very interested in intellectual things. I loved to read and I loved to explore. So I didn't know how I was going to reconcile that with being some professional who had to take care of people. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Sorry. Speaker 2: (TAPE INTERRUPTION) Speaker 1: Okay, okay. All right so we were talking about high school, right and so I was asking you what you had projected as a career, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, I knew that I would find what I wanted to do once I got to college. I didn't have any specific yearning to be any specific thing. I knew I wanted to do something and I knew I had to do something. But I didn't know what it was going to be; I hadn't found it yet. Story_ID: 643635 Speaker 1: You were counseled, right? Now you're an A student, right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, um-hm. Speaker 1: One of the top students. Were you the top student? Speaker 2: No, interestingly enough, our tracks were combined. We had students in there who--girls who and boys who studied what they called the business track. And we had the academic track. And we always thought it was an injustice because the in- academic track, there was always--it was more difficult than the business track. But they ranked according to just numbers and the tracks were combined. So I was the fourth highest and three ahead of me, and I was the academic track and the three ahead of me were in the business track. But I knew, I knew what it meant, you know, because I took Latin for four years and I took French and all the hard courses. And they were taking shorthand and typing and business math and stuff like that. So it was--the academic track was harder. So it--I never had any bitterness about that because that was just the way the school [Ansonia High School, Ansonia, Connecticut] was configured. And I knew that I was the top student and I had no doubt about that so-- Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So did--what kind of counseling did you have about college? Speaker 2: None. But my older sister [HistoryMaker Jewelle Taylor Gibbs] had already been to college. And all my uncles had been to college, my mother [Margaret Morris Taylor] had been--my father [Julian Taylor, Sr.], so they were pretty wary--I just picked, I, you know, my sister had gone to Radcliffe [Radcliffe College, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and so I put that down. I put down Smith [Smith College, Northampton, Massachusetts] and Holyoke [Mount Holyoke College, South Hadley, Massachusetts] and Wellesley [Wellesley College, Wellesley, Massachusetts]. And one of my high school teachers had actually gone to Wellesley, my French teacher. And I went up to--I knew I wanted to go to a woman's college. And I was accepted at all those schools and I went to Wellesley. Speaker 1: Okay. So was this on the recommendation of your teacher having been there you think? Speaker 2: She enjoyed it. But no, it was on my own heartfelt feeling. We arrived at Wellesley in a snow storm. Wellesley's--have you ever seen it? It's probably one of the most beautiful campuses in America, it's gorgeous. And I was at a very romantic age. And to arrive at this place where all the buildings looked like castles, all great houses with meadows and dells as they would say in the book. I mean, I was just enchanted, I didn't even have to get interviewed, this is where I want to be. It was--I--it was physically so appealing to me. It was, it was like a dream out of a book. You know I'd never seen such a beautiful place except in pictures. And when I'd see the great houses in England, you know, I don't know if you ever watched those programs. But, so many of the dormitories looked like that. It was astoundingly beautiful and very well planned. And I knew it had a good reputation academically. But I said this is where--it was truly a romantic choice in the basic meaning of that word. I just thought this was the place where I should be for the next four years and I was very happy there. The only issue for me there was at the time there were only--Wellesley had four hundred in a class, so it was sixteen hundred women. And each class at that time had a formula, which of course they didn't tell us it was a formula, two black, two blacks in each class. So there were only eight on the campus for my first two years. I started in '55 [1955]. But the last two years they opened it up and they chose four more girls. So there were six girls in each class. And the first year we discovered it, I had a meeting in my room. We were all so excited that there were so many more of us on campus. And we just had a meeting so we would know who we were and what we were about. But of course the school has changed a lot since; a lot more black students go to Wellesley now. Story_ID: 643636 Speaker 1: I neglected to ask you this, but back in high school [Ansonia High School, Ansonia, Connecticut] were there any special teachers or mentors that you remember? Speaker 2: The French teacher, yes; and an English teacher. And a teacher who taught, what subject did he--I had, I had three really good teachers that I liked a lot, French, two were women and one was a man. One was a man. One was Bickery [ph.], Shoemaker [ph.] and Lane [ph.]. I especially liked the English teacher 'cause I liked English. And they were all very supportive of me. I found my teachers very endearing and very caring. 'Cause I suppose all teachers like good students and I knew I was a good student. And I always did everything that was asked of me and went beyond that. So I got good, I got really good private mentoring from those teachers. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, so-- Speaker 2: And good recommendations. Story_ID: 643637 Speaker 1: So at Wellesley [Wellesley College, Wellesley, Massachusetts], who was there? I mean, were there any--who were some of the notable people there with you, and who were some of your mentors and teachers? Speaker 2: Well, let's see there's a--in my class there was a young woman named Amalya Kearse [Amalya Lyle Kearse] and she's since become a famous judge on Ninth Circuit [sic. U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit]. But at the time she wasn't of course. Other than that, Madeleine Albright was in my class. And she and I were friends. We--I was in a small dormitory when I first went there with twenty six women. And Madeleine was right down the hall from me. So, you know, you get very close to twenty-six women. And she would come with me sometime to my home in Connecticut. Now at that time her father [Josef Korbel] was a diplomat, Hungarian, I think it was Hungary [sic. Czechoslovakia]. Yeah, I think Hungarian diplomat. So she was the most famous person. But she wasn't famous then of course. Speaker 1: Right, right, right. Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: She went on to become the secretary of state. Speaker 2: Yes, secretary of state. And we have maintained a friendship and every time I see her, I say, "Is that you Maddie?" (Laughter) So Ali MacGraw was right behind me at the time, the actress. Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Other than that, I don't think there was anybody famous during that period of time. Story_ID: 643638 Speaker 1: My mentors were, it was--I took a--everybody was required to take a biblical history class, which I think is quite interesting now. And one of my mentors was the professor out of that group. And then I had a French teacher, French professor who was, her name was Madame Picave [ph.]. She was a mentor for me. Most of my teachers I liked very much, you know. I didn't, I didn't get any sense of active racism at all. Because Wellesley [Wellesley College, Wellesley, Massachusetts] had had black students since the 1890s. Not a lot, but every year they had black students, so they weren't, and they didn't have to go live someplace else and you know--as they did in some colleges. Story_ID: 643639 Speaker 1: You're related to Montague Cobb [William Montague Cobb] we found out there in the break, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: W. Montague Cobb (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Montague is related to me through my mother [Margaret Morris Taylor]. So we would--every year when we would go to visit relatives in Washington [D.C.], he and his wife Hilda [Hilda Smith Cobb] would be among those we visited. And their daughter, Amelia [Hilda Cobb Gray] is in my age category. And we would go visit with them on--at Highland Beach [Maryland] as well as in the city. And I didn't know at the time that he was so well thought of at the medical school [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.] because I was just, you know, his cousin. He was Cousin Monty. But over the years I've learned that he was quite a teacher, quite a professor and left a major impression on most of the students who studied with him. Speaker 1: Right, unqualified genius is what they say. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Knew everything (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Knew everything. Speaker 1: He would play the violin in class and became president of the NAACP [National Advancement for the Advancement of Colored People] board-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --too, later on. Speaker 2: He did. Speaker 1: So it was--and there's someone else you mentioned too that you're related to that we didn't-- Speaker 2: Yeah, Ruth Lloyd [Ruth Smith Lloyd], Ruth and Sterling Lloyd, and they were both (background noise), they both worked at the medical school as well, um-hm. Story_ID: 643640 Speaker 1: All right. Well, back to Wellesley [Wellesley College, Wellesley, Massachusetts], so we're--or Wellesley, how do you--it's Wellesley, right? Speaker 2: Wellesley, yeah. Speaker 1: We- Wellesley, right (simultaneous) Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Just think of wells and lee. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Wellesley, yeah. Speaker 1: All right. So, now as you're at Wellesley- ley, we were, we were talking about the number of black students--they had a cap on the number of black students each class. Speaker 2: Um-hm, as they did with Jewish students as well, um-hm. Speaker 1: I didn't know that (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But it was never talked about, you know. We only just discovered it because you knew they weren't there, you know. Speaker 1: Now did--were all of the--I intended to ask this question, so I'll go on and ask it. Especially since the--(unclear) going to be about color. You know, were all the black girls real light? Speaker 2: No, they weren't (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 2: I can say in my class. For example there's one who is now a federal judge. Her name is Amalya Kearse [Amalya Lyle Kearse] and she was in my wedding and I'll show you her picture later. But she wasn't, she was brown, a good brown. And in the years afterwards there were brown skinned people so-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --who were light and brown. They weren't all light by any means. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right. See I wondered if the schools-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --if that was a criteria. Story_ID: 643641 Speaker 1: So the Civil Rights Movement is kind of heating up while you're in school, and the Brown versus the Board happened in '54 [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] before you go to school, but the implementation of it, you know, starts I guess sometime while you're in school. Speaker 2: Right, and I think that's why the number increased dramatically when I was a junior [at Wellesley College, Wellesley, Massachusetts]. The--when I entered as a junior, the number had more than doubled. And I had a meeting in my room, and I didn't realize then it was a black consciousness meeting. I was just so excited that there were more black students and I just thought we should know each other and we didn't have a program or anything like that. It was just a way of saying we're here, let's--how can we, how can we be together, what can we do together. Speaker 1: In terms of group dynamics, peo- people in those situations--not just black people but other people too, tend to face, to be faced with the dilemma are they going to bond with the people who are like them or are they going to try to act like they're just there like all the white people or, and not--did that, was that part of the discussion, or was that a dynamic on campus? Speaker 2: No, it was just--I think the discussion was that we should know each other, you know, and be together. We didn't so far as to have a club, that did come later, however. But after I left college. It was just that we needed to be aware of each other and help each other, that kind of thing. But not-- Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) stay apart because we went to a broader place to be part of that place. Story_ID: 643642 Speaker 1: Tell us about Wellesley [Wellesley College, Wellesley, Massachusetts] when you were there and what you, what you liked about it, and--? Speaker 2: I loved the place physically, it was beautiful. I loved the offerings that they gave you beyond your college courses. And great lectures. Famous people were always on the campus every week in some field. And I regret, regret now I didn't take advantage, as most students don't, of all the wonderful things that are available. They had great traditions. They were very supportive of the students. The living facilities were terrific. It was a safe place, safe place to be. And I think it was also a melding place because a lot of the girls who went there were very rich and only had known other rich girls. But Wellesley was a place of great egal- egalitarianism. There were a lot of middle class and some less than middle class girls there, and everybody mixed. So for people from all different circumstances, it was the first time they could be with people who were unlike themselves. I think that was tremendous value of Wellesley, tremendous. Now when I went to Wellesley, there was no black professor on the staff, but it happened a year after I left. And, now there are quite a few black professors there. Story_ID: 643643 Speaker 1: Who was the first black professor, do you remember? Speaker 2: Yes, and he happened to be someone from my little hometown in Ansonia [Connecticut]. Name was Dr. William Cousins [William J. Cousins], C-O-U-S-I-N-S. And his father had been the minister at the church [Macedonia Baptist Church, Ansonia, Connecticut] where my father [Julian Taylor, Sr.] was. But he had left the town by the time we got there. His father had died and this young man had gone to Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut]. And he became the first black professor there (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. William Cousins. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And what did he teach? Speaker 2: I don't remember, I think it was sociology, but I'm not sure (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 2: I can look that up for you. But it was after I left and I was so disappointed, but thought it was terrific. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Now that didn't mean they, you know, they had, they would have black choirs come in to sing. And black intellectual celebrities come to speak. So it wasn't a total white out, so to speak, you know. Anybody who was in the popular culture came. Speaker 1: Who was--any black celebrities (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not that I remember, not that I--unless they were po- politicians. I do remember though, not black, but a person called Ravi Shankar came. That was the first time I ever heard of a--I went to hear him play, and that was in the '50s [1950s]. Speaker 1: Ravi Shankar. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: The father of Norah Jones. Speaker 2: The father of Norah Jones. Speaker 1: Yes, and a great sitar player. Speaker 2: Yeah, wonderful. I had never even heard of a sitar. But that's something Wellesley [Wellesley College, Wellesley, Massachusetts] did for me. Story_ID: 643644 Speaker 1: So your major [at Wellesley College, Wellesley, Massachusetts] was--? Speaker 2: Sociology. Speaker 1: Okay, sociology. And, now did you have a, like an idol in terms of the sociology community that you, I mean-- Speaker 2: Oh, I liked my professor. And I liked the reading lists that he gave us. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Anything sig- significant learnt that you didn't know otherwise in sociology? Speaker 2: Yeah, I think I really broadened my perspective of the class structure in America. You know, I didn't, I knew that it existed, but didn't understand how it worked and I got that. I think that sociology gave me a grounding in the realities of how we live in America. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was really very valuable for me. Speaker 1: Okay. Now did, now in the '50s [1950s] I would guess Paul Robeson was still a factor in the United States in those days. Did you--was there any discussion about him or did he come to campus or any (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He didn't come to our, he didn't come to our campus while I was there. You know, and I would read about him. He didn't come. Story_ID: 643645 Speaker 1: So when it was time to graduate, I mean what was your plan? Speaker 2: Well, I had met the young man that I ma- I was going to marry when I was a junior. And he kind of diverted my plan because I got married the week after we graduated which we had planned that whole year before. And I, and I had been accepted at law school, Boston University law school [Boston University School of Law, Boston, Massachusetts] for the fall, that September. And I decided during the summer I didn't want to go to law school because I thought it was very important for me to establish a solid marriage. And I knew that the way that I studied and did my own personal business would take up too much of my time in law school. So, and it wasn't a big decision. I think I was relieved to make that decision, you know, because I was going to be some kind of professional and I had chosen law because I didn't want to go to medical school. But that, you know, that's not a good reason as you, as an adult to do one thing 'cause you don't want to do the other. And I felt that I had to be a professional in order to live up to my family's standards and my own. And, so I was relieved, actually. So I told my husband [HistoryMaker Harold Haizlip], I said, "I'm not going to go to law school." I said, "I'll do something later, but I'm not going to go to law school," so I didn't go to law school. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So now who was he and what did he, where was he-- Speaker 2: He was a--he's from Washington, D.C. and he'd gone to Dunbar [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar Senior High School] and he was the valedictorian of Dunbar, as my father [Julian Taylor, Sr.] had been. And the reason I was attracted to him was he was a classics major, majored in Latin and Greek and he did his thesis in Greek. And he could speak ancient Greeks. And, so I was just tantalized by this young man who I didn't know, he called me. We had a blind date. He had gone to Amherst [Amherst College, Amherst, Massachusetts] and his roommate, one of his fraternity roommates, had a girlfriend in my class at Wellesley [Wellesley College, Wellesley, Massachusetts]. So they fixed us up, as they used to say. And I was smitten and decided that this was the man that I was going to marry. He was, he was very smart and very funny and charismatic. And I thought he was going to do wonderful things in life. So he influenced--now he did not at all say, "No, I don't think you should go to law school"? That decision was totally mine. What it said to me was I really didn't have a commitment in my heart to go to law school. But I was doing it just to go and get a law degree. I didn't want to do that. Story_ID: 643646 Speaker 1: So did you start having children (unclear)? Speaker 2: No, not right away. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I had my first job was at the--let's see, my first job was as an editorial director for a gentleman who was one of the editors of a mag- a jou- a medical journal called the Annals of Allergy and Asthma [Annals of Allergy, Asthma and Immunology]. And he had an editorial staff because all the articles came through, and my job was to read the articles, some of them, and to put them in lay language. And I (background noise) enjoyed that really because I was using my English skills, which I loved, and reading and it was a very great intellectual job for me and I could walk to work. We were living in Boston [Massachusetts] at the time. And I could walk to his office. And he was, he had developed a groundbreaking treatment, giving one shot a year for people who were allergic. And, so he was very well known in the field. So that was my first job. And I did that and then I worked for the Boys' Clubs of Boston [Boys' Clubs of Boston, Inc.; Boys and Girls Clubs of Boston, Boston, Massachusetts] as a special assistant to the director. And the boys clubs had three units and one was in Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts] which as you know is black area. One was in Charlestown [Boston, Massachusetts], and I'd forgotten where the third was. But I worked, I worked at the main office which was--Charlestown, which is very Irish as you know. And I did everything that an assistant director would do. He didn't have an assistant director, but he had an assistant to the director. And he was not a very well educated Irishman. But a, more like a politician. And he needed somebody to, to give him what I gave him. I wrote things, wrote speeches and did PR [public relations] for him and stuff like that. And I really, really enjoyed that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He gave me, took me into the world of the nonprofits and let me see what was going on there. Speaker 1: Now just to recap, to go back and you graduated in '59 [1959], right, from Wellesley [Wellesley College, Wellesley, Massachusetts]. And then you got married to Harold [HistoryMaker Harold Haizlip]-- Speaker 2: A week after graduation. Speaker 1: Hai- Haizlip (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Haizlip, right. Speaker 1: In '59 [1959] as well. And started your work life same year. Speaker 2: Yeah, same year. And, so I did the job at, with the doctor for two years. And then I had the job with the boys clubs for almost three years. And then we had, I had, we had our first child [Deirdre Haizlip Celotto] in our fifth year of marriage. Story_ID: 643647 Speaker 1: This was a wonderful thing just came my way. A--I got a call, actually it was from a former professor at Wellesley [Wellesley College, Wellesley, Massachusetts], my sociology professor, and he said, "They're looking for a TA [teaching assistant], a teaching fellow at Tufts University [Medford, Massachusetts]. Would you like to enroll there and they'll give you free enrollment. You can take some courses and, but you have to help the chairman of the department and run his classes after he lectures." So it was an offer that came out of the blue, with good, you know, nice salary and the chance to take graduate school courses to see if I wanted to do that, and I, so I did. I mean it was just wonderful. Speaker 2: So-- Speaker 1: And I had a young baby and I had a caretaker for the baby. Speaker 2: So this is nine- nineteen sixty (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Let's see. It was the same year my first child [Deirdre Haizlip Celotto] was born. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty-three [1963], same year that-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] was assassinated. And I loved that because he would leave me in charge of these classes for discussion after he lectured. And, so, you know, and then I would answer questions and move things along. And that was elementary sociology, which had been of course my major. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: It was the first year of sociology classes for the students there. And that allowed me to know that I was good, I was good, confident and good in that area and I enjoyed the interchange with the students. So I did that and then I got another offer to, from Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] to go to the school. I took a course at night from the chairman of the planning school, city planning school, urban, urban design it's called now. And I got an--aced the course at Harvard, I got an A in it. And he encouraged me, the chairman, to apply for the urban design program. Which I did, and they only took in twelve students. There was me and a guy from St. Thomas [U.S. Virgin Islands], we were the people of color. And another woman. Two women and the rest were men. And, so I did that and while I was doing that, let's see I was, I was pregnant and had a baby. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And then we moved to New York [New York]. So I only finished a year there. We moved to New York 'cause my husband [HistoryMaker Harold Haizlip] had a wonderful job opportunity. And-- Speaker 2: So you entered the-- Speaker 1: School of Design [Harvard Graduate School of Design, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. Speaker 2: Yeah, the master's [degree]-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --program. Speaker 1: Yeah, and took a full year. Speaker 2: So this would be, this would be like '65 [1965] or so? Speaker 1: Yeah, I think so, I (unclear). Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Let's see. Speaker 2: Okay. So you were at Tufts in '63 [1963]. Speaker 1: Three [1963], yeah. Sixty-five [1965], good for you. Speaker 2: So '65 [1965] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 643648 Speaker 1: So 1965 (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Moving along, moving along very fast. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Yeah, in 1965. Speaker 2: So we moved to New York [New York] and I thought I would finish my degree. I'd taken a full year plus some courses. And I thought I would finish my degree at Hunter [Hunter College, New York, New York]. 'Cause they had a program in city planning that was very similar to the program at Harvard [Harvard Graduate School of Design, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. So I started that. And then I got waylaid, or I waylaid myself because I got involved with--I was invited to get involved with the off- mayor's office of special events. And the mayor was Lindsay [John Lindsay] who I really liked. And there was a very famous lady named Sharman Douglas and she ran all of the special events out of the mayor's office for the city. And she somehow had gotten my name. And they--that office had been run primarily and only by white people. And people had complained there were so many international visitors and visitors of color from different countries that they really needed somebody of color. And, so I was invited to do that with her and that was an amazing time for me. I was going to school and doing that. It was mostly receptions at Gracie Mansion [Archibald Gracie Mansion, New York, New York] or other places around town with the mayor for heads of state. And one time they did one at the museum of natural history [American Museum of Natural History, New York, New York] with an African king [Opoku Ware II]. I've forgotten the country, but it was a country that had a lot of gold and he came in just--and they paraded him around the museum on these wonderful things that came from Africa I don't know what they're called [sika 'dwa] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Like a sedan chairs. Speaker 2: Yeah, sedan chairs. Speaker 1: They carry-- Speaker 2: Yeah, and he just, just ropes of gold on him, just ropes of gold. Speaker 1: Sounds like the Ashanti from Ghana. Speaker 2: That's exactly it. Speaker 1: Asantehene. Speaker 2: Yes, asantehene, good for you, good for you (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 2: That's exactly it. And my husband had been named, Harold [HistoryMaker Harold Haizlip] had been named to the board of trustees of the museum of natural history and he was the first black to do that. So when we went through the--that day I decided I was going to wear all the gold chains that I had and I had some more like this, and I had this dress that kind of had a little cleavage in it. So the asantehene, as we, as we walked through the line to meet him, he says looking at my chest, "Oh, I love all your gold." I said, "Well, I love yours too," 'cause he had, he had of course thousand times more than I had on. But, so I did mostly that. I worked for Mayor Lindsay and Mary Lindsay [Mary Harrison Lindsay] and did some really inno- innovative things. We did a program--the first program that--there was a new hall that was opening called the Hall of Man in Africa at the museum of natural history, a tremendous place. And Harold was on the board and the trustees asked if I would co-chair it with Mary Lindsay, the opening. And I said, "Yes, but only if I can you know, you give me free hand to do most of the things I'd like to do." So, and they said, "Well, what would you like to do?" I said, "Well, I'd like to have an equal number of black people here as white. I don't want--it's the Hall of Man in Africa. I don't want just a few black--." "Okay, Shirlee [HistoryMaker Shirlee Haizlip], you put the list together," and I, and I did that. And it was a magnificent evening, which The New York Times carried, carried a picture of me. That was my first picture in The New York Times, saying that the guests dined nervously under the whale, but they had a good time. And I also told them now you have to let me do the seating, and we're going to do black, white, black, white, black, white. I said, "It's going to be forced integration." And they laughed, they said, "Okay, Shirlee." So there were, you know, museums of natural history tend to draw as patrons the richest people in town, the oldest people and the richest people. So all of New York society was there and I'm sure for most of them it was the first time that they ever sat by and had been with so many black people. But it turned out to be quite a splendid evening, which created a lot of buzz. It got to--do you remember the publication Women's Wear Daily? Speaker 1: Yeah, I've heard of that (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, it was a fashion thing. I don't think it still comes out, but we even got--it only catered to the elite and the fashion industry. And they--we got there and The New York Times. It was really a breakthrough moment in New York social life. So I really, really was--enjoyed doing that. Story_ID: 643649 Speaker 1: Then we had another big decision to make about whether I was going to continue school [at Hunter College, New York, New York], or go off and do event planning. And my husband [HistoryMaker Harold Haizlip] got a job offer in the [U.S.] Virgin Islands. So that--we decided to take that because that was quite wonderful. Speaker 2: Okay. Now this is--now what was his position to be? Speaker 1: Commissioner of education of all the islands. It's like a state commissioner here. It is a state commissioner except that's not a state. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And it was a big leap up for him. He had, he was doing a wonderful--he was the headmaster of a great school in New York [New York] and they--people from the Virgin Islands heard about him cause it was such a famous school and experimental and everything. And it was called the Lincoln [New Lincoln School, New York, New York]. Speaker 2: So this is 1975? Speaker 1: No, that was--we went to the islands in '71 [1971]. Speaker 2: Seventy-one [1971], okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, we spent the '70s [1970s] in the Virgin Islands. And we missed a lot of American culture. When everything, anything happens here that I don't know about, I'll say, "Well, when did that happen?" They said, "Oh, that was the '70s [1970s]." I said, "That's why I don't know about it" (simultaneous). Story_ID: 643650 Speaker 1: Now one of the things that happened that I must point out, 'cause I, when I heard the name Haizlip I thought of Ellis Haizlip who's your husband's cousin. He was the host in the early '70s [1970s] of 'Soul!' (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Of 'Soul!,' right. Speaker 1: Yeah, 'Soul!'-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --on public television [WNET-TV, New York, New York]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Well, tell us something about him. Speaker 2: About Ellis? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. You know, and actually I think it started in the late '60s [1960s] 'cause we went to about a year of his shows before we left. Ellis had grown up with Harold [HistoryMaker Harold Haizlip] on Sheriff Road in Washington, D.C. And their fathers were brothers. Ellis' father [Ellis M. Haizlip] was very conservative Christian man. Ellis was not conservative. Ellis went to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] and he was always out there, he was always an avant garde type. He was very smart, very charming, very witty. He's the kind of person everybody liked to be around cause he was funny and kind and knew everything. And he loved Harold's mother [Nellie Hill Haizlip] 'cause she was much more relaxed in the world. You know, his father was very conservative and wanted him to do the things that children of good Christians do, so to speak. Harold's mother was more lenient than that. And, so, and Ellis didn't have a brother, so Harold became like his little brother. And, so Ellis was--I can say now, a guide to our living in New York [New York] because he was very well known. He did a lot of plays on Broadway and off. He did a lot of shows. He was an early impresario, he was like a black Sol Hurok. And he had a connection. He went to the Yale drama school [Yale School of Drama, New Haven, Connecticut]. So he had a connection there with [HistoryMaker] Lloyd Richards. And he was very well respected. Ellis is the kind of man who could take us to the back of any theater after everybody had been seated, everybody knew him and he would get us in and himself, and get still good seats down at the front and not pay a cent for it. Because he was so beloved and he was so well connected. It was ama- amazing. A fabulous dresser, an avant--he was dressing in Japanese men's clothes ten years before they became popular in America. He dressed--a great storyteller in many ways. He would tell people, you know, he was from another planet or something, tell these wonderful stories. And a phen- a fabulous guy to know and very beloved. Story_ID: 643651 Speaker 1: So he went off to Europe for a year, and somebody sublet his apartment. And then when he came back, he couldn't get into his apartment because there were a few months left, so he actually lived with us for a while. And that was tremendous fun 'cause Ellis [Ellis Haizlip] didn't have regular hours and he and I would eat strawberries and oatmeal late at night and that would be our dinner. He was a great raconteur and that's when he started the 'Soul!' show. And after the--we would go to every taping of the 'Soul!' show. And after the, the show, he'd bring people to our apartment. So everybody who was on the show came to our apartment and had strawberries and oatmeal or whatever we were having at midnight. And, so it was a fabulous time in our lives. And these were all--except for maybe Sidney Poitier and Harry [HistoryMaker Harry Belafonte] who were both on his show, all the rest were emerging. I mean he had Patti LaBelle and Bluebells [Patti LaBelle and the Bluebells]. That what's they, you know, before she was Patti LaBelle. And everybody before they had made that tremendous leap to stardom. And we were included in that, so it was a very happy and thrilling time for us. Ellis was a very special feature of our lives. Speaker 2: And your, one of your re- relatives, and I can't remember what relationship is, is working on a bi- Speaker 1: My daughter [Melissa Haizlip], yeah. Speaker 2: Your daughter, okay. That's-- Speaker 1: Because she was a little girl and you know [HistoryMaker] James Earl Jones would come in and pat her cheek, or Cicely Tyson would put her on her lap. And she remembers all that. And Ellis was like a fairy godfather, you know. He was just magical with children. So she has a deep connection to what he was and what he did. Speaker 2: And what's the name of the documentary when it comes out? Speaker 1: It's going to be 'Mr. Soul!' It's about him and he was quite an intellectual, very smart. So it wasn't just showing off, you know, people dancing and singing and all of that. He had a lot of intellectual--he had, he had [HistoryMaker] Nikki Giovanni interview James Baldwin, for example. Nikki was not a household word then. But the intellectuals knew who she was, but she wasn't a household word as she is, as she became. So it was performance and thought; and that was wonderful because it indicated the breadth of the black experience. Story_ID: 643652 Speaker 1: So you're in the [U.S.] Virgin Islands (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We're in the Virgin Islands, all right. Speaker 1: And your husband [HistoryMaker Harold Haizlip] has an important job in education. Speaker 2: He has an important job and I don't have a job. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But the interesting thing about landing in the Virgin Islands was that when I'd been in graduate school at Harvard [Harvard Graduate School of Design, Cambridge, Massachusetts], there were two other people of color in my class of twelve, and one was a Virgin Islander. And he was now the head of the planning department for the Virgin Islands [U.S. Virgin Islands Department of Planning and Natural Resources] and asked me would I be interested in a job. And I said, "Well, no, because I didn't, I don't really want to do that anymore." But it was, it's such a small world. So the first year I was in the Virgin Islands I watched a lot of television 'cause I didn't have a job. And I said, "I can do that, that looks interesting." So I went down to see, it was only one station, CBS. Went to the station and I said, "Do you have anything in a production capacity that, where I can learn and just, you know, be your assistant." 'Cause it was not a big, fancy station. It was very small with a staff of ten. And I think he thought that having a commissioner's wife would be useful to him, so he hired me as a production assistant to learn how to do camera work and set the stage, do sets and things like that, which I enjoyed. And that's how I got into television. And it was a very small station with one engineer, one camera person, and then some clerical staff. So I--and it was a station that had been bought by Bob Johnson [Robert L. Johnson] and a group of other, other people, other black men. And it was the first black owned station in America, except that it was all violent. And there was a famous black New Yorker that they called the Silver Fox, Jay Raven Jones [ph.] who was a big politician. Well, he had retired to the Virgin Islands and he was one of the buyers. And then there was the father of the woman who is in the cabinet now. The black woman. You know, you know, Susan, Susan Rice. Susan Rice's father [Emmett J. Rice] was also one of the owners and Ted Ledbetter. But anyway they bought the station and the general manager was a man named Ted Ledbetter, he was one of the owners as well. And after a year, Ted left and I became the general manager and I had learned all that I needed to know that I could do. And I started running the station. And I brought in local programming which they hadn't had before. And a local news announcer which they hadn't had before. 'Cause everybody who was doing the news was off island and didn't look like the islanders. And I thought that needed to be adjusted, so I made that change. And had a wonderful time running a station in basically a small town. So if you're out swimming at Magens Bay, which is one of the famous beaches of St. Thomas [U.S. Virgin Islands], somebody will swim by you and say, "You know, I didn't like that editorial, editorial you had on the air yesterday." But it was a terrific experience and one which we did some very dramatic programs. We did one about the first high school graduating class in St. Thomas. Because up to a certain point, St. Thomas didn't have a high school. And if you wanted high school, your parents had to have enough money to send you away and you usually went to Washington, D.C., and a lot of them went to Dunbar [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar Senior High School, Washington, D.C.], and then come back. And, so I did a story on the first class that left the island and came back, and they were all at this point in their lives, famous islanders. They were doctors, dentists or realtors or done something wonderful in the island. And we did a tremendous story about their lives and how they had to make that trek to Washington and what it meant, and then what it meant for them to come back. And that was a very significant commentary that we did. Speaker 1: That's the story a lot of peo- people in D.C. would pro- probably want-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --to see as well. Speaker 2: I'm sure they would. It was, it was just really quite thrilling to do that. Speaker 1: So you were a general manager from--what was it from '75 [1975] to eigh- to '81 [1981]? Speaker 2: Yeah, I think so (background noise), yes, yeah, 'til we left. Story_ID: 643653 Speaker 1: So you came back to New York City [New York, New York]? Speaker 2: We came back to Connecticut. We came back to Connecticut. And then Harold [HistoryMaker Harold Haizlip] and I both got jobs in New York. And I went to the big station of WNBC [sic.], which is one of the largest stations in the country, in New York City, Channel 13 [WNET-TV]. And they do famous 'Great Performances,' programs, and they originated the 'Nature' program. So I traveled from very tiny league to the big league. Speaker 1: So is that the same station that produced 'Soul!'? Speaker 2: It's the same station that produced 'Soul!' Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: It's what they call a national distributor because a lot of their programs are bought up by the other stations. Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And-- Speaker 1: Channel 13. Speaker 2: Yeah, Channel 13. Speaker 1: Okay. So this is 1981. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And you came in as a director of corporate communications? Speaker 2: Yes, and special assistant to the president. So I was in charge of the unit that had to do with music and graphics and all the kind of special, other special aspects of television. And I was a troubleshooter for the president. Everything he didn't want to do. And, so I, you know, I knew more than he did about how to run a station 'cause he hadn't actually run a station before. And I knew more technical things than he did. So he used me in a lot of very efficient ways. Story_ID: 643654 Speaker 1: What would you consider to be the highlight of your stay there? 'Cause you were there from what, '81 [1981] to '89 [1989]? Eight years (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Eighty-one [1981] to I think it was '86 [1986] or '87 [1987], I can't remember now. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I just--every--I loved that station [WNET-TV, New York, New York] because it was like being in graduate school. And hear- hearing and seeing everybody who's doing something important in the world. 'MacNeil/Lehrer' ['The MacNeil/Lehrer News Hour'; 'PBS NewsHour'] for example, started their evening report there and I, you know, I'd be in the elevator with Bill Moyers. They all were working where I was working. So it was just like a picnic every day, an intellectual picnic every day. And I think there was a highlight a week the whole time I was there. And the station did a lot of special events. I helped to put those together. So I would say that that was probably one of the most innovative and exciting jobs that I had because it was non-routine certainly. Never knew who was coming in or what was going to happen or what kind of program was going to be introduced. Lot of press stuff, you know, had a lot of press relationships and special events to introduce programs or program strands. And traveled a lot. We went, I went to Africa for the station. We--they wanted to bring in African programs, so they sent us to Senegal. And that was a really thrilling experience to talk with Afri- and other filmmakers from--I suppose that was a highlight then, from other parts of Africa came to this meeting to talk about how could--what kind of programs were they doing, what was in the pipeline and how could we get them to America. So it was a first initiative. Speaker 1: So it was a--I know the greatest filmmaker then, Ousmane Sembene, was he a part of this-- Speaker 2: I'm sure he was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) these discussions? Speaker 2: --sure he was. But that was, you know, it was a, it was a thrilling thing. And the thrilling things, oh, equally thrilling was going to the White House [Washington, D.C.] at least seven or eight times for 'Great Performances,' which were done at the White House. And my job was to squire a group of very high end contributors to the White House every time. We would get invitations and Harold [HistoryMaker Harold Haizlip] was able to come as well for luncheons and dinners and these special performances. My only regret was that the president was not a Democratic president (laughter) when I went. I was--we went during the Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] years. Story_ID: 643655 Speaker 1: Now you were also there when--during the Muppet [Muppets] years of (unclear) (laughter) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right, of the--and they started out at that station [WNET-TV, New York, New York] as well. Joan Ganz Cooney was there. So I guess I was there in the really, when the station was at zenith in terms of those pioneers, MacNeil [Robert MacNeil] and Lehrer [Jim Lehrer] for example, and Joan Ganz Cooney. And then do the 'Great Performances.' Jack--there's a man named Jack Vince [ph.] who was very famous in the public television world who would bring in the operas and he did the Three Tenors program, which was very famous. Speaker 1: Oh, right, right. Speaker 2: We went to that. Pavarotti [Luciano Pavarotti] and the other two. Speaker 1: Placido Domingo and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Placido Domingo, yeah. Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: So it was a really a banner time for that station. And also that wonderful English series, not 'The Forsyte Saga.' Speaker 1: 'Upstairs, Downstairs'? Speaker 2: No, the one that came after that, 'Brideshead Revisited,' yes. We were the presenting station for that. And, so we had all this, all this--the stars and gave everybody teddy bears. If you know, if you remember the, one of the major characters carried around a teddy bear all the time. So it--that was just more like a big, funny, fun gala every day I went to work because you never knew who was going to be there, and what I was going to be exposed to. And I learned a lot. It was a station, it was probably the station, the workplace that had the most intelligent and intellectual people and culturally savvy people that I'd ever been at and probably wouldn't duplicate that again unless I went back to that station. (Background sound) You see, every department head knew a lot about his or her particular area. You know, there the people who did the documentaries who knew about, a lot about the various subjects. Ken Burns started when I started. So I knew Ken Burns very well. So it was--if you were intellectually oriented and liked to learn, it was a wonderful place to be. So it was just great for me. Speaker 1: It sounds like it (unclear). Speaker 2: Yeah, it really was. Story_ID: 643656 Speaker 1: Now you moved to Los Angeles [California] in '89 [1989] or did--well, what happened? What was the? Speaker 2: Well, they got new--the president had to leave so when the pre- you know when staff changes, you change. And a fellow came in to take over from the president and he wanted his own staff. And I had a fairly high salary. The president was gone and he wanted, you know, people that he knew. So a whole group of us were let go. And that was a very sad time for me. You know, if you have a job that you love and you lose it all of a sudden and you haven't done, you don't think you've done anything to deserve that. It was not a great time for me, but I recovered from that and then was offered a great job out here. Speaker 1: Okay, now-- Speaker 2: And that's what brought us to Los Angeles. Speaker 1: Do you remember some of the struggles with the Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] administration around funding for public television? Speaker 2: Yeah, I remember, you know, we all, of course always talking about that at the office and how could we impact that. Yes, we certainly do remember it because we are, we're the largest of the public television stations [WNET-TV] in a very rich city [New York, New York]. And we were presenting 'Great Performances' and 'Live from Lincoln Center,' 'Nature,' 'The MacNeil/Lehrer Report' ['The MacNeil/Lehrer News Hour'; 'PBS NewsHour']. So we had a huge budget. And, so our budget was very much impacted with those cuts. Speaker 1: Was Mrs. Reagan [Nancy Reagan] an ally at all (unclear)? Speaker 2: Not that I know of, I don't think so. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I don't think so. But we certainly did give them coverage in terms of the events that they had. So we didn't make them an enemy, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I don't think Mrs. Reagan was particularly interested in the arts as I remember; I think she was more interested in preservation and things like that. Story_ID: 643657 Speaker 1: Is '89 [1989] the year that--? Speaker 2: That we came out here? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah Speaker 1: All right. So you came out here and became the national director of the National Center for Film and Video Preservation-- Speaker 2: Right (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --at the American Film Institute [Los Angeles, California]. Speaker 2: Right, and let their job, but that job was a wonderful job because there were several hundred, there are several hundred film and television archives around the country and they all need funding. They're like little, you know, what they are of course and-- Speaker 1: Well, kind of explain this to peo- people who have no idea what this is about. Speaker 2: How can you explain it? Speaker 1: No, no, I want you to explain-- Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: --what the, what the job entailed for those who don't know. Speaker 2: Okay. What--we were a funding source. And archives need money. And we got money from the National Endowment for the Humanities and the National Endowment for the Arts. They gave us a huge budget every year. And a film archive in need of money would apply to us for funding for a particular project, and that's what we did. We divvied up the money to archives in need, and they were all in need. And, so every year became a different dance. And we--that was one part of our job. The other big job was to do every year a massive volume to catalogue all the films. We even did a--one of my priorities was to put the preservation of black films, the old black films at the highest priority. The ones they discovered and ones that were given to the archives. Those needed to be preserved. But we all--and out of that came a special volume of the American Film Institute catalog, which is a big, thick tome. And it was called Beyond These Gates [sic. Within Our Gates: Ethnicity in American Feature Films, 1911-1960]. And that was the first catalogue of black films. And aside from that-- Speaker 1: Now I'm sorry, but what does the name signify, Beyond These Gates? Speaker 2: It was just a name that was to signify beyond the Warner Brothers [Warner Bros. Entertainment, Inc.] gates and other gates. There were studios that were doing--and it may have been taken from a movie film as well. But in other words, that group of films was not considered at the time mainstream and as you know it wasn't 'cause white theaters never saw those black films. So I'm assuming that's what the title meant. But it came out a very thick tome, many more, you know they discover films every year in canisters in different places. And, well, you know, about that, and then they go into archives. And, so we worked very closely with the major archive of the country in Washington [D.C.] and all--we had six or seven different people on our board who worked with me. And my job was to be like a referee and they would come to us for special funding for special projects and things like that. And I had to speak about preservation of films. I was the national spokeswoman for that and enjoyed that a great deal. Speaker 1: I remember hearing, you know, Roger Ebert and Gene Sis- Siskel [Gene Siskel] talk about this on their show 'Sneak Previews.' It seemed to be in the, in the '80s [1980s], I guess peo- people began to really think about the loss of, you know, certain films. Some films were completely-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --have been completely lost because of-- Speaker 2: Yeah. You know where films turn up? I'm sure you heard, in Europe. And a lot of American films are still over there in canisters and people find them and then they send them back. So it's the job of the various archives to preserve them and then to get them cataloged. Speaker 1: So did the American Film Institute employ or like contract out with people that understand film preservation (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, they did it themse- I mean they were employees. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And they were paid for by the National Endowment for the Arts and the National Endowment for the--and huge grants, yeah. And they had an office of four or five people and they worked under me who did nothing but catalogue films and find the old posters and find who was in it and do all of that. There's a citation for every film that we know about now in a volume of books. It's called the American Film Institute Catalogue-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --of Feature Films [American Film Institute Catalogue of Feature Films] and then there was a separate one done for black films called Beyond These Gates. And then the subtitle is American, you know, Film Institute Catalogue. Speaker 1: Some of the black films started to show up at festivals, yeah. I know in Chicago [Illinois] we saw films by Spencer Williams. Speaker 2: Um-hm, Micheaux. Speaker 1: Yeah, Oscar Micheaux, right, that I didn't know existed before. Story_ID: 643658 Speaker 1: Is there a particularly interesting story about one of these films? Speaker 2: No (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Not that I can think, not that I can think of now. Speaker 1: One that was saved from falling off a cliff or something or I don't know. Speaker 2: The interesting thing is where people find them. In their attics and in barns, you know, in basements. And they've always wondered what were, you know, people, ordinary people could have these in their closet. That's what's interesting. And some--they look at them and you open it up and, you know, there's a certain smell, you know, it's on its way to deterioration if it hasn't already deteriorated. Speaker 1: Well, they oxidize or something, the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right. Speaker 1: --the emulsion oxidizes. Speaker 2: Yeah, so it's an interesting world, preservation. Speaker 1: Do you know the oldest film that's been preserved? Speaker 2: I don't know what-- Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) what it is. I could find that out for you and let you know. Speaker 1: All right. I--just asking. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. So is there a highlight of this peri- period of time that you can think of? Speaker 2: I had a fabulous highlight, yes, and they did the restoration of that film that was in the desert and it had Omar Sharif and the man with blue eyes. Speaker 1: Oh, 'Lawrence of Arabia.' Speaker 2: 'Lawrence of Arabia.' Well, we--they had a huge, big party to present the restored film. And it was in the American embassy in the, British embassy in Washington, D.C. They were gonna premier it there. As head of pre- preservation [at the National Center for Film and Video Preservation], I was invited to come and I, Harold [HistoryMaker Harold Haizlip] and I got there early. And the two people who came to meet me and thank me so much for the preservation were O'Toole [Peter O'Toole] and Omar Sharif. So I said, "If Harold hadn't been there," (laughter) "I might have left with both of them." That was a big kick for me. Speaker 1: Yeah, David Lean's 'Lawrence of Arabia.' Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 2: Good for you. Story_ID: 643659 Speaker 1: So you were there until around 1990? Is that correct, or? Speaker 2: Let's see, when did I start there? I'm trying to remember, eighty (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Eighty-nine [1989], no, it would be longer than that, '89 [1989], so you were there through-- Speaker 2: I think I was there for three or four years (unclear). Speaker 1: But I, but-- Speaker 2: I, yes, I was there through '94 [1994], cause that's when I started writing my book. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I got the idea to write the book while I was looking out the window at a deer in the AFI [American Film Institute, Los Angeles, California] parking lot. Speaker 1: Okay. That's the moment you know you came up with the idea? Speaker 2: Yeah, it was--the deer was out of place. You know, it's right up the street here, the AFI, and right on a busy highway, busy, busy street, which is next to a big, the big park, Griffith Park [Los Angeles, California]. And there's a big parking lot at the AFI. And I looked down one day and there was this deer in the parking lot. And it just, it just seemed so strange to me because it was next to a traffic light. And I--my mind wandered off and I said, and I don't know what the connection was, I'll have to find out someday. I said, "I really need to start investigating my mother's story while she's still here." Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I started thinking about it then. And that became the seed for doing it. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So as we--just to recap what we talked about before. Your mother [Margaret Morris Taylor] was basically orphaned by her own relatives, basically-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --when she was four years old. Speaker 2: Yes, by her older siblings, yes, but they--the oldest of them [Sumner Morris]--I have, I have to have a note of forgiveness here because the oldest of them was eighteen, a young man. It was--so that--she was born in 1912, it was 1916. Not a lot of money around. They weren't at all well-to-do. And the father [William Morris, Sr.] was an alcoholic, which I didn't find out till later. So this eighteen year old kid had to take care of two young brothers, three younger brothers [William Morris, Jr., Edward Morris, and Michael Morris] and another sister [Grace Morris Cramer]. And the youngest was my mother. And beyond that, those four. So, now that I'm an adult, an adult and had been an adult for a while and a mother, I can understand why the boy did what he did. He probably--my mother was probably better off than to be dragged around at four years old, not knowing where she was going to live, what she was going to eat. So, but of course I didn't know that until I began my journey to find out what had happened and why. Speaker 1: Now in the beginning of your journey, did you see it as a book for public consumption? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Or was it just your own personal-- Speaker 2: It was going to be her eightieth birthday present. I was going to--she was approaching eighty and I was thinking what could I give my mother? And I said, "Why don't I see if I could find out what happened to her family" because she always wanted to know. And she always wanted to know why she was left. She knew nothing. She just knew they were gone. And, so I just decided that's what I was going to do. I didn't know what I was going to find. I don't know if, I didn't know who was alive, who was alive or where they were. So I started out with very little knowledge. But it was not meant to be a book at all. And one day I was talking to a friend of Ellis' [Ellis Haizlip], whose name is Faith Childs. She's a good friend and she said, "What are you working on?" I said, "Oh, I'm just doing something for my mother's birthday." And, "What are you doing?" And I told her. She said, "Well, Shirlee [HistoryMaker Shirlee Haizlip] that's--do you understand that's the, that's a book, that's a book idea." I said, "Well, I'll get back to you on that." I said, "I don't know, it's just my mother's story I'm trying to put together." So she kept after me as I was working. And she said, "Well, let me see what you have." And she said, she kept urging me, she kept saying, "This is a story. Can I take it to somebody?" I said, "Okay, but I don't think people are going to be interested in this." And she took it to twelve publishers and we got eleven offers before it was finished. So it did have some--it struck a chord with people. Speaker 1: Okay. So this is 'The Sweeter the Juice' ['The Sweeter the Juice: A Family Memoir in Black and White,' Shirlee Haizlip], right. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: 'A Family Memoir in Black and White.' And the title is sort of a play on 'The Blacker the Berry' ['The Blacker the Berry: A Novel of Negro Life,' Wallace Thurman], right. Speaker 2: Yes, that's exactly what it is, the blacker the--and I was in the room with the editors of every department at Simon and Schuster [Simon and Schuster, Inc.] and the publicity people, and they said, "Well, that's a nice title, but what--nobody's going to know what it means." I said, "No, there's a good part of America, both white and black, and certainly the white southerners would know what it means." And I said, "It comes from an expression, the blacker the berry." They didn't know the first part. None, nobody--none of these erudite people around that table had heard that saying. And it turned out to be a very popular title. Story_ID: 643660 Speaker 1: Now what did you uncover? What was the kind of (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What did I uncover? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: First I uncovered the fact that the eighteen year old [Sumner Morris] took the children and left my mother [Margaret Morris Taylor] because he thought she would be--he couldn't take care of a four year old. And she was left with a neighbor. And I always knew the neighbor's name. And then I started looking at records and I uncovered what her father's [William Morris, Sr.] name was and that he was in fact still living when I was in high school [Ansonia High School, Ansonia, Connecticut]. And she knew that he was living, but she didn't know where he was. And, so I tracked down where they all went. And then I started looking back at the history that brought them together. Where had they come from. And I found that out, that some roots started in Virginia. And the Virginia roots had started back either in Ireland or Scotland or England. So I laid all that out through research and census and other--one day I wrote to the--I had been told from the time I was a little girl that we had been related to some very important people. That's what some of my Washington [D.C.] relatives told me, but they wouldn't tell me who they were. And, so, and they said but we knew the name. They said the man's name was Halyburton [James Dandridge Halyburton], spelled differently from today's Halliburton. And that he lived in Virginia. So I wrote to the Virginia archives and asked did they have any--and this is before the Internet was established. And I said, "Do you have anything on a Halyburton family of Richmond, Virginia?" So a week later they--I got a thick manila envelope and therein it was Judge Halyburton. And it turned out that he was a nephew of Martha Washington [Martha Custis Washington]. And that's all been, you know, all done--that was in the papers about his family. So I had a--and he was the father of my mother's grandfather [Edward E. Morris]. And he, who had a relationship, whatever kind it was we don't know, with a mulatto slave [Ruth Morris] who worked for him in Virginia. So this Judge Halyburton was the beginning of the black-white line. Story_ID: 643661 Speaker 1: Can you spell your ancestor Halyburton's [James Dandridge Halyburton] name for us? Speaker 2: H-A-L-Y-B-U-R-T-O-N, Halyburton. Speaker 1: Okay. And this question may be, may seem odd, out of left field, left field. But is he, is the, is the current Halliburton industries [Halliburton Company] related to that (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't think so, we've looked that up. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And they seemed to come out of a different place and they spell it differently-- Speaker 1: They do. Speaker 2: --too, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. And, so, but, now he--you were telling me off camera too that he swore in-- Speaker 2: Jefferson Davis, yeah, he was a well known jurist, a judge at that time. So, and obv- I, and, you know, worked with the Confederacy and lived in Richmond, Virginia. So when I was doing my research, I went down to see where he lived and he lived, obviously lived quite well. Speaker 1: Did he have like the columns and the-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --all the-- Speaker 2: Yeah, but it was an eerie feeling. And they have a lot about him in the Museum of the Confederacy [Richmond, Virginia]. Speaker 1: Yes, so this is (laughter)--well, how did you feel about having him for an ancestor? Speaker 2: Odd (laughter), odd. But it's part of all of our black patterns in terms of where we came from and what happened to us after we got here, so I just look at it as another, just another bloodline which I didn't nec- you know, which was not necessarily invited in. But there it is. Speaker 1: So he's related to Martha Washington [Martha Custis Washington]. Speaker 2: Through Mar- yeah, he's her nephew [sic. great-nephew] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Unclear) Okay. Speaker 2: She--he was the son [sic. grandson] of one of her sisters or brothers [Bartholomew Dandridge]. I don't remember which one, but it's all, that's all documented. Story_ID: 643662 Speaker 1: What else did you discover in this? Speaker 2: I discovered the reasons that the family broke up and we didn't know until I did my research that my mother's father [William Morris, Sr.] was an alcoholic, so he couldn't take care of the family. And then many people did what they did to, to make a living. Just went away and established a new life where they could be treated better than they had been as black people. And, so my job was to find the living relatives and let them know they had another relative and a whole group of us and see what would happen from there. I had no idea how this news would be received. I had no idea, you know, where the people were until I began to search for them. And I found my mother's sister [Grace Morris Cramer] through a private detective 'cause I had--this was before, as I said before, before the Internet. So I had to--every--I traveled a lot with Harold [HistoryMaker Harold Haizlip] and every time we went away, I would call all the Morrises, which was my mother's maiden name, in the book to see if anybody was related. That never gotten me anywhere. And then I started doing the research and then I hire, I found out that they had been in Cleveland [Ohio], that some Morris family had been in Cleveland. And, so I hired a private detective and gave him the information that I had. And within two weeks he called me back. He says, "I have really good news for you. I think I found your mother's sister, but she's no longer here." And I said, "Well, where is she?" And he said, "She's in California, in Anaheim." I said, "Not too far from me." He said, "No," and he said, "I'll give you her address. And the rest is up to you." Now I didn't tell this detective what the reason was I was searching. He didn't know what my nationality was or race. And, so that didn't come up. So he was giving me information. And he told me how old she was, and he said she was a widow. And I had her address. And, so then I went from there. I told my husband. I said, "We're going to go down to see Grace. And will you take me?" And he said, "Well, I've got a busy week coming up. See if somebody else can take you." I said, "I don't want to go with anybody else." And he said, "Okay, well, I'll hire a car for you. And the car can take you." So the morning we, the car arrives and I'd gotten myself all dressed up and I'd gotten papers together so I could make this journey. And I had made a decision not to call because I might have been hung up on. I didn't know. And I knew how old she was, which was older than my mother [Margaret Morris Taylor]. And, so I decided I was going to make her a surprise visit. And that morning my husband decided, "Well, I don't want you to go alone, so I'll go with you, but we'll just drive in the car." So we drove down to Anaheim, and I hadn't been to Anaheim before and I had not heard great things about Orange County [California]. I heard there was a lot of racism in Orange County. So that made me a little bit nervous. So we drive down and the chauffeur says, "Are you sure you have the right address?" And I said, "Yeah." And he said, "Well, I think I know where that is." He said, "Did you know that it's a trai- trailer park?" And I said, "No, I didn't know that." And, so we drove in and the homes looked like cottages, they didn't look like the trailer parks I was used to back east where there were bullet wagons, you know. And we got to the number and by this time people were peaking out the window at this big large limousine going into the trailer park, or the mobile home community as it's called. And we stopped. And Harold said, "You know, hun, I don't want to give the lady a heart attack or a stroke. So I'm going to go off and have coffee with the driver and I'll be back for you in an hour or so." So he left me outside, pulled off. Story_ID: 643663 Speaker 1: At this point I'm getting a little nervous. I hadn't been nervous up to that point. But here I was going in to see a woman [Haizlip's maternal aunt, Grace Morris Cramer] who had no idea who I was. I didn't know how I was going to be received. It was a lovely day and the sun was shining. And there was a little rose bush outside of this little house [in Anaheim, California]. And I walk up the stairs and I hadn't planned what I was going to say, I didn't know what I was going to say. But I rang the bell and her blinds were closed. And I knew she was going to be home because she was home alone and didn't go out very much, was the report that I had gotten. And, so I rang the bell and this little woman comes to the door. And I had a big bunch of flowers and a box of candy and a big bag that had a lot of records in it in case there was going to be any question. And she opened the door and I was stunned when I saw her because she looked so much like my mother. And I don't know what else I expected, but it was just a stunning thing 'cause I had not seen anybody look like my mother before. And she smiled at me and I said, "I have flowers for you." And she said, "Who are they from?" I said, "They're from your sister Margaret [Margaret Morris Taylor] and me, your niece Shirlee [HistoryMaker Shirlee Haizlip]." So she looked at me and because I didn't know her, it was hard for me to read the expression. It was all--I guess the best way to describe it was stoic. And, so she opened the door and said, "All right, come in," just like that, very easily. And she was tiny. Probably five feet, if that, and slender. And she took me over to the sofa and the house was very neat and there was a picture of a very handsome young man beside the sofa. And I said, "Well, who's that?" And she said, "That's my grandson Jeffrey [ph.]." And, so we sat down and in my pocketbook, my big bag, I had put a tape recorder and a camera and all the papers, you know, in case I, I needed to show her anything. She was very matter of fact in affect. I didn't know what--I couldn't--'cause I didn't know her, I didn't know what was going on inside of her. And I told her how glad I was to meet her, that I'd been thinking about her all the, for a long time. And we all wondered what had happened. And I said, "I know my mother is going to be very happy to know that I'm here and before I leave I hope we can call her together." And, so I said, "Tell me about your life. Tell me, tell me what you've been doing since you left Washington [D.C.]." I said, "I know you had a daughter 'cause I read some things about you. And I know you had a husband [Earl Cramer]. What happened to your husband?" And she told me she was a widow and that her only daughter whose name was Patricia [Patricia Cramer], which is one of my sister's [Patricia Taylor Lewis] names, had died as a young woman, but had left behind three children who would be my cousins, and who are her grandchildren. And, so she got the pictures and showed them to me and she went back and got more pictures and showed me. And told me, she told me about her life and that it had been very difficult after their mother had died. And she didn't have much schooling after that. She was twelve when her mother [Rosalind Scott Morris] died. And that she was dragged around from place to place. And of course while she's telling me this I'm thinking about my mother's life that had been so much easier, you know. And then she told me she had lived in Cleveland [Ohio]. I said, "Yes, I know." And then she came out here to be with her daughter and her daughter died at a young age. But she was close to her grandson and two granddaughters who lived nearby. And all she could talk about was this grandson, his name was Jeffrey. And of course I have a nephew named Jeffrey [ph.], which is my sister's child. So we talked and I didn't want to wear her down because she was an older woman. And I said, "Well, I'd like to come again. I'm gonna invite my mother out, and I know she would like to meet you." And I said, "I'd like to call her if you wouldn't mind and tell her I'm here and you can just say hello and tell her that we hope she'll come out." And we did that. And there were no tears or anything like that. I think we both kept our emotions in check. For me it was very overwhelming because it was--I knew all of my life that my mother's family had left her or went somewhere, and we didn't know why. We knew that they passed. And she--the--my aunt and I didn't talk about the passing because that was obvious, you know, and I'm not going to--there was no point in talking about it. And, so we called my mother and chatted. And I said, "Well, I'd like to come back and see you some more and meet Jeffrey and your granddaughters." She said, "You will." So I would call her once a week--I'm sorry, we left. Story_ID: 643664 Speaker 1: I would call her [Haizlip's maternal aunt, Grace Morris Cramer] once a week after that and I said, "Well, when am I going to meet Jeffrey [ph.]?" She said, "Well, he--." I said, "Have you told him?" She said, "No, I haven't told him yet. I'm not sure how to tell him." And I said, "Well--," she said, "Do you think you could help me?" I said, "Sure." I said, "What do you want me to tell him?" She said, "Well, you just tell him who you are and who your mother is and just tell him." So I called and he was in New York [New York]. He lives in the Anaheim--in Brea [California]. And I told him who I was. I told him I'd been visiting with his grandmother and that I was the daughter of his grandmother's sister [Margaret Morris Taylor]. This is all in a message. And would he call. The next morning I get a call, Harold [HistoryMaker Harold Haizlip] calls up and says, "Jeffrey's on the phone." And, so he said, "Well, who are you and how are you related to me?" So I told him the story, much as I'm telling it to you. And he said, "Well, why don't I know about you?" Well, I said, "Jeffrey I don't know, you'd have to ask your grandmother that." And I said, "But what you need to know is that I am a black woman, my family is black." So he didn't, he didn't say anything. He said, "Well, I'd like to meet you as soon as I can." He says--I mean he was calling me back from New York City. I said, "Well, you can do even better than that." I said, "My daughter is in a show on Broadway, in 'Jelly's Last Jam' [George C. Wolfe]. I'm sure she would love to see you, meet you, she knows all about you and I have another daughter who works in New York in a law office and she knows all about you, they're your age category. They can tell you some things about our family." And I, now remember I haven't met Jeffrey. I had no idea of his character, what he's like, whether he would follow through or whatever. I just know what he looks like 'cause I saw a picture. So the, in the next hour my phone rings off the hook. My mother's calling and saying that he called her and he's going to come to see her in Connecticut. And Deirdre [Deirdre Haizlip Celotto] and Melissa [Melissa Haizlip] both called and said that he was coming to see them. And he was going to go--Melissa invited him to see the play she was in that night. Now if you remember what 'Jelly's Last Jam' was about, he, Jelly Roll Morton had anxieties and, about his racial identity. And his family wanted him to be more Creole and more French but, you know, he wanted to be more black and play the black music. So I thought it was ironic that this young man from Orange County [California] who had no idea that he was anything but Irish and Italian, his father was Italian, goes to a play where his cousin is singing and acting about the very issues that separated his family long--many years ago. Isn't that ironic? So he sees the play and then he goes backstage and he said, she says, "Jeffrey?" And he says, "Melissa?" And, you know, they had this big greeting and he was very, very open. And then he--the next night he went to--so Melissa told him what she knew of the story. And the next night he went and visited Deirdre, the other daughter. She took him to a cocktail party. And she said, "Well, I'm sorry but, you know, I'm the only black person here." And he says, "Well, no, I guess now there are two of us." So he was, you know, accepting this idea of his added genetic element that he knew nothing about. Story_ID: 643665 Speaker 1: Probably the most poignant visit of all was that to my mother [Margaret Morris Taylor]. Because all of the people who left her in her life were the men that she knew. Her mother [Rosalind Scott Morris] died and then her father [William Morris, Sr.] and her brothers left. So here comes one back from Orange County, California on a rainy day drives up to Connecticut. She's really nervous 'cause she hasn't met her sister [Grace Morris Cramer] yet. And Jeffrey's [ph.] very charming and pleasant. And very smiley. And, so he goes to the door, course he doesn't know what he's going to see. And she doesn't know what she's going to see. And she answers it and he sees a little woman that looks like his grandmother. And she sees a man who looks like her father. So, you know, this man comes back, man with blue eyes and dark hair, comes back to reclaim that part of his family that he didn't even know was lost. So they had a wonderful reconciliation. He was very kind to her and he told her how pleased he was to be part of her family. He was really cool, and that was good for her. And she called me after that and she was very excited. I said, "Well, now you have to come out and meet your sister." So that was another, you know, she was very nervous and came out. And we didn't have a chauffeur this time, we drove our own car, Harold [HistoryMaker Harold Haizlip] drove us down. My mother kept saying--and this would suggest to you her anxiety about the meeting. "Do you think she's going to like me?" I said, "Yes, mother, everybody loves you. Of course she's going to like you." And she had talked to her sister several times on the phone. And, so I let her go in first and it was remarkable how much alike they were, in the same tonal quality in their voice. They both had had a daughter named Patricia [Patricia Taylor Lewis and Patricia Cramer], even though that wasn't a family name. And they both had had long marriages. So they had a lot in common. Except that my mother found out that her life had, my mother's life had been so much better, much more comfortable. My aunt's life had been somewhat of an, you know, economic strain. Her husband [Earl Cramer] was not a professional man. And didn't make very much money. Pro- she was probably doing better now than she had when she was married 'cause her grandchildren were helping to take care of her. I don't even think she finished high school. So she didn't have much education. But, you know, she was eighty, in her eighties, late eighties when all of this happened. And that's a lot to absorb, especially when you've lived your life closeted for so long and in a certain way and in the, in the majority which was then the majority of the country. You're part of that group and to find out that perhaps you are not as eligible for that group as you thought you were. It had to been--but she handled it well. She handled it well and she was--after that, very welcoming. And she grew to--we would go see her every, every two weeks. And she grew to love Harold. And she said, "You know, he's really a lot like my husband." And I thought isn't that a wonderful racial leap, you know, because she had no black people in her life after she left Washington [D.C.]. And yet she was really accepting of a man who was very different from the men in her life had been. Story_ID: 643666 Speaker 1: Did she discuss at all the process of changing i- racial identity? Speaker 2: No, she didn't. And I--because of her age and I didn't know how facile she would be or could be when dealing with that subject, and it had to be emotional. I didn't press her on that. I would have wanted her to say those things. I don't know if she had the capability, you know, I really don't. I don't--she didn't finish high school, so she didn't have a lot of intellectual tools, you know. And then she'd lived a cloistered existence among white people. Her husband [Earl Cramer] had been a factory worker. So I don't, and I don't know if she was emotionally able to do that. You know, it takes a certain kind of strength. And there would have been no way for her to build that strength up because she never had to confront it until now. And here's she, you know, almost feeble but not quite in her, in her late eighties. But they made a nice reconciliation. And then we met Jeff's [ph.] father who had no idea that his mother-in-law [Grace Morris Cramer], you know, was a woman of color. And he was an Italian, hardy Italian guy. And he was terrific--and very welcoming, as were, as were the sis- and Jeff's sisters, her granddaughters in other words. So once she saw that that group, which was her core group at this point in her life, was open and accepting. I think she might, you know, people are always nervous about how somebody else is going to accept you. And I'm sure that she was suffering from that. And when she saw that they were accepting and we all, we all went down to dinner at her son-in-law's house, her daughter [Patricia Cramer] had died. And that was a wonderful dinner. And it was like a first date. We were all saying, "Well, when did you do this, and when did you do that? Where did you go to school?" You know, we were all talking at once, a big family dinner, in the Italian style. And I have a, you know, very good memories of that. So the coming together has--was wonderful. And now we try to keep up as family. We send Christmas cards. We don't visit enough, but we talk on the phone and there's no separation. My aunt died, but she and my mother [Margaret Morris Taylor] had six good years together. And it, so it was a, it was a wonderful thing. And I could see the transformation in my mother's face to have her sister back in her life. To have some of her family. And one of her great-nieces on that side was getting engaged, and made sure that we were all invited. We were the only black people at, only known black people at this party down in Orange County [California]. And the girl who was the bride was a great-niece of my mother's. And she took my mother by the hand to, and the girl was marrying into an Italian family. To take my mother around and introduced her as her, you know, great-blah, blah, blah. And it was a, it was a lovely moment. So I think that for my mother it, you know, it put a period on--at the end of a long look, and then opened up a new chapter. So it was a--probably the most wonderful thing I've done in my life in terms of doing something for another person, especially for my mother. And it was very satisfying to me because I think all of us, all of my mother's siblings inherited a sense of loss and also perhaps a sense of sorrow that we could be abandoned that way because we are people of color. So we have that collected feeling as a family. And then having the aunt and then getting this family back was restorative to us. So I only look at it as a merely wonderfully positive experience. And, so I wrote all of that up and then the agent said, "This is definitely a book." And we did get a lot of offers for it ['The Sweeter the Juice: A Family Memoir in Black and White,' Shirlee Haizlip] so, and it touched a lot of people. You got, you know, you got thousands of letters. People sent locks of their hair in to--could I possibly be. And this is before all the, you know, they're genetic testing now. You can go and see what your different parts are. And this was before all that happened. And I've got lots of a--stories of similar things happening. And, so it was a watershed kind of situation. Story_ID: 643667 Speaker 1: How does this personal story affect your, I guess larger view of race in this country, and the dynamics of who's who? Speaker 2: Well, it makes me, it just confirms for me--'cause I knew so many people passed, you know. Everybody know, knew that. Then they could never name the percentage. But just confirmed for me how impermeable [sic.] the racial line is. And that we're all much more mixed than we know. And certainly in terms of the geography of the country, and who was where, and then how they moved. So there are a lot more families where, many families where this has happened, you know. And they--the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] every year would estimate in The Crisis which was their magazine, the number of people who passed a year. Each year they would have that figure in there. It was a, it was an estimate 'cause they didn't really know, but it was large. So, you know, every time I see somebody that looks as if--there's an expression that you've probably have heard, touch of the brush. Looks as if they have a touch of the brush. And I'll say, "Um-hm, that's my story." Speaker 1: I've never heard that expression but I (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You've never heard it? No, it's a southern expression and it meant that you're black or part black. Speaker 1: I know it's part of the culture growing up. But I could look at someone on television or in a magazine and tell if they were black or not--without--and I don't even know how we would do it. But our whole family could, we could tell. We didn't have any stories of pa- passing in the family, but we could tell if somebody was black and we would always, seemed to be always right. We were never like fooled with is that person black or white? (Unclear) he's black, you know, or they're not or, but it's so many stories, we've had stor- we had [HistoryMaker] June Cross, (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Hugh Price and (unclear)-- Speaker 2: He's my cousin. Speaker 1: Hugh Price? Yeah, he had a [maternal] grandmother [Cora Schuster] that deliberately passed and would only visit on holidays-- Speaker 2: I know. Speaker 1: --incognito. Speaker 2: I know, that was a sad story. Speaker 1: Very sad story. His mother [Charlotte Schuster Price] just could not, you know, bear it. [HistoryMaker] Eugenia Collier, the writer in Baltimore [Maryland] told a story about an aunt of hers, a light skinned aunt that could almost pass, who decided to adopt a white baby. And did, and raised the baby. And she was her passport to white (laughter)-- Speaker 2: So she, did she pass then--the aunt pass? Speaker 1: She could pass a lot easier with the white baby that she adopted. That she, you know, she literally, you know, adopt a white baby in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] with blue eyes, an Irish girl. Now that ended up being a tragic kind of a story. Speaker 2: Yeah, that is sad. Speaker 1: And, but it's so many stories--there are more stories like this than we know, I guess. Speaker 2: Oh, many more. Speaker 1: And every year like-- Speaker 2: Many more (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) Carol Channing reveals that she's black. Speaker 2: Yeah, that was a shocker. Speaker 1: I mean, according to the (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But then you look at her and you can say, "Oh, of course, I should have known that," you know. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: There are, there are just lots of people like that out there. But I think now that this genetic testing is so popular, a lot of people are going to find that out and the question is what they'll do with it. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And it depends on where they lived and how they were raised, and how open they are, or closed, you know. Speaker 1: You're right. So, but your second book was 'Finding Grace.' Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: 'Two Sisters and the Search for Meaning Beyond the Color Line' ['Finding Grace: Two Sisters and the Search for Meaning Beyond the Color Line,' Shirlee Haizlip]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: This is--is this the story, a continuation of the story? Speaker 2: Well, no, it's what happened after. It's really a story about the letters and inquiries that people made and other, there are other incidents of passing that are described in that book. But we had, we had so much mail and people telling their stories. So I wanted to share those stories. Story_ID: 643668 Speaker 1: Before we get into the second book ['Finding Grace: Two Sisters and the Search for Meaning Beyond the Color Line,' Shirlee Haizlip] in depth, tell us about the reception of the first one ['The Sweeter the Juice: A Family Memoir in Black and White,' Shirlee Haizlip], yeah, which was considerable. I've seen the scrapbooks of all the press. Speaker 2: Tremendous press. And I think because we hit a nerve. And but it was a novel story for a while. People who had no idea that this had happened. So it was a very personal story and yet people saw how it could affect the entire population. So we were on all the shows. Oprah [Oprah Winfrey] had us on three times. In fact on one, on the first show, we met some of the family for the first time, and she just loved that. She said (imitates voice), "Here's the family." And she got a big kick out of that. And it was a day where there were blizzards on the East Coast and in Chicago [Illinois] so a lot of people were home. So it turns out it was their fifth most watched show in all the shows she's ever done. And then she had us on for two follow ups. But all the papers carried the story. And did a good job on it and often reflected on it through local prisms. The L.A. Times [Los Angeles Times] put it on the cover of the book review section. It had two book reviews in The New York Times. And people, journalists who were really good writers and creative, used it as a way into talking about race and racial differences. And it has been adopted for--as required reading in about 185 colleges. And some colleges require it for the summer before freshman year. So it's getting a lot of--still continues to get a lot of play. Story_ID: 643669 Speaker 1: So the second book ['Finding Grace: Two Sisters and the Search for Meaning Beyond the Color Line,' Shirlee Haizlip], now comes out in 2004. Or is that, is that correct? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. And this is a book--you were explaining it was a response to all the letters and inquiries you had. Speaker 2: All the letters and inquiries and stories. Sometimes people would send letters with hair in it saying, "Does this kind of hair make me a black person," or "What should I do if--?" So I think one of the ways that you can reach people and people can feel they can look at their own situations is by telling them stories. So I got many stories in the letters. And I wrote to each person asking if I could share those stories. And, so the book is the aftermath of finding Grace [Grace Morris Cramer]. 'Cause people said to me, "Well, what happened?" And I hadn't been able to tell them in the way that I'm telling you what happened afterwards because the book ['The Sweeter the Juice: A Family Memoir in Black and White,' Shirlee Haizlip] ends with our coming together for the first time. And, so I extended what happened so that they would know and then shared stories and observations and racial and genetic information in the book. So it's a pastiche so to speak, of stories, letters, inquiries, and ex- explanations about racial lines and genetic information. Story_ID: 643670 Speaker 1: Is there a particular story you could tell us that really resonates that you can remember from your book ['Finding Grace: Two Sisters and the Search for Meaning Beyond the Color Line,' Shirlee Haizlip]? Speaker 2: From that book, we'll come back to that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: All right, 'cause I can't (unclear). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I have to think about that for a minute. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: But this question though is something that I think is, I think a lot of people are confused about. I have conversations and just from what I think I know about science, a lot of people are confused about how many generations it takes for a line to go from black to white? I mean to look like, you know, I mean human beings are all human beings of course. But, and, so, well, what would you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You mean in terms of external features? Speaker 1: Yeah, exter- yeah, fea- features, yeah. Speaker 2: Well, I don't know if there's a formula for that. It depends on the two people who marry and what their genes are. 'Cause it's all genetically determined. You never lose the genes, even though you may--the group or the family might get lighter. You still have the same genes. You don't lose those. The same DNA. You have a portion of the DNA that went before you. So you don't lose it, you know. So it's a, I'm not a medical scientist or a biological scientist I can say, but you could be very, very light, for example, and still have black features. But if you're very light, people sometimes don't see those black features. By black features I mean ones that are attributed to looking--emanating from Africa, broad noses or fuller lips or the chin is set in a certain way or, you know, certain color eyes. But one of the things that most people should be aware of is that when people have green or hazel eyes, that's a sign of mixture, always. No matter the color of their skin. They have been mixed with a person of a darker race. So it's a--once you have black genes, they don't leave you or white genes, they don't leave you. But if you marry another person who has none or has fewer, then it's possible that the skin can become lighter. Speaker 1: Well, isn't it true there's no absolute separation, anyway? Speaker 2: No, no (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I mean, 'cause it's not like we're two separate species. Speaker 2: No, no. It's just like we all have different kind of hair, you know, and different physiques. So it's, it's sort of like different recipes and mixing them up. Story_ID: 643671 Speaker 1: Now you have another story, I mean another book, right? And that's out now. What was the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I wrote that with my husband Harold [HistoryMaker Harold Haizlip]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, and it was a view of our marriage. And he said/she said kind of format. We agreed from the very beginning that these are the areas we're going to cover from the time we got married, or the time we met up until the time we're writing the book. So we knew we were going to talk about this, this, this and this. And you talk about it as you saw it, and I'll talk about it as I saw it. And we had one editor who edited both. And The New York Times said, "Sometimes it seemed like the Haizlips were on different planets. But they always got back together again." So it's a--people who read it find it quite interesting because of the male psyche and the female psyche. And then you add into that our experiences and our racial experiences. So it, again it resonated with our--we began a book tour on that in Nashville, Tennessee. And we didn't think anybody was going to come out. It was going to be held at the courthouse because that's where they decided it was going to be 'cause there's a lot of different rooms for the different authors. And we were going to be on early, I think 9:30. We were the first on. And there was a lot of authors there. And it was like a book festival. So we said, "Who in Nashville is going to come out to hear us?" We were just shocked because the room was filled, and it was mostly white people. And, so we had a very success- and older white people. And they related to our story, which is just wonderful because what they were relating to, relating to us as two human beings who married and went through the same things that they did. And when we reached that point in American society, it's really quite wonderful because they looked beyond our race and said, "This is what we--," and they would--they would come up and talk to my husband and say--or a man would talk to him, "Yeah, I know blah, blah, blah," and the women would talk to me. So it was very, very wonderful. And it was--a lot of people are using that in classrooms, you know, how they're teaching about marriage these days in school-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --as a primer. Speaker 1: Now this book is 'In the Garden of Our Dreams' ['In the Garden of Our Dreams: Memoirs of a Marriage,' Harold Haizlip and Shirlee Haizlip] Speaker 2: 'In the Garden of Our Dreams,' yeah. The title comes from a line of James Baldwin. You know, he said, America is not exactly the garden of our dreams. So I sort of switched it around a little bit. Speaker 1: Okay. I like that, I mean the use of Baldwin for a book title. Story_ID: 643672 Speaker 1: Do you have a project that you're working on now, that's--? Speaker 2: I'm working on a children's book series about a black family. It's very much like my own family. And it'll be for children from four to eight. And each one will be different. And there aren't as you, as nearly as many books for black children as you know that are illustrated about black family life. They're not really many. So this series will help fill that gap. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And it'll be about a mother, a father and four children and three dolls. Story_ID: 643673 Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: I'm very concerned about the African American community because just as there is a divide of the haves and the have nots in the white community, there's an even greater divide in the black community. Kids aren't doing well in school, not motivated to do well in school, and a lot of people don't help to guide them to do well in school. I mean I think of my own growing up and my husband's [HistoryMaker Harold Haizlip], how doing well in school was drilled into us. That we needed to do that. But that doesn't happen now because of the stru- I'm sure for a host of reasons. You know, women working out of the home, economic hardships and all the distractions. And, so that--those affects are having deleterious effects on the black family. I'm really concerned about that. And I think about it every day, every single day when I hear kids dropping out of school. Don't speak well, don't read. And of course if they don't finish high school or finish with bad grades, they can't find jobs. And we understand that segregation and, and racism still exists in America. So, you know, people will use any excuse not to hire a young black kid. And I'm not sure I, I don't know what the answer is. Because we pour a lot of money into educational systems. We have a lot of organizations that help people. So I think we need a lot more self-help in the black community. I don't think the black community is headed in a, in a good direction really. I think we're becoming more isolated, less educated, less employable, and that just spells trouble. And I'm very concerned about all the young black men who are being shot, young black women being shot and the police in the black community. I'm concerned about that issue. So I just think we need a group of rousing leaders and another civil rights type of movement to help young, young black people, especially young black males. Story_ID: 643674 Speaker 1: Now your path to success was not direct. It was more of a indirect one. You started with aspirations to be either a lawyer or doctor, but you ended up being successful but not as a lawyer or a doctor. Do you have any advice for young people in terms of choosing their path (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Keep an open mind. Yes, keep an open mind. Read, read, read everything you can. Try to learn as much as you can. And don't be disappointed if one area doesn't work for you because there are a lot of other areas that you might look to going into. Story_ID: 643675 Speaker 1: Now when you look back on everything that you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could, or? Speaker 2: Would I do anything differently? Probably not. I don't think so. I can't say that everything that I did was planned, you know what I mean? Some things I just fell in and I didn't know that I had talents in certain areas. I discovered those. So I don't think I would have done any- anything--I love where I went to school. I love the man I married [HistoryMaker Harold Haizlip]. I like the places where I lived, I've lived in some wonderful places. And the only thing I would like to have had is more money (laughter), which most people would like. Which would allow me to do, to do more for the community, help and stuff like that. But no, I would, I would not have done anything differently. Speaker 1: Okay. This leads to this question. When you look back on everything you've done to this point again, what today would you consider to be your legacy as a, as a professional I guess. Speaker 2: I think idea, the ideas that were planted in 'The Sweeter the Juice' ['The Sweeter the Juice: A Family Memoir in Black and White,' Shirlee Haizlip] about race. Just being like a line on a piece of paper. I think that is my best legacy. Story_ID: 643676 Speaker 1: Tell us about your family. Now you, tell us about your children and-- Speaker 2: We (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) I know you've mentioned them in the interview. Speaker 2: Yeah. We have two daughters [Deirdre Haizlip Celotto and Melissa Haizlip]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And they've lived in the different places where we lived. They lived--both were born in Boston [Massachusetts]. And then we lived in New York [New York] with them and in Connecticut with them and they think of themselves as [U.S.] Virgin Islanders, which is very funny 'cause they were there for a long time. And then we came back to Connecticut and they both went to Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] which is really quite wonderful. And when we left come out here, they said, "You're going to California? Oh, how terrible. You're going to California?" And fortunately they're out here now themselves. And they both have wonderful careers. One's working on a documentary for PBS [Public Broadcasting Service]. And the other is working for a company that makes drugs that help people. And she's got a really fine job there. And we have one grandchild. So we are glad to be out here near them. And like the life that that ga- that brings to us. Story_ID: 643677 Speaker 1: Now is there anything I haven't mentioned that we need to talk about before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: I don't think so, I think you've covered a lot of space. Speaker 1: All right, all right. Well, the last question is similar to legacy but a little different. Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Now do you mean that on a personal level or on a level of people who've read my books, or I'm not sure if you mean it professionally or just how would I, the individual [HistoryMaker] Shirlee Haizlip like to be remembered. Speaker 1: More on a personal le- level. Speaker 2: On a personal level. I would like to be remembered as a kind person, as a generous and thoughtful person. AS an intelligent person. As a person concerned about her immediate community and the broader community. Concerned about the world and the warming oceans and the things that are happening in different countries. So, I guess I'd like to be remembered as a thoughtful world citizen. Story_ID: 643678 Speaker 1: Margaret [Margaret Morris Taylor] and Julian Taylor [Julian Taylor, Sr.] sitting in the living room of the parsonage in Ansonia, Connecticut, about 1949. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: My mother Margaret Taylor standing behind her sister, her older sister Grace [Grace Morris Cramer] after she had found her after they had been separated for forty some years. Speaker 2: (HAROLD HAIZLIP): How many? Seventy-six. Speaker 1: Seventy-six years. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's a difference, yeah. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): That's quite a bit of a difference. Speaker 2: Oh, you're going to make me like that lady now. And that was my great-great-grandfather [James Dandridge Halyburton] (cough) Ha- his name was, he was a judge. He swore in Jefferson Davis during the Confederacy, and his name was Halyburton, William Halyburton [sic.]. Speaker 1: I didn't know you had a picture of him (laughter). Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): He looks a little like my father. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, that's what the Virginia archives [Library of Virginia, Richmond, Virginia] sent me. Speaker 2: That's something. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Unclear) dust. Speaker 2: Yes, he is. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Unclear) into the atmosphere--(unclear) (makes sound) dust. Speaker 2: Goes into the atmosphere--choke his-- Speaker 1: Shirlee [HistoryMaker Shirlee Haizlip] and [HistoryMaker] Harold Haizlip in New Haven, Connecticut celebrating their twenty-fifth wedding anniversary. Speaker 2: My father, Reverend Julian Taylor posing for a portrait in Washington, D.C. That was by that good photographer [DeWitt Keith] you like. Speaker 1: Okay. I'm telling, I'm telling you that's a hell of a photo. Speaker 2: Our daughter, our second daughter Melissa Haizlip Wildman [Melissa Haizlip]. Speaker 1: Our first daughter Deirdre Taylor Celotto [Deirdre Haizlip Celotto], and our first grandchild Talia Celotto. Speaker 2: Is that the cov- I think it's the first one in there. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: The president's wife, First Lady Michelle Obama, Shirlee Haizlip. Speaker 1: My two grandmothers. One is Rose Scott [Rosalind Scott Morris], and the other is Roberta Fortune [Roberta Fortune Taylor]. Speaker 2: Fortune? Any relationship to Timothy Thomas Fortune, the writer? Speaker 1: If he's from Virginia, yes. Or that area (laughter)-- Speaker 2: He was from (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) or North Carolina. Speaker 2: I believe he was from Virginia. Well, he was from Florida originally. He worked in New York. Speaker 1: Yeah, most of the Fortune family is related. Speaker 2: Shirlee and Harold Haizlip in their apartment in Los Angeles [California]. Speaker 1: The Taylor family in 1935, featuring my uncles, all of my five uncles, my five aunts, my grandfather and my mother and two sisters. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Where's your mother? Speaker 1: My mother is here on the left holding, as we look at her, holding my brother [Julian Taylor, Jr.]. I was not born yet. Speaker 2: Over here, yeah. Speaker 1: And this is my older sister Jewelle [HistoryMaker Jewelle Taylor Gibbs]. This is my sister Doris [Doris Taylor Keith]. You have their names, I wrote-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I'll write them down for you. My sister Mauryne [Mauryne Taylor Brent]. The other men, all the men are uncles except for one cousin, that's [HistoryMaker] Billy Taylor. And my grandfather, William [William A. Taylor]-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): In the center. Speaker 1: --in the center, uh-huh. He was the father of all the uncles. Speaker 2: This is in New York [New York] when we lived in New York, in Central Park. And on the left is Melissa and then there's Shirlee Haizlip, Harold Haizlip and Deirdre Celotto. Speaker 1: That's my great-great-grandmother and her name was Jane [ph.]. Speaker 2: And this is my grandmother [sic. paternal aunt] and her name was Blanche [Blanche Taylor] and my uncle, two, my two uncles. Speaker 1: (OF CAMERA VOICE): Do you have the (unclear)? Speaker 2: Yes, this was--left on--its William and this is Clinton. Speaker 1: Tay- Taylors or-- Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: And that is me with my two sisters on our wedding day in June of 1959. My sister Jewelle on the left, my sister Patricia [Patricia Taylor Lewis] on the right. Speaker 2: The picture I look at every day which inspired me for all of my life. My grandfather and his five sons, one of whom is my father on the left in the back. I can name them all if you want them. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. From left to right. Speaker 2: Okay. From left right sitting is Robert Taylor, my uncle, my grandfather, William Taylor, my uncle, Percy Taylor. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): If you lean in front of the camera-- Speaker 2: Oh, I'm sorry! Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA): That's fine. It's okay, I mean. Speaker 2: And my father on the far left, Julian Taylor, my uncle in the middle is Clinton Taylor, and my uncle on the right is William Taylor [William Taylor, Sr.]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The night we celebrated our fiftieth wedding anniversary, Harold and Shirlee Haizlip. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Looks like you're having fun. Speaker 2: Oh, we had a ball. Speaker 1: That is my mother Margaret Taylor. And that picture was taken in the mid-'50s [1950s]. Speaker 2: Shirlee Haizlip on the left and Prince Philip of England [Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh] on the right. On the island of, it was Antigua [Antigua and Barbuda] was it? Speaker 1: (HAROLD HAIZLIP): Antigua. Speaker 2: Antigua. Speaker 1: That's Shirlee Haizlip with an old friend Jahmad--Ahmad Jamal. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): So- somebody has this exact same photograph from the opposite perspective, someone. Speaker 1: Yeah, right. He was a, he was a--yeah, they put it in the Sentinel [Los Angeles Sentinel] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Simultaneous) With a photographer in it in the center and everything. Just like that one but from the other side. Speaker 1: That would be the Queen [sic.] (unclear). Speaker 2: Shirlee and Harold Haizlip going through the line meting President Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] and Mrs. Reagan [Nancy Reagan] at the White House [Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 1: On the far right is Cab Calloway and his wife Nuffie Calloway [Zulme McNeill Calloway], my uncle, Wadell Thomas, Shirlee is in the middle with the long earrings and African ambassador and his wife, and he was from Ghana and I do not remember his name. Speaker 2: Ebenezer Debrah. Speaker 1: It was in, this was in the '60s [1960s]. Speaker 2: At a museum? Speaker 1: No, it was at Uncle Wadell's house so-- Speaker 2: I'll take a guess but we asked to write stuff and he actually came. His name was Ebenezer Debrah. May not be the same one (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But how long--yeah. Speaker 2: May not the be the same one. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Might have changed, but that's it. Oh, no, we got the big ones (unclear). Speaker 1: I didn't know if you wanted the cover of the books or not. And you have the other books if you want them. And this big picture which is-- Speaker 2: (HAROLD HAIZLIP): The sticker (unclear). Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, the sticker-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Yeah. Speaker 1: Oh, that's gonna tear the-- Speaker 2: I think there's another copy down here. Speaker 1: (HAROLD HAIZLIP): Did it tear? Speaker 2: Well, it's really glued to the top. Speaker 1: (HAROLD HAIZLIP): Oh. Speaker 2: It doesn't peel of easy (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (HAROLD HAIZLIP): (Simultaneous) Is there another one nearby? Speaker 2: Yeah, there is another one, just have to find it. I brought all three down so they would have-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Hold on. You're tethered. Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: Do you know where they are (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, they're around here. They might be right in the kitchen. Speaker 1: (HAROLD HAIZLIP): Behind me? Speaker 2: Might be in the kitchen, not in the kitchen but in the breakfast room. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. This portrait. Speaker 2: That's Shirlee Taylor Haizlip in 2012 (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (HAROLD HAIZLIP): (Simultaneous) Let's see. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Who painted that? Speaker 1: Let me think for a minute. He didn't put his name on it, yeah, yeah. Michael Foulkrod, it's F-O-U-L-K-R-O-D, Michael Foulkrod. Look into the dining room, hun. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Unclear) microphone. Speaker 1: Is it in the dining room on the dining room table? Okay. I'll go get another one, I know there were quite a-- Speaker 2: Just have a (unclear). Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION) Speaker 2: That actually is our wedding, a picture of our wedding. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Tell us about that. Speaker 2: They--'In the Garden of our Dreams' ['In the Garden of Our Dreams: Memoirs of a Marriage'] by Shirlee Haizlip and Harold Haizlip. And that is a picture of our wedding reception throwing the bouquet event. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: The bride and the bridesmaids. Speaker 1: All right. And one last one. And this is my favorite, got the big Afro, I like it. I wish I could have one again. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Did you ever have one? Did you ever have one? Speaker 1: I had a halfro (unclear). Speaker 2: (HAROLD HAIZLIP): I see. Speaker 1: Shirlee Taylor Haizlip in the garden in the [U.S.] Virgin Islands-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I had one I guess I'd say. Speaker 1: --in the '70s [1970s]...