 Story_ID: 660836 Speaker 1: My name is Julieanna Richardson and I'm the interviewer. And, Matthew Hickey is the videographer and Larry Crowe is observing. And, I'd like to have you--we slate the interviewers to begin with. So, just a few questions. I'd like to have you start out by stating and spelling you name for us, and giving us your date of birth, and place of birth. Let's start there. Speaker 2: You, you want my official name that's on my passport? Oh, my name is Herbert Jeffrey Hancock [HistoryMaker Herbie Hancock]. I was born April 12, 1940 in Chicago, Illinois. Speaker 1: And, can we have today's date? Speaker 2: Oh, what is today's date? Today's date, let's see. Today's date is November 13, 2014. Speaker 1: And, our location? You don't have--just L- Los-- Speaker 2: We're in Los Angeles [California]. Speaker 1: And, your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm a musician. Story_ID: 660837 Speaker 1: Okay, and I ask- we ask five People magazine-ish questions. Just short answers. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Your favorite food? Speaker 2: It's (laughter), that's hard (laughter). It used to be meatloaf years ago. But, now, I don't eat, eat much beef. So--oh, good food. That's my favorite food. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: But, more toward the vegetarian or, or like fish and fowl side. Speaker 1: Favorite color? Speaker 2: It's difficult for me to pick--you know, my perspective is more egalitarian. I mean, it's hard for me to pick one thing and put it above the other. So, even though at one time red was my favorite color. I can't really say that any more. It depends on the context. It depends on, on the, what the other colors are in the, in the vicinity. Speaker 1: Favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Favorite? Speaker 1: Time of year? Speaker 2: My favorite time of year is now. Now, meaning-- Speaker 1: Any, any-- Speaker 2: Whenever--again, you're gonna, every answer you're gonna get- when you say, try to get me to pick one thing, it's, it's gonna be impossible 'cause I don't, I don't look at things that way anymore. Speaker 1: Okay. What about favorite place to vacation? Do you have that? Speaker 2: (Laughter) I can't pick one place-- Speaker 1: Okay. Okay (laughter), okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) As a favorite place to vacation. I mean, I like Bali [Indonesia]. I like--actually, the reason it's a hard questions is because I don't take that many vacations. I mean, it's every, I don't know, five, six years I take a vacation. Oh, I know my favorite vacation place. Speaker 1: Where? Speaker 2: Home. (Laughter) Because I never get to, well, not that I never get to see it, but I don't get to see it as often as I might like 'cause I'm traveling all the time. Speaker 1: Right. And, favorite phrase or saying? Do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Okay. Speaker 2: (Shakes head) I don't have a favorite phrase. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite song? Speaker 2: I don't have a favorite song. I don't--closest I can come to that is Stravinsky's 'Rite of Spring' ['The Rite of Spring'], makes me cry every time I hear it. And, I, I have no idea why. By the way, I found out that Igor Stravinsky use to live around the corner from where I live. And, and, his address is almost, his address was almost exactly the same, the number was almost exactly the same except there was, you know, ten numbers beyond mine. Every, all the other four digits, I mean the four digits, the, the first two were, were ten above, above mine. And, just one block over, which is, I don't, I don't know, maybe that had something to do with--and, and, I heard that Stravinsky also knew the woman that lived in my house and that he had visited her. So, he, he had been to, to my house. So, maybe, maybe there's some connection from the deep past. I have no idea. But, 'Rite of Spring' always makes, makes me cry. Speaker 1: That's been for a long time that that song has made you cry, right? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Absolutely. And, I also, well just a small connection. But, the first time I played in Paris [France], which was with Miles Davis in 1963, it was--we played at the same theatre [Theatre des Champs-Elysees] where 'Rite of Spring' was first performed. Its, its premiere performance, where you know, there was a riot and, and people were throwing things. So, I don't know, there's some connection there to Stravinsky that's, you know, beyond this, this, this lifetime. Speaker 1: That's fascinating. Story_ID: 660838 Speaker 1: So, I wanna take you back to Chicago [Illinois] and your family and the community you grew up in. So, I'd like to, you know, ask about your, for us, you, to tell you about, I wanna ask about your father. And, if you could give his name and his year of birth, and what you know about his family background and growing up. Speaker 2: My father was Wayman Edward Hancock [Wayman E. Hancock, Sr.]. And, he was born December 25, 1910. He passed away I, I think it was July in 2010. And--no, not 2010 'cause he would've, no-- Speaker 1: He would've been (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In 2000 [sic. 2001]. He died in, in 2000 'cause he was ninety years old. And-- Speaker 1: So, he was born on Christmas Day? Speaker 2: Yes. And, my mother [Winnie Griffin Hancock] was born on Valentine's Day. And, my brother [Wayman E. Hancock, Jr.] missed New Year's Day by a few hours. His birthday is January 2nd and his--1937. Every once in a while, my birthday falls on Easter (laughter). It's only happened maybe three or four times in my life. Yep, but, I already told you my birthday is April 12th. Speaker 1: Right. So, tell me about your father's background. Speaker 2: Okay. My father, okay, I said, he's Wayman Edward Hancock. That wasn't his original name because my grandmother was married to a man name Pace before. And, so, as far as my blood is concerned, I'm actually not a Hancock. That's my, you know, Louis Hancock who married my grandmother adopted my, my father. And, so, my, my blood name would've been Pace, P-A-C-E. Speaker 1: Now, can you described your father? Did he share any stories of growing up? Was he a, you know, did he share stories with of growing up? Speaker 2: He, he shared stories about, not that many stories about living in Georgia. He was born in Georgia. And, they say, (pronunciation) Albany, Georgia, right. He, he was born in a, you know, to a poor family. He, he talked about Uncle Jack [ph.]. That was, that was his, his uncle who was a piano player. The only one, as far as I know, in, in the family. And, I didn't really find out about Uncle Jack until maybe I was thirty some odd years old and I happened to go back to Chicago. I moved from Chicago to New York [New York] when I was twenty. And, and I don't remember whether I was still living in New York or living in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] at the time, but I went to Chicago to play a concert and, and I had a day off where I took my, my father to lunch. And, the conversation we had led to him talking about Uncle Jack who played in the turn of the century, played jazz, improvised. And, he said, "Oh, Jack could hear anything one time and he could play it." And, I, I said, "Could he read music?" He said, "No, no, he couldn't read music, but get--just, just hear it." And, and he said, "Whether it's classical music or jazz." He could just hear and play it. Speaker 1: But, you had never heard of Uncle Jack 'til that point? Speaker 2: No, I hadn't. But, my father insist, "Oh, I told you about Uncle Jack before." (Laughter) I don't remember him telling me about Uncle Jack. And, I would've remembered that. I mean, piano player. Are you kidding? Of course, I would've remembered. Story_ID: 660839 Speaker 1: So, how did--tell, tell me about your mother. Give her name and what you know of her, her, her growing up. And her year of birth. Give her name and her year of birth. Speaker 2: Okay. My, my mother's name was Winnie Belle Hancock, well it was Griffin [Winnie Griffin Hancock]. That was her maiden name. She was born February 14th, Valentine's Day, in 1916. Is that right? Yeah, 1916. She was born in Americus, Georgia. And, she and my father [Wayman E. Hancock, Sr.] actually met after they had both separately moved to Chicago [Illinois]. So, they met in Chicago. Speaker 1: But, that's, so that's so-- Speaker 2: They didn't know each other in Georgia. Speaker 1: Yeah, but those put, they're not that far from each other; Americus and where he was from [Albany, Georgia], right? Is it that far away? Speaker 2: I don't know (laughter). Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: I don't think they're that close. I think they're in different parts of the state [sic.]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So, how, how did they meet? Do you know that? She's six years younger than he is. Speaker 2: Yeah. I don't remember. My--I'm sure my father probably told me how they met, and I don't remember what that was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So-- Story_ID: 660840 Speaker 1: So, your siblings, give their names and, and their, and the age range. Speaker 2: Okay. I have an older brother, Wayman [Wayman E. Hancock, Jr.]. He was born in 1937 in Chicago [Illinois]. And, he was born on January 2nd. I have an older half-sister, Earline, Greenfield [Earline Hancock Greenfield] was her, her married name. Anyway, she was a daughter from my father [Wayman E. Hancock, Sr.], from a former marriage before he married my mother [Winnie Griffin Hancock]. Earline's passed away now. My brother is still alive. I don't, I don't really know Earline's birthday. She was, I think she was born 1930 because we were about ten years apart. So, she was born '30 [1930] or '31 [1931], you know. And, and, I had a younger sister name Jean. Jean Carol Hancock [Jean Hancock] was her name. She passed away. She, she actually died in a plane crash in, back in 1985. She was (laughter), she was the genius of the family; my young, youngest sister. She was born in 1943. Her birthday was December 20th. And, she (laughter) she had this IQ that was up there (unclear), 180 IQ. And, I remember when she was three years old she used to ask my brother and I what we were taught in school that day. And, we would tell her. We, you know, for us the idea that, you know, three years old don't know how to, can't learn, you know, math or, or especially math. 'Cause I specifically remember that she learned to add and subtract when she was three and four years old. And, she learned to divide when she was, you know, four or five years old. I mean, this was way before that was taught in school. Story_ID: 660841 Speaker 1: And, I think she [Hancock's sister, Jean Hancock] even had a photographic memory about words. Because she knew hundreds of songs 'cause she loved music. Even though when my mother [Winnie Griffin Hancock] and father [Wayman E. Hancock, Sr.] bought me a piano on my seventh birthday because they noticed that I seemed to be interested in the piano. Soon, like a few months after the piano arrived, you know, after my birthday, we started taking piano lessons; my older brother and my younger sister [Jean Hancock]. My half-sister [Earline Hancock Greenfield] didn't live with us at the time, she lived with her mother. And, but after about three, three and a half years, well my little--my older brother and younger sister they, they kind of, you know, faded off from piano lessons. But, I, I continued it. But, later on, my sister taught herself how to play guitar. She wrote lyrics for some of my songs and she wrote some of her own songs that have been recorded by people like [HistoryMaker] Dianne Reeves, and, and others. Speaker 2: Earth, Wind and Fire (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Earth, Wind and Fire recorded one of her songs. Booker T. and the M.G.'s did, did one of her songs, yeah. So, she would've been a really prol- she was a prolific writer but not just of songs. She also wrote for various publications. She never wrote a book, but she was a very, very talented writer. But, you know what, her field formerly was as a, a computer systems engineer, systems analyst. And, she had her own, own consulting business. And, but, prior to that, she used to work at IBM [International Business Machines Corporation] and she and two other women developed the ATM machine [automated teller machine]. And, people don't know, women developed that. Of course, because they were working at IBM, they didn't get credit for it, IBM did. But, I remember for this long period of time, more than a year, that she was working on some secret project and I found out later on it was ATM machines. Speaker 2: Now, I--was Wayman [Wayman E. Hancock, Jr.] equally technically oriented because that a big part of your background too? So, I'm just wondering-- Speaker 1: My brother? Speaker 2: Yes. Was he, was he also technically oriented? Speaker 1: My brother was the first one to get into the computer field right after high school. I think he, he joined IBM for a while. This was the early days of data processing when they had punch cards. That's really early and, and the computers were these monstrous machines. And, it's kind of in our DNA. Story_ID: 660842 Speaker 1: My father [Wayman E. Hancock, Sr.] was good with math. Even though he didn't finish high school, he got a, a--what is it called? G-- Speaker 2: GED [General Educational Development]? Speaker 1: GED, right? Speaker 2: GED, right (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right. Yeah. My father did get a GED later on. Many years after, after high, high school. Where he had already had the, three kids. We were almost grown by the time my father finished his, got his high school diploma. But, he was always good in, in math. And, he became--when I was born, he actually owned a neighborhood grocery store. That was a mom and pop's store, you know. That was long before the big supermarkets. And, the store was actually in this large apartment building where, where we lived. But, later on he worked at the stockyards when they were in Chicago [Illinois]. Because he became a butcher and when he lost his store he actually sold his store because he was drafted and then found, then they passed a new law that someone of a certain age, you know, that had three children wouldn't have to go to war. That was the Second World War [World War II, WWII]. But, then he didn't have his store anymore. But, I had my father all of my life, fortunately. But, he got jobs working in other stores. Usually, in the meat department, and then he had his own business. But, the job that he had the longest was working at the stockyards. Almost like a veterinarian without the, the title. And, as a matter of fact, when he reached retirement age and, you know, with this kind of government job, they, they let him go, right. But, ten years later, they called him back. And, asked if he would have any desire to be a government meat inspector. That was the, the job. Again, and he did. I don't remember how many years he stayed on as meat inspector but, I mean, at least five years maybe. Somewhere between five and ten years, you know, after he had retired. 'Cause he was good at it. He had a whole series of medical books and knew the various diseases for, for the cattle. Again, he was like a veterinarian without, without the title. And, because when he was a kid, he always wanted to be a doctor. That was his dream. But, coming from the South, being that poor and, and with racism being the way it was back then, there was no way he was gonna go to medical school. Speaker 2: But, you know what's interesting is the technical thing going on with your, you know, your family in many ways, with all three kids. You know, being technically inclined where it's, you know, science and math. And, then the coalition between math and music too. Speaker 1: Well, I think the fact that my father was a veterinarian, having to know those diseases, that's science. See, so, he already had this, and also being really good in, in math, he already had this kind of scientist, kind of DNA, in a sense and it kind of trickled down to his, his kids, all of us. Story_ID: 660843 Speaker 1: Now, your mother [Winnie Griffin Hancock], you know, you, and you know, she was bipolar, right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: You didn't know it at the time? Speaker 2: Right, we didn't know. Speaker 1: And, they would fight. Would they fight a lot sometimes? Speaker 2: There weren't that, there weren't that many fights between my parents because my father [Wayman E. Hancock, Sr.] learned how to keep the peace in the family. And, that was to completely avoid anything that might trigger my mother. Even though we didn't know, officially, that she was bipolar. I mean, that name didn't even exist at that time. The word manic depressive came up years later. I mean, this was after I had moved, after I had moved from Chicago [Illinois] to New York [New York]. And, but, we just thought she was, that word was high strung. And, but, she could be trigged easily into an argument about something. So, there were, there were always arguments with members of the family. Her, her family or, or, you know, her, from her mother's [Winnie Daniels Griffin] side, aunts and uncles, or sometimes on--with the, with the Hancock family too. Story_ID: 660844 Speaker 1: Now, what is your earliest memory of growing up? Speaker 2: My earliest member of growing up I think is riding my tricycle outside the entrance to the apartment building where we lived [in Chicago, Illinois]. That's, that's what I, I remember. I remember when my sister [Jean Hancock] was a baby and she was three years younger than, than me. I remember her being in a basket. (Pause) So, I guess, that was, I guess it's three, you know, three, three or four. Story_ID: 660845 Speaker 1: Now, you lived at 54th [Street] and King Drive [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive] it was, was that-- Speaker 2: 45th [Street], 45th and King Drive (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) 45th and King Drive. So, that was, was it called South Park [South Parkway] then? Speaker 2: It was called South Park. Speaker 1: Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 2: And, it was actually diagonally across the street from where Morgan Freeman used to live. And, I didn't know that until, I think it was last year, when I saw, saw Morgan at Dockery Farms [Dockery Farms Historic District] which is in Mississippi. The--really the birthplace of the, of the blues. And, Morgan lives in Mississippi not that far from Dockery Farms. And, and so, we, the Monk Institute [Thelonious Monk Institute of Jazz, Washington, D.C.] is, is very much connected with Carolyn Powers whose family owns and were the founders of Dockery Farms. And, and, anyway, we were there, my first time visiting Dockery Farms and Morgan Freeman who happened to be in Mississippi, he was invited to, there was a dinner that we had, and, and they seated him next to me. And, I had actually met him maybe three or four, on three or four occasions prior to that, so we knew each other. But, when we started digging into our past, you know, and I found out that he lived in Chicago [Illinois]. And, and he asked me, "Well, where did you live?" Anyway, it turned out that he lived diagonally across, in the building that was diagonally across from, from ours. And, we went to the same elementary school, Forrestville [Forrestville Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois]. Yeah, he, he remembered the Ebenezer Baptist Church [Ebenezer Missionary Baptist Church, Chicago, Illinois]. He remembered the place that's called the big house, where all the really bad, bad guys were, and the bad boys were, were living, you know, and to stay away from that; walk on the other side of the street. You know, 'cause you might be beat up if you walk on the side of the street (laughter) of, of what they called the big house. Speaker 1: Now what was the big house? What was in the big house? What was going on in the, the big house? Speaker 2: I don't know. I never went in there. I just know there were a lot of like unsavory young men (laughter), young kids that were really hardcore, tough and angry, and ready to attack you or steal your money, and you know, beat you up (laughter). And, everybody knew to stay clear of the big house, and don't make any arguments with anybody that, that lived in the big house, 'cause you're asking for trouble. Story_ID: 660846 Speaker 1: I wanna take you back to that time period of growing up, and I wanna ask you what sights, smells, and sounds remind you of, of growing up? Sights, smells, and sounds? Speaker 2: I remember the, the backyard that all the people in the kind of L shaped corner building shared. Most of it was concrete slabs, maybe not--pavement anyway. There was a part where there was dirt. And, the, the kids made a makeshift basket for playing basketball. We'll play a little softball there. Women would--in this building there were porches out of the backs of these buildings. And, it was from those porches that people would see coming through the cobblestone alleys of Chicago [Illinois], a vegetable man, or the watermelon man with his horse drawn wagon. And, it was that scene that really was so vivid in my mind that was the reason that I wrote about that when I wrote the songs 'Watermelon Man.' Other than that, as far as smells are concerned, food (laughter). I mean, good home cooking, you know. In a black neighborhood there's nothing like that, you know. I don't eat fried food anymore (laughter). I mean, I stay away from, from that 'cause that's not very, very healthy, and, you know, at this age, I'm seventy-four and counting, you know, health is, is an issue. Fortunately, my health is good, my genes are good and you know, both my parents died basically in their sleep when they were ninety. But, my mother [Winnie Griffin Hancock] actually paid a little more attention to the idea of healthy food because she wanted fresh vegetables rather than can vegetables. I don't think my father [Wayman E. Hancock, Sr.] cared that much. But, he worshiped my mother, so, he would always defer to her wishes. Especially, if you consider the fact that she was bipolar. But, my mother was a, was a great cook. My, my, you know, the grandmothers are always great cooks, you know. So, both, grand- grandmothers on my mother's side [Winnie Daniels Griffin] and my father's side were, were great. As a matter of fact, my grandfather, Louis Hancock, was a chef aboard the Super Chief rail- railroad train. That was a train that went from Chicago, you know, all the way out to L.A. [Los Angeles, California] I think. And, he made that trip quite often. Story_ID: 660847 Speaker 1: And, what about sounds? Sounds that remind you of your childhood? Speaker 2: We heard a lot of blues either from the radio or from record players. Back then they had 78 rpm records, you know, with the needles (laughter). And, so, people like Muddy Waters, you know, was popular. Memphis Slim, Lightnin' Hopkins. I remember those names. I didn't pay that much attention to the blues. I like the rhythm and blues. So, there were groups like The Ravens, The Five Thrills. Later like The Parrots [ph.]. I remember the The Midnighters [Hank Ballard and The Midnighters] and they, they did 'Work with me Annie.' And, they, they created, created that song. Before--there was a song later on called 'Dance with me, Henry' ['The Wallflower']. That's some white vocal group had a pop group, same song, different lyrics. But, nobody knew that the, it was really The Midnighters that created that song. And, you know, I was kind of a doo wopper myself (laughter) back in those days. So, that was mainly what was playing. I, I wasn't that attracted to the blues. Rhythm and blues, great. That, that was like, our music, you know, my generation at that time. The blues, you know, the hardcore blues, you know, like I said, Muddy Waters and others that was primarily the, the older generation. Although, it was, I mean, rhythm and blues, and blues, I mean, obviously the blues is in rhythm and blues so that, so they are completely interconnected. I remember one, one incident when I went to see some cartoons at one of the local movie theaters, I think down on 43rd Street. But, anyway, I guess I went with some other kids or maybe I went with my parents [Winnie Griffin Hancock and Wayman E. Hancock, Sr.]. I don't remember that. But, when we got to the movie theater the cartoons hadn't started yet. But, what used to happen is that, they would have a band play at the movie theater on the stage, on stage before they showed whatever the movie was and in this case the cartoons. So, I went there and this, this blues band is on stage and I, I couldn't wait for them to get off the stage so I could watch the cartoons. And, they were playing--but, I heard this song this, one of the songs that they played was something that was really very popular. And, it was 'I'm a Man' ['Mannish Boy']. That's Muddy Waters. Because it had--it was just a huge hit right, right then it was, it was a new record that was, that was out, and it was huge hit. So, I heard Muddy Waters early in the, in the game. And, and didn't have the sense to, to really appreciate it at that time. Story_ID: 660848 Speaker 1: First time I heard Miles Davis was at the, at the Regal Theater [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): We're rolling. Speaker 2: Okay. So talk about that then. Speaker 1: The first time I heard Miles Davis was at the Regal Theater. I don't remember what year. But-- Speaker 2: How old do you think you were? Speaker 1: I must, well, I had to be older than fourteen 'cause I was interested in jazz before that. Well, I, I could tell you because John Coltrane was on stage was with him. And, John didn't play that long with Miles. So, it must've been 1959 that I heard Miles. So, it must've been in the summer of '59 [1959] because I was going to college at the time, at Grinnell College in Iowa [Grinnell, Iowa]. And, I was only home in, in the summers. I think, Cannonball Adderley was also with Miles. And, Bill Evans on the piano, I think. I don't remember if it was Bill Evans or it was Red--maybe it was Red Garland, I don't remember for sure. But, I was already a fan of Miles by that, huge fan of Miles by that time. And, the Met [Metropolitan Theatre, Chicago, Illinois] was one block from the Regal. One was on the other, one side of 47th Street and what was then South Park [South Parkway; Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive]. And, the other was on the other side of 47th Street again, South Park. But, the, the Met, I don't remember the Met having any live performances there. They only showed movies there from, from what I can remember. But, the Regal did become a theater for, for musical performances. Speaker 2: Well, was the--it was the place for a lot of people to come and perform. Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, yeah. Yeah. Speaker 2: Now, I wanna take you back though to younger, and the story is that your, there was a neighbor [Levester Corley], you know, that would have piano--I, the, your-- Speaker 1: Oh, can I say one more thing about the Regal? Speaker 2: Yes, of course. Speaker 1: They also used, I think the Regal had boxing matches there too. I could be wrong, maybe I'm (gesture), you know, because I was, I was so young but something tells me they also periodically had boxing matches at the Regal. But, I wasn't really into, into sports that much. To this day, I'm the last guy you'd wanna ask, you know, about sports questions (laughter). Although, I admire athletes. I mean, it's amazing what they're able to do, you know. Wow, and the team work. I mean, very much in, in keeping with the spirit of, of jazz. Story_ID: 660849 Speaker 1: So tell--talk about your interest in the piano and how that sort of came, came about. Speaker 2: Well, in, I had a best friend named Levester Corley, and he lived in an apartment also in our building but from a different outside entrance. There were three external entrances, entrance, entrances to this building. And, each entrance had six apartment. Anyway, Levester's parents bought him a piano on his sixth birthday which was--he and I was just months apart. And, my mother [Winnie Griffin Hancock] recognized that once Levester got his piano that seemed to be--all I wanted to do was to jump on the piano. Now, I couldn't play (laughter). I have no idea what I could've attempted to play. Chopsticks, I don't, I don't know. Maybe I tried to pick out a melody. I don't remember back that far. But, she noticed that I seemed to be interested in, in the piano. So, on--that's why she told my father [Wayman E. Hancock, Sr.], "We gotta get this boy a piano." So, on my seventh birthday, I remember looking out the, the front window and seeing my father's truck pull up. And, because he had this business dealing with meat, you know, he had this white jacket on. And, and some of his brothers actually sometimes worked for my father. And, so, there were a couple of his, his brothers that, you know, my uncles that jumped out of the truck. And, all of a sudden they're taking this piano out of the truck, big upright piano. And, I looked out the window and I said, "Mama, whose, whose piano is that?" And, she said, "That piano is for you, son. Happy birthday." And, I was blown away, I was like, "Oh." I couldn't believe it, you know. It was like, "Oh, wow. Really?" You know, and that piano was heavy. It was a lot of iron. You know, those old pianos are really heavy. Anyway, somehow they managed to carry the piano upstairs. The first floor apartment was not a ground floor apartment. There were no apartments on the ground floor. There was a vestibule on the ground floor and you had to walk up some steps to get to the first floor, and we lived on the first floor. And, they, they brought the piano in. Speaker 1: And, then you-- Speaker 2: My life changed (laughter). Speaker 1: Yes your life changed, right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Story_ID: 660850 Speaker 1: So, talk about your--'cause you were given lessons too, right? Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) At that, was--so, so-- Speaker 2: Not, not-- Speaker 1: Not orig-- Speaker 2: Immediately. It was, maybe a couple months later that I started lessons with a woman named Mrs. Whalum [B. Maye Whalum] at Ebenezer Baptist Church [Ebenezer Missionary Baptist Church, Chicago, Illinois] which was located right across the street from the big house, right. And, Ebenezer Baptist Church was the church that we went to at that time. We changed churches later on a couple times. But, Mrs. Whalum took me on as a, as a student. And, she taught how to read. And, then after about maybe two, two and a half, three years, I changed piano to--piano teachers and a woman named Mrs. Jordan became my teacher, Bertha Jordan, that was her name. I'd forgotten her first name until now, right. I don't think it's even in my, my book ['Herbie Hancock: Possibilities,' Herbie Hancock with Lisa Dickey]. Speaker 1: It says Mrs. Jordan. Speaker 2: It says Mrs. Jordan. It was Bertha Jordan. I--it finally popped into my head. Anyway, she, Mrs. Jordan was the one that really taught me about touch and sound on the piano. And, that just, plink, plink, plink, plink, plink, just playing the note, the notes, you know. So, that was more about feeling and nuances which I knew nothing about from Mrs. Whalum. Speaker 1: And, do you know what age you were when you start taking lessons with Mrs. Jordan? Speaker 2: Probably, nine. Speaker 1: So, you're at Forrestville [Forrestville Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] still at that time? Speaker 2: I was still going to Forrestville, right. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Story_ID: 660851 Speaker 1: And, so, what hap- so, let's talk about, so you're--as a kid though, and, well, let me ask this. Are your, are your, is your sister [Jean Hancock] still taking it and are your brother [Wayman E. Hancock, Jr.] taking piano at this time as the piano comes into the house? Or, is it just you at that (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We all, we all started at the same time. But, after maybe two and a half to three years, my brother and sister kind of dropped off of piano lessons. That was, they weren't that inter- interested in continuing, and I was. And, and, it actually pertains to, to sports, oddly enough. And, by the way, it took me years to figure this out. But, when, when I was four, my brother was seven. There's a huge difference between a four year old kid and a seven year old kid. I mean, now, I'm seventy-four and, and my brother's, you know, seventy-seven. That (laughter) right next to each other, right. So, I was, I was small, you know, small hands, my hands are still small. But, so, I was little and, but my brother would, you know, take me around to play, first it was marbles, and I would always mess up the game. And, and then it--softball. The softball was too big for my hand. So, all the kids, the other boys, they were all very nice to me and they would let me pitch if they were winning by some score that looked like a football score, like twenty to nothing (laughter), they would let me pitch. And, they would move up and let me move up, you know, closer to the, to home plate to pitch. And, if I actually got the ball over the plate, they would applaud and, but, I mean, I couldn't catch. I mean--and football, forget it. If I threw the football, because I couldn't really palm the football, it would just flap all over the place. So, I was more like a mascot for the team (laughter). And, but, they were all nice to me so I never knew that inside, I wasn't aware of being or feeling inferior to them, that I wasn't good enough. But, I, but I, when it came to the piano, I was as good as my brother. We were on the same level. I wasn't better than my brother. As a matter of fact, my brother won a little local contest that my teacher put us in. He, he placed--won, you know, first place, and I got second place. So, but, the fact that I was, you know, basically as good as my brother and those were the people I hung out with were my brother's friends. When it came to going back out to playing basketball and softball, I just never bothered. I just stayed with the piano (laughter). Story_ID: 660852 Speaker 1: And, what are you, what are people--is it Mrs. Jordan [Bertha Jordan] that first sees something in you, you think? Or, are your parents [Winnie Griffin Hancock and Wayman E. Hancock, Sr.] seeing something, or are teachers at school [Forrestville Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] seeing anything? Or, they're not aware so much of your piano playing at school? Speaker 2: I think my, it was Mrs. Jordan that seemed to recognize that I, I might have some talent for, for the piano. Anyway, she entered, entered me in a contest called the young people's concert series contest [Young People's Concerts], whereby you would learn piano concerto, actually just one movement of piano concerto. And, audition with that concerto, and so, she entered me in the piano competition. And, I played Mozart's B flat piano concerto ['Piano Concerto No. 18,' Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart]. I don't remember what the K number was right now. Speaker 1: Was it eighteen [sic.]? No. Speaker 2: I think it was eighteen. Speaker 1: Eighteen. I think it was eighteen. Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Anyway, I won, I won. They sent a postcard about three months later, "Congratulations, you have been selected, you know, as the, you know, winner for piano and your date for performing with the Chicago Sy- ." Oh, the prize. I forgot to tell you, was you got to play that concerto with the Chicago Symphony Orchestra at Orchestra Hall which is now called Symphony Center [Chicago, Illinois], the home of the Chicago Symphony Orchestra. It was a big deal. And, so, this postcard said, "Your date would be February 5th." This was 1952. And, so, but it said also, "Unfortunately, we were not able to find the orchestra parts to that particular concerto," you know, the B flat concerto. "So, you'll have to learn a new concerto or forfeit the date with the Chicago Symphony Orchestra." So, I just had a few months to learn a new concerto. I wasn't too happy about that because I had a year to learn the first one. I had that down cold. But, I, I got it. I worked hard and I got it up to snuff, and, and performed. And, as a matter of fact, after my performance, I signed autographs for the first time I remember. The first autograph was some young girl that asked me for my autograph. That was cool. That was cool. Speaker 1: You're age eleven? Speaker 2: I was age eleven, right (laughter). But, you know, I, I mean, I've, I felt like, wow, this is exciting. I get to not only get to play with the Chicago Symphony Orchestra, people are asking me for my autograph. Wow. And, a young girl, too (laughter). Story_ID: 660853 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Do you remember that night? 'Cause I mean, you're young. And, how--was this part of a program that they have, that they, you know, they obviously, they had this contest to encourage young people, but, that's a big, big deal. Speaker 2: Yeah, well, I mean, I won for the piano but someone else won for the violin, someone else for the clarinet. So, they all got to play their concerto with Chicago Symphony Orchestra. But, they all performed on different days. I remember being very nervous about it because I knew that I wasn't as confident with this concerto as with the, with, you know, number K 18 [sic.] that I played for the audition. I remember that when I was peeking through the curtain before I actually went on, after the orchestra played a few pieces, the, they had a platform, you know, where the conductor stood. And, this platform was on hydraulics and it descended down into the basement. And, then when it came back up, it had this big nine foot concert grand piano, probably a Steinway [Steinway and Sons]. And, then I walked on stage. I think I was wearing short pants (laughter), or knickers or something, long socks. This little (laughter), little kid walks through the violin section to the, to the piano. And, I remember looking out at the audience and seeing I think five levels of galleries (laughter). And, it just look like it went up for days and days and days, you know. But, you know, I got through, I got through the piece and it was a very fond memory. Story_ID: 660854 Speaker 1: I'll tell you something interesting, years later when I took my family to Kenya. It was our first time on the continent of Africa and we, we did a tour. And, we went to Mountain Lodge [Serena Mountain Lodge, Kabaru, Kenya], that's what it was called. And, this was, near a water, it's a hotel near a watering hole for animals. And, you had to get up, you know, like five in the morning or something like that and much of the hotel was underground. But, we had to go to the roof in order to see the animals come to the watering hole. And, so, this was, this was great. I had my camera. And, so, all the tourists, you know, a tourist spot, and I happened to turn around. My wife [Gigi Hancock] happened to be behind me at some point. And, I turned around to take a picture of her and I noticed there was a tree behind her that had a plaque on it. So, I couldn't read it with my naked eye. But, I had a, a telescopic lens on the camera. So, I zoomed in to that. And, it said, "On this date, Elizabeth [Elizabeth II] was visiting Mountain Lodge and she was informed that her father King George [George VI] had passed away, and she became queen February 5, 1952." The same day that I played with the Chicago Symphony Orchestra. That blew my mind. I took, I took a photograph of that. I said, "Wow," you know. Because of time differences, I read that he died February 6th. But, it depends on where he, where he was located, you know. Because, you know, of the time differences. It might have been February 5th in, in Kenya. But, anyway. Speaker 2: Maybe February 2nd, you mean February 2nd, 5th--2nd, 2nd, right? You--it was the 1st, right, February 1st? Speaker 1: No. It was February 5th. Speaker 2: The 5th, okay, for the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's when I played. Speaker 2: So-- Story_ID: 660855 Speaker 1: When you--I mean, this is, this is huge. This whole thing. I mean, in, in that way for a black kid, you know. What--how many, how many other of the, you said there was clarinet, you know, everyone. But, how many of those students that were chosen [for the Young People's Concerts] were black? Speaker 2: I don't know. But, I seriously doubt if there were many, if any. I only remember seeing something about a violin player and maybe a clarinetist. But, I didn't have the list of all the people nor, had I seen photographs of all of them. But, at that time, there may not have been any others. One week after I played with the Chicago Symphony Orchestra my teacher, Mrs. Jordan [Bertha Jordan] had a, a nice surprise for me. She had bought tickets to a concert of a classical pianist playing with the Chicago Symphony Orchestra, you know, a week after my, my concert. And, so, we got there and guess what she played. She played the con- the concerto ['Piano Concerto No. 18,' Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart]. But, they said, they couldn't find the orchestra parts. My teacher was livid about that, you know. How could they do that to an eleven year old kid, you know. I don't know who's to blame. I don't know who, whether it was pressure from--it was Myra Hess by the way. I don't know if it was pressure from her people or whether it was the orchestra, or whether it was some racism or not. It's, there's no way for me to tell. We never carried it that far. But, that was wrong. That was wrong. Speaker 1: Did you ever review that history that's in your, your book ['Herbie Hancock: Possibilities,' Herbie Hancock with Lisa Dickey] and that you're recounting now with, with the Chicago Symphony Orchestra? Have you ever done that? It would be interesting to-- Speaker 2: Oh, to go to Chicago Symphony Orchestra and see in their history books? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: You know, that was mentioned to me that, that I could've asked them to look that up. Speaker 1: I mean, still, but that would be (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I haven't done it, no. Speaker 1: That would be sort of interesting to do. But-- Speaker 2: Yeah. That, that-- Speaker 1: That would be interesting to do. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah. We could find that out, you know. Story_ID: 660856 Speaker 1: So, wait, you went from Forrestville [Forrestville Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] in elementary. What was your junior high school? Speaker 2: We didn't have a junior high school. Speaker 1: So, you went from there to Hyde Park [Hyde Park High School; Hyde Park Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. So, can you-- Speaker 2: Right, so, as I said, that was eight, eight years in elementary school, and then four years of high school, ninth through twelfth. Speaker 1: Now, after that, with the time with the Chicago Symphony [Chicago Symphony Orchestra], are there other engagement or exposure that you're having after that point? Do you remember? Or, you're-- Speaker 2: Exposure to what? Speaker 1: Exposure in the public. Like whether it's (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, oh. Not really. The only, only thing, when I went to Grinnell College [Grinnell, Iowa], during my second year there, and I was, I was seventeen, so I've been playing jazz for three years by that time. And, I was so into jazz it was, I couldn't get enough of it and I was trying to learn as much as I could. I decided I wanted to have a jazz concert at Grinnell College. So, I actually pulled it off. We had a jazz concert. I put together a big band and, I mean, especially at that time, how many jazz musicians could you find in Iowa? You know, young kids that are jazz musicians. Really hard to do. We had two trumpet players that were pretty good; Bob Preston and John Smith [sic. John Scott]. And, they were, they were the, they were like the best musicians there. And, anyway, I was able to, to do it only by spending most of my semester working on the jazz concert. Giving section rehearsal 'cause, by that time, 'cause I'm from Chicago [Illinois]. So, I got a chance to learn more during the summers, you know, working with other musicians. And, and, the great thing about jazz is that jazz is about sharing. Musicians always share their information. They don't even think about trying to hide anything or, or keep something as their own. So, anyway, I had more of a sense of swing and anyway, so, I had to be at the section rehearsals to teach the guys how to phrase, how to be, you know, have a tight section so that it would sound, at least approach being somewhat professional. I had to write all the solos because they didn't know how to improvise. I had to write them out. And, I did one arrangement from a Count Basie record, and I had to write out the solo that was played on, on the record for one of our guys. But, I wasn't going to my classes and I was failing everything. And, I would've, I would've flunked. But, (laughter) I knew the only way I could pass was to cram for the finals. And, I had to ace the finals in order to pass. I aced the finals. Except one, I got a B in one of 'em that--but, like, I got A's in, in the others. Speaker 1: Is that, are you talking about what year in college at that point? That's your--? Speaker 2: I was, yeah, I was in my second, second year. Speaker 1: Second, that was your sophomore year. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 660857 Speaker 1: I, I just wanna take you back to Hyde Park High School [Hyde Park Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] and the influences because you say it's while you're at Hyde Park High School that that's when your interest came to jazz. And, and, you also talk about Hyde Park being, you know, it was mainly white at--and the student body was majority white at that time, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. But, it was a mix, it was a mixed school. I mean, it wasn't like, not like Grinnell [Grinnell College, Grinnell, Iowa]. Grinnell, they only had like, twelve students that were black. But, very few Asians. At Hyde Park, I think maybe 30 percent of the student were non-whites. I don't know exactly, 'cause I never took real statistics from that. But, what I did notice was that the black students seemed to wanna stick together. But, I'm, I'm looking at the student body. I had not met any white kids until I got to Hyde Park High School. None. You know, the only white people I knew were people coming to our house to collect money. You know, insurance man, or the, you know, the rent, you know. I didn't know any kids that were white. So, I wanted to find out about them. 'Cause I didn't know, you know, what, what kind of differences that maybe besides the skin color. There were a lot of Jewish kids at, at the school too. I didn't know about Judaism. You know, what's, what's happening with that? And, there were, there were Asian kids that were, you know, primarily Japanese. You know, what's happening with that? So, I didn't stay with the black kids. I actually mixed in with everybody. As a matter of fact, I became pretty popular. I was class president for my second year, and actually I was king of the yearbook (laughter) when I graduated. Anyway, that's--primarily because I, I, I think it's part of the curiosity that comes from me. You know, with, if I don't know something that I have a connection to, in this case, high school, my curiosity is to, you know, let's examine that. I mean, that's, that's what I've done throughout my whole life. Story_ID: 660858 Speaker 1: So, you're--you know, but you were classically trained. And, what is interesting in the book ['Herbie Hancock: Possibilities,' Herbie Hancock with Lisa Dickey] is even how you start really looking at jazz. And, I'm not, I know you talk about it at Grinnell [Grinnell College, Grinnell, Iowa], but before that in high school [Hyde Park High School; Hyde Park Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois], how are you, what makes the transition for you? I mean, can you talk about that? Because here you are playing classical music and then you, you know, you go over to jazz (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 1: --and so-- Speaker 2: When I first started listening to these George Shearing records and I tried to write out little phrases that I liked. I'd write them out, and I'd play them, and then I'd play the record again and when that phrase came by I would try to play it along with George. And, somehow it sounded a little different (laughter). I didn't know how to swing (laughter). And, so, I guess with the kind of analytical mind that I, that I have, I decide to, you know, examine it in more detail to find out why, why it sounded different. And, in the meantime, I started expanding just these little phrases into longer phrases and writing out more, more things. And, trying to analyze why does these notes over here sound like they're related to these notes over here? And, now I know now it was because they were played over the same cord. See, so, I was little by little learning theory and, and voice leading and some other musical devices. Anyway, through the process of analyzing what I heard on these records in detail, I started to pay more attention to the dynamics, you know, loud and soft. And, that sometimes when phrases would go, when the notes would go up, they might be louder than the notes, than the notes that were lower. So, people were playing, instead of (sings musical notes), it would (sings musical notes), you know, like that. And, but, then there were differences in the timing. It wasn't (sings musical notes), it was (sings musical notes). And, so, I started zeroing in, zeroing in on those details and trying to copy that. So, little by little I got more of a sense of, of swing. But, it took a lot of practice and lot of listening for me to walk that minefield between classical music and jazz. But, eventually, I, I got it. Speaker 1: So, I--is this you're doing by yourself? Are you doing this with other friends? Is this, is this solitary activity? Speaker 2: This is solitary activity. I mean, that's what we do. It wasn't, has nothing to do with it being me. That's how jazz musicians learn, at that time. Now, jazz is taught in schools. Well, we, we know that, that a lot of funding has been cut for the arts in elementary schools but there're still some that have jazz programs. I know through Thelonious Monk Institute of Jazz [Washington, D.C.], we have established some programs in various high schools throughout the United States. And, actually, other countries too, that, you know, facilitate the learning of--of jazz. Story_ID: 660859 Speaker 1: I wanna ask, so, you, you had told the story about George Shearing that you had heard him and then your mother [Winnie Griffin Hancock] ended up saying--you know we have the record. Speaker 2: Right (laughter). It was, it was so funny that when I ran home from Hyde Park [Hyde Park High School; Hyde Park Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] after having heard Don Goldberg who was this pianist in my class with a jazz trio playing at, what we used to call senior varieties. It's a variety show that the senior class gave every semester. So, it was all student driven. Anyway, he had this jazz trio and I guess at the time, yeah, I was, I was fourteen. And, I was only playing classical music before that. And, jazz, I had heard in the house, 'cause my folks listened to a lot of jazz. They listened to, you know, a lot of big band stuff like Count Basie and Duke Ellington. Also, my, my mother liked Fats Waller a lot. But, I considered it their music. But, now at this senior varieties, I'm hearing this guy that's my age, playing my instrument, and doing something I couldn't do, which was improvise. So, I wanted to learn how to do that 'cause it looked like they were having fun. And, and the kids liked it too. So, went backstage afterward and I said, hi, to, to Don. And, that's when I told him, I said, "I wanna learn how to play jazz. How do I go about it?" He, and he said, "Well, if, if you like what I did, the person I like to listen to is George Shearing." So, I, I wrote the name down, George Shearing. And, and he said, "Maybe, you know, get some records and, and listen to, to his records and see if you can pick out just some phrase that you like and write 'em down and try to play them." So, that's what I did. I ran home. I said, "Mama, mama, we gotta get some George Shearing records." And, my mother said, "Herbie [HistoryMaker Herbie Hancock], remember two years ago when I bought you some records for Christmas and you got mad at me 'cause they wasn't the record you wanted?" I said, "Oh, yeah." She said, "They were George Shearing records and you have 'em in the record cabinet." And, I went down to this record cabinet, sure enough there was album of George Shearing records. Now, albums then were 78 records [78 rpm record], they were five or six of them in sleeves, in this binding, you know. And, actually, two of the songs from the George Shearing records, were two songs that Don Goldberg had played. So, I recognized that when I put, put them on. So, I listened, yeah, that was that sound that Don, Don had. And, and that's how I started. Listening, finding phrases I liked and, and writing them out and trying to figure out how to match the way George played them. But, later on, because I didn't just stop at listening to George Shearing, I start finding out more about other jazz musicians from other students. There was French horn player name Ted Harley that was, you know, very much into jazz and, and I was in the orchestra so that's how I knew Ted. And, and he turned me on to some other, other jazz musicians and, and that was how it started. Story_ID: 660860 Speaker 1: Now, did you, did you wanna form a group similar to the, you know, the group you had heard that day at school [Hyde Park High School; Hyde Park Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois]? You know, did you, did you--? Speaker 2: I was, I was more interested in learning more about jazz so I thought, my first thought was, how can I learn more from Don [Don Goldberg]? I mean, he was a physical person, not a record. How can I learn more from him? And, so, I remember when I saw the bass player in his little trio, the, it seemed like the, the notes that the bass player was playing wouldn't be hard to learn. And, and, of course, he was playing a very simple accompaniment on, on the bass. So, I sort of learned how to play bass a little bit, you know. First, it was kind of boogie woogie 'cause that was, you know, a kind of a generic thing that you learn. And, and, but then, then there was blues, some blues, but I could repeat notes, it would be, you know (sings musical notes), you know. And, but, I did that so that I could play with Don and that I could watch his fingers and see what he was doing. So, that was sort of my training, early training in, in jazz. Speaker 1: Now, did you, at that point, there, schools are, there other groups forming around town. Did you know of [HistoryMaker] Ramsey Lewis at that point or not? No. 'Cause he's, he's five, he's older than you. Speaker 2: Yeah, he's, he's older than me. Well, now, he's not that much older than me (laughter). But, at that time, yeah, he was, he was older than me. I didn't know of Ramsey. I didn't know about Ahmad Jamal 'til later when--I learned about Ahmad Jamal listening to the radio. Because there was a song called "Poinciana" that was very popular. And, also, "But Not for Me," was another one Ahmad Jamal played. And, I liked what Ahmad Jamal was playing. And, he was an international musician but he lived locally in Chicago [Illinois]. So, I got the record, it was Ahmad Jamal at the ['At the Pershing: But Not for Me']--oh, well, right now I can't think of the name-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --of the theater. But, I got that right away. But, that was because I heard his records on, on the radio. Speaker 1: And that's--was it Al Benson that you were listening to? Speaker 2: It was probably Al Benson show, yeah. I mean, that's when I heard, you know, a lot of my first jazz. It was--even though he primarily played rhythm and blues, and blues, but occasionally he'd play some jazz. I heard, one of the first jazz things I heard was Johnny Smith, Moon- "Moonlight in Vermont." That was the name of the song, Johnny Smith with Stan Getz. And, I didn't know what it was but something about I liked it. It, it was pretty. It sounded pretty. And, I think I even heard The Four Freshmen the first time on Al Benson's show. Probably, heard Ramsey Lewis on Al Benson's too. I don't remember for sure. Story_ID: 660861 Speaker 1: So, when it comes time to go to college, how is--talk about the Grinnell, how that ends up being the, the school that you go to. Can you talk about that (unclear)? Speaker 2: Okay. When it was time to go to college, my brother [Wayman E. Hancock, Jr.] had already gone to the University of Illinois. And, he had gone to Navy Pier [Chicago Undergraduate Division; University of Illinois at Chicago], and he'd gone to Champaign-Urbana [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois]. You know, Navy Pier was in Chicago [Illinois], and Champaign [Illinois] is a different, different city south of Chicago where the main, you know, campus was located. Anyway, that was a possibility. And, I did apply to the University of Illinois. I also applied to Oberlin [Oberlin College, Oberlin, Ohio] which was very famous as a, like a great school for the arts, great school for, for music in particular. But, the reason I applied to Grinnell is because of two things. My mother's [Winnie Griffin Hancock] best friend who lived across the street from us, Mrs. Smith, had not only gone to Grinnell College but she was born in Grinnell [Iowa]. Born in Iowa, right. And, I could only imagine that a black woman born in Iowa, you know, back, her, her generation, you know my mother's generation. She may have been one of the black student that they had at Grinnell. But, I never really inquired whether that's true or not. But, there could've been that many. Because, I mean, when I went there were only twelve or thirteen at the most. Anyway, but, Mrs. Smith said it was a great school. It had a great reputation. And, there was a friend of mine who also went to Grinnell and the common--and he talked about it as, as being a really wonderful school. He had a great time there. He was a semester in front of me. And, so, between those two influences and the idea of going away to school as attractive to me. So, I applied to Grinnell. And, the reason I chose Grinnell is because I didn't get any kind of scholarship from Oberlin, like nothing. And, we couldn't afford that. But, I did get a grant and aid and a Pullman scholarship [George M. Pullman Educational Foundation] from Grinnell. And, so, that was great, and I, I, it was a great school. Speaker 1: Now, who was the, who was the friend who was the semester ahead of you? Speaker 2: Don Stewart [Donald M. Stewart]. Speaker 1: Don Stewart? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So-- Story_ID: 660862 Speaker 1: You had, I mean, the group that was there I find, I'm sorry, I found it a fascinating group. Because-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: There's Don Stewart [Donald M. Stewart] who becomes, he then ends up being later in his life, a president of, of Spelman College [Atlanta, Georgia]? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Right. But, there-- Speaker 2: There's [HistoryMaker] Allison Davis, you know, and Gordon Davis [HistoryMaker Gordon J. Davis], the two of them, the two brothers, they went to Hyde Park [Hyde Park High School; Hyde Park Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] too, you know. Speaker 1: And, the other person, I don't know if he was behind you, was Jim Lowry [HistoryMaker James Lowry], James-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Yeah, he played basketball at Hyde Park. Speaker 1: I mean, it's, it's like-- Speaker 2: And, Jimmy Simmons [James R. Simmons], and Jimmy Lowry, yeah. Speaker 1: I come, I mean, 'cause these, everybody ends up doing extremely well with their careers. And, this is, I just found it, it interesting, you know, and it's-- Speaker 2: Yeah. But, I run into Jimmy Lowry every once in a while, you know. And, it's, it's like, like old home week when we see each other. Speaker 1: And, Al- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And, Allison and Gordon, I see them periodically in Washington, D.C. for various functions there. Speaker 1: Right, right. And, I mean, their father [W. Allison Davis] was a well know black sociologist. The first, you know-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: To teach at-- [University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois]. So, I just found it (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They, they were the kind of the upper class of black society at that time. They--because they came from well to do parents. Story_ID: 660863 Speaker 1: And, my parents [Winnie Griffin Hancock and Wayman E. Hancock, Sr.] weren't well to do but, my, my mother was always looking for a way to kind of encourage me or push me toward opportunity. And, so, I went to the events that the, the Jack and Jill's [Jack and Jill of America, Inc.] (laughter) gave. The Jack and Jill was kind of, of a club that was, really the--kind of upper echelon of, of black youth, you know, from professional parents, you know. Parents who were lawyers or, or doctors, or people of note from, for various reasons. Speaker 2: So, you're saying, you actually participated in Jack and Jill? Your mother had you participate? Is that what you said? Speaker 1: Yeah. I went, I went to the parties. I would get invited. I wasn't a member of the Jack and Jills. (Laughter) I didn't qualify. We, we didn't have enough money, you know. But, but, I knew a lot of the kids from there. Speaker 2: So, what you're basically is talking about is this, in the black community, a very aspirational, everyone's trying. I mean-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Right. You know, even the, you know, the music when you were taking classical music lessons. Everyone's really trying. But, this is a good school [Grinnell College, Grinnell, Iowa] you're going to. Speaker 1: It's like upper mobility concept, you know. At that time, the whole idea was to get out of the black neighborhood so that you could actually survive and, and make something of yourself. Now, I'm not, I mean, I've changed my whole attitude about that since then. I mean, why can't we make the black neighborhood lift itself up without having to move. That's, that's the ideal to strive for. Story_ID: 660864 Speaker 1: But, you're saying of this, you're saying there're--Grinnell is, it's in Iowa, right? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And, are you saying there're total twelve students in the whole school? This is 1950, and you're young also when you go. So, can we, can you just talk about that. Speaker 2: Okay. In the four years that I went to Grinnell, from 1956 to 1960, the most black students we had at one time was twelve. And, usually, it would peter down to about six. And, the one's that left were usually the black girls. Because the black men could date white women, Asian women, black women, whatever, you know. The white men didn't have much of a tendency to date the black girls, some did. And, I'm not sure whether, well, black women were interested in dating white men. I don't--I never asked that question, you know. But, that's, statistically that's what happened. The black men just stayed at Grinnell College [Grinnell, Iowa] and little by little black women left 'cause they, they weren't dated that much. Speaker 1: So, you have been passed ahead in school, and, and before you got there 'cause you, you're sixteen--how old are you when you start Grinnell? Speaker 2: Sixteen. Speaker 1: Sixteen. So, you had been, you had been promoted, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, well, I started elementary school [Forrestville Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] actually when I was four. My mother [Winnie Griffin Hancock] was able to get me in there. She had to be a little pushy (laughter). A little, kind of nudged one of the teachers that she knew there, Mrs. Kenney [ph.], who liked my mother, knew my mother. And, anyway, they were able to get me into the school at the age of four. But, they put me in, well, normally I would go into 1B, and then the next is 1A, then you go 2B, 2A, so forth. But, they decided to put in, in what was called 1C because I was so young. Sort of--the idea was that would be kind of preparation for getting into 1B. (Laughter) 1C also had children in it that were, had difficulties. Sometimes learning difficulties, sometimes deportment or behavioral difficulties. But, they got me outta that and also I skipped a grade in, in school. I forgot which, which one it was. So, that's why I graduated from elementary, elementary school at sixteen, yeah. Speaker 1: You mean, high school [Hyde Park High School; Hyde Park Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: I mean at twelve, at twelve. Speaker 1: You were twelve and then you--? Speaker 2: And, then I went to, I went to high school at twelve until I was sixteen. I was always the youngest one in the class, you know, in high school and college. Speaker 1: So, when you, are you the youngest one of the black students at Grinnell? Do you know that? Do you remember that? 'Cause I mean I-- Speaker 2: No. Not always, because--in my class, yeah. Speaker 1: In your class. Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: I mean, I was the youngest student at Grinnell. I mean, the youngest in my class; black, white, Asian, any--I mean, all through the, the four years in my class I was the youngest. Story_ID: 660865 Speaker 1: But, you had been a good student--see we haven't talked about your academics. Were you a good student in, you were-- Speaker 2: (Gesture). Speaker 1: You were an okay student? (Unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was okay. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I wasn't, I wasn't an A student. Speaker 1: Were you a B, A, B student? Speaker 2: Nah, more like-- Speaker 1: B, C? Speaker 2: B, C, and it varied. But, they wanted me there. There weren't that many black students anyway. But, it was still difficult on my parents [Winnie Griffin Hancock and Wayman E. Hancock, Sr.] because they still had to come up with money. I also got, I almost had to go home because they had to have a check for a certain amount of money at a certain time. And, at, at the last moment, my parents--the check arrived. And, what my mother had to do was to call my uncle, her brother [Peter Griffin], and plead with him. Well, I guess, pleading is too strong, too strong a word. They both owned the house that my grandmother [Winnie Daniels Griffin], their mother, had in Michigan. It was in a town called Lacorda, Michigan [sic. Lacota, Michigan] near South Haven, Michigan. She had her house and forty acres of property there. And, that she bought many years ago. And, my mother said to my uncle, "I, I want Herbie [HistoryMaker Herbie Hancock] to stay in, in college at Grinnell [Grinnell College, Grinnell, Iowa], and I need the money and I can't afford it. And, would you be willing to--for us to sell the house so that I can have the money?" And, my, my uncle readily agreed. He said, "Yeah." That was his present to me, you know, and to my, my mother. I mean, it meant that much, the school. And, they sold it for a song because they had to sell it within a matter of days. So, they didn't get very much for it, a few thousand dollars. But, she had just enough to actually keep me in school then. Speaker 1: (Unclear) that, that's huge. I mean, when you think, I mean, that's sacrifice in a lot of ways. Speaker 2: (Nods head) Totally. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 660866 Speaker 1: So, so, what, what were you wanting to, to be though when you started? When you, when you--what were you majoring in? Speaker 2: At Grinnell [Grinnell College, Grinnell, Iowa]? I was an engineering major (laughter) when I went to Grinnell. Well, because when I was at Hyde Park [Hyde Park High School; Hyde Park Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois]--okay, between the time I was fourteen and the time that I was sixteen when I graduated, that's when I got hooked on jazz. And, really hooked big time on it. But, when I start thinking about college and after college, and the idea of getting a job, I asked myself, if I'm a music major when I graduated from Grinnell, would I be able to get a job, you know, playing jazz? And, it was maybe yes, maybe no. It's no way to tell. Could I get a job as an engineer? Definitely. And, I love science anyway. Because when I was five, I showed interest in science. And, I used to take apart clocks, watches, because this curiosity that I have. I always wanted to find out how things worked. And, I had kind of this analytical mind so I would try to figure out, once I opened up, what does what, you know. And, and then I could put it back together, you know. What made the hands go around, for example. Sometimes they would work when I put it back together, sometimes they wouldn't, you know. But, I took apart, I start taking apart my Lionel electric train that my father [Wayman E. Hancock, Sr.] had bought for one of my birthdays. And, you know what I got for that? A spanking (laughter). It was politically okay at that, at that time, you know. But, that interest in science I, I'd always had, and I was good in math too, like my, my father. So, the idea of majoring in engineering was exciting to me because that was one of my interests. Story_ID: 660867 Speaker 1: But, the hook in jazz was just getting deeper and deeper and deeper. By the end of my second year after we had performed this successful jazz concert that I had produced, I went back to my dorm room and I looked in the mirror and said, who are you trying to kid? The next day I changed my major to music. You know, I reali- it wasn't even a choice. I just, I knew that there's no plan B. That was a do or a die things. I go down with the ship (laughter), if that's what it took. Speaker 2: So, how was Grinnell's [Grinnell College, Grinnell, Iowa] music department? Speaker 1: It's really good now. The, it wasn't that great. There were some good teachers. I had Mr. Goodbrod [Norman Goodbrod] was a piano teacher. He was very good. And, he, he actually stayed in--teaching at Grinnell a really long time. I mean, to his later years. I think even into his nineties he was still at Grinnell. But, now he's passed away. But, it's, it's a really good school for music now. But, the thing is, I mean, I realize now, it was up to me to grab what I wanted to learn from Grinnell. But, what may be interesting to some people is that because I had already been playing jazz and learning jazz from musicians in Chicago [Illinois] in the summer when I go home and I was, you know, like eating up everything I could about the structure of jazz. You know, how it's to be played, how to--about theory and harmony, and voice leading and all those techniques for, for playing, that when I took music classes at Grinnell, theory class, harmony class, I already knew that stuff. I'd learned it from the streets. So, all I had to do was take the exams. I got A's in all the exams, you know. I didn't have the names for all of the things that they taught, the formal names. But, once I saw what it was I went, oh, I know what that is, (laughter). And, then I just, I just took, took the test. Story_ID: 660868 Speaker 1: So, the summers, what were you doing summers? Can you talk about that? I mean, who were you (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: Who were you, were you playing with anyone, or were you observing? I mean, what were you doing, doing the summers? Speaker 2: I was a mailman in the summer (laughter). I got a job working in the post office [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service], which was a, a day gig. If someone hired me at night to play a gig, I would do that. But, I'd have to get up in the morning to, you know, deliver mail. By that time, we had moved from 45th [Street] and King Drive [South Parkway; Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive] to 62nd [Street] and Evans [Avenue], in Chicago [Illinois]. And, the post office was only like a block away, I think on 61st [Street] or 60th Street, and so I would walk to the post office from my house. And, we'd say, throw the mail, because it, it wasn't automated then. We had to physically put the mail in slots that were, each slot was a particular address. So, I learned how to do, what they call, my case, you know. And, and then I, you know, stuff it in the, in the, you know, the bag and carry it. So, I did that during the day. Story_ID: 660869 Speaker 1: Once I had finished Grinnell [Grinnell College, Grinnell, Iowa] in 1960, I went back to the post office [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service] in the summer but when September came I stayed in the post office. Well, during the month of September of 1960, I got a call to do a gig with the legendary Coleman Hawkins, at a, a club in the, was the Maryland Hotel [Chicago, Illinois] and they, they used to have a club downstairs. And, the reason I got the gig is because the--Coleman was coming, was on the tour where he used what they call pick up bands. So, he was a sax, a tenor saxophonist. So, he would go to different cities and use like the best rhythm section players, the best piano--pianist, bassist, and drummer that he could find. Well, the number one pick in Chicago [Illinois] was a pianist name Jodie Christian. He was busy. So, the drummer who had been hired to play with Coleman Hawkins, his name was Louis Taylor, he decided to give me a chance. So, he called me and, and I accepted the gig. I was thrilled, Coleman Hawkins, are you kidding. And, (laughter) but I had to work at the post office in the morning. Well, let me tell you the hours of this gig. First of all, they billed it was a show rather than a club date. 'Cause as a show, like Broadway show, you could actually perform for seven days, that's more money in a week. So, we performed fourteen days, at two weeks straight. From nine o'clock in the evening to four o'clock in the morning, except for Saturday where we had to play from nine o'clock in the evening to five o'clock in the morning and we had a breakfast show on Sunday. That was hard (laughter), hard work. Well, let me tell you, I lasted about two days and then I had a cold and a fever because I was only getting, I don't know, a half hour or two hour, maybe a hour and half sleep, two hours sleep. Because by the time I would come from the gig, take the elevated train to, the "L" [elevated train] we call it, take it down to my house on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois], this club was on the North Side [Chicago, Illinois], I didn't have that much time to sleep and then I have to deliver mail. And, but, the drummer started complaining, he said, "You better quit that post office 'cause it's interfering with the music." And, see, that meant something to me. But, what was the, the thing that actually made me quit the post office was one day delivering mail to this one house, kind of a brownstone, I had to walk up some stone steps to get to the landing. The woman came out to get her mail and I'm thumbing through the mail to get hers. Next thing I know, I'm hearing this woman's voice and she's shaking me, she said, "Mailman, mailman." I had fallen asleep standing there, at the edge of these stairs. I could've fallen down, I could've killed myself. And, right after that, I went back to the post office and I quit. And, the other musicians were there--who were working in the post office, and there were some, said, "You better think about this because this is a good job, you get all the health benefits, and all these things, the government job and if you quit you're not gonna be able to come back," and I knew about that. But, I quit. And, then I continued to gig with Coleman Hawkins. Then I had nothing except a few local gig until [HistoryMaker] Donald Byrd came through Chicago. A few months later in December and hired me to play a gig in Milwaukee [Wisconsin] which led to me joining his group and starting my professional career moving to New York [New York]. Story_ID: 660870 Speaker 1: When you--so let's talk about meeting [HistoryMaker] Donald Byrd. Speaker 2: Oh, by the way-- Speaker 1: Okay. Sorry. Speaker 2: I said one wrong thing. Speaker 1: What was it? Speaker 2: About, (laughter) musicians at Grinnell College [Grinnell, Iowa]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I said, there were two trumpet players-- Speaker 1: Yes, you did. Speaker 2: That were, that were pretty good. And, one was Bob--now, I can't think of his name. Speaker 1: You said there were two trumpet players. Speaker 2: Yeah, he was okay. The other one I said, John Smith; it was John Scott. Speaker 1: Oh, John Scott, okay. Speaker 2: His name was John Scott. Speaker 1: Okay. Oh, yes. I have it right here. It's John Scott (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's John Scott. Yeah, I just don't want it on it (laughter)-- Speaker 1: So, John Scott was--and, he (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) John Scott was a, and John Scott was a really good friend of mine that was--oh, the other one was Bob Preston was a trumpet player. Who lived actually in Grinnell, in the town of Grinnell [Iowa]. But, John Scott actually, I think he came from another school, then to Grinnell. And, he and I became really tight, you know, you know, like brothers, right. And, he was, he was a good trumpet player. He and I wrote a song together that I actually records years later with Donald Byrd. Speaker 1: And what the name of it? Speaker 2: It's called 'A Tribute to Someone.' And, and he wrote the melody, and I wrote the harmonies. Yeah, John Scott. Story_ID: 660871 Speaker 1: Now, you were, you, you talked about just before we, I took the break about meeting [HistoryMaker] Donald Byrd-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and, and, and can we talk about that because that is the beginning of a, he became a real, really important mentor to you in many ways. So, I--so can we talk about that? Speaker 2: In December of 1960 when I as no longer working in the post office [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service]. But just taking local gigs but still living with my parents [Winnie Griffin Hancock and Wayman E. Hancock, Sr.]. I got a call from a club owner that owned a club called the Birdhouse [Chicago, Illinois]. And, he said, "You wanna work with Donald Byrd and Pepper Adams?" (Laughter) I said, "What? What? Are you kidding?" He said, "Well, go get your maroon jacket and come down here to the Birdhouse," 'cause, because he knew I only had one jacket (laughter) that I would wear that was like the nice jacket. And, I wore it to every like gig, and (laughter) anything that was like, where I had to be, you know, dressed in any kind of way, so--anyway, so, I went down to the Birdhouse and there I met Donald Byrd and Pepper Adams who had a quintet. They were on their way to Milwaukee [Wisconsin], which is just a couple, couple hours' drive from Chicago [Illinois]. But, there was a blizzard that night. And, what had happened is their piano player had gotten stranded somewhere because of the blizzard and they needed a piano player just for the weekend at a club in Milwaukee called Curro's. Anyway, we started to, to drive there, but we got caught up in the, in the blizzard and had to turn back to Chicago. And, so, then Donald and Pepper were asking me about, "Is there any place where we can hear you play?" Like, a place where there's a jam session or something. And, I knew of a place that had a jam session. So, we went there and I think it was Ira Sullivan. He was a trumpet player and a tenor sax player. Unusual combinations for one guy to play both those instruments but a really talented guy. And, anyway, he was having this jam session and they let me sit in and I was so nervous that I wasn't very good (laughter). And, I knew it and when I came back to the table where Donald and Pepper were sitting, you know, I shook their hands. I said, you know, "Thank you for the opportunity. I know you're not gonna wanna take me to Milwaukee." And, Donald said, "Oh, man, hold, hold on." He said, "Nah, you coming up, coming with us to Milwaukee tomorrow." He said, "We already factored in that you would be, be nervous so don't, don't worry about that. It'll be fine." So, I went, "Really? Okay. Great." So, the next day we went to Milwaukee and we had a rehearsal. I met the other members of the band and we played that night. And, after the gig I said to Donald, I said, "Some of those tunes are pretty fast. Especially, the song, 'Cherokee.'" And, and I said, "I'm, I'm okay with ballads with kind of moderate tempo tunes but is there any tip you could give me about learning how to play fast?" And, he said, "Okay. Let me tell you what Barry Harris told me." Barry Harris a jazz pianist that, that Donald knew, great, great pianist. He said, "Barry said, that the reason a musician can't play fast is because they've never heard themselves play fast." So, here is what Barry suggested. He said, take a form like the blues, twelve bars, you know, twelve bars blues, or a form like rhythm changes. It's, it's based off the song, 'I Got Rhythm.' He said, write out improvised solo on which ever you chose, write, write one out and, and like chorus after chorus after chorus of you, of what an improvisation on the chord structure would be. And, do a lot of 'em, and then practice that. But practice it to learn how to play it fast. But, you're reading it so it's not that you have to really compose it in your head the way you would on stage. But, this is an exercise. So, I practiced it, not to get it perfect but I was hearing myself play fast. So, then I started doing a few things with this speed, a little bit. Anyway, that next night, we played 'Cherokee,' I was right on it. I could play fast. It actually worked overnight. Story_ID: 660872 Speaker 1: And, at the end of that weekend Donald said to me, "Well, Herbie [HistoryMaker Herbie Hancock] I talked it over with the band. We all like the way you play and we'd like for you to join our band and be our, our new pianist." And, he said, "But, you'll have to move to New York [New York]." And, I was thrilled. I said, "Move to New York, are you kidding? That's my dream." I said, "But you have to ask my mother [Winnie Griffin Hancock]," you know, (laughter). So, he, he probably like chuckled inside himself and said, "Oh, of course. I'll talk to your mother." So, I got my mother on the phone and he talked to her and he explained that he was also an educator, which he was. He had a master's degree in music education and, and he said, "Don't worry, I'll watch out for your son. Everything's gonna be okay. Rest assured." You know, anyway, my, so my parents who had always told my brother [Wayman E. Hancock, Jr.] and sister [Jean Hancock] and I that whatever we wanted to be when we grew up, they would be there for us. Now, they didn't have any money to support us really, to speak of. But, but just in spirit they would, they would be in our corner. And, I don't think they were happy about me choosing to be a jazz musician (laughter). But, but anyway, they didn't go back on their word, they said, "Okay, okay, if that's what you wanna do." But, I don't think my mother was comfortable with that. She was a little worried. And, anyway, I had took my first plane, plane flight from Chicago [Illinois] to New York to move to New York. So, that, that was thrilling for me. I'd never been on a plane before. Speaker 2: But, you're twenty years old, too. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: You're not even, you're not even the legal age of twenty-one at that point. Speaker 1: Right. Not, not yet twenty-one, yeah. Yeah. Which was January of, I left in January of 1961. This gig was the week of, or maybe it for two weeks, but that included Christmas and New Year's. Speaker 2: So, this was a holiday period? Speaker 1: It's the holiday period, right. Speaker 2: So, you go there and you're part of this group and this is, I mean, it's not like you know [HistoryMaker] Donald Byrd-- Speaker 1: No. I'd never met him. I'd never met him (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) At all, at that point. Speaker 1: I'd heard his records. Speaker 2: But, you didn't really, you didn't know him as a person? Speaker 1: No, I didn't (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You didn't even know the members of the group. Speaker 1: No. I didn't know them at all. Story_ID: 660873 Speaker 1: So, so tell me what happens when you get there then, because you--I mean talk about that. Speaker 2: Well, I was under the false impression (laughter), that since [HistoryMaker] Donald Byrd had several records out, you know, Pepper Adams had, had some records that they probab- that Donald probably lived in some mansion somewhere, had plenty of money, and so I was anxious to see where Donald lived. But, I didn't expect to live there. So, I got to New York [New York]--I first, I had enough money to stay in a hotel [Alvin Hotel, New York, New York]. It's, it's in my book ['Herbie Hancock: Possibilities,' Herbie Hancock with Lisa Dickey], I don't remember the name of it right now. Speaker 1: It's, it was a well known hotel for musicians. Speaker 2: Yeah, music, a lot of musicians stayed there. Speaker 1: Musicians there, right. Speaker 2: And, but it was around the corner from Birdland [New York, New York] which was exciting to me 'cause Birdland was the jazz mecca, you know. And, but then after being there for maybe a couple of weeks I guess, the bass player, Laymon Jackson and I took an apartment together on 80 something Street, 84th Street maybe, on the West Side in New York. Which now is a very, very kind of posh, expensive area. Back then, it was poor, primarily black and Hispanic neighborhood. A lot of roaches and (laughter), so we found this really cheap place and, and (laughter) I was scared to stay there because insects and stuff floating around. And, anyway, so, I was there maybe two, close to three months. And, I remember one particular period during those three months where I had twelve cents in my pocket. And, it was near a holiday and there were other musicians that lived in that same neighborhood. And one of 'em, his name was Jinx Jingles [Teddy Charles] and he played vibes. None of us were doing well financially and, but, Jinx and his wife [Diana Charles] decided to have a dinner there for all of the, you know, the neighborhood musicians that were friends. There were about maybe eight of us there that went over to his house. And, we all pulled our money, pulled our money together and like I had twelve cents in my pocket. We pulled it together, we had a dollar and fifty cents. So, she went out and bought a loaf of, like, Silvercup bread or Wonder bread, you know, white bread. And, and she got a bag of flour and got a free soup bone from one of the stores. And, she made gravy. So, we had bread and gravy. Now, I hadn't eaten in several days, and I'll never forget that meal. It was like we had had a gourmet meal. It was so delicious. It was fantastic. And, I mean, in a way, it was like a highlight of my life. We were all in the same boat. We were all like starving. But, we were in it together, you know. And, we were jazz musicians, you know. Story_ID: 660874 Speaker 1: And, one day [HistoryMaker] Donald Byrd descended, some- somehow from his throne (laughter), he came down to the neighborhood driving his Jaguar. And, anyway, he took me from that neighborhood. He said, "Okay. Herbie [Herbie Hancock], why don't you stay with me?" I said, "Wow, fantastic." So, he drove me up to his neighborhood which was in the Bronx [New York]. It was not a castle (laughter), or a mansion. It was a five story walkup and I slept on the Hide a Bed in the living room, and it was just one bedroom, right. And, I had on instruction and that was, if anybody knocked on the door before 8:30 in the morning, to wake him up first. Don't answer the door. Don't say anything. Wake him up first. And, then he would tell me what else to do. Months went by and finally, one day, 8:30 in the morning there's a knock on the door. So, I ran to wake up Donald. He got out of the bed. He went out the window, onto the fire escape and climbed up to the, to the roof of the--'cause we were at the top floor--the roof of, roof of the building. It was the IRS [Internal Revenue Service] (laughter), 'cause he hadn't paid his taxes. I mean, since then, it took years, but he finally did settle that whole thing with the, with the IRS, you know. But, I mean, those are fond memories for me. Story_ID: 660875 Speaker 1: Can you talk about him as a person and what you got to know? I mean, he, he gave you really important advice during the time that would, you know, really put you in good place. And, I'm talking about the publishing. But, I, but I wanna ask you 'cause I don't, what was he like, as a person? I mean, you're living in his house. Speaker 2: Donald [HistoryMaker Donald Byrd] was very nurturing. He really has always cared about young people, has always tried to support them, move them forward. I think it's just in his bones to be an educator and to share information with young people to encourage them and to teach them. It's, it's part of his being. And, and so, of course, that applied to me. He taught me lot. He laughed at me a lot. Because here I was this young guy from Chicago [Illinois], green on the New York [New York] jazz scene. And, (laughter) having gone to school in Iowa [Grinnell College, Grinnell, Iowa]. I probably seemed like a farmer or something (laughter). And, and anyway, it was Donald that not only had me play on what was my first recording date, a record called 'Out of This World' on a label called Warwick. Now, that wasn't the label that Donald was--had a contract with. He--well, no, let me say it this way. That wasn't the label that Donald was assigned to. He, he actually was with Blue Note Records. But, Warwick Records was a label owned by another musician, Teddy Charles [sic. Morty Craft] who played vibes. And, and, Donald made this kind of side contract for one record on Warwick label and I was on that. Then, he had to deal with Blue Note, (laughter). But, anyway, that, that all worked out. But, Donald also was responsible for me doing my first record and that was also with Blue Note. And, what he did, he told me how to get a contract for a record with Blue Note. Because even though Blue Note was famous for having a lot of the young lions at that time. You know, Lee Morgan, [HistoryMaker] Wayne Shorter, Billy Higgins as a drummer, you know, you know, those were key people on the jazz scene. You know, the youth element at that time. And, Freddie Hubbard was on, on Blue Note. But, they didn't like taking a chance on somebody new. But, they, they had to have done it because they had young people there that got there by being highly recommended by other musicians that they did trust. So, Donald told me, he said, "Look," he said, "go down to Blue Note and tell Alfred," Alfred Lion who's the founder of Blue Note, "that you're getting drafted and that you wanted to make a record before you went to the [U.S.] Army." So, I did that. And, they said, "Fine. Okay. Fine." So, then I went back to the Bronx [New York]. And, the other thing that Donald told me was, he said, "Okay, half the record," here's how the music business, jazz music business works. "Half the record is for you, the other half is for the record company." I said, "What does that mean?" He said, "Look, half the record can be your compositions. Whatever you want, that's for you. The other half for the record company is what could sell the record." And, I'm thinking, what? So, he says, "Okay. Nobody knows who you are. Nobody knows your compositions. People tend to buy things that are familiar to them. So, what's familiar to them is blues. So, if you do a song that's based off of the blues or do some blues that they know, that's more of a change that your record can at least strong enough to pay for itself. Or, do a cover of, of a standard that everybody knows, or do something based off of 'I Got Rhythm,' chord changes, you know, people knew that. That's for the record company." But, I wasn't quite satisfied with that so I started thinking about Horace Silver. Story_ID: 660876 Speaker 1: Now, Horace Silver, his records were his own compositions and his records sold. Why did they sell? 'Cause they were like funky jazz compositions. People seem to like that. So, I started to think, I'm from Chicago [Illinois], that's a blues town. And, if I can't write a funky jazz tune, something's wrong. So, anyway, I decided that I wanted to write something that was honestly from my experience as an African American, from my neighborhood. Something that was, you know, truly ethnic. Because, I mean, that's where the whole funky thing came from. So, since I hadn't experienced being in a chain gang or, or being beaten, or being in the South and abused, I was from Chicago. And, so, I started thinking, okay, who's the most ethnic character I would think of? And, it was the watermelon man. But, I started to think, I don't know if I wanna write a tune called 'Watermelon Man' 'cause there was stigma attached to watermelons. And, that stigma was this image of the (air quotes) pickaninny, you know, with big eyes, you see the white of his eyes and, you know, lip smacking, you know, the watermelon. It was very like a stereotypical negative--that was the idea that it was a negative image of black people. And, so, I didn't wanna call attention to that. I mean, at that time, and it sounds ridiculous today. But, black people would buy watermelons in a black neighborhood. Black people would not buy watermelons in a grocery store in a white neighborhood because of that stigma. It just wasn't done. So, but, I started to think about that, you know. And, I, I thought, okay. Maybe I could call it the vegetable man. But, that didn't fly. So, I said, okay. How can I work this? I started thinking, okay. Is there anything wrong with watermelons? Nope. Tasty, delicious, it's not unhealthy at all. It's a lot of water in it, you know. Okay, that's--the fruit is fine. Is there anything actually wrong with the watermelon man? Nope. Couldn't find anything wrong with that. So, I had no compelling argument to dissuade me from calling it 'Watermelon Man,' except my own lack of courage. So, I couldn't let myself do that. So, I said, I'm gonna have to stand up for what I believe in. It's nothing wrong with the watermelon man. I'm calling it 'Watermelon Man.' And, there was some musicians that when I told 'em I had written a song called 'Watermelon Man,' this was before I actually--yeah, maybe I had recorded it but it wasn't released yet. And, I told them that I'd written a song called 'Watermelon Man.' They said, "You're not really gonna call it that, are you?" And, I said, "Yes. I am," (laughter). And, they'd walk away shaking their head, you know. Story_ID: 660877 Speaker 1: So, anyway, I--Donald told me one, one more thing that was very important. He said, "When you go down to play your songs for Alfred Lion and Frank, Frank Wolff [Francis Wolff]," who was also the co-founder of Blue Note [Blue Note Records], he says, "they're gonna tell you that you have to put your songs in their publishing company." He said, "Don't do it." He said, "I'll show you how to set up a publishing company. It's really easy. It cost very lit- almost pennies and you can publish your own songs. So, don't do that." I said, "But, Donald, maybe they won't make my record." He said, "They'll make your record." So, sure enough I go down. I play three of the songs I had written. And, just on the piano. They said, "Fine." And, then they said just like Donald explained. They said, "Well, you know, you'll have, you have to put your compositions in, in our publishing company." You know, the Blue Note publishing company. And, I said, "No. I can't." They said, "Why not?" Donald never told me the answer (laughter) of why not. But, I said, I quickly thought, I said, "Because they're already in my publishing company." They weren't. I lied, 'cause I didn't even set it up yet. But, anyway, they said, "Well, I guess then we can't make your record." And, that was the thing I didn't wanna hear. So, I got up, I walked toward the door, and just as I was about to put my hand on the doorknob, they said, "Okay, hold on, hold on. Okay." They said, "Come back, come back. Okay, you can keep your publishing, we'll do the record." One of those songs was 'Watermelon Man.' Speaker 2: I mean, lots of things are amazing about this story. I mean, I wanna understand, is this indicative, were, was what he was doing, you know, for you--I know, said, you know, he was an educator by nature. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: A mentor, you know, a natural mentor. But, was he, what he did for you in terms of those instructions, are there counterparts who have others in, you know, in the, in the industry doing that for them. You know, telling them exactly--was this going on as a matter (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah. It, yeah, Art Blakey did the same things, same kinds of things with his musicians. Maybe he didn't know about the publishing. Donald happened to know. Again, Donald was an educator. So, he was, not privy to the information, oh, well, in a sense that he sought out that kind of information. But, Art Blakey also was very nourishing to his musicians and always tried to help them to grow and expand and he encouraged them to write songs 'cause Art didn't write, write any songs. [HistoryMaker] Donald Byrd wrote, wrote songs. Speaker 2: So, was this-- Speaker 1: It's, it's--that's inherent in the jazz community; that musician do that. They help each other. Speaker 2: And, they were, and the writing of songs, I mean, that had been something you had started in Grinnell [Grinnell College, Grinnell, Iowa], right? You had started-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: That's what you were talking about? Okay. Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. I mean, I didn't have a lot of songs already written. I, I don't remember-- Speaker 2: See that's-- Speaker 1: Anything before except for that one tune that I wrote-- Speaker 2: In Grinnell? Speaker 1: At Grinnell. I may have even played it for Donald at that time. And, but, I think Donald sensed that I, I had something, you know. And, he wanted to encourage it. So, my writing really started with, with Blue Note. Story_ID: 660878 Speaker 1: This is just--okay, this is, this is a rough one; might wanna get into more details of it later. One of 'em was that he introduced me to Miles [Miles Davis] first. And, he also--when the, like a year later when there were rumors going around that Miles was looking for me. Because he had disbanded his previous band and we forming a new band. But, I didn't believe in any, in any of the rumors 'cause Miles, Miles, was on a, like the highest pedestal for me, and for a lot of musicians. And, the idea of playing with Miles, is, is like I've died and gone to heaven or something (laughter), you know. And, and, but Donald [HistoryMaker Donald Byrd], at a certain point when the rumors were getting heavier and heavier, Donald said, "Look, when Miles calls, tell him you're not working with anybody." And, I said, "Look, Donald, Miles is not gonna call. And, how could I do that to you? Man, you discovered me. You got me my first record contract. You got me my, my publishing company [Hancock Music Company], you know, so that I could keep the publishing to 'Watermelon Man.'" And, he said, "Shut up." He said, "If I stood in the way of your having an opportunity like playing with Miles," he said, "I couldn't look at myself in, in the mirror." He said, "Tell Miles you're not working with anybody." And, within hours the phone rings and it's Miles. The first questions that Miles says (imitates Miles Davis), "You working with anybody?" I said, "No. I'm not" (laughter). Just like Donald told me. And, anyway, Miles asked me to come to his house the next day, in the afternoon, and, and then he hung up, click. I didn't have Miles' phone number. I didn't have his address. But, I had been to his house once before because Donald had taken me to his house. But, I was still kind of panicking. About a half hour later, Tony Williams, the younger drummer that I had met in Boston [Massachusetts] the previous year--by, by the way, now we're talking about 1963, and I met Tony in December of '62 [1962] when I had gone-- Speaker 2: Okay. Can we not go so quickly? I wanna go back to the-- Story_ID: 660879 Speaker 1: Your debut of your album ['Takin' Off'] before you go to 1963, 'cause your album comes out in 1962 (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But, I thought you wanted the, like the, okay, the things that-- Speaker 1: Well, go on--what he did. Speaker 2: What he did. Okay. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Okay, so I did that. Okay, I won't talk about that--the other thing that, that Donald did was when the first money for "Watermelon Man" started to come in, when Mongo Santamaria's version became a hit. And, it's in, Hancock Music Company. So, I got a, a big check, you know, a few thousand dollars. Speaker 1: That's a lot of money back then. Speaker 2: Lot of money back then. I had a check for like three thousand doll-thirty-five hundred dollars, that's what it was. I got that check from BMI, Broadcast Music Incorporated [Broadcast Music Inc.]. They collect money for-- Speaker 1: For royalties. Speaker 2: --for royalties on, on, not for record sales. But, royalties from air play. You know, radio or TV. And, so, that was an advance from them. Although, I had signed as a writer, I had never signed as a publisher with them. And, I didn't know there were two differ- designations with BMI. But, anyway, when I signed as a publisher, I got this--thanks to the lawyer, Paul Marshall, that I had hired, who again was suggested by [HistoryMaker] Donald Byrd. He got me this advance of thirty-five hundred dollars. And, so, I had said to Donald, "Wow, this record's a hit. I might have to go out and take a band out myself. And, and to promote this record." And, so I was thinking of, maybe I should buy like a station wagon. I could put a bass in there, you know, an upright bass, and drums. And, Donald said, "Have you ever thought about buying a sports car?" And, now, Donald had a Jaguar. And, I told him, "No. I, I hadn't." Now, the last car I had was not one that I bought. It was a car that my father [Wayman E. Hancock, Sr.] bought for me when I was in college [Grinnell College, Grinnell, Iowa], an old used, I don't know, DeSoto or something. And, I had no car in New York [New York]. And, so, Donald said, "There's this car called a Cobra [AC Cobra] that is, has been beating Ferrari on the racing scene and there's like a street version of it. And, it's one down in Manhattan [New York] on 54th Street at a dealership there, 54th and Broadway. You might wanna look at it." So, I said, "Okay." Story_ID: 660880 Speaker 1: So, I went down there, not really thinking about buying the car but I figured, let me look at it. But, the attitude that I got when I got into the dealership was really foul. Granted, I didn't look like I was a man of means. I was probably wearing jeans and, you know, I just taken the subway (laughter) to, you know, coming from, from the Bronx [New York] to, to this dealership. And, and this, the salesman, there was one salesman at a desk and he didn't, he didn't even look up at me. He probably saw me coming into the door. He was probably thinking, you know, why waste, why waste my time, you know. So, I walked up to his desk. He still never looked up. I'm standing there and he says--no, he didn't say anything. I finally said, "I understand you have an AC Cobra here?" And, he just, again, not looking at me, pointed toward the car. Now, if that isn't a height of rudeness. So, I start walking toward the car. Now, I'm getting a little hot behind the collar, right. And, I went to the car, I kicked the tires (laughter). I never owned a car. I didn't know anything about what you supposed to look for. And, and then--the car looked nice. I went back to the desk and the guy still didn't look up. And, I said, "I wanna buy the Cobra." He looked up then. He said, "Do you know how much this car cost?" I said, "Yeah, six thousand dollars. And, I'm gonna come back with the cash tomorrow." And, I just stormed out of the place. And, he was looking at me like, what? The next day I came in, now, Donald [HistoryMaker Donald Byrd] drove me in this Jaguar. I'm wearing a nice sport jacket. But, then I'm met by the owner of the dealership, shakes my hand, you know, the car is there. I began, you know, signing the papers and musicians walked by. They saw me in there. Next thing, I, I know, I'm seeing [HistoryMaker] Jimmy Heath, saxophonist. In my car that I'm buying on a joy ride with, with one of the, you know, people from the dealership, around the block (laughter). And, then Jimmy Owens, another trumpet player, who, who lived also in the Bronx. He also got a ride. So, it was about three different musicians that had a ride around the block. And, I hadn't even been in the car yet. So, after I physically bought the car, they had one of the service people drive me around the block in this sports car. Scared the daylights out of me. It was so fast that--and, I was so scared that I couldn't drive the car back to the Bronx. I told Donald, "Can you drive my car back?" And, and, I drove his Jaguar (laughter). And, I didn't drive the car for a few weeks. But, I let Donald drive it 'cause I was scared of the car. And, the clutch was really stiff. (Laughter) But I would go to the garage where I kept the car, I'd sit in it, and I would, I would just say with my mouth, vroom, vroom (laughter), it was so silly (laughter), until I finally took the car out. Speaker 2: You still have that car now, right? Speaker 1: I still have that car. Speaker 2: That's really, that's a great story. You know, I, this is the other thing. So, he has you having everything in tack. Like, he's telling you by the book. I have to go back to this because--but, his house is not really intact though 'cause he's running from the IRS [Internal Revenue Service]. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: I'm just-- Speaker 1: Yeah, well, you know, that, that was a decision he made to not pay taxes. People do that, you know, and sometimes they get caught and maybe sometimes they don't. Or, at least they delay it, or they think they, you can avoid it for a long, long time. I mean, with most people that catches up to them. Speaker 2: Right. So, this is what I-- Speaker 1: But, he's putting himself in jeopardy. He didn't want me to be in jeopardy. He was protective. Story_ID: 660881 Speaker 1: So, so, did he have any other mentees beside you? You know, were there others beside you? And, then, how are you adjusting to this world around you? 'Cause I mean, it's not like you, you literally got snatched out of Chicago [Illinois] and two weeks later, you're in New York [New York]. And, it's a, and you--it's not like you have family or anything there and I'm just, I'm wondering how you're taking it all in, you know, and-- Speaker 2: Well, for me, I was like the new kid in town. Granted, it's New York City, it's a huge city. But, the first gig I had with [HistoryMaker] Donald Byrd in New York was at the Five Spot [Five Spot Cafe] and it was after I'd been there maybe three months. Speaker 1: And, it's a famous place. Speaker 2: Famous club. And, Donald told me beforehand, he said, "There'll be, like Horace Silver, Bill Evans, you know, all these, you know, Paul Chambers on bass, he's gonna be there." All these famous, he said, "There will be ten or twelve famous musicians there to check you out." So, he said, "I'm just warning you right now. And, they'll be sitting there like judges," (laughter), "like the supreme court of something," (laughter). So, he scared me even more (laughter), right. But, evidently, I must've passed the test because, you know, after I played the response was, was good he told me. And, then musicians started hiring me. Because Donald didn't work all the time. So, when he wasn't working somebody else might have a gig for a week here, or two weeks there, you know, sometimes in New York. Like the, the Coronet Club [Blue Coronet Club] in, in Brooklyn [New York], or some of the other clubs, kind of there or maybe in New Jersey. I don't, I didn't do any touring that I can remember with other groups during the time I was with Donald. Just single, single gigs. Speaker 1: Okay. So, then-- Speaker 2: My, my name, so my name was getting around with the musicians. I was like the new, new piano playing in, in town, and I, and I was working. And, I was mak- also recording with other musicians too. They'd hire me to be a side man, a side man on their records. Story_ID: 660882 Speaker 1: So, you talk about--so, how long did it take you write 'Watermelon Man'? I mean, you didn't, you said, you talk about but how long did it take? You know, you were-- Speaker 2: It took, it took me about fifteen or twenty minutes to write 'Watermelon Man.' Speaker 1: No way. Speaker 2: It was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Seriously? Speaker 2: --pretty quick. Yeah. I, it took me long to think about what I wanted to depict how I wanted to approach the song. And, I did something that I hadn't thought of doing before. Which is, to actually take a character and try to musically describe the scene. So, I wrote this rhythm pattern based off of the idea of the wagon wheels going over the cobblestones of the alleys of Chicago [Illinois]. And, that's the (sings musical notes). That was kind of to depict that visual scene. The melody was based off of women tel- yelling to the watermelon man, "Hey, watermelon, watermelon man," you know, "Hey, watermelon man." And, and, so that's the melody, you know. So, it didn't take me that long to, to do that. And, that it's a little bit of a release and, and that's the song. Speaker 1: Okay. So, okay, so when you, then you go down to Blue Note [Blue Note Records], you do--they like the song, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Immediately? Immediate they like the song? You don't leave there-- Speaker 2: I, they, they didn't single that song out. Speaker 1: They did not? Speaker 2: No. They--I had no--I just played the three songs. And, then the next thing they said is, "We'll have to put it in our publishing company." And, then, then as I started to walk out, they called me back, they said, "Okay." Now, they didn't say anything to me about that particular song, ever. But, I think they heard the potential in that song. Story_ID: 660883 Speaker 1: So, on--so the--your debut album is 'Takin' Off.' Now, who comes up with the title for 'Takin' Off' at that point? Is it the, is it the record company [Blue Note Records] at that point, or do you know? Speaker 2: I, yeah, that was, that was the record company that came up with that title. Speaker 1: And, there how many songs on the first album? Speaker 2: I think six. Yeah, I think it's six songs; all original. Oh, that was the other thing, they told me, after I said, "Okay, tomorrow I'll come back with a, a blues and a, and a cover of a, you know, standard or maybe two of those." Anyway, they, they said, "No. Why don't you write three more originals?" That was shock 'cause they never did that for like a new artist on their label, for them--for there to be all originals. I mean, the only conclusion I could draw is that I think they heard the potential in "Watermelon Man." Speaker 1: So, you get, so, the, the album comes out and then that's when you say you start, you got, you started getting your royalty--you, when it starts--okay, so, so (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, let me explain. Speaker 1: 'Cause I'm-- Speaker 2: Okay. My record came out and it was actually doing very well on the, the charts. It was number eighty. The charts--the rating system was not the way it is today where there are categories. It was one chart. Everything went into that. And, for my song to be number eighty mixed in with other songs that were, you know, pop songs, or rhythm and blues, that's pretty good for a, for a jazz tune. But, it was a few months later that I got a gig with Mongo Santamaria. First time I played with a Latin band. And, I didn't even know how to play Latin music. But, I got hired because, this is funny it's almost similar to, to me getting a gig with [HistoryMaker] Donald Byrd. They actually had a weekend where their previous pianist had quit and the new pianist couldn't come in until the beginning of the next week. And, they just needed somebody for three days. And, so, I told 'em, "I never played Latin music before." They said, "Don't worry, we'll teach you how to play a simple montuno and you'll be fine." And, it's just a rhythm pattern or some rhythm patterns, simple ones. And, so, I played three gigs. The third gig happened to be in the Bronx [New York] not that far from where Donald and I lived. So, Donald came by to hear his little brother, so to speak, play with Mongo. And, he knew Mongo 'cause, you know, Mongo was, was--he's from Cuba. And, he's like a top conguero, playing, you know, the conga drums. And, really well respected by the jazz musicians and Latin musicians. And, so, they, we were playing in a supper club. Not, not that many people were getting up to dance. Sometimes some people would. But, for the most part, they weren't dancing very, very much. Between sets, Donald had a conversation with Mongo about relationship between Afro Latin music and Afro American music. And, Mongo was saying, you know, considering, considering the diaspora, he had never quite heard the link between those two. You know, he had jazz musicians playing in his band but there wasn't something that he considered to be a link. Anyway, I kind of half heard that conversation. I was talking to some other people. But, Donald said, "Hey, Herbie [HistoryMaker Herbie Hancock], why don't you play "Watermelon Man" for Mongo?" Now, my recording had already been out and so I was wondering, what is my little funky jazz tune have to do with this conversation, this, you know, cultural conversation they're, they're having; culture and historical? So, anyway, I say, "Okay." So, I started playing it and Mongo got up and said, "Keep playing it." And, he got up on the conga drums and started playing with me. And, this combinations of what I was doing with "Watermelon Man" and the Latin beat, fit so perfectly together. It was like they were made for each other. And, little by little, the other musicians pick up the bass line and the chord structure and they, they all started coming up on the bandstand to play "Watermelon Man" and improvise off of it. People started getting on the dance floor. Pretty soon the whole place was jumping. It was like a movie or something. Everybody was, I mean, they yelling, "This is a hit, this is a hit." And, everybody was dancing having a good time. Musicians were enjoying playing the song too. They were getting off on it. And, after we finished, Mongo said, "Can, I, can I record this?" I said, "Absolutely." He recorded it, and his record became really a top ten hit. Story_ID: 660884 Speaker 1: So, what is going thr- okay, before I ask what's going through your mind, what is the record company, what in those days would they do to promote, promote, promote an album or a record? Were there, I mean, I see the, you know, the, the cover and your hands do look small, but you look so young, your hands look small in there. Speaker 2: Yeah. I was young (laughter). Speaker 1: But, what are they, what are they doing? Do they, did they have publicists and things like that? Or, what would happen with the record when it came out? Speaker 2: You know-- Speaker 1: Do you remember (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) At the time, I had no interest in--there was nothing, there was nothing compelling me to find out how a record company works. Speaker 1: Oh, I see. Speaker 2: So, I didn't know. I never went to--I don't remember even going to the final mix for the record ['Takin' Off']. I just played, and I just figured they, they knew how to do that and they would take care of it. They advertised in jazz magazines, that I knew. I didn't have--how did they do it--I guess, I did have a single come out of it. Yeah, I'm sure I did. But, by the way, Mongo [Mongo Santamaria] was also on a jazz label [Battle]. So, whatever (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, your song is on two jazz labels then, at that point? Speaker 2: Right, on Blue Note [Blue Note Records] and on, it was a sub label of a larger label [Riverside Records]. But, Orrin Keepnews was the, the, the head of that label. I can't think of it right now. It's easy to find out. Story_ID: 660885 Speaker 1: So, this--are you--what are people saying about you, though? I know you're the new, new, new young pianist in town, jazz pianist but, what are people saying about you? Are they comparing you to anyone? Or, are they just saying you're very talented? I mean, what, what are, what's being said amongst--? Speaker 2: Chicago [Illinois] happens to be a town where--first of all, young talent is nurtured in Chicago. People will come out to hear, you know, to the jam sessions, to hear new people that are appearing on, on the scene. There's a lot of support for development in Chicago. The pianists in particular were very much interested in harmony and harmonic development. There was one musician named Chris Anderson from Chicago that was for, for the pianists who were focusing on harmony and chords, Chris was like the go to guy because he was a master of, like, choral relationships and melodic relationships. And, everybody wanted to either study with Chris or at least study, you know, hear Chris a lot to kind of learn from Chris. And, so, there were--he had devotees and I was one of 'em. You know, and, and there were others. Harold Mabern is another pianist was a devotee, still is of, of Chris Anderson. Billy Wallace was another pianist at that time. And, sometimes we would get together with Chris, four pianists. And, we'd decide on a ballad to play. And, each one would play one chorus on a ballad, re-harmonizing it, you know, putting knew harmoni- harmonies to it. And, to--it's almost like a challenge to each other. And, we go back and forth until we run out, run out of ideas for, for that particular song. And, I mean, those are the kind of things that we, we did. So, so, by the time I got to New York [New York], I was very much into playing harmonies that were, like newer harmonies or harmonies that were, that were older, that were based off of older techniques but used in a, in a new way. And, and, I didn't sound like some of the other piano players who used just kind of standard modern jazz harmonies. And, I think for that reason I got a lot of gigs playing with musicians. They knew, you know, I was, now I had some of these modern, modern techniques that they, they liked. Speaker 1: So, you get this call from, from--thanks for that explanation, though. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Story_ID: 660886 Speaker 1: You get this call from Miles [Miles Davis] and, and Donald [HistoryMaker Donald Byrd] has told you that, you know, that this call may be, be coming, but the call comes. And, you said that you don't even know the address, you know, at that point, you know, 'cause he hangs up the phone. And, you also said that he's starting to regroup, you know, reorganize this quintet. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Quintet, okay. So, talk about, and you also talked Tony. Is it Tony? Speaker 2: Tony Williams, yeah. Speaker 1: Tony Williams, that you had met him in Boston [Massachusetts]. Speaker 2: Right (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, this is Boston--while, you're in New York [New York]. You know, you do a gig in Boston. Speaker 2: Right. I would, I was living in New York already in the winter of 1962 when my record ['Watermelon Man'] was already, my first record was already out I got a gig with Eric Dolphy, actually a touring gig. So, for about maybe a month, something like that, about a month. And, in one of the cities we visited and performed in was Boston. And, it was there that I met Tony Williams. And, I, and I heard that Tony was working sometimes with Jackie McLean who was a alto saxophonist. Very well respected, who had years before had also worked with Miles and been on a lot of Miles' records. And, anyway, when, when Miles hung up the phone on me after he called me to come to his house the next day, within about thirty minutes Tony Williams called me. And, oh, I should tell you this too. That Tony moved from Boston to New York in something like February of 1963, and one of the first things he did, he called me to say, "Hey man, I moved from Boston." Now, he's seventeen years old. I was twenty-two and, so, this kid calls me in New York. I'd never heard him play. I had only met him. And, you know, people had talked about how brilliant he was as a, as a drummer. And, but, inside I had been thinking, he's seventeen. Are they saying, he's brilliant for seventeen or are they saying he could really play regardless of age? Well, when Tony called me, you know, I'm listening to him on the phone and he says, "Hey man, what's, what's happening?" And, and I'm trying to think, okay, how can I get this kid off the phone, (laughter), you know. But, you know, I was cordial to him and you know, I talked briefly to him and then I hung up. Well, maybe a month later or less, I get a call from Jackie McLean. And, Jackie says, "I got this gig in Brooklyn [New York] and I wanted to know if you would like to play the gig with me? Are you available to, to play?" And, I, I said, "Oh, who's, who's on the gig?" He said, "Eddie Khan on bass and Tony Williams on drums." I said, "Tony Williams? That little kid from Boston?" He said, "Yeah." I said, "Okay, Jackie, look, can he just play good for seventeen year old kid or can he really play?" So, Jackie said, "I tell you what Herbie [HistoryMaker Herbie Hancock], why don't you just come down to the gig and find out for yourself?" I said, "Okay. I'll take the gig." And it was like a little challenge. So, this was, not a gig where we rehearsed. We didn't have any time to rehearse. We played tunes that were part of the standard repertoire of jazz musicians at that, at that that time. We decided which tunes we wanna play. And, I just remember when Jackie counted off the first tune. The first thing I hear is bam. And, I hear this stuff from the drums that I'd never heard from any drummer before. This little kid, Tony Williams is blowing my mind. And, I couldn't even play at first I was so dumbfounded. And, I finally, you know, played and he was so incredible. And, he was doing things rhythmically that I never heard before, advanced stuff. And, the next day--and, I'm thinking, I wanna know, I wanna know what he's doing, 'cause I wanna figure out how to do some of that stuff on the piano. So, the, so, the next day I call Tony Williams. And, I say, "Hey, Tony, what's happening?" (Laughter) The shoe was on the other foot this time (laughter). Story_ID: 660887 Speaker 1: So, anyway, he and I became really, you know, close friends, really bonded together and so this is why when Miles called me, the next thing is Tony [Tony Williams] calls me and says, "Hey, did Miles call you?" I said, "Yeah." And, he--we were both really excited about it. So, the next day we show up at Miles' house and Ron Carter, bass player, was player already there. George Coleman who had been playing with Miles along with Ron was, was already there. And, Miles--we started playing something, you know, some, maybe some standard tunes. I don't remember now what, what we started to play. And, Miles played a few notes and then took his horn and threw it on the couch and, and kind of went upstairs like it was, didn't wanna, he didn't wanna be bothered or he was disgusted or I don't know what. But, not with us but he just threw the horn down and left. And, so, Ron Carter kind of took over to proceed with us playing more music. And, this went on for three days. And, the second day Miles came down for a minute to meet two friends of his that came, came by, Philly Joe Jones, a great drummer that had played with Miles in the, in the First Great Quintet. What we call the First Great Quintet. And, Gil Evans who was the arranger of, of, some orchestra pieces with Miles, 'Miles Ahead,' 'Porgy and Bess,' and 'Sketches of Spain.' Two heroes of mine, by the way. Anyway, Miles came down to speak to them, and they listened to us for a while. And, then the third day Miles came down, he played a little bit more and then he said, "Okay, next Monday we're gonna meet at--" he said (imitates Miles Davis), "Monday we're gonna meet at Columbia, Columbia recording studio [CBS 30th Street Studio, New York, New York] at 3:30." And I, I said, "Miles, does that mean I'm in the band?" And, Miles looked at me, first thing was some expletive (laughter), and he said (imitates Miles Davis), "You're making the record." But, he had a little glint in his eye, you know. And, that was fine with me. I just, I'm thinking, I'm gonna make a record with Miles Davis. You know, beyond my wildest dreams. But, it was a combination of rehearsal and audition. And, because after we made the record, we went and played our, our first gig up in, in Maine at a, at a college and that was the beginning of a five and a half year stint with Miles Davis. Story_ID: 660888 Speaker 1: Miles [Miles Davis] hadn't been known for hiring musicians that young before, who were so new on the scene. So, this was a young band playing with Miles, a young, fresh band. Before he always hired like, seasoned musicians who everybody knew were top people. Tony [Tony Williams] was new on the scene. I was brand new but I was still pretty new at the time I joined Miles' band. So, that was, it was daring for Miles to do that. Now, granted, Miles was still in his thirties. He was about thirty-seven I think. Yeah, right, because he was born in 1926, and this was 1963. But, still, with this reputation that he had, you know, making a radical departure from the kind of band he had before [First Great Quintet] to this new band with a new kind of energy. And, Miles was incredible because he encouraged us to help him shape the sound of the band. He didn't, he wasn't like an overlord where he wanted us to just play in the background and have him featured. No, this was a team, a collaborative team that worked together to play a music that was inspired by the moment. And, he encouraged us to always like, work on stuff. Not just the stuff you know. Not just the stuff that will get you applause. If we, if, as a matter of fact, if we played something and Miles knew we were just doing that just to get applauses from the audience, he would've, he would've fired us. You know, he wanted the real stuff. You know, it's great to have a, a boss like that. Speaker 2: You know, I, so do you think he purposely--I mean, on hindsight, you know, 'cause you said this is a second great quart- [Second Great Quintet]-- Speaker 1: Quintet. Speaker 2: Quintet, that's it. Speaker 1: That's what they say. I never called it that (laughter) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But, no, I understand. But, what I'm trying to--do you think he was purposeful in some respects of what he wanted to do at this point in his career in forming this quintet, or he was just trying to get the best people, but he went younger? I mean, do you, has there been any analysis of that at all? Speaker 1: There, nobody ever asked me that question. There was no- nobody ever gave me a definitive answer to this question that nobody ever asked me. But, my take on it is that Miles wanted something that was new and fresh. New, like start with new people. Tony was not only a new drummer, nobody played like Tony. The other drummer that was the--known for being the initiative drummer was Elvin Jones, who played with John Coltrane's band. John Coltrane had previously played with Miles Davis. What Tony was doing was not in any way a copy of what Elvin was doing. It was--as great as Elvin was, and he was definitely great and influenced a lot of drummers. Tony had something new that no other drummer had, and Miles knew that. So did everybody else that heard Tony. So, Tony was a key element in the band. And, then, I had this harmonies and Miles like my touch too. He liked, Miles liked to play ballads. He liked to play pretty stuff, but he also like to play fiery stuff. So, I think this combination of, of me and Tony, and Ron [Ron Carter] being a very solid father. He was already married and was a father. For--as a bass player, which has a, is a kind of a foundational instrument in a sense. Ron and his, his confidence, the kind of confidence he used in playing, and, and perfection that Ron was always looking for, always admiring, always demonstrating. But, creativity too. It was, it was a rhythm section that, that was very inspiring to me, I'll tell you that. Story_ID: 660889 Speaker 1: Well, you talk in, in the book ['Herbie Hancock: Possibilities,' Herbie Hancock with Lisa Dickey] and you've talked other, other places, what is interesting is the growth that occurred during that time and things that really happened. And, I, I found it--so, can you talk about that a little? I mean, the-- Speaker 2: Well, Miles [Miles Davis] really listened to us, musically. He really listened to what we were doing. He would study us. You could see him on the side of the stage. If I was taking a solo, or, you know, any of the other members of the band [Second Great Quintet], Miles would be on the side studying us, you know, listening to what we were doing. And, and I know that behind Miles, even though we would, we, we, even though we would create excitement behind Miles, much of the exploratory stuff and the, the ideas that we had that were stimulated by our influence that came from the avant-garde, we didn't do that behind Miles. We did that behind George Coleman who was the saxophone player at that time. And, George really was highly influenced by John Coltrane, and the way Trane played with Miles. But, by that time, John Coltrane was already being influenced by the avant-garde and getting further and further out. And, but, that influence from the avant-garde when the four of us would play, or the three of us, me, Tony [Tony Williams], and, and Ron [Ron Carter], that avant-garde influence was more prevalent. But, one day we were in Detroit [Michigan] playing in a club there, and Miles said to me, to me and Tony, he said (imitates Miles Davis), "Why don't you play behind me the way you play behind George?" And, we thought, really? You wanna go out that far (laughter). We--I didn't say that but we were thinking about--and we said, "Okay." So, we started playing these conga rhythms and this, you know, doing these things, you know, new stuff, behind Miles. And, it was throwing him, throwing, I mean. I mean, his body start twisting and played like a short phrase and, you know, he was trying to find his way in that kind of minefield, musical minefield. And, but, we kept pouring it on. We, we didn't stop. And, the second day again, we continued, 'cause Miles never told us, "What the heck is that?" I mean, he never said anything to, that would encourage us to stop moving forward, forward with Miles. But, the second day Miles played longer phrases, more connected phrases and it was working. And, by the third day, Miles had it. He was all over that stuff. And, I was the one that was stumbling and fumbling trying to find my way because what Miles was playing now was new and it required me to change some of what I was playing behind his solos. I had to find kind of a new approach to it that would work with the, this combination of, of the new things Tony was doing, what Ron was doing, and what Miles was doing. But, it was, it was a great environment for learning, an incredible environment for learning. Story_ID: 660890 Speaker 1: And, do you think that continued the whole five, five and a half years, that learning process the whole time or not? Or, was-- Speaker 2: For me in particular or just for the band [Second Great Quintet]? Speaker 1: For the band. First, for the band. Speaker 2: The great thing about this band is that we got better and better and more familiar with each other's style and the band got tighter and tighter. And, it got to the point where we could make it happen, just like snapping your finger. But, that became too easy. And, one day, we were in Chicago [Illinois] too, by the way, and Tony Williams and I were in the same car that we were being driven to the gig at, at the Plugged Nickel, a club in Chicago. And, Tony said, "Hey, man, it's too easy. It's getting too easy. We have to do something. We have to, we gotta find a challenge someway or else it ain't gonna go nowhere," right. And, I understood exactly what he was talking about. But, Tony had the courage say, "Look man, I'm gonna play like anti-music. You know, right now whatever anybody plays, everybody knows how I'm gonna respond to whatever phrase Wayne [HistoryMaker Wayne Shorter] is gonna play. They know how I'm gonna respond. They know how you're gonna respond. It's too easy. So, I'm gonna do the opposite of what anybody expects." And, I said, "Tony, I know what you're talking about. I'm gonna do the same thing." And, we called it anti-music, right (laughter). So, when we actually get inside the club, what's staring us in the face, a bunch of tape recorders. We didn't know that Columbia Records had, I guess talked to Miles [Miles Davis], and they had prepared to record us at the Plugged Nickel. And, here we're gonna use the Plugged Nickel as a development house? And, that the audience we knew they were gonna be guinea pigs for what was gonna sound awful at first. But, it was a process we had to go through to find challenge, to, to stretch out more. So, then, I was kind of scared of holding on to my promise of that anti-music. But, Tony Williams said, "No. I'm still doing it." So, I said, "Okay, Tony, me too." And, and, we spoke to Ron [Ron Carter] and Ron was onboard. We never said anything to Miles. We said something to Wayne. Wayne was fine. We never told Miles. And, we started playing, and it was not the same. And, it was really strange, strange (laughter), you know. All of us thought, it sounds like crap. And, none of us wanted to hear the playback. And, they record pretty much every day. And, I didn't wanna hear any of that. Later on the record came--I mean, it took a while before they brought the record out. Because frankly, I don't think the record company thought much of what we were doing. But, some years later, the first single album of Plugged Nickel, 'Miles at the Plugged Nickel' [sic. 'Live at the Plugged Nickel 1965'] came out. And, I got a copy but I never played it. I didn't wanna hear that stuff. And, somebody called me up and said, "Hey, Herbie [HistoryMaker Herbie Hancock], you heard the record you did with Miles at the Plugged Nickel?" I said, "No, and I don't want to" (laughter). They said, "I think you should listen to it. You might be surprised." So, it took me a couple days and I listened to it. And, you know, it was very strange because it sounded raw, unpolished, and weird, quirky, but it sounded human. And it, and it, it sounded honest, you know, like, we were really reaching for something, and we were trying. And, and not just going to the easy places where people would expect us to go. There was something about it that worked. And, and then later on they brought out a whole package of about five CDs [compact disc] that were pretty much every night at the Plugged Nickel. And, it, it got great reviews too, from the, from the critics. Story_ID: 660891 Speaker 1: Now, he also said one night to you about the butter notes (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, can I say one thing? Speaker 1: Of course. Speaker 2: Once we did the, played the Plugged Nickel [Chicago, Illinois] the band [Second Great Quintet] did move on to another level of playing. There was much more intuitive, much further out but it got more and more cohesive. And, it was very enigmatic to the other musicians. They didn't know what we were doing but it sounded like we knew what we were doing and they all wanted a piece of that. But, they didn't even know how to approach it, you know. It was very hard to explain to them what we were doing. But, they were wondering, "How do you guys know that you're going on to this next song? Or, how do you know that it's going on to this next part of the, the piece? And, how is it you, you wind up somehow being connected?" You know, and it was very difficult for me to explain in, in words. But, it was not easy. I think we broadened the palette. We broadened the palette of choices and we really depended more on the, the feeling of the moment rather than the knowledge from the brain about chord structure and the normal ways you define music. Speaker 1: There was a lot of trust there and improvisation. So, but-- Speaker 2: Right (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And also, he, he permitted all of this. I mean-- Speaker 2: He encouraged it. Speaker 1: He encouraged it. Speaker 2: Miles [Miles Davis] encouraged this, the idea of constantly developing, constantly working outside the box, constantly exploring. Miles loved that. Speaker 1: So, when you say the other musicians, who are the other musicians you're talking about that didn't understand it and didn't quite--who are we talking about? Speaker 2: All of 'em, pretty much. You know, I mean, yes, there were fans and devotees. The musicians liked what we were doing but they couldn't figure out what, what it was. I mean, they felt it but they couldn't analyze it in the normal way. Speaker 1: And, not only all of your fans liked, that were there at the Plugged Nickel liked it either (unclear)? Speaker 2: No. They didn't like it, they didn't know what we were doing. But, again, after the Plugged Nickel, we, we embarked on a new direction at the Plugged Nickel and it began to develop as the band continued to play more gigs in the clubs and in concerts. And, it was a new approach to, to the music. Story_ID: 660892 Speaker 1: So, he took the lead then, that night. I'm talking about Tony [Tony Williams] is the one who made that decision? Speaker 2: (Nods head). Speaker 1: Okay, that he (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was Tony. Speaker 1: So, how do you have with this, and you're going forward, who's taking the lead and how is that decision even made? Or, is it made? You know, I mean-- Speaker 2: The lead is whomever we are responding to in the moment. So in other words, it is really a team working together. If the strongest element happens to be something that Tony plays, that might be the launching platform for the next moment of development. It might be something that Miles [Miles Davis] played. And, it wasn't always, now that I'm thinking about it, it wasn't always that we'd be doing something together. There could be different activities with different people. And, I might be just doing something that has its own direction in a, in a given few moments. Tony might be doing something completely different. So, it's not like we're all conversing together. Sometimes it's like different conversations happening, or different people almost like working in a, in a community. Each one creating their own musical direction in the moment. Speaker 1: So, he made that statement-- Speaker 2: That's what made Miles a great leader. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Is because Miles didn't try to make us follow him. Miles had the genius to know that if he encouraged each of us to be constantly creative, this is gonna present a challenge for each of us for growth and a challenge for him for growth too. There was no end point that we wanted to sound like that. We wanted to work so we would sound like that. It was constantly working toward the development of a direction. Story_ID: 660893 Speaker 1: So, how long did it take you to get there? Is that two years into--everybody playing together? Because, you know, there are these--I'm just asking, I'm asking, how long, how long do you think it took? Speaker 2: For (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Be- for you to get to that point. 'Cause you talk, I mean, there're other things that he said to you, but I think they're after. Like, when he, he said to you, "Don't play butter notes." Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: That--is that after? Speaker 2: I don't remember which--what the sequence was. Speaker 1: And, then he al- ? Speaker 2: It wasn't always aft- no, no. Speaker 1: No. So, then he also said you're playing, was it you're playing too much? You're playing--no. Speaker 2: No, he said at one time for, for a record. When we were rehearsing the tune for the record, you know, I'm, I'm playing--but, then Miles [Miles Davis] said (imitates Miles Davis), "Why don't you play with just the right hand?" And-- Speaker 1: Stop using your left hand. Is it-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I don't remember how, how it was phrased. It couldn't been, stop using your left hand. I, I didn't know why, but I just said, "Okay," you know. It's Miles, right. You know Miles doesn't, doesn't--is not a person that speaks idle words. So, for me that was gonna be a challenge. But, I discovered something, in only using my right hand, I began to realize, it was my left hand that was hindering my right hand solos. Because in soloing on the piano, traditionally, it's the right hand that plays the solo lines and the left hand typically plays chords. And, so, when I left the left, (laughter) when I left the left hand out, the right hand was freer to explore other kinds of territory. Miles didn't tell me that. He just told me leave out the left hand. He knew but he wanted me to discover it for myself. And, that's what a great mentor does. Speaker 1: But, there's a lot of trust there, though. That's what I'm saying, everybody was trusting 'cause-- Speaker 2: It was total trust, yeah. Yep. He believed in each one of us. We believed in each one of us, and that was what that band [Second Great Quintet] was about. Trust in each other, but trust in ourselves too. 'Cause you have to trust yourself to trust someone else. Like the level of trust was really high but that meant you have to trust yourself to allow yourself to trust to that degree, to trust others to that degree. But, Miles had faith in us, and that gave us the, the support to trust ourselves to that degree. And, Miles could do that without saying a word. Speaker 1: But, he also learned a lot too, himself. That's what I'm saying. He almost became part--it was the mentor and the mentee but then it also became an ensemble completely. Speaker 2: That's Miles. And, that's the lesson we could all learn, you know. Is--we can learn from each other if we trust each other and trust ourselves. And, the progress can be in leaps and bounds rather that--rather than tiny steps. Speaker 1: So, you, is this, oh that, you know, what I think it was 'Miles Smiles' that was the, that was the album, right? 'Miles Smiles' for the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Unclear) what, didn't play with my left hand? Speaker 1: Yeah, when you didn't play (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah I think you're right. Story_ID: 660894 Speaker 1: So, during this time though, the other thing I found interesting is that you were all (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, you're right. It was after, after, after-- Speaker 1: It was after. Speaker 2: That time in Detroit [Michigan]. The time in Detroit where Miles [Miles Davis] said, "Why don't you play behind me like you would play behind George [George Coleman]." Well, of course, later on [HistoryMaker] Wayne Shorter joined the band that's when we did 'Miles Smiles.' Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: But, there was a record called 'E.S.P.' that we did with Wayne first. And, that was kind of a beginning of, of a new kind of exploration. We hadn't gotten to the Plugged Nickel [Chicago, Illinois] yet. But, that brought us to that kind of next level. And, then the Plugged Nickel brought us to the level beyond that. Speaker 1: And, the rest is history 'cause all that, all that body of work is there for people to, to listen to; all that body of work. Speaker 2: Yeah, a lot of records. Speaker 1: Um-hm. How many records were there? I thought they were (unclear). Why did I think (unclear)? No, maybe I'm wrong. I may be wrong about that, the number. But, you know, what I found--so, he also-- Speaker 2: By the way, I actually-- Speaker 1: You gotta go? Speaker 2: Need to go to the bathroom for one thing. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: How long has it been?..